
Electricity &
Controls for
HVAC/R 6th
Edition

This page intentionally left blank 

Electricity &
Controls for
HVAC/R
6th
Edition
Stephen L. Herman
Bennie L. Sparkman
Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States

Electricity and Controls for HVAC/R, 
6th Edition
Stephen L. Herman, Bennie L. Sparkman
Vice President, Career and Professional 
Editorial: Dave Garza
Director of Learning Solutions: 
Sandy Clark
Managing Editor: Larry Main
Senior Product Manager: John Fisher
Senior Editorial Assistant: 
Dawn Daugherty
Vice President, Career and Professional 
Marketing: Jennifer Baker
Marketing Director: Deborah S. Yarnell
Marketing Manager: Jimmy Stephens
Marketing Coordinator: Mark Pierro
Production Director: Wendy Troeger
Production Manager: Mark Bernard
Content Project Manager: 
Christopher Chien
Senior Art Director: David Arsenault
Technology Project Manager: Christopher 
Catalina
Production Technology Analyst: 
Thomas Stover
© 2010, 2006 Delmar, Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the 
 copyright herein may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used 
in any form or by any means graphic, electronic, or mechanical, 
including but not limited to photocopying, recording, scanning, 
digitizing, taping, Web distribution, information networks, or infor-
mation storage and retrieval systems, except as permitted under 
Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, with-
out the prior written permission of the publisher.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2009920822
ISBN-13: 978-1-4354-8427-6
ISBN-10: 1-4354-8427-4
Delmar
5 Maxwell Drive
Clifton Park, NY 12065-2919
USA
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning 
solutions with oﬃ  ce locations around the globe, including 
 Singapore, the United Kingdom, Australia, Mexico, Brazil and Japan. 
Locate your local oﬃ  ce at: international.cengage.com/region
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by Nelson 
 Education, Ltd.
For your lifelong learning solutions, visit delmar.cengage.com
Visit our corporate website at cengage.com
Printed in the United States of America
1 2 3 4 5 XX 11 10 09
For product information and technology assistance, contact 
us at
Professional Group Cengage Learning Customer & Sales 
Support, 1-800-354-9706
For permission to use material from this text or product, 
submit all requests online at cengage.com/permissions
Further permissions questions can be e-mailed to 
 permissionrequest@cengage.com
Notice to the Reader
Publisher does not warrant or guarantee any of the products described herein or perform any independent analysis 
in connection with any of the product information contained herein. Publisher does not assume, and expressly 
disclaims, any obligation to obtain and include information other than that provided to it by the manufacturer. The 
reader is expressly warned to consider and adopt all safety precautions that might be indicated by the activities 
described herein and to avoid all potential hazards. By following the instructions contained herein, the reader willingly 
assumes all risks in connection with such instructions. The publisher makes no representations or warranties of any 
kind, including but not limited to, the warranties of ﬁ tness for particular purpose or merchantability, nor are any 
such representations implied with respect to the material set forth herein, and the publisher takes no responsibility 
with respect to such material. The publisher shall not be liable for any special, consequential, or exemplary damages 
resulting, in whole or part, from the readers’ use of, or reliance upon, this material.

v
PREFACE / ix
SECTION 1 Basic Electricity 
1
A SPECIAL NOTE ON SAFETY 
2
Unit 1 
Atomic Structure 
6
Unit 2 
Electrical Quantities and Ohm’s Law 
15
Unit 3 
Measuring Instruments 
24
Unit 4 
Electrical Circuits 
35
Unit 5 
Electrical Services 
50
Unit 6 
Wire Size and Voltage Drop 
63
Unit 7 
Inductance 
72
Unit 8 
Capacitance 
79
SECTION 2 Control Circuits 
89
Unit 9 
Schematics and Wiring Diagrams 
90
Unit 10 Developing Wiring Diagrams 
107
SECTION 3 Motors 
117
Unit 11 Split-Phase Motors 
118
Unit 12 The Shaded-Pole Induction Motor 
131
Unit 13 Multispeed Motors 
135
Unit 14 Three-Phase Motor Principles 
148
Unit 15 The Squirrel-Cage Induction Motor 
159
Unit 16 The Wound Rotor Induction Motor 
179
Unit 17 The Synchronous Motor 
186
Unit 18 Brushless DC Motors 
193
CONTENTS

vi   CONTENTS
SECTION 4 Transformers 
199
Unit 19 Isolation Transformers 
200
Unit 20 Autotransformers 
221
Unit 21 Current Transformers 
227
SECTION 5 Control Components 
233
Unit 22 Overloads 
234
Unit 23 Relays, Contactors, and Motor Starters 
243
Unit 24 The Solid-State Relay 
248
Unit 25 The Control Transformer 
252
Unit 26 Starting Relays 
260
Unit 27 Variable-Speed Motor Control 
270
Unit 28 The Defrost Timer 
274
Unit 29 The Thermostat 
282
Unit 30 Pressure Switches 
298
Unit 31 The Flow Switch 
304
Unit 32 The Humidistat 
308
Unit 33 Fan-Limit Switches 
311
Unit 34 The Oil-Pressure Failure Switch 
317
Unit 35 Solenoid Valves 
321
Unit 36 The Short-Cycle Timer 
327
Unit 37 Methods of Sensing Temperature 
338
Unit 38 Gas Burner Controls 
347
Unit 39 Oil Burner Controls 
353
SECTION 6 Troubleshooting Using Control Schematics 
359
Unit 40 Introduction to Troubleshooting 
360
Unit 41 Room Air Conditioners 
376
Unit 42 A Commercial Air Conditioning Unit 
383
Unit 43 Heat-Pump Controls 
388
Unit 44 Packaged Units: Electric Air Conditioning and Gas Heating 400

CONTENTS  vii
SECTION 7 Ice Maker And Refrigeration Controls 
413
Unit 45 Household Ice Makers 
414
Unit 46 Commercial Ice Makers 
436
Unit 47 Refrigeration Controls 
452
SECTION 8 Solid-State Devices 
463
Unit 48 Resistors and Color Codes 
464
Unit 49 Semiconductor Materials 
472
Unit 50 The PN Junction 
478
Unit 51 Light-Emitting Diodes (LEDs) and Photodiodes 
483
Unit 52 The Transistor 
490
Unit 53 The Unijunction Transistor 
496
Unit 54 The Silicon-Controlled Rectiﬁ er 
501
Unit 55 The Diac 
509
Unit 56 The Triac 
512
Unit 57 The Operational Ampliﬁ er 
518
SECTION 9 Solid-State Controls 
531
Unit 58 Programmable Logic Controllers 
532
Unit 59 Programming a PLC 
546
Unit 60 Analog Sensing for Programmable Controllers 
557
GLOSSARY / 561
INDEX / 579

This page intentionally left blank 

has no prior knowledge of control systems. Opera-
tion of the manufacturer’s control schematics
is explained to aid the student in understand-
ing how a control system operates and how to 
troubleshoot the system.
Electricity and Controls for HVAC/R, sixth edition, 
includes information on household and commer-
cial icemaker controls. These circuits are explained 
in a step-by-step procedure to ensure that students 
have a thorough working knowledge of these units.
Solid-state devices common to the HVAC/R fi eld 
are covered in a straightforward manner. The devices 
covered are: diode, transistor, SCR, diac, triac, and 
operational amplifi er. The last section of the text 
covers programmable logic controllers, which are 
becoming more and more common in the fi eld.
NEW FOR THE SIXTH EDITION
The unit on atomic structure has been rewritten to 
refl ect the most accepted theories concerning the 
structure of atoms. Many of the illustrations have 
been updated to help students gain a better under-
standing of the principles involved concerning the 
subject matter. The unit devoted to troubleshooting 
has been expanded to include an example of a step-
by-step procedure for determining the problems 
with a central air conditioning system.
FEATURES OF THIS BOOK
Electricity and Controls for HVAC/R, sixth edition, 
contains many features to help enhance learning 
for the student:
• A special section covering Safety rules at the 
front of the book reminds students to follow cor-
rect  procedures and take the necessary precau-
tions when working around electricity.
Electricity and Controls for HVAC/R is written with 
the assumption that the student has no prior knowl-
edge of electricity or control systems. Basic electrical 
theory is presented in a practical, straightforward 
manner. Mathematical explanations are used only 
when necessary to explain certain concepts of elec-
tricity. Each unit starts with the objectives of the 
unit and ends with a summary of important facts.
The text begins with the study of basic electri-
cal theory and progresses to series circuits, par-
allel circuits, alternating current, inductive 
circuits, and capacitive circuits. The text also 
includes information on different types of three-
phase services found in industrial and commercial 
locations as well as single-phase residential services. 
Individual devices and components common to the 
air conditioning, heating, and refrigeration fi eld 
are presented in a practical manner. Devices are 
explained from a standpoint of how they operate 
and how they are used. The text contains testing 
procedures for many of the devices covered. The 
practical presentation of these devices makes this 
text a must-have reference book for the service tech-
nician working in the fi eld.
Electricity and Controls for HVAC/R, sixth edition, 
includes information on isolation transformers, 
autotransformers, and current transformers. The 
three major types of three-phase motors—squirrel 
cage induction, wound rotor, and synchronous—
are also covered. Coverage of single-phase motors 
includes: split-phase motors, resistance-start 
induction-run motors, capacitor-start induction-
run motors, and permanent-split capacitor motors. 
Shaded-pole induction motors and multispeed 
motors are also covered. The sixth edition also pro-
vides information on variable-frequency drives.
Control circuits are developed using the compo-
nents in the text. The text assumes that the student 
ix
PREFACE

• Step-by-Step 
Procedures 
are 
integrated 
throughout the text where applicable, and provide 
students with a thorough working knowledge of 
the HVAC systems.
• Troubleshooting Questions present situations 
in which students must develop critical-thinking 
and problem-solving skills to prepare them for 
the fi eld.
• Review Questions and Practice Problems are 
included at the end of each unit to allow students 
to evaluate their comprehension of the material 
and apply what they have learned from the infor-
mation presented in the unit.
• An extensive art program includes schematics, 
line drawings, and up-to-date photos that help to 
reinforce the information presented in the text.
SUPPLEMENT TO THIS BOOK
Also available to the instructor is the Instructor 
Resource to Accompany Electricity & Controls for 
HVAC/R, sixth edition. Thoroughly updated to 
refl ect changes to the sixth-edition book, the Instruc-
tor’s Resource contains:
• Instructors Guide with answers to the text’s 
Review Questions 
• PowerPoint presentations
• Test bank
(Order #: 1435484266) 978-1-4354-8426-9
Visit us now at our newly designed Web site, www.
delmarelectric.cengage.com, featuring other titles 
available from Delmar Cengage Learning, industry 
links, career profi les, job opportunities, and more!
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author and Delmar, Cengage Learning grate-
fully acknowledge the time and effort put forth by the 
review panel of this revision. Our special thanks to:
Dan Burris
Eastfi eld College
Mesquite, TX
John A. Chemsak
Technical College of the Low Country
Beaufort, SC
Phil Coulter
Durham College
Whitby, Ontario, Canada
Mark Davis
New Castle School of Trades
Sharon, PA
Eugene C. Dickson
Indian River Community College
Fort Pierce, FL
Malcolm Evett
San Jose City College
San Jose, CA
James Hutchinson
Roanoke-Chowan CC
Ahoskie NC
Robert S. Kish
Belmont Technical College
Wheeling, WV
Doug Lacey
Grayson County College
Denison, TX
Reed Lovell
Lanier Technical Institute
Oakwood, GA
William Matthews
Linn State Technical College
Linn, MO
Marvin Maziarz
Niagara County Community College
Niagara Falls, NY
Peter McCann
New Britain, CT
Joseph Moravek
Lee College
Houston, TX
Tom Nieson
Gateway Technical College
Kenosha, WI
Randy Paul Smith
Altamaha Technical Institute
Jesup, GA
Richard Wirtz
Columbus State Community College
Columbus, OH
x   PREFACE

SECTION 1
Basic 
Electricity

2
The purpose of this textbook is to provide the 
air conditioning and refrigeration technician 
with knowledge of electricity. Electricity is an 
extremely powerful force and should never be 
treated in a careless manner. The air condition-
ing and refrigeration technician commonly 
works with voltages ranging from 24 volts 
to 480 volts. One mistake can lead to serious 
injury or death.
Never work on an energized circuit if it 
is possible to disconnect the power. When 
possible, use a three-step check to make certain 
that the power is turned off. The three-step 
check is as follows:
1. Test the meter on a known live circuit to 
make sure the meter is operating.
2. Test the circuit that is to be de-energized 
with the meter.
3. Test the meter on the known live circuit 
again to make certain that the meter is still 
operating.
Install a warning tag at the point of discon-
nection to warn people not to restore power to 
the circuit, as shown in Figure SF–1.
GENERAL SAFETY RULES
Think
Of all the rules concerning safety, this one is proba-
bly the most important: No amount of safeguarding 
or “idiot-proofi ng” a piece of equipment can protect 
a person as well as the person’s taking time to think 
before acting. Many technicians have been killed by 
supposedly “dead” circuits. Do not depend on circuit 
breakers, fuses, or someone else to open a circuit. 
Test it yourself before you touch it. If you are work-
ing on high-voltage equipment, use insulated gloves 
and meter probes designed to be used on the voltage 
being tested. Your life is your own, so think before 
you touch something that can take it away.
A SPECIAL NOTE ON SAFETY
Certain pieces of equipment can be especially 
hazardous if you are not aware of them. Some cen-
tral air conditioning units use a main contactor that 
has only one set of contacts to disconnect a  240-volt 
circuit, as shown in Figure SF–2. The contactor 
operates on the principle that a complete circuit 
must exist for current to fl ow. If one line is broken 
or open, no current can fl ow to the compressor. 
The hazard lies in the fact that one of the 240-volt 
lines is still supplying power to the unit. If a techni-
cian should touch the unbroken line and ground, a 
120-volt circuit is completed through his body. 
Other contactors employ two load contacts to 
break the circuit to the compressor, as shown in 
Figure SF–3. This type of contactor is much safer 
and can prevent a serious injury.
 Figure SF–1
Warning tags warn people that the circuit should not be 
turned back on. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

3
240-VOLT
INPUT
TO
COMPRESSOR
 Figure SF–2
Some main contactors use one set of load contacts to break a 240-volt connection to the compressor. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
240-VOLT
INPUT
TO
COMPRESSOR
 Figure SF–3
Contactors that employ two load contacts to break both sides of the 240-volt line are much safer and can 
prevent a serious injury. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

Avoid Horseplay
Jokes and horseplay have a time and place, but the 
time and place are not when someone is working on 
an electric circuit or a piece of moving machinery. 
Do not be the cause of someone’s being injured or 
killed, and do not let someone else be the cause of 
you being injured or killed.
Do Not Work Alone
Work with someone else, especially when working 
in a hazardous location or on a live circuit. Have 
someone with you to turn off the power or give arti-
fi cial respiration or cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
(CPR). One of the effects of electrical shock is that it 
causes breathing diffi culties and can cause the heart 
to go into fi brillation.
Work with One Hand 
When Possible
The worst case for electrical shock is when the 
current path is from one hand to the other. This 
path causes the current to pass directly through 
the heart. A person can survive a severe shock 
between the hand and one foot that would other-
wise cause death if the current path were from one 
hand to the other.
Learn First Aid
Anyone working on electrical equipment should 
make an effort to learn first aid. Knowing first 
aid is especially important for anyone who must 
work with voltages above 50 volts. A knowledge 
of first aid and especially CPR may save your life 
or someone else’s.
Effects of Electric Current 
on the Body
Most people have heard that it is not the voltage that 
kills but the current. Although this is a true state-
ment, do not be misled into thinking voltage cannot 
harm you. Voltage is the force that pushes the cur-
rent though the circuit. Voltage can be compared to 
the pressure that pushes water through a pipe. The 
more pressure available, the greater the volume of 
water fl owing through a pipe. Students often ask 
how much current will fl ow through the body at a 
particular voltage. There is no easy answer to this 
question. The amount of current that can fl ow at a 
particular voltage is determined by the resistance 
of the current path. Different people have different 
resistances. A body will have less resistance on a hot 
day when sweating because salt water is a very good 
conductor. What you ate and drank for lunch can 
have an effect on your body resistance. The length 
of the current path can affect the resistance. Is the 
current path between two hands or from one hand to 
one foot? All of these factors affect body resistance.
The chart in Figure SF–4 illustrates the effects of 
different amounts of current on the body. This chart 
is general and shows the effects on most people. 
Some people may have less tolerance to electricity, 
and others may have greater tolerance.
A current of 2 to 3 milliamperes will gener-
ally cause a slight tingling sensation. The tingling 
sensation will increase as current increases and 
becomes very noticeable at about 10 milliamperes. 
The tingling sensation is very painful at about 
20 milliamperes. Currents between 20 and 30 mil-
liamperes generally cause a person to seize the line 
and become unable to let go of the circuit. Currents 
between 30 and 40 milliamperes cause muscular 
paralysis, and currents between 40 and 60 mil-
liamperes cause breathing diffi culty. By the time 
the current increases to about 100 milliamperes, 
breathing is extremely diffi cult. Currents from 100 to 
200 milliamperes generally cause death because the 
heart usually goes into fi brillation. Fibrillation is a 
condition in which the heart begins to “quiver” and 
the pumping action stops. Currents above 200 mil-
liamperes generally cause the heart to squeeze shut. 
When the current is removed the heart will typi-
cally return to a normal pumping action. This is the 
principle of operation of a defi brillator. It is often said 
that 120 volts is the most dangerous voltage to work 
with. The reason is that 120 volts generally cause 
a current fl ow between 100 and 200 milliamperes 
through the bodies of most people. Large amounts 
of current can cause severe electrical burns. Electri-
cal burns are usually very serious because the burn 
occurs on the inside of the body. The exterior of the 
body may not look seriously burned, but the inside 
may be severely burned.
4

0.100–0.200 AMPERES (DEATH)  THIS  RANGE  GENERALLY  CAUSES 
 
FIBRILLATION  OF  THE  HEART.  WHEN  THE   
 
HEART   IS  IN  THIS  CONDITION,  IT  VIBRATES  
 
AT  A  FAST  RATE  LIKE  A  “QUIVER”  AND  
 
CEASES  TO  PUMP  BLOOD  TO  THE  REST  
 
OF  THE  BODY.
0.060–0.100 AMPERES  (EXTREME  DIFFICULTY  IN  BREATHING) 
0.040–0.060 AMPERES  (BREATHING  DIFFICULTY) 
0.030–0.040 AMPERES  (MUSCULAR  PARALYSIS) 
0.020–0.030 AMPERES  (UNABLE  TO  LET  GO  OF  THE  CIRCUIT) 
0.010–0.020 AMPERES  (VERY  PAINFUL) 
0.009–0.010 AMPERES  (MODERATE  SENSATION) 
0.002–0.003 AMPERES  (SLIGHT  TINGLING  SENSATION) 
 Figure SF–4
The effects of electric current on the body. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
5

UNIT X
One Line Title
6
To understand electricity, one should start with the 
study of atoms. The atom is the basic building block 
of the universe. All matter is composed of atoms. An 
atom is the smallest part of any element. Atoms are 
composed of three principal parts, the electron, the 
proton, and the neutron. Electrons exhibit a nega-
tive charge, protons exhibit a positive charge, and 
neutrons have no charge. Some theories suggest 
that neutrons are composed of both a proton and an 
electron. The positive charge of the proton and the 
negative charge of the electron cancel each other.
Protons and neutrons are extremely massive 
particles as compared to the electron. It is believed 
that the electron is approximately three times larger 
than a proton, but the proton weighs approximately 
1840 times more than an electron, as shown in 
Figure 1–1. It is like comparing a piece of lead shot 
to a soap bubble.
6
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Discuss basic atomic theory
 Name the principal parts of an atom
 Discuss the law of charges
 Deﬁ ne electricity
 Discuss the differences between 
conductors and insulators
UNIT 1
Atomic 
Structure

UNIT 1  Atomic Structure    7 
THE LAW OF CHARGES
One of the basic laws of physics concerning atoms 
is the law of charges. This law states that oppo-
site charges attract each other and like charges 
repel each other. If charged particles were sus-
pended from a string, a positively charged particle 
and negatively charged particle would attract each 
other, but two positively charged particles or two 
negatively charged particles would repel each other, 
as shown in Figure 1–2. Since electrons are nega-
tively charged particles and protons are positively 
charged particles, they are attracted to each other.
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
The nucleus or center of the atom is composed of 
protons and neutrons. Electrons orbit the exterior 
of the atom in specifi c orbits or shells. The smallest 
of all atoms is hydrogen. Hydrogen does not con-
tain a neutron in its nucleus. The hydrogen atom 
contains one proton and one electron, as shown in 
Figure 1–3. The smallest atom that contains both 
protons and neutrons in the nucleus is helium, 
shown in Figure 1–4. Helium contains two protons, 
two neutrons, and two electrons.
In 1808 a scientist named John Dalton proposed 
that all matter was composed of atoms. Although 
the assumptions that Dalton used to prove his 
theory were later found to be factually incorrect, 
the idea that all matter is composed of atoms was 
adopted by most of the scientifi c world. Then in 1897 
J. J. Thompson discovered the electron. Thompson 
determined that electrons have a negative charge 
and that they have very little mass compared to 
the atom. He proposed that atoms have a large, 
Electron
Proton
 Figure 1–1
The electron is three times larger than the proton, but 
the proton weighs 1840 times more than the electron. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 1–2
The law of charges states that opposite charges attract 
and like charges repel. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Electron
Proton
 Figure 1–3
An atom of hydrogen contains one proton 
and one electron. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

8   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
positively charged, massive body with negatively 
charged electrons scattered throughout it. Thomp-
son also proposed that the negative charge of the 
electrons exactly balanced the positive charge of the 
large mass, causing the atom to have a net charge of 
zero. Thompson’s model of the atom proposed that 
electrons existed in a random manner within the 
atom, much like fi ring BBs from a BB gun into a slab 
of cheese. This was referred to as the plum pudding 
model of the atom.
In 1913 a Danish scientist named Niels Bohr 
presented the most accepted theory concerning the 
structure of an atom. In the Bohr model, electrons 
exist in specifi c or “allowed” orbits around the 
nucleus, similar to the way that planets orbit the 
sun, as shown in Figure 1–5. The orbit in which 
the electron exists is determined by the electron’s 
mass times its speed times the radius of the orbit. 
These factors must equal the positive force of the 
nucleus. In theory there can be an infi nite number 
of allowed orbits.
When an electron receives enough energy from 
some other source it “quantum jumps” into a higher 
allowed orbit. Electrons, however, tend to return 
to a lower allowed orbit. When this occurs, the 
 electron emits the excess energy as a single photon 
of electromagnetic energy.
Atoms have a set number of electrons that can 
be contained in one orbit or shell, as shown in 
 Figure 1–6. The number of electrons that can be 
contained in any one shell is determined by the 
formula (2N 2 ). The letter N represents the number 
of the orbit or shell. For example, the fi rst orbit can 
hold no more than two electrons.
2  (1)2
2  1  2
The second orbit can hold no more than eight 
electrons.
2  (2)2
2  4  8
The third orbit can contain no more than 
18 electrons.
2  (3)2
2  9  18
+ +
-
-
Electron
Proton
Neutron
 Figure 1–4
A helium atom contains both protons and neutrons in 
the nucleus. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 1–5
Electrons exist in allowed orbits or shells. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

UNIT 1  Atomic Structure    9  
electrons that explain much of electrical theory. 
A conductor, for instance, is made from a material 
that contains one or two valence electrons. Atoms 
with one or two valence electrons are unstable and 
will give up these electrons easily. Conductors are 
materials that permit electrons to fl ow through 
them easily. Silver, copper, and gold all contain 
one valence electron and are excellent conductors 
of electricity. Silver is the best natural conductor of 
electricity, followed by copper, gold, and aluminum. 
An atom of copper is shown in Figure 1–9. Although 
it is known that atoms containing few valence elec-
trons are the best conductors, it is not known why 
some of these materials are better conductors than 
others. Copper, gold, platinum, and silver all contain 
only one valence electron. Silver, however will con-
duct electricity more readily than any of the others. 
Aluminum, which contains three valence electrons, 
is a better conductor of electricity than platinum, 
which contains only one valence electron.
Electricity is composed of electrons. If it were 
possible to connect a spigot to a wall outlet and 
catch electricity in a glass, the glass would be full 
of electrons, as shown in Figure 1–10. Electric 
current is the fl ow of electrons, which means that 
The fourth and fi fth orbits cannot hold more than 
32 electrons. Thirty-two is the maximum number of 
electrons that can be contained in any orbit.
2  (4)2
2  16  32
Although atoms are often drawn fl at, as illustrated 
in Figure 1–6, the electrons orbit around the nucleus 
in a circular fashion, as shown in Figure 1–7. The 
electrons travel at such a high rate of speed that they 
form a shell around the nucleus. It would be similar 
to a golf ball being surrounded by a tennis ball that is 
surrounded by a basketball. For this reason, electron 
orbits are often referred to as shells.
VALENCE ELECTRONS
The outermost shell of an atom is known as the 
valence shell. Any electrons located in the outer 
shell of an atom are known as valence elec-
trons, as shown in Figure 1–8. The valence shell 
of an atom cannot hold more than eight electrons. 
It is the valence electrons that are of primary con-
cern in the study of electricity, because it is these 
Nucleus
Electron
 Figure 1–6
There is a maximum number of electrons that can be 
contained in one orbit or shell. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 1–7
Electrons orbit the nucleus in a circular manner. (Source: 
Delmar/Cengage Learning)

10   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
the electrons must be moving to produce current. 
It is the movement of the electrons that produces 
electrical energy. There are several theories con-
cerning how electrons are made to fl ow through 
a conductor. One theory is generally referred to 
as the bump theory. It states that current fl ow is 
produced when an electron from one atom knocks 
electrons of another atom out of orbit, as shown 
in Figure 1–11. The striking electron gives its 
energy to the electron being struck. The striking 
electron settles into orbit around the nucleus, and 
the electron that was struck moves off to strike 
another electron. This action can often be seen 
in the game of pool. The moving cue ball gives 
it energy to the ball being struck, as shown in 
Figure 1–12. The stationary ball then moves off 
with most of the energy of the cue ball, and the cue 
ball stops moving. Although most of the energy 
Valence Electron
Valence Shell
 Figure 1–8
Valence electrons are located in the outermost orbit of 
an atom. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 1–9
Copper atom. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Wall outlet
Spigot
Electricity
Electrons
 Figure 1–10
Electricity is composed of electrons. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

UNIT 1  Atomic Structure    11  
 terminal. The negative terminal is created by 
causing an excess of electrons to form at that 
terminal, and the positive terminal is created 
by removing a large number of electrons from 
that terminal, as shown in Figure 1–13. Differ-
ent methods can be employed to produce the 
excess of electrons at one terminal and deficiency 
of electrons at the other, but when a circuit is 
completed between the two terminals, negative 
electrons are repelled away from the negative ter-
minal and attracted to the positive terminal, as 
shown in Figure 1–14. The greater the difference 
in the number of electrons between the negative 
and positive terminals, the greater the force of 
repulsion and attraction.
Most of the world’s electric power is produced 
by rotating machines called alternators. Alterna-
tors work on the principle of cutting magnetic 
lines of flux with a conductor. One of the basic 
principles of electricity is that anytime a con-
ductors cuts magnetic lines of flux, a voltage is 
inducted into the conductor. Another common 
source of electricity is batteries. Batteries produce 
electricity by chemical action. Other methods 
include solar cells, thermocouples, and piezoelec-
tric devices. Solar cells produce electricity when 
they receive photons of light that cause elec-
trons to move. Thermocouples produce electric-
ity by heating the junction of two different types 
of metal, and the piezoelectric effect produces 
current flow from pressure.
 Figure 1–11
One electron knocks another electron out of orbit. (Source: 
Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Q Ball
Ball Being Struck
 Figure 1–12
The cue ball gives its energy to 
the ball it strikes. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
was transferred to the stationary ball, some energy 
was dissipated as heat caused by the impact of the 
cue ball striking the stationary ball.
Other theories deal with the fact that all electric 
power sources produce a positive and negative 

12   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
INSULATORS
Insulators are materials that do not permit 
electrons to fl ow through them easily. The atoms 
of an insulator generally contain seven or eight 
valence electrons. When an atom contains seven 
or eight valence electrons, they are tightly held 
by the atom and not easily given up. Insulator 
materials are generally made from compounds 
instead of a pure element. The molecules of the 
compounds are extremely stable and do not break 
Negative
Terminal
Positive
Terminal
----------------------------------
-
-
-
-
 Figure 1–13
The negative terminal of a power source has an 
excess of electrons, and the positive terminal has 
a lack of electrons. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
----------------------------------
-
-
- - - -
- - - - --
-
-
-
 Figure 1–14
Electrons ﬂ ow from the negative terminal, through the 
load, to the positive terminal of the power source. (Source: 
Delmar/Cengage Learning)
their bond easily. Some examples of insulators are 
wood, ceramic, mica, rubber, and thermoplastic. 
Insulator materials are generally rated by voltage. 
The voltage rating indicates the amount of volt-
age they can withstand without breaking down. 
A very common electric cable used in residential 
wiring is the nonmetallic two-conductor cable 
with ground, shown in Figure 1–15. This cable is 
generally referred to as NM or Romex. The insula-
tion around the conductors has a voltage rating of 
600 volts.

UNIT 1  Atomic Structure    13  
 Figure 1–15
Two conductor cables with ground are commonly used in residential wiring. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
SUMMARY
 The three major parts of an atom are the electron, proton, and neutron.
 Electrons have a negative charge, protons have a positive charge, and neutrons have no 
charge.
 The nucleus of the atom contains protons and neutrons.
 An electron is about three times larger than a proton, but the proton weighs about 
1840 times more than an electron.
 The law of charges states that opposite charges attract and like charges repel.
 Electrons exist in allowed orbits around the nucleus of the atom.
 Neutral atoms contain the same number of electrons and protons.
 Valence electrons are the electrons located in the outermost orbit of an atom.
 The best conductors of electricity generally contain one or two valence electrons.
 Insulators are materials that do not conduct electricity easily.
 Insulator materials are rated by voltage.

14   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What are the three subatomic parts of an atom, and what charge does each carry?
 
2. How many times larger is an electron than a proton?
 
3. The weight of a proton is how many times heavier than that of an electron?
 
4. State the law of charges.
 
5. What scientist presented the most accepted theory concerning the behavior of 
atoms?
 
6. Materials that make the best conductors generally contain how many valence 
 electrons?
 
7. What are valence electrons?
 
8. What is the maximum number of electrons that can exist in the valence orbit?
 
9. How is most of the electric power in the world produced?
 10. Insulator materials are generally rated by the amount of _____ they can withstand 
without breaking down.
atom
conductor
electricity
electron
insulator
law of charges
neutron
nucleus
proton
valence electrons
valence shell
KEY TERMS

Electricity has a standard set of values. Before you can 
work with electricity, you must have a knowledge of 
these values and how to use them. Because the values 
of electrical measurement have been standardized, 
they are understood by everyone who uses them. For 
instance, carpenters use a standard system for mea-
suring length, such as the inch or foot. Imagine what 
a house would look like that was constructed by two 
carpenters who used different lengths of measure for 
an inch or foot. The same holds true for people who 
work with electricity. A volt, ampere, or ohm is the 
same for everyone who uses them.
COULOMB
A coulomb is a quantity measurement of elec-
trons. One coulomb contains 6.25  1018 electrons. 
The number shown in Figure 2–1 is the number of 
15
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Deﬁ ne a coulomb
 Deﬁ ne an ampere
 Deﬁ ne voltage
 Discuss resistance
 Deﬁ ne a watt
 Use Ohm’s law to solve electrical 
problems
UNIT 2
Electrical 
Quantities and 
Ohm’s Law

16   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
 Figure 2–1
The number of electrons in a coulomb. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
6,250,000,000,000,000,000
AMPS
BATTERY
GPM
PUMP
 Figure 2–2
One coulomb ﬂ owing past a 
point in one second. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 Figure 2–3
Water ﬂ ow is similar to current 
ﬂ ow. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
electrons in one coulomb. Because the coulomb is a 
unit of measurement, it is similar to a quart, gallon, 
or liter. It takes a certain amount of liquid to equal a 
quart, just as it takes a certain amount of electrons 
to equal a coulomb.
AMPERE
The ampere, or amp, is defi ned as one coulomb per 
second. Notice that the defi nition of an amp involves 
a quantity measurement (the coulomb) combined 
with a time measurement (the second). One amp of 
current fl ows through a conductor when one cou-
lomb fl ows past a point on one second, Figure 2–2. 
Amperage is a measurement of the actual amount 
of electricity that is fl owing through a circuit. In a 
water system, it would be comparable to gallons 
per minute or gallons per second,  Figure 2–3. If 
one coulomb were to fl ow past a point in a half 
second, there would be 2 amperes of current fl ow. 
If one coulomb were to fl ow past a point in two sec-
onds there would be a half amp of fl ow. Current is 
normally measured in amperes, milliamperes, and 
microamperes. A milliamp is one-thousandth of an 
amp (0.001). A microamp is one-millionth of an 
amp (0.000,001).
VOLT
Voltage is actually defi ned as electromotive 
force, or EMF. It is the force that pushes the elec-
trons through a wire and is often referred to as 
electrical pressure. One should remember that 
voltage cannot fl ow. To say that voltage fl ows is like 
saying that pressure fl ows through a pipe. Pressure 
can push water through a pipe, and it is correct to 
say that water fl ows through a pipe, but it is not cor-
rect to say that pressure fl ows through a pipe. The 
same is true for voltage. The voltage pushes current 
through a wire, but voltage cannot fl ow through a 
wire. In a water system, the voltage could be com-
pared to the pressure of the system, Figure 2–4.

VOLTS
BATTERY
PSI
PUMP
 Figure 2–4
The pressure in a water system is 
comparable to the voltage in an 
electric circuit. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
 Figure 2–5
A reducer reduces the ﬂ ow of 
water through a water system 
just as a resistor reduces the ﬂ ow 
of electrons in an electric circuit. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
OHM
The ohm is the measure of the resistance to the 
fl ow of current. The voltage of the circuit must over-
come the resistance before it can cause electrons to fl ow 
through it. Without resistance, every electrical circuit 
would be a short circuit. All electrical loads, such as 
heating elements, lamps, motors, transformers, and 
so forth, are measured in ohms. In a water system, a 
reducer would be used to control the fl ow of water. In 
an electrical circuit, a resistor can be used to control the 
fl ow of electrons. Figure 2–5 illustrates this concept.
There are electrical quantities other than resis-
tance that are also measured in ohms. Inductive reac-
tance and capacitive reactance are current-limiting 
forces that exist in alternating current circuits and 
will be discussed later in the text. Another term used 
to describe a current-limiting force is impedance. 
Impedance is a combination of all current limiting 
forces in a circuit and can include resistance, induc-
tive reactance, and capacitive reactance. Because 
resistance is only one of the current-limiting forces 
found in alternating current circuits, impedance is 
the quantity generally used to describe the current-
limiting force in an alternating current circuit. Imped-
ance will be discussed in more detail later in the text.
WATT
Wattage is a measure of the amount of power that 
is being used in the circuit. It is proportional to the 
amount of voltage and the amount of current fl ow. 
BATTERY
RESISTOR
PUMP
REDUCER
UNIT 2  Electrical Quantities and Ohm’s Law   17

 Figure 2–6
Pump used to drive a waterwheel. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
 Figure 2–7
The amount of voltage and 
 current determine the power. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
VOLTMETER
AMMETER
WATTMETER
To understand watts, return to the example of the 
water system. Assume that a water pump has a 
pressure of 120 psi (pounds per square inch) and 
causes a fl ow rate of one gallon per second. Now 
assume that this water is used to drive a waterwheel 
as shown in Figure 2–6. Notice that the waterwheel 
has a radius of 1 ft from the center shaft to the rim 
of the wheel. Since water weighs 8.34 pounds per 
gallon, and is being forced against the wheel at 
a pressure of 120 psi, the wheel could develop a 
torque of 1000.8 foot pounds (120  8.34  1  
1000.8). If the pressure is increased to 240 psi, but 
the water fl ow remains constant, the force against 
the wheel will double (240  8.34  1  2001.6). 
If the pressure remains at 120 psi, but the water 
fl ow is increased to two gallons per second, the 
force against the wheel will again double (120  
16.68  1  2001.6). Notice that the amount of 
power developed by the waterwheel is determined 
by both the amount of pressure driving the water 
and the amount of fl ow.
The power of an electrical circuit is very similar. 
Figure 2–7 shows a resistor connected to a circuit 
with a voltage of 120 volts and a current fl ow of 
1 amp. The resistor shown represents an electric 
heating element. When 120 volts forces a current of 
1 amp through it, the heating element will produce 
120 watts of heat (120  1  120 watts). If the volt-
age is increased to 240 volts, but the current remains 
constant, the element will produce 240 watts of heat 
(240  1  240 watts). If the voltage remains at 
120 volts, but the current is increased to 2 amps, 
the heating element will again produce 240 watts 
(120  2  240). Notice that the amount of power 
used by the heating element is determined by the 
amount of current fl ow and the voltage driving it.
A good rule to remember concerning watts, or 
true power, is that before watts can exist in an 
electric circuit, electrical energy must be converted or 
changed into some other form. When current fl ows 
through a resistor, the resistor becomes hot and dis-
sipates heat. Heat is a form of energy. The wattmeter 
connected in the circuit shown in Figure 2–7 mea-
sures the amount of electrical energy that is being 
converted into heat energy. If the resistor shown in 
Figure 2–7 were replaced with an electric motor the 
wattmeter would measure the amount of electrical 
energy that was converted into mechanical energy.
OHM’S LAW
Ohm’s law is named for the German scientist 
George S. Ohm. Ohm discovered that all electrical 
quantities are proportional to each other and can 
therefore be expressed as mathematical formulas. In 
its simplest form, Ohm’s law states that it takes 1 volt 
to push 1 amp through 1 ohm.
1 FT.
120 PSI
PUMP
18   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity

UNIT 2  Electrical Quantities and Ohm’s Law   19
Figure 2–8 shows three basic Ohm’s law formulas. 
In these formulas, E stands for electromotive force and 
is used to represent the voltage. The I stands for the 
intensity of the current and is used to represent the 
amount of current fl ow or amps. The letter R stands 
for resistance and is used to represent the ohms.
The fi rst formula states that the voltage can be 
found if the current and resistance are known. Volt-
age is equal to amps multiplied by ohms. For example, 
assume a circuit has a resistance of 50 ohms and a 
current fl ow through it of 2 amps. The voltage con-
nected to this circuit is 100 volts (2 amps  50 ohms  
100 volts). The second formula indicates that if the 
voltage and resistance of the circuit are known, 
the amount of current fl ow can be found. Assume 
a 120-volt circuit is connected to a resistance of 
30 ohms. The amount of current that will fl ow in 
the circuit is 4 amps (120 volts/30 ohms  4 amps). 
The third formula states that if the voltage and cur-
rent fl ow in a circuit are known, the resistance can 
be found. Assume a circuit has a voltage of 240 volts 
and a current fl ow of 10 amps. The resistance in the 
circuit is 24 ohms (240 volts/10 amps  24 ohms).
Figure 2–9 shows a simple chart that can be a great 
help when trying to remember the Ohm’s law formula. 
To use the chart, cover the quantity to be found. For 
example, if the voltage, E, is to be found, cover the E 
on the chart. The chart now shows the remaining 
letters IR. Therefore, E  I  R. If the current is to be 
found, cover the I on the chart. The chart now shows 
E/R. Therefore, I  E/R. If the resistance of a circuit is 
to be found, cover the R on the chart. The chart now 
shows E/I. Therefore, R  E/I.
A larger chart that shows the formulas needed 
to fi nd watts as well as the voltage, amperage, and 
resistance is shown in Figure 2–10. Because watt 
is the unit of electric power, the letter P is used 
to represent watts. The chart is divided into four 
quadrants. Each quadrant contains three formulas 
that can be used to fi nd the electrical quantity rep-
resented in that quadrant.
EXAMPLE 1: An electric heating element is connected 
to 120 volts and has a resistance of 18 ohms. What 
is the power consumption of this element?
SOLUTION: The electrical quantity to be determined 
is power, or watts. The known electrical values are 
voltage and resistance. Using the formula chart in 
 Figure 2–8
Three Ohm’s law formulas. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
E  I  R  I   E 
__ 
R   R   E 
__ I 
 Figure 2–9
Ohm’s law formula chart. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
R
E I
I
R
2
X
X
E
I
P
P
2
E
2
E
2I
P
P
I
I
X R
X R
E
R
P
E
P
R
P
I
R E
 Figure 2–10
Ohm’s law chart. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Figure 2–10, choose the formula for fi nding power 
that includes the two known electrical quantities. 
The formulas for determining power are located in 
the fi rst quadrant of the chart. The formula that 
contains the known values of voltage and resistance 
is P  E2/R, as shown in Figure 2–11.
P    E  2 
__ 
R  
P    120  120 
_________ 
18 
 
P  800 watts

20   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
 Figure 2–11
Power can be determined when the voltage and 
resistance are known. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 2–12
Current can be determined when the power and 
voltage are known. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 2–13
Standard metric preﬁ xes. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
EXAMPLE 2: A 240-volt electric furnace has a power 
rating of 15,000 watts, or 15 kW. How much cur-
rent will this furnace draw when in operation?
SOLUTION: The quantity you are looking for is cur-
rent or amps, represented by the letter I.
Formulas for determining current are located in 
the second quadrant of the formula chart shown in 
Figure 2–10. The two known quantities are power 
(watts) and voltage. The correct formula is I  P/E, 
as shown in Figure 2–12.
I    P 
__ 
E  
I   15,000 
______ 
240
  
I  62.5 amperes
METRIC PREFIXES
Metric prefi xes are used in the electrical fi eld just as 
they are in most other scientifi c fi elds. In the English 
system of measure, different divisions are used for 
different measurements. A yard, for example, can 
be divided into 3 feet. A foot is generally divided 
into 12 inches, and an inch is often divided into 
sixteenths. In the metric system, ten or a multiple of 
ten is always the dividing factor. A kilometer can be 
divided into 10 hectometers. A hectometer can be 
divided into 10 dekameters, and a dekameter can 
be divided into 10 meters. A chart listing standard 
metric prefi xes is shown in Figure 2–13.
In the electrical fi eld, a different type of metric 
notation called engineering notation is used instead of 
the standard metric prefi xes. Engineering notation 
is in steps of one thousand instead of ten. A chart 
R
E I
I
R
2
X
X
E
I
P
P
2
E
2
E
2I
P
P
I
I
X R
X R
E
R
P
E
P
I
R E
P
R
R
E I
I
R
2
E
I
P
P
2
E
2
E
2I
P
P
I
I
X R
X R
E
R
P
E
P
R
P
I
R E
kilo
1000
hecto
100
deka
10
Base unit
1
deci
1
10
or
0.1
centi
milli
1
100
or
0.01
1
1000
or 0.001

listing common engineering notation prefi xes and 
their symbols is shown in Figure 2–14. Starting 
with the base unit or one, the fi rst engineering unit 
greater than one is kilo, or one thousand. The next 
engineering unit greater than kilo is Mega, or one 
million. A million is one thousand times larger than 
a thousand. The fi rst engineering unit less than the 
base unit is milli, or one one thousandth. The next 
engineering unit less than milli is micro, or one one-
millionth. A millionth is one thousand times smaller 
than a thousandth.
These prefi xes are used to simplify standard elec-
trical measurements. Five billion watts can be writ-
ten as 5,000,000,000 W or as 5 GW. Twenty-fi ve 
microamperes can be written as 0.000,025 A or 
as 25 μA.
µ
Giga 
G 
1,000,000,000 
X10
Meg 
M 
1,000,000 
X10
kilo 
k 
1,000 
X10
Tera 
T 
1,000,000,000,000 
X10
Base unit 
1
Milli 
m 
.001 
X10
Micro 
.000,001 
X10
Nano 
n 
.000,000,001 
X10
Pico 
p 
.000,000,000,001 
X10
12
9
6
3
-3
-6
-9
-12
ENGINEERING
UNIT
SYMBOL 
MULTIPLY BY:
 Figure 2–14
Standard preﬁ xes used in engineering notation. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

22   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
SUMMARY
 A coulomb is a quantity measurement of electrons that is equal to 6.25  1018 electrons.
 An ampere is the amount of current that fl ows through a circuit.
 An ampere is defi ned as one coulomb per second.
 Voltage is the force that pushes the electrons through a circuit.
 Voltage is defi ned as electromotive force (EMF).
 Voltage is sometimes referred to as electrical pressure.
 Resistance to the fl ow of electricity is measured in ohms.
 Wattage is a measurement of electric power.
 Before an electric circuit can have true power, or watts, electrical energy must be 
 converted into some other form of energy.
 Ohm’s law can be used to mathematically fi nd electrical values when at least two of these 
values are known.
KEY TERMS
ampere
coulomb
electrical pressure
electromotive force
impedance
ohm
Ohm’s law
resistance
true power
voltage
wattage
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What is a coulomb?
 
2. What is the defi nition of an amp?
 
3. Defi ne the term voltage.
 
4. Defi ne the term ohm.
 
5. Defi ne the term watt.
 
6. An electric heating element has a resistance of 16 ohms and is connected to a voltage 
of 120 volts. How much current (amps) will fl ow in the circuit?
 
7. How many watts of heat are being produced by the heating element in question 6?
 
8. A 240-volt circuit has a current fl ow of 20 amps. How much resistance (ohms) is con-
nected in the circuit?
 
9. An electric motor has an apparent resistance of 15 ohms. If a current of 8 amps is 
fl owing through the motor, what is the connected voltage?
 10. A 240-volt air conditioning compressor has an apparent resistance of 8 ohms. How 
much current (amps) will fl ow in the circuit?
 11. How much power (watts) is being used by the compressor in question 10? 

 12. A 5,000-watt electric heating unit is connected to a 240-volt line. What is the current 
fl ow (amps) in the circuit?
 13. If the voltage in question 12 is reduced to 120 volts, how much current (amps) would 
be needed to produce the same amount of power?
 14. Is it less expensive to operate the electric heating unit in question 12 on 240 volts or 
on 120 volts? Explain your answer.

24
Anyone who wants to work in the air conditioning 
and refrigeration fi eld must become profi cient with the 
common instruments used to measure electrical quan-
tities. These instruments are the voltmeter, am-
meter, and ohmmeter. In the air- conditioning 
and refrigeration fi eld, the technician works almost 
exclusively with alternating current. For this reason, 
the meters covered in this unit are intended to be used 
in an alternating current system.
VOLTMETER
The voltmeter is designed to be connected directly 
across the source of power. Figure 3–1 shows a 
voltmeter being used to test the voltage of a panel 
box. Notice that the leads of the meter are connected 
directly across the source of voltage. The reason a 
voltmeter can be connected directly across the power 
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Discuss the operation and connection 
of a voltmeter
 Measure voltage using a multirange 
voltmeter
 Discuss the operation of an ammeter
 Describe different types of ammeters
 Measure current with an ammeter
Measuring 
Instruments
UNIT 3

UNIT 3  Measuring Instruments   25
line is because it has a very high resistance connected 
in series with the meter movement,  Figure 3–2. 
A common resistance for a voltmeter is about 
20,000 ohms per volt for DC and 5,000 ohms per volt 
AC. Assume the voltmeter shown in Figure 3–2 is an 
AC meter and has a full-scale range of 300 volts. The 
resistor connected in series with the meter would, 
therefore, have a resistance of 1,500,000 ohms 
(300 volts  5,000 ohms per volt  1,500,000 ohms).
Most voltmeters are multiranged, which 
means that they are designed to use one meter 
movement to measure several ranges of voltage. 
For example, one meter may have a selector switch 
that permits full-scale ranges to be selected. These 
ranges may be 3 volts full-scale, 12 volts full-scale, 
30 volts full-scale, 60 volts full-scale, 120 volts full-
scale, 300 volts full-scale, and 600 volts full-scale. 
 Figure 3–1
Voltmeter being used to test the voltage of a panel. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 3–2
A voltmeter has high resistance connected in series with 
the meter movement. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
The reason for making a meter with this number of 
scales is to make the meter as versatile as possible. If 
it is necessary to check for a voltage of 480 volts, the 
meter can be set on the 600-volt range. If it becomes 
necessary to check a control voltage of 24 volts, 
however, it would be very diffi cult to do on the 
600-volt range. If the meter is set on the 30-volt 
range, however, it becomes a simple matter to 
test for a voltage of 24 volts. The meter shown in 
 Figure 3–3 has multirange selection for voltage.
When the selector switch of this meter is turned, 
steps of resistance are inserted in the circuit to in-
crease the range, or removed from the circuit to 
decrease the range, Figure 3–4. Notice that when 
the higher voltage settings are selected, more resis-
tance is inserted in the circuit.
Another type of voltmeter that is gaining popu-
larity is the digital meter. A digital meter dis-
plays the voltage in digits instead of using a meter 
movement, Figure 3–5. Digital meters have several 
advantages over voltmeters that use a meter move-
ment (commonly called analog meters). The 
greatest advantage is that the input impedance, 
or resistance, is higher. Analog meters commonly 

26   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
have a resistance of about 5,000 ohms per volt. This 
means that on a 3-volt full-scale range, the meter 
movement has a resistance of 15,000 ohms con-
nected in series with it (3  5,000  15,000). On 
the 600-volt full-scale range, the meter movement 
has a resistance of 3,000,000 ohms connected in 
series with it (600  5,000  3,000,000). Digital 
meters commonly have an input impedance of 
10,000,000 ohms (10 megohms), regardless of the 
range they are set on. The advantage of this high 
input impedance is that it does not interfere with a 
low-power circuit. The advantage of this may not 
be too clear at fi rst, because most technicians are 
used to working with circuits that have more than 
enough power to operate the meter. However, many 
of the newer controls are electronic; these circuits 
may be greatly altered if tested with a low imped-
ance meter.
For example, assume an electronic control is 
operated on 5 volts, and has a total current capacity 
of 100 microamps (.000100 amps). Now assume 
that a 5,000-ohm-per-volt meter is set on the 
12-volt scale and is to be used to check the control 
circuit. The voltmeter has a resistance of 5,000  
12  60,000 ohms. If this meter is used to test 
the circuit, the meter will have a current draw 
of 83.3 microamps (5 volts/60,000 ohms  
.0000833 amps). Because the control circuit only 
has a total current capacity of 100 microamps, the 
meter is using most of the current to operate. The 
circuit has been changed to such a degree that it can 
no longer operate.
If the digital meter is used to test this same 
 circuit, it will have a current draw of 0.5 microamp 
(5 volts/10,000,000  .00000005 amp). The cir-
cuit will be able to furnish the 0.5 microamp needed 
to operate the meter without a problem or altering 
the circuit.
Another advantage of the digital meter is that it 
is generally easier for an inexperienced person to 
learn to read. Analog meters can be used for about 
 Figure 3–3
Multimeter with an analog scale. (Courtesy of Triplett Corp.).
3
12
30
60
+
–
300
600
 Figure 3–4
A multirange voltmeter. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 3  Measuring Instruments   27
 Figure 3–5
Digital multimeter. (Courtesy of Triplett Corp.).
 Figure 3–6
Speedometer. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
120
110
100
90
80
70
 Figure 3–7
Fuel gauge. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
F
E
 Figure 3–8
Multimeter face. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
99% of the measurements that must be taken, but it 
generally takes some time and practice to read them 
properly.
Learning to read the scale of a multimeter takes 
time and practice. Most people use meters every-
day without thinking about it. A very common 
type of meter used daily by most people is shown in 
Figure 3–6. The meter illustrated is a speedometer 
similar to those seen in an automobile. This meter is 
designed to measure speed. It is calibrated in miles per 
hour (mph). The speedometer shown has a full-scale 
value of 80 mph. If the pointer is positioned as shown 
in Figure 3–6, most people would know instantly 
that the speed of the automobile is 55 mph.
Figure 3–7 illustrates another common meter 
used by most people. This meter is used to measure 
the amount of fuel in the tank of an automobile. 
Most people can glance at the pointer of the meter 
and know that the meter is indicating that there 
is one-quarter of a tank of fuel remaining. Now 
assume that the tank has a capacity of 20 gallons. 
The meter is now indicating that there are a total of 
5 gallons of fuel remaining in the tank.
Learning to read the scale of a multimeter is 
similar to learning to read a speedometer or fuel 
gauge. The meter scale shown in Figure 3–8 has 
several scales used to measure different values 
and quantities. The very top of the scale is used to 
measure resistance or ohms. Notice that the scale 
begins at the left-hand side with infi nity, and zero 

28   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
can be found at the far right-hand side. Ohmme-
ters will be covered later in this unit. The second 
scale is labeled AC–DC and is used to measure volt-
age. Notice this scale has three different full-scale 
 values. The top scale is 0 to 300, the second scale is 
0 to 60, and the third scale is 0 to 12. The scale used 
is determined by the setting of the range control 
switch. The third set of scales is labeled AC AMPS. 
This scale is used with a clamp-on ammeter attach-
ment that can be used with some meters. The last 
scale is labeled dbm and is seldom if ever used by the 
technician in the fi eld.
Reading a Voltmeter
Notice that the three voltmeter scales use the pri-
mary numbers 3, 6, and 12 and are in multiples of 
10 of these numbers. Because these numbers are 
in multiples of 10, it is an easy matter to multiply 
or divide the readings in your head by moving a 
decimal point. Remember that any number can be 
multiplied by 10 by moving the decimal point one 
place to the right, and any number can be divided 
by 10 by moving the decimal point one place to 
the left. For example, if the selector switch is set 
to permit the meter to indicate a voltage of 3 volts 
full-scale, the 300-volt scale would be used, and the 
reading divided by 100. The reading can be divided 
by 100 by moving the decimal point 2 places to the 
left. In Figure 3–9, the meter is indicating a voltage 
of 2.5 volts if the selector switch is set for 3 volts 
full-scale. The pointer is indicating a value of 250. 
Moving the decimal point 2 places to the left will 
give a reading of 2.5 volts. If the selector switch is set 
for a full-scale value of 30 volts, the meter shown in 
Figure 3–9 would be indicating a value of 25 volts. 
This reading is obtained by dividing the scale by 10 
and moving the decimal point one place to the left.
Now assume that the meter has been set to have 
a full-scale value of 600 volts. The meter shown in 
Figure 3–10 is indicating a voltage of 440 volts. 
Since the full-scale value of the meter is set for 
600 volts, use the 60-volt range and multiply the 
reading on the meter by 10. This can be done by 
moving the decimal point one place to the right. The 
pointer in Figure 3–10 is indicating a value of 44. 
If this value is multiplied by 10, the correct voltage 
reading becomes 440 volts.
 Figure 3–9
Reading an analog multimeter. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
There are three distinct steps that should be fol-
lowed when reading a meter. Following the steps is 
especially important for someone who has not had a 
great deal of experience reading a multimeter. These 
steps are:
 1. Determine what the meter indicates. Is 
the meter set to read a value of DC voltage, 
DC current, AC voltage, AC current, ohms? 
It is impossible to read a meter if you do not 
know what the meter is measuring.
 2. Determine the full-scale value of the 
meter. The advantage of a multimeter is that 
it has the ability to measure a wide range 
of values and quantities. After it has been 
determined what quantity the meter is set to 
measure, it must then be determined what 
the range of the meter is. There is a great deal 
 Figure 3–10
Reading an analog multimeter. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

of difference in readings when the meter is set 
to indicate a value of 600 volts full-scale and 
when it is set for 30 volts full-scale.
 
 If you are not sure of the voltage value being 
tested, always set the meter on its highest 
range and then reduce the range until the 
indicator moves up scale to a value that can 
be easily read. A meter can never be damaged 
by placing it on a high range setting and then 
reducing it, but it can be damaged by placing 
it on a low range setting and then connecting 
it to a high voltage.
 
 Another consideration is the position of the 
indicator. Analog meters are more accurate 
at the upper end of the scale than at the lower 
end. If possible, adjust the range setting so 
that the indicator is more than halfway up 
the scale.
 3. Read the meter. The last step is to deter-
mine what the meter is indicating. It may 
be necessary to determine the value of the 
hatch marks on the meter face for the range 
the selector switch is set for. If the meter in 
Figure 3–8 is set for a value of 300 volts full-
scale, each hatch mark has a value of 5 volts. 
If the full-scale value of the meter is 60 volts, 
however, each hatch mark has a value of 
1 volt.
When reading a meter, always look straight at 
the indicator. Viewing the indicator from the side 
causes a parallax view and the reading will not be 
accurate. It is the same effect as produced when 
trying to determine the speed of an automobile by 
looking at the speedometer from the passenger seat. 
The only way to accurately determine the speed is to 
view the speedometer straight on, not from the side. 
Some meters have a mirror section on the meter 
face. This permits the person using the meter to line 
up the indication with the refl ection behind it to 
ensure an accurate reading.
AMMETER
There are several different types of ammeters used to 
measure electric current. Clamp-on types are gener-
ally used in the fi eld for troubleshooting, and inline 
ammeters are panel mounted. The inline  ammeter, 
unlike the voltmeter, is a very-low- impedance 
device. Inline ammeters must be connected in 
series with the load to permit the load to limit the 
current fl ow, Figure 3-11.
An ammeter has a typical impedance of less than 
.1 ohm. If this meter is connected in parallel with 
the power supply, the impedance of the ammeter is 
the only thing to limit the amount of current fl ow 
in the circuit. Assume that an ammeter with an 
impedance of .1 ohm is connected across a 240-volt 
AC line. The current fl ow in this circuit would be 
2,400 amps (240/.1  2,400).The blinding fl ash 
of light would be followed by the destruction of the 
ammeter. Ammeters that are connected directly 
into the circuit as shown in Figure 3–11 are referred 
to as inline ammeters. Figure 3–12 shows an 
inline ammeter.
 Figure 3–11
An ammeter must be connected in series with the load. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 3–12
AC inline ammeter. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
LOAD
AC LINE 
AMMETER

30   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
Notice that the meter in Figure 3–12 has sev-
eral ranges. AC ammeters use a current trans-
former to provide multiscale capability. The 
primary of the transformer is connected in series 
with the load, and the ammeter is connected to the 
secondary of the transformer. Figure 3–13 illus-
trates this type of connection. Notice that the range 
of the meter is changed by selecting different taps 
on the secondary of the current transformer. The 
different taps on the transformer provide different 
turns ratios between the primary and secondary of 
the transformer.
When a large amount of AC current must be 
measured, a current transformer is connected in 
to the power line. The ammeter is then connected 
to the secondary of the transformer. The AC amme-
ters are designed to indicate a current of 5 amps, 
and the current transformer determines the value 
of line current that must fl ow to produce a current 
of 5 amps on the secondary of the transformer. The 
incoming line may be looped around the opening in 
the transformer several times to produce the proper 
turns ratio between the primary and the secondary 
windings. Figure 3–14 shows a transformer of this 
type. This type of connection is often used for panel 
meters mounted on large commercial units.
The type of ammeter used in the fi eld by most air 
conditioning service technicians is the clamp-on 
type of ammeter similar to the one shown in Fig-
ure 3–15. To use this meter, the jaw of the meter 
is clamped around one of the conductors supplying 
power to the load. Figure 3–16 shows this connec-
tion. Notice that the meter is clamped around only 
one of the power lines. If the meter is clamped around 
LOAD
AC LINE
 Figure 3–13
A current transformer provides different scales. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 3–14
Current transformer used to meter large AC currents. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
more than one line, the magnetic fi elds of the wires 
cancel each other and the meter indicates zero.
This type of meter also uses a current transformer 
to operate the meter. The jaw of the meter is part 
of the core material of the transformer. When the 
meter is connected around the current-carrying 
wire, the changing magnetic fi eld produced by 
the AC current induces a voltage into the current 
transformer. The strength of the magnetic fi eld 
and its frequency determine the amount of voltage 
induced in the current transformer. Since 60 Hz is 
a standard frequency throughout the country, the 
amount of induced voltage is proportional to the 
strength of the magnetic fi eld.
The clamp-on type of ammeter can have differ-
ent range settings by changing the turns ratio of 
the secondary of the transformer just as the inline 
ammeter does in Figure 3–13. The primary of the 
current transformer is the conductor the ammeter 
is connected around. If the ammeter is connected 
around one wire as shown in Figure 3–16, the 

UNIT 3  Measuring Instruments   31
 Figure 3–15
Multirange and clamp-on ammeter combination. 
 (Courtesy of Triplett Corp.).
 Figure 3–16
Clamp-on ammeter used to measure the running current 
of a compressor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 3–17
Two turns of wire change the turns ratio of the 
 transformer. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
primary has one turn of wire as compared to the 
number of turns of wire in the secondary. If two 
turns of wire are wrapped around the jaw of the 
ammeter, the primary winding now contains two 
turns instead of one, and the turns ratio of the trans-
former is changed, Figure 3–17. The ammeter will 
now indicate double the amount of current in the 
circuit. The reading on the scale of the meter would 
have to be divided by two to get the correct reading. 
For example, assume two turns of wire have been 
wrapped around the ammeter jaw, and the meter 
indicates a current of 3 amps. The actual current in 
this circuit is 1.5 amps (3 ÷ 2  1.5). The ability to 
change the turns ratio of a clamp-on ammeter can 
be very useful for measuring low currents such as 
those found in a control circuit. Changing the turns 
ratio of the transformer is not limited to wrapping 
two turns of wire around the jaw of the amme-
ter. Any number of turns of wire can be wrapped 
around the jaw of the ammeter and the reading will 
be divided by that number. If three turns of wire are 
wrapped around the jaw of the meter, the reading 
will be divided by three.
LOAD

32   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
A very handy device can be made by wrapping 
10 turns of wire around some core of nonmagnetic 
material, such as a thin piece of plastic pipe. Because 
the device is intended to be used for low current 
readings, the wire size does not have to be large. A 
#20 or #18 American Wire Gauge (AWG) wire is 
large enough. Plastic tape is used to secure the turns 
of wire to the core material, and two alligator clips 
are connected to the ends of the wire. This device 
is shown in Figure 3–18. To use this device, break 
connection in the circuit to be tested, and insert the 
10 turns of wire using the alligator clips. The jaw of 
the ammeter is placed around the plastic core. The 
primary of the transformer now contains 10 turns 
of wire, and the scale factor can now be divided by a 
factor of 10. The correct ammeter reading is found 
by moving the decimal point one place to the left. If 
the ammeter has a low scale of 6 amps full-scale, it 
can now be used to measure .6 amps full-scale. This 
can be a real advantage when it is necessary to mea-
sure control currents that may not be greater than 
.2 amps under normal operating conditions.
Some clamp-on ammeters use a digital read-out 
instead of a meter movement. A digital type meter 
is shown in Figure 3–19. The digital ammeters are 
 generally better for measuring low current values, but 
the 10 turn scale divider can be used with these amme-
ters also. Just remember to divide the reading shown 
by a factor of 10. The clamp-on ammeters discussed 
in this unit are intended to be used for measuring AC 
currents only, and will not operate if connected to a 
DC line. There are clamp-on type ammeters, however, 
that can be used to measure DC current.
Many clamp-on ammeters are designed to mea-
sure AC volts and ohms as well as AC current. This 
makes the meter a more versatile instrument. When 
voltage or resistance is to be measured, a set of leads 
is attached to the meter.
OHMMETER
The ohmmeter is used to measure resistance. The 
common volt-ohm-milliammeter (VOM) 
contains an ohmmeter. The ohmmeter must  provide 
its own power supply to measure resistance. This is 
done with batteries located inside the instrument. 
When resistance is to be measured, the meter must 
 Figure 3–18
Scale divider used with clamp-on ammeter. The  ammeter 
indicates a value of 3.25 amperes. If the scale divider 
has a ratio of 10:1, the actual current is 0.325 amps.  
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 3–19
Digital clamp-on ammeter. (Courtesy of Simpson  Electric Co.).

UNIT 3  Measuring Instruments   33
 Figure 3–20
The ohmmeter must be set at zero. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
 Figure 3–21
Read the ohmmeter from right to left. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
fi rst be zeroed. Zeroing is done with the ohms adjust 
control located on the front of the meter. To zero 
the meter, connect the leads together and adjust 
the ohms adjust knob until the meter indicates 
0 at the far right end of the scale, Figure 3–20. 
When the leads are separated, the meter will again 
indicate infi nity resistance at the far left side of the 
meter scale. When the leads are connected across 
a resistance, the meter will again indicate up scale. 
Figure 3–21 shows a meter indicating a resistance 
of 25 ohms, assuming the range setting is R  10.
Ohmmeters can have different range settings 
such as R  1, R  100, R  1,000, or R  10,000. 
On the R  1 setting, the resistance is measured 
straight off the resistance scale located at the top of 
the meter. If the range is set for R  1,000, however, 
the reading must be multiplied by 1,000. The ohm-
meter reading shown in Figure 3–21 would be indi-
cating a resistance of 2,500 ohms if the range had 
been set for R  1,000. Notice that the  ohmmeter 
scale is read backward from the other scales. Zero 
ohms is located on the far right side of the scale, 
and maximum ohms is located at the far left side. It 
generally takes a little time and practice to read the 
ohmmeter properly.
Digital ohmmeters display the resistance in fi g-
ures instead of using a meter movement. When 
using a digital ohmmeter, care must be taken to 
notice the scale indication on the meter. For exam-
ple, most digital meters will display a K on the scale 
to indicate kilohms or an M to indicate megohms. 
(Kilo means 1,000, and mega means 1,000,000.) 
If the meter is showing a resistance of (.200 K), 
it means .2  1,000, or 200 ohms. If the meter 
indicates (1.65 M), it means 1.65  1,000,000, or 
1,650,000 ohms.
The ohmmeter must never be connected to a cir-
cuit with power on. Because the ohmmeter uses its 
own internal power supply, it has a very low operat-
ing voltage. If a meter is connected to power when it 
is set in the ohms position, it will probably damage 
or destroy the meter.
SUMMARY
 A voltmeter is a high resistance device and is designed to be connected directly to the 
power line.
 The resistance of an analog voltmeter, a voltmeter with a scale and moving pointer, 
changes with the setting of the meter.
 An analog voltmeter typically has a resistance of 5,000 ohms per volt on the AC setting 
and 20,000 ohms per volt on the DC setting.
 Digital voltmeters generally have a resistance of 10 million ohms on all range settings.

34   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
 The three basic steps to reading an analog meter are:
A. Determine what the meter indicates.
B. Determine the full-scale value of the meter.
C. Read the meter.
 Ammeters are low resistance devices and must be connected in series with the load.
 AC ammeters generally use a current transformer to change scale values.
 Current transformers designed to measure large amounts of current have a standard out-
put current of 5 amps.
 Most clamp-on ammeters can measure values of AC current only because they depend on 
magnetic induction to operate.
 The range setting of clamp-on ammeters can be changed by wrapping more turns of wire 
around the meter jaw.
 Ohmmeters are used to measure the resistance of a circuit.
 Ohmmeters should never be connected to a circuit that has power applied to it.
 Ohmmeters must have their own source of power to operate.
KEY TERMS
ammeter
analog meter
clamp-on
current transformer
digital meter
inline
input impedance
multiranged
ohmmeter
turns ratio
voltmeter
volt-ohm-milliammeter (VOM)
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What type of meter has a high resistance connected in series with the meter movement?
 
2. How is a voltmeter connected into the circuit?
 
3. If a voltmeter has a resistance of 5,000 ohms per volt, what is the resistance of the 
meter when it is set on the 300-volt range?
 
4. What is the advantage of using a voltmeter that has a high impedance as opposed to 
a low-impedance meter?
 
5. What is an analog meter?
 
6. Why must an ammeter be connected in series with the load?
 
7. What device is used to change the scale values of an AC ammeter?
 
8. What is meant by the term inline ammeter?
 
9. A clamp-on ammeter has three turns of wire wrapped around the movable jaw. If the meter 
is indicating a current of 15 amps, how much current is actually fl owing in the circuit?
 10. List the three steps for reading a meter.
 11. What type of meter contains its own internal power supply?
 12. What precaution must be taken when using an ohmmeter?

35
Electrical circuits can be divided into three basic 
types. These are series, parallel, and combi-
nation. The simplest of these circuits is the series 
circuit shown in Figure 4–1. A series circuit is 
characterized by the fact that it has only one path 
for current fl ow. If it is assumed that current must 
fl ow from point A to point B in the circuit shown in 
Figure 4–1, it will fl ow through each of the resistors. 
Therefore, the current fl ow in a series circuit must be 
the same at any point in the circuit. Another rule of 
series circuits states that the sum of the voltage drops 
around the circuit must equal the applied voltage. A 
third rule of series circuits states that the total resis-
tance is equal to the sum of the individual resistors.
The circuit shown in Figure 4–2 shows the val-
ues of current fl ow, voltage drop, and resis-
tance for each of the resistors. Notice that the total 
resistance of the circuit can be found by adding the 
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Deﬁ ne a series circuit
 Find Ohm’s law values for series 
circuits
 Deﬁ ne a parallel circuit
 Find Ohm’s law values for parallel 
circuits
 Discuss combination circuits
 Find Ohm’s law values for 
combination circuits
Electrical 
Circuits
UNIT 4

36   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
they will equal the voltage applied to the circuit 
(40  20  60  120).
Because a series circuit has only one path for cur-
rent fl ow, if any point in the circuit should become 
open, current fl ow throughout the entire circuit 
will stop. Some strings of Christmas tree lights are 
wired in series. If any bulb in the string burns out, 
all of the lights will go out. When the defective bulb 
is replaced, all of the lights will operate. Because 
of this characteristic of series circuits, fuses and 
circuit breakers are connected in series with what 
they are intended to protect. Figure 4–3 shows a 
fuse used to protect an air conditioning unit. If the 
fuse should open, current fl ow to the entire circuit 
will stop.
PARALLEL CIRCUITS
Parallel circuits are characterized by the fact that 
they have more than one path for current fl ow. 
The circuit shown in Figure 4–4 illustrates mul-
tiple paths of a parallel circuit. If the current in this 
values of each of the individual resistors (20  10  
30  60 ohms). The amount of current fl ow in the 
circuit can be found by using Ohm’s law.
I    E 
__ 
R  
I    120 
____ 
60  
I  2 amps
There is a current fl ow in the circuit of 2 amps. 
Notice that the same current fl ows through each of 
the resistors. The voltage drop across each resistor can 
be found using Ohm’s law (E  I  R). The voltage 
dropped across resistor R1 is 2  20  40 volts. 
This means that it takes a voltage of 40 volts to 
push 2 amps of current through 20 ohms of resis-
tance. If a voltmeter is connected across resistor 
R1, it would indicate a voltage drop of 40 volts. 
The voltage drop of resistor R2 can be found the 
same way (E  I  R), (2  10  20). The voltage 
dropped across resistor R2 is 20 volts. The third 
resistor has a voltage drop of 2  30  60 volts. 
Notice that if the voltage drops are added together, 
A
B
 Figure 4–1
Series circuit. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 Figure 4–2
Series circuit. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

UNIT 4  Electrical Circuits     37  
 circuit is assumed to fl ow from point A to point B, 
there are three separate paths through which it 
can fl ow. Current can fl ow from point A, through 
resistor R1 to point B, or it can fl ow from point A 
through resistor R2 to point B, or from point A 
through resistor R3 to point B. Because current can 
fl ow through each of these resistors, the total cur-
rent fl ow in the circuit is the sum of these individual 
currents. A rule for parallel circuits states that the 
total current in a parallel circuit is the sum of the cur-
rents through the individual paths (It  I1  I2  
I3). Notice in Figure 4–4 that each of the resistors is 
connected directly across the incoming power line. 
Therefore, all the components in a parallel circuit have 
the same voltage drop.
Each time a new component is added to a paral-
lel circuit, a new path for current fl ow is created. 
Because there is less opposition to current fl ow each 
time a component is added, the total resistance of 
the circuit is decreased. The total resistance of a 
parallel circuit can be found using either of three 
formulas. The fi rst of these formulas is:
Rt    R1  R2 
________ 
R1  R2  
The second formula is:
 1 
__ 
Rt     1 
___ 
R1     1 
___ 
R2     1 
___ 
R3     1 
___ 
RN  
or
 1 
__ 
Rt    1 
___ 
R1    1 
___ 
R2     1 
___ 
R3     1 
___ 
RN  
The third formula is:
Rt    R 
__ 
N  
The third formula can be used only when all resistors 
connected in parallel are the same value. Assume 
that four resistors with a value of 100 ohms each 
are connected in parallel. The total resistance would 
be 25 ohms. To use this formula, divide the resistance 
of one resistor by the total number of resistors.
Rt    R 
__ 
N  
Rt    100 
____ 
4  
Rt  25 
Figure 4–5 shows a parallel circuit containing three 
resistors with the values of 15, 10, and 30 ohms. 
The total resistance of the circuit can be found by 
using either of the two formulas.
Rt    15  10 
________ 
15  10     150 
____ 
25   6
Notice that in this formula only two of the resistors 
can be found at a time. It is now necessary to use the 
total resistance of the fi rst two resistors and use that 
value for R1 in the formula. Resistor R3 is used in 
the R2 position in the formula.
Rt    6  30 
_______ 
6  30  
Rt    180 
____ 
36  
Rt  5 ohms
The total resistance of this parallel circuit is 5 ohms. 
The second formula can be used to fi nd the total 
FUSE
AIR-CONDITIONING
UNIT
 Figure 4–3
Fuses are connected in series. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
R1
A
B
R2
R3
 Figure 4–4
Parallel circuits have more than 
one path for current ﬂ ow. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

38   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
If 120 volts is applied to the circuit, the values 
of voltage and current for the entire circuit can be 
found. Because each of the resistors is connected 
directly across the power line, each resistor will have 
the same voltage drop of 120 volts. The current fl ow 
through resistor R1 can be found using Ohm’s law.
I    E 
__ 
R  
I    120 
____ 
15  
I  8 amps
The current fl ow through resistor R2 is (120/10  
12 amps). The current fl ow through resistor R3 is 
(120/30  4 amps). The total current fl ow in the 
circuit can be found by using the formula
It    Et 
__ 
Rt  
It  120/5
It  24 amps
Notice that the total current can also be found by 
adding the currents fl owing through the individual 
resistors (8  12  4  24 amps).
Most circuits are connected in parallel. The lights 
and outlets in a house are connected in parallel. 
Because all of the lights and outlets are connected in 
parallel, each light has an applied voltage of 120 volts, 
and each outlet can supply 120 volts to whatever is 
connected to it. If the lights in a house were wired in 
series, all of the lights would have to be turned on 
before any of them would burn.
COMBINATION CIRCUITS
A combination circuit contains both series and 
parallel connections within the same circuit. In 
resistance by plugging the values of resistance into 
the formula. With these values, it becomes a matter 
of adding fractions. When fractions are to be added, 
the fi rst thing that must be done is to fi nd some 
number all the denominators will divide into. This 
is called fi nding a common denominator. For 
this problem, 30 will be the common denominator.
 1 
__ 
Rt     1 
___ 
15     1 
___ 
10     1 
___ 
30  
 1 
__ 
Rt     2 
___ 
30     3 
___ 
30     1 
___ 
30  
 1 
__ 
Rt     6 
___ 
30  
 Rt 
__ 
1      30 
___ 
6  
Rt  5 ohms
Notice that the two formulas give the same answer.
Another method of fi nding the total resistance in 
a parallel circuit is to fi nd the reciprocal of each 
individual resistor. A third rule for parallel circuits 
states that total resistance is the reciprocal of the sum 
of the reciprocals of the individual resistors. The prob-
lem can, therefore, be solved by fi nding the recipro-
cal of each individual resistor, adding them together, 
and fi nding the reciprocal of the sum. (The reciprocal 
of any number can be found by dividing that number 
into 1.) The problem can be solved as follows:
 1 
__ 
Rt     1 
___ 
R1     1 
___ 
R2     1 
___ 
R3  
 1 
__ 
Rt     1 
___ 
15     1 
___ 
10     1 
___ 
30  
 1 
__ 
Rt   .0667  .1  .0333
 1 
__ 
Rt   .02
Rt  5 ohms
 Figure 4–5
Three parallel resistors. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 4  Electrical Circuits     39  
Figure 4–6, resistor R1 is connected in series with 
resistors R2 and R3. Resistors R2 and R3 are con-
nected in parallel with each other. If it is assumed 
that current fl ows from point A to point B, all of the 
current will have to fl ow through resistor R1. At 
the junction of resistors R2 and R3, however, the 
current divides and fl ows through separate paths. 
The amount of current that fl ows through each 
resistor is determined by its resistance. Notice that 
all of the circuit current must fl ow through R1. 
Because there is only one current path through 
R1, it is connected in series with the rest of the 
circuit. When the current reaches the junction of 
resistors R2 and R3, there is more than one path 
for current fl ow. These resistors are, therefore, 
 connected in parallel.
Values will now be added to the example circuit 
shown in Figure 4–6. It will be assumed that resistor 
R1 has a value of 75 ohms; resistor R2 has a value of 
100 ohms; and resistor R3 has a value of 125 ohms. 
It will also be assumed that a voltage of 24 volts 
is connected to the circuit, Figure 4–7. To fi nd the 
missing values in this circuit, it is fi rst necessary 
to determine the total resistance. The fi rst step in 
determining the total resistance is to calculate the 
resistance of the parallel block formed by resistors 
R2 and R3. This value will become RC (resistance of 
the combination).
Rc    
1 
________ 
 1 
___ 
R2     1 
___ 
R3  
  
Rc    
1 
___________ 
 
 1 
____ 
100     1 
____ 
125  
  
Rc    1 
_____ 
0.01   0.008
Rc    1 
______ 
0.018  
Rc  55.556 
Now that the combined resistance of resistors R2 
and R3 is known, this value can be treated as one 
single resistor. The circuit will now be redrawn as 
shown in Figure 4–8. The circuit is now a simple 
series circuit containing resistors R1 and RC.
The total circuit resistance of the circuit can 
be determined by adding the values of resistors R1 
and RC.
R1
A
R2
R3
B
 Figure 4–6
Combination circuit. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 E2 
 I2 
R2 100 Ω
 E3 
 I3 
R3 125 Ω
 E1 
 I1 
R1 75 Ω
 ET 24V
 IT 
RT 
 Figure 4–7
Adding circuit values. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

40   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
Resistor RC in reality is the combined values of 
resistors R2 and R3. The values that apply to resis-
tor RC, therefore, apply to the parallel block formed 
by resistors R2 and R3. In a parallel circuit, the volt-
age is the same across each branch. Therefore, the 
voltage dropped across resistor RC is dropped across 
both R2 and R3. Now that the voltage drop across 
each is known, the current fl ow through each can 
be determined using Ohm’s law.
I2    E2 
___ 
R2  
I2    10.2 
_____ 
100  
I2  0.102 amps
I2    E3 
___ 
R3  
I2    10.2 
_____ 
125  
I2  0.0816 amps
The circuit with all calculated values is shown in 
Figure 4–10.
Another example of a combination circuit is 
shown in Figure 4–11. In this circuit, resistors R1 
and R2 are connected in series with each other and 
resistors R3 and R4 are connected in series with 
each other. Resistors R1 and R2 are connected in 
Rt  R1  RC
Rt  75  55.556
Rt  130.556 
Because the applied or total circuit voltage is known 
and the total resistance is known, the total circuit 
current can be determined using Ohm’s law.
It    Et 
__ 
Rt  
It    
24 
________ 
130.556  
It  0.184 amps
In a series circuit the current is the same at any 
point in the circuit. The voltage drop across resistors 
R1 and RC can now be determined.
E1  I1  R1
E1  0.184  75
E1  13.8 volts
EC  IC  RC
EC  0.184  55.556
EC  10.2 volts
The computed circuit values are shown in 
Figure 4–9.
 E1 
 I1 
R1 75 Ω
 EC 
 IC 
RC 55.556 Ω
 ET 24V
 IT 
RT 
 Figure 4–8
Resistors R2 and R3 become RC. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 E1 13.8 
 I1 0.184 
R1 75 Ω
 EC 10.2 
 IC 0.184 
RC 55.556 Ω
 ET 24V
 IT 0.184 
RT 130.556 
 Figure 4–9
Circuit values for the series circuit 
are determined. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

UNIT 4  Electrical Circuits     41  
parallel with resistors R3 and R4. It is assumed that 
resistor R1 has a value of 200 ohms, resistor R2 
has a value of 150 ohms, resistor R3 has a value 
of 300 ohms, and resistor R4 has a value of 
250 ohms. It is also assumed that 120 volts is applied 
to the circuit.
The fi rst step in solving this circuit is to compute 
the total circuit resistance. This can be done by com-
puting the total resistance of the branch containing 
resistors R1 and R2 and the branch containing 
resistors R3 and R4. Resistors R1 and R2 are con-
nected in series. The total resistance of this branch 
can be computed by adding the values of resistors 
R1 and R2. This value will be RC1 (resistance of 
combination 1).
RC1  R1  R2
RC1  200  150
RC1  350 
The resistance of the second branch can be computed 
by adding the values of R3 and R4. This resistance 
value will be RC2 (resistance of combination 2).
RC2  R3  R4
RC2  300  250
RC2  550 
The circuit can now be reduced to a simple paral-
lel circuit containing a 300-ohm and a 550-ohm 
resistor, Figure 4–12. The total resistance can now 
be computed using one of the parallel resistance 
formulas.
Rt    Rc1  Rc2 
__________ 
Rc1  Rc2  
Rt    350  550 
 
__________ 
 
350  550  
Rt    192.500 
________ 
900  
Rt  213.889 
 E2 10.2 
 I2 0.102 
R2 100 Ω
 E3 10.2 
 I3  0.0816
R3 125 Ω
 E1 13.8 
 I1 0.184 
R1 75 Ω
 ET 24V
 IT 0.184 
RT 130.556 Ω
 Figure 4–10
Circuit with all computed values. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 ET 120V
 IT  
RT  
 E3    
 I3 
R3 300 Ω
 E1 
 I1  
R1 200 Ω
 E4    
 I4  
R4 250 Ω
 E2 
 I2  
R2 150 Ω
 Figure 4–11
Example combination 
circuit 2. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

42   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
through any part of the circuit. Therefore, the 
current flowing through RC1 is the same cur-
rent flowing through R1 and R2. Likewise, 
the current flowing through RC2 is the same 
current that flows through resistors R3 and R4, 
Figure 4–14. Now that the value of resistance and 
current are known for each of the resistors, the 
voltage drop across each can be computed.
E1  I1  R1
E1  0.343  200
E1  68.6 V
E2  I2  R2
E2  0.343  150
E2  51.45 V
E3  I3  R3
E3  0.218  300
E3  65.4 V
E4  I4  R4
E4  0.218  250
E4  54.5 V
All values for the circuit are shown in 
Figure 4–15.
The total current can now be computed using 
Ohm’s law.
It    Et 
__ 
Rt  
It    120 
________ 
213.889  
It  0.561 amps
Because resistors RC1 and RC2 are connected in 
parallel, the voltage across each is the same as the 
applied voltage of the circuit. The current through 
each branch can now be determined.
IC1    120 
____ 
350  
IC1  0.343 amps
IC2    120 
____ 
350  
IC2  0.218 amps
The complete values for the parallel circuit are 
shown in Figure 4–13.
The values of RC1 and RC2 can now be sub-
stituted in the original circuit. Resistor RC1 is a 
combination of resistors R1 and R2. The values 
of RC1 apply to the branch composed of R1 and 
R2. Resistors R1 and R2 are connected in series. 
In a series circuit, the current flow is the same 
 ET 120
 IT  
RT  
 EC2  
 IC2  
RC2 550 Ω
 EC1  
 IC1  
RC1 350 Ω
 Figure 4–12
Reducing the circuit to a 
simple parallel circuit.
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 ET 120
 IT 0.561
RT  213.889 Ω
 EC2 120  
 IC2 0.218 
RC2 550 Ω
 EC1 120
 IC1  0.343
RC1 350 Ω
 Figure 4–13
The values for the 
parallel circuit have been 
determined. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

UNIT 4  Electrical Circuits     43  
 Three basic types of electric circuits are the series, parallel, and combination.
 Series circuits contain only one path for current fl ow.
 Three rules concerning the electrical values in a series circuit are:
A. The current fl ow is the same in all parts of a series circuit.
B. The sum of the voltage drops across each element is equal to the applied voltage.
C. The total resistance can be determined by adding the resistance of each element in the 
circuit.
 Parallel circuits contain more than one path for current fl ow.
 Three rules concerning the electrical values in a parallel circuit are:
A. The voltage is the same across all branches in a parallel circuit.
B. The total current can be found by adding the current fl ow through each branch of the 
circuit.
 ET 120V
 IT 0.561 
RT 213.889  
 E3    
 I3 0.218 
R3 300 Ω
 E1 
 I1 0.343  
R1 200 Ω
 E4    
 I4 0.218  
R4 250 Ω
 E2 
 I2 0.343  
R2 150 Ω
 Figure 4–14
Determining the current 
ﬂ ow through each 
branch. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 ET 120V
 IT 0.561 
RT 213.889  
 E3 65.4V    
 I3 0.218 
R3 300 Ω
 E1 68.6V 
 I1 0.343  
R1 200 Ω
 E4 54.5V   
 I4 0.218  
R4 250 Ω
 E2  51.45
 I2 0.343  
R2 150 Ω
 Figure 4–15
All missing values have 
been determined. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
SUMMARY

44   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
C. The total resistance can be found by adding the reciprocal of the resistance of each 
branch and then taking the reciprocal of that sum.
 Combination circuits contain both series and parallel branches.
combination
common denominator
current fl ow
parallel
reciprocal
series
voltage drop
KEY TERMS
 
1. List the three basic types of electrical circuits.
 
2. What is the major characteristic of a series circuit?
 
3. List the three basic rules for series circuits.
 
4. What is the major characteristic of a parallel circuit?
 
5. List the three basic rules for the parallel circuit.
 
6. What type of circuit is used most often in industry and the home?
 
7. What type of circuit is used the least in industry and the home?
 
8. Three resistors valued at 300 ohms, 200 ohms, and 600 ohms are connected in 
series. What is their total resistance?
 
9. If the three resistors in question 8 are connected in parallel, what is their total 
 resistance?
 10. How are fuses and circuit breakers connected in a circuit and why are they connected 
this way?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
PRACTICE PROBLEMS SET 1
 1. Refer to the circuit shown in Figure 4–2. Find the missing values.
  
 ET = 240 
E1  
 
E2   
E3
 IT   
I1  
 
I2   
I3 
 RT   
R1 = 1,200 Ω 
R2 = 2,000 Ω 
R3 = 1,800 Ω

UNIT 4  Electrical Circuits     45  
 2. 
   ET  48 
E1  
 
E2   
E3  22.795
 IT   
I1  
 
I2   
I3
 RT  990  
R1  220  
R2  300  
R3
 3.
   ET  120 
E1  24.75 
E2   
E3  59.4
 IT   
I1  
 
I2   
I3
 RT   
R1  
 
R2  2.2 k 
R3
 4. Refer to the circuit shown in Figure 4–5. Find the missing values.
   ET   
E1  
 
E2   
E3
 IT  26 
I1  
 
I2   
I3
 RT   
R1  24  
R2  18  
R3  36 
 5.
   ET   
E1  
 
E2   
E3
 IT   
I1  
 
I2   
I3  1.5
 RT  8  
R1  24  
R2  48  
R3
 6.
   ET   
E1  
 
E2   
E3
 IT  0.289 
I1  0.139 
I2  0.1 
I3
 RT   
R1  860  
R2  1,200  
R3  2,400 
 7. Refer to the circuit shown in Figure 4–7. Find all missing values.
  
 ET  120 
E1  
 
E2   
E3
 IT   
I1  
 
I2   
I3
 RT   
R1  360  
R2  1,200  
R3  1,600 
 8.
   ET   
E1  
 
E2   
E3
 IT   
I1  0.080 
I2   
I3
 RT  2,600  
R1  
 
R2  2,400  
R3  4,800 

46   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
 9.
   ET   
E1  
 
E2   
E3  114.18
 IT  0.466 
I1  
 
I2   
I3
 RT   
R1  270  
R2  510  
R3  470 
10. Refer to the circuit shown in Figure 4–11. Find all missing values.
  
 ET  277 
E1  
 
E2   
E3  
 
E4 
 IT   
I1  
 
I2   
I3  
 
I4
 RT   
R1  3,300  
R2  4,300  
R3  2,700  
R4  5,100 
 11. 
   ET   
E1  
 
E2   
E3  
 
E4
 IT   
I1  0.06 
I2   
I3  
 
I4
 RT  960  
R1  
 
R2  1,000  
R3  650  
R4  950 
 12.
   ET   
E1  
 
E2   
E3  
 
E4
 IT   
I1  0.0444 
12   
I3  0.0369 
I4
 RT   
R1  3,000 
R2  2,400  
R3  1,800  
R4  4,700 
PRACTICE PROBLEMS SET 2
Ohm’s Law
 
1. E  
 
I   10 A
 
R  12 
 
2. I    
 
E   220 V
 
R  10 
 
3. R  
 
E   120 V
 
I    3 A
 
4. E   
 
I    1 A
 
R  240 
 
5.
 
  
10 Ω
V =  ________________
10 Ω
1.2A

UNIT 4  Electrical Circuits     47  
 
6.
 
  
30 Ω
V =  ________________
30 Ω
30 Ω
1.2A
PRACTICE PROBLEMS SET 3
Ohm’s Law
 1.
  
10 Ω
IT =  ________________
10 Ω
120 V
 2.
  
10 Ω
10 Ω
IT =  ________________
10 Ω
120 V
 3.
  
5 Ω
IT =  ________________
10 Ω
10 Ω
240 V

48   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
 4.
  
10 Ω
IT =  ________________
10 Ω
240 V
48A
PRACTICE PROBLEMS SET 4
Ohm’s Law
 
1. E  
 
I    1 A
 
R  12 
 
2. I    
 
E   220V
 
R  5 
 
3. R 
 
E   120V
 
I    5 A
 
4. E  
 
I    .5 A
 
R  240 
 
 
 
50 Ω
VT =  ________________
RT =  ________________
50 Ω
1.2A
 
 
 
30 Ω
VT =  ________________
RT =  ________________
40 Ω
30 Ω
1.2A
5.
6.
7.
8.

UNIT 4  Electrical Circuits     49  
PRACTICE PROBLEMS SET 5
 1.
  
20 Ω
IT =  ________________
20 Ω
120 V
 2.
  
10 Ω
10 Ω
IT =  ________________
20 Ω
120 V
 3.
  
15 Ω
IT =  ________________
10 Ω
10 Ω
240 V
 
  
10 Ω
IT =  ________________
RT =  ________________
10 Ω
240 V
48A
24A
4.
5.

Air conditioning equipment must be connected to 
an electrical service. The type of air conditioning 
equipment used is generally determined by the type 
of electrical service available to operate it. The air 
conditioning technician must have knowledge of 
different types of electrical services.
POWER GENERATION
In the United States and Canada, power is generated 
as a three-phase 60-hertz voltage. The term hertz 
means 60 cycles per second. This means that the 
voltage increases from zero to its maximum positive 
value, returns to zero, increases to its maximum 
negative value and returns to zero 60 times each 
second. Figure 5–1 shows one complete cycle of 
A C voltage.
Electrical 
 Services
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Discuss alternating current
 Discuss three-phase power
 Find voltage and current values for 
a wye-connected three-phase service
 Find voltage and current values for a 
delta-connected three-phase service
 Discuss a high-leg three-phase 
connection
 Discuss an open-delta three-phase 
service
 Discuss a 120/240 volt single-phase 
service
 Describe different kinds of circuit-
breakers
 Discuss fuses
 Be able to ﬁ nd standard fuse rating 
in accord with the National Electrical 
Code®
 Install a single-phase panel box
50
UNIT 5

UNIT 5  Electrical Services   51
physically wound 120° apart, the three voltages are 
120° out of phase with each other. The windings of 
the stator are connected to form one of the two basic 
three-phase connections. These connections are the 
delta and wye.
WYE CONNECTION
The wye connection is also referred to as the star 
connection. This connection is made by joining one 
end of each of the windings together as shown in 
Figure 5–3. The connection shown in Figure 5–4 
is a wye connection that has been drawn schemati-
cally to make it easier to see and understand. Notice 
how one end of each of the windings is joined at 
the centerpoint. The wye connection can be used 
to provide an increase in the output or line voltage. 
The phase voltage is the voltage produced across 
one of the windings. The line voltage is the voltage 
produced across the output points of the connec-
tion. Figure 5–5 shows a wye connection connected 
to a three-phase load bank. Ammeters and voltme-
ters are used to illustrate the differences between 
phase values and line values. Notice that the phase 
value of voltage is measured from the output of 
the winding, at point C, to the centerpoint of the wye 
The term three phase means that there are 
three separate voltage waveforms produced by the 
alternator. An alternator is a generator that 
produces AC voltage. For the alternator to produce 
the three phases, the internal windings of the 
alternator—called the stator—are wound 120° 
apart. Figure 5–2 illustrates the windings of an alter-
nator. The moving part of the alternator, called the 
rotor, is actually a large electromagnet. When the 
magnet is turned, the magnetic fi eld cuts through 
the windings of the stator and induces a voltage into 
them. The amount of voltage induced is controlled by 
the strength of the magnetic fi eld, and the frequency 
or hertz is controlled by the speed of the rotation of 
the magnet. Because the windings of the stator are 
 Figure 5–1
AC sine wave. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
N
C
A
B
S
 Figure 5–2
The windings of an alternator are 120° apart. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
N
C
A
B
L1
L2
L3
S
 Figure 5–3
Wye or star connection. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 5–4
Schematic of a wye connection. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

52   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
and the voltage between any two of the lines is 
208 volts. The 208/120-volt three-phase connec-
tion is very common in industry and commer-
cial buildings. Another very common three-phase 
connection at the point labeled O. The line value is 
measured across two of the output points of the con-
nection (B&C). The phase current meter is inserted 
in the winding of the alternator, and the line current 
meter is inserted in the output line. Notice also that 
the two ammeters are indicating the same value of 
current. In a wye connection, phase current and line 
current are equal. The voltages, however, are not. 
The line voltage in a wye connection is 1.732 times 
greater than the phase voltage (1.732 is the square 
root of 3). The reason for this voltage increase is 
that the voltages are 120° out of phase with each 
other. Figure 5–6 shows a diagram to illustrate this. 
Because the three voltages are out of phase with 
each other, they will be added. Vector addition must 
be used, however, because of the 120° phase shift. 
If three voltages are shown in a length that corre-
sponds to 120 volts, and a resultant is drawn to the 
point of intersection, it will be found that the length 
of the resultant corresponds to 208 volts. The 120° 
phase shift between voltages is the reason the two 
120-volt phases add to produce 208 volts instead 
of 240 volts.
Wye-connected systems often use a fourth con-
ductor connected to the center of the connection. 
This conductor becomes the neutral, Figure 5–7. 
Notice in this connection that the voltage between 
any line and neutral is the phase voltage or 120 volts, 
 Figure 5–6
Vector diagram of the phase and line values in a three-
phase system. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
208
120°
120
208
120
208
120
A
O
C
A
PHASE
CURRENT
10  AMPS
10  AMPS
LOAD
LINE  CURRENT
B
PHASE
VOLTAGE
120
LINE
VOLTAGE
208
V
V
A
 Figure 5–5
Phase and line values of a wye connection. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 5  Electrical Services   53
 Figure 5–10 shows a delta system connected to a 
three-phase load bank. Ammeters and voltmeters 
are used to illustrate the differences in phase and 
line values of voltage and current. Notice that 
the values of phase voltage and line voltage are 
equal for the delta connection. One of the rules 
for three-phase systems states that line voltage and 
phase voltage are equal in a delta connection. The 
ammeters, however, are not equal. In a delta con-
nection, the line current is 1.732 times greater than 
the phase current. This is the reason that the delta 
connection is so popular in industry. The current 
fl ow through the windings of a transformer are 
less than the line amps if the transformer bank is 
connected in delta.
 four-wire  connection is shown in Figure 5–8. This is 
a 480/277-volt connection. Two hundred seventy-
seven volts is often used in large stores and offi ce 
buildings to operate the fl uorescent lights while the 
480-volt is used to operate large air conditioning 
systems. The 120-volt connections are provided 
by transformers that step down the 480 volts to 
120 volts.
DELTA CONNECTION
The next connection to be covered is the delta. A 
schematic diagram of a delta connection is shown 
in Figure 5–9. This connection gets its name from 
the fact that it looks like the Greek letter delta (). 
V
120
120
V
208
V
V
208
V
208
V
120
L1
L2
N
L3
 Figure 5–7
Fourth wire connected for a neutral. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 5–8
A 480/277-volt connection. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 5–9
The delta connection. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

54   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
L3, and neutral are used to supply 240/120 volts for 
single-phase loads. Care must be taken not to con-
nect a 120-volt device across L1 and neutral. Line 
L1 is known as a high leg and a voltage of about 
208 volts exists between these two points.
OPEN-DELTA SYSTEM
Another type of three-phase service is known as 
the open delta. The open-delta system has 
the advantage of needing only two transformers 
to provide three-phase voltage. This connection is 
often used when the amount of three-phase power 
needed is low, or if the power needs are expected to 
increase in the future. The open-delta connection, 
however, does have some disadvantages. The total 
HIGH-LEG SYSTEM
Figure 5–11 illustrates another common type of 
transformer connection. This is a 240/120-volt 
system with a high-leg. Three transformers are 
connected to form a delta connection. One of the 
transformers is larger than the other two, however, 
and is center tapped. The large transformer must 
be able to supply power for both three-phase and 
single-phase loads. The other two transformers sup-
ply power for the three-phase loads only. If the phase 
voltage of the transformers is 240 volts, the voltage 
between any of the three lines is 240 volts. If the 
center-tap connection is used as a neutral conduc-
tor, however, the voltages between L2 and neutral, 
and L3 and neutral will be 120 volts. Therefore, L2, 
 Figure 5–10
Voltage and current relation-
ships in a delta connection.
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 5–11
High-leg system. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
A
V
V
A
LINE  CURRENT
17.32  AMPS
PHASE  VOLTAGE
440
PHASE
CURRENT
10  AMPS
LINE  
VOLTAGE
440
LOAD
V
120
120
V
240
V
V
240
V
240
V
208
L1
L2
N
L3
50  kVA
20  kVA
20  kVA
HIGH  LEG

UNIT 5  Electrical Services   55
output power is only 84% of the combined rating 
of the transformers. If the two transformers shown 
in Figure 5–12 each have a power rating of 25 kVA 
(kilovolt amps), the total delivered power of this 
connection is only 42 kVA (25  25  50) (50  
84%  42). If at a later date the power requirements 
increase, a third transformer can be added to close 
the delta. The total output power of this connection 
is the combined rating of all three transformers. In 
this case it will be 75 kVA (25  25  25  75).
SINGLE-PHASE SERVICE
A single-phase 240/120-volt system can be 
obtained by connecting a single transformer to two 
lines of a three-phase system. The primary of the 
transformer shown in Figure 5–13 is connected to 
two of the three-phase lines of the power  company. 
k
k
k
 Figure 5–12
Open-delta system. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
V
240
V
120
3-PHASE  LINE
PRIMARY
TRANSFORMER
SECONDARY
V
120
L2
L1
NEUTRAL
 Figure 5–13
Single-phase transformer. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
PRIMARY
NEUTRAL
120
–
+
120
–
+
240
The secondary voltage of the transformer is 
240 volts. The secondary winding of the trans-
former is center tapped. The center tap is grounded 
and becomes the neutral conductor. If the volt-
age across the entire secondary is measured, it will 
be 240 volts. If the voltage between either of the 
secondary leads is measured to the center tap, it 
will be 120 volts. The reason this is true for single-
phase and not three-phase is that the voltages of the 
single-phase system are in phase with each other, 
Figure 5–14. Because the transformer center tap 
 Figure 5–14
The voltages across the winding of the second-
ary of the single-phase transformer are in 
phase with each other. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

56   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
is the neutral conductor, it will be 120 volts more 
positive than one side of the secondary winding and 
120 volts more negative than the other side of the 
secondary winding at a particular point in time. 
Because these two vectors are in phase or are in 
the same direction, they will produce a total voltage 
of 240 volts.
PANEL BOX
Regardless of the type of service used, connec-
tion will be made at a fuse or circuit-breaker 
box. Figure 5–15 shows a 150-amp single-phase 
circuit-breaker panel. Circuit breakers are made in 
different sizes and types. Figure 5–16 shows three 
different types of circuit breakers. The single-pole 
breaker is used for connecting a 120-volt circuit, 
the two-pole breaker is used for connecting a 
240-volt single-phase circuit, and the three-pole 
breaker is used for connecting a three-phase 
circuit. The three-pole breaker must be used with 
a three-phase circuit-breaker panel and cannot be 
used in a single-phase panel.
When a 120-volt connection is to be made, 
cable is brought into the panel. A two-conductor 
romex cable contains three wires—a black, 
white, and bare copper. The bare copper wire is the 
grounding wire or safety wire and is not considered 
a circuit conductor. Only the black and white wires 
are considered to be circuit conductors. The black 
wire is used as the “hot” conductor and the white 
wire is used as the neutral. Figure 5–17 shows a 
120-volt single-phase circuit connected into the 
panel box. Notice that the black wire is connected 
to the circuit breaker, and the white wire is con-
nected to the neutral bus. Notice also that the bare 
copper wire is connected to the neutral bus with 
the white wire.
When a 240-volt connection must be made, a 
two-pole circuit breaker is used. If the connection 
is to use only two-circuit conductors as shown in 
Figure 5–18, the black wire connects to one pole of 
the two-pole breaker. The National Electrical Code® 
does not permit a white wire to be used as a hot 
circuit conductor. For this reason the wire must 
be identifi ed by wrapping a piece of colored tape 
around it. The tape can be any color except white, 
gray, or green. Black or red tape is generally used. 
The identifi ed conductor is then connected to the 
other pole of the two-pole breaker. The bare copper 
wire is connected to the neutral bus.
If a 240-volt three-wire circuit is to be connected 
to the panel, a three-conductor cable is used. The 
three-conductor cable contains four wires—a black, 
red, white, and green. The green is the grounding or 
safety wire and is not considered a circuit  conductor. 
 Figure 5–15
150-amp single-phase panel. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 5–16
Single-pole, double-pole, and three-pole 
circuit  breakers. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 5  Electrical Services   57
not be a neutral depending on the type of circuit. 
For example, a 208/120-volt connection would 
use a fourth wire connected to the neutral bus. A 
440-volt straight, three-phase connection would 
use only three conductors connected to a three-pole 
breaker.
Figure 5–19 shows a 240-volt three-wire connec-
tion. The black and red wires are connected to the 
two poles of the circuit breaker. The white and green 
wires are connected to the neutral bus.
When a three-phase panel connection is made, a 
three-pole circuit breaker is used. There may or may 
 Figure 5–17
120-volt single-phase 
connection. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 Figure 5–18
240-volt single-phase two-wire 
connection. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)

58   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
as much as 225% of their full-load running current. 
If the fuse size needed does not correspond with one 
of the standard fuse sizes, the next smaller size fuse 
will have to be used. For example, assume it has 
been determined that a fuse rating of 130 amps is 
needed. The standard ratings chart for fuses shown 
in Figure 5–21 does not list a 130 amp fuse. There-
fore, the closest standard rating less than 130 amps 
FUSES
Circuit breakers are not the only means used to 
provide circuit protection. Fuses are still used to 
a great extent. Fuses are rated in two ways—by 
voltage and current. The voltage rating of a fuse 
indicates the amount of voltage the fuse is designed 
to interrupt without arcing across. Although fuses 
can be obtained that have ratings of several thou-
sand volts, the most common fuses used in the air 
conditioning fi eld are 250 volt and 600 volt. The 
600-volt fuse is longer to provide a greater distance 
between the two contact ends if the fuse link should 
blow. The extra length is needed at higher voltages 
to prevent arc-over.
Figure 5–20 shows a type of fuse that uses a 
replaceable link. When this fuse blows, the fuse car-
tridge can be taken apart and the fuse link replaced. 
This type of fuse is more expensive to purchase, but 
it could be a savings if the fuse has to be replaced 
frequently.
Fuses used for circuit protection are made in 
standard ampere ratings. Figure 5–21 shows these 
ratings as taken from the National Electrical Code®. 
Fuses for air conditioning and refrigeration equip-
ment are normally sized at 175% of the rated full-
load current of the motor. If this does not permit the 
motor to start, however, compressors can be fused 
 Figure 5–19
240-volt single-phase three-
wire connection. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 Figure 5–20
Replaceable-link type of fuse. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 5  Electrical Services   59
of the fuse. The fuse link is also designed to allow 
some amount of overload for a short period of time. 
This time delay permits the motor to start without 
 opening the fuse link. The overload protection is pro-
vided by a solder link. The solder is intended to melt 
at a specifi c temperature and a spring is used to pull 
the link apart. Although the motor starting current 
is greater than the overload protection would per-
mit, it takes time for the solder to melt, permitting 
the motor to start.
FUSED DISCONNECTS
Fused disconnects provide both a disconnect switch 
and fuse holders. Figure 5–23 shows a fused discon-
nect used for three-phase circuits. Fused disconnects, 
is 125 amps. A 125-amp fuse will be used. Notice 
that fuses can be sized as much as 225% of the full-
load current of the compressor. Fuses are sized this 
much above the running current of the motor to 
permit the fuse the ability to withstand the starting 
current of the motor. Fuses are designed to protect 
the circuit against short circuits; they are not used 
to protect the motor from overloads.
Overload protection for the motor is provided by 
the overload relay, which will be covered later, or by 
dual-element time delay fuses. Dual-element time 
delay fuses are designed to provide both types of pro-
tection. Figure 5–22 illustrates a dual-element time 
delay fuse. The fuse link is designed to open quickly 
in the event of a short circuit. Short circuit cur-
rents are generally several hundred times the rating 
240.6 Standard Ampere Ratings.
(A) Fuses and Fixed-Trip Circuit Breakers. The standard ampere ratings for fuses 
and inverse time circuit breakers shall be considered 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 45, 50, 60, 
70, 80, 90, 100, 110, 125, 150, 175, 200, 225, 250, 300, 350, 400, 450, 500, 600, 700, 
800, 1000, 1200, 1600, 2000, 2500, 3000, 4000, 5000, and 6000 amperes. Additional 
standard ampere ratings for fuses shall be 1, 3, 6, 10, and 601. The use of fuses and 
inverse time circuit breakers with nonstandard ampere ratings shall be permitted.
 Figure 5–21
Standard fuse ratings. (Reprinted with permission from NFPA 70™, National Electrical Code®. Copyright 2008, National 
Fire Protection Association, Quincy, MA 02269. This reprinted material is not the ofﬁ cial position of the 
National Fire Protection Association, which is represented by the standard in its entirety. National Electrical Code® and 
NEC® are registered trademarks of the National Fire Protection Association, Inc., Quincy MA 02269).
Fuse element
Solder
Spring
 Figure 5–22
Dual-element time-delay fuse. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

60   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
necessary, certain precautions should be taken by 
the service technician. Remember that your life is 
your own and do not trust someone else not to turn 
the circuit back on while it is being serviced. Most 
industries provide a tag that is hung on the discon-
nect while it is being serviced. A paper tag, however, 
cannot stop someone from turning the power back 
on. For this reason, a small padlock should be used 
to lock the disconnect in the off position. If a lock 
is not available, the fuses should be removed with 
fuse pullers. There is no such thing as being too safe 
when working with high-voltage electricity.
like fuses, have standard ratings. The standard sizes 
for fused disconnects are shown in Figure 5–24. 
The rating of the disconnect indicates the maximum 
size of fuse that can be used in that enclosure. For 
example, assume the 125-fuse discussed earlier in 
this unit is to be mounted in a disconnect. Because 
the fuse size is greater than 100 amps, it cannot be 
mounted in a 100-amp enclosure. The next stan-
dard size enclosure is 200 amps. The 125-amp fuses 
will have to be mounted in a 200-amp disconnect.
When servicing equipment, it is often necessary 
to turn off the power to the equipment. When this is 
 Figure 5–23
Three-phase fused disconnect. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
STANDARD DISCONNECT SIZES
 
30 amp
 
60 amp
 
100 amp
 
200 amp
 
400 amp
 
600 amp
 
1,000 amp
 
1,200 amp
 
1,600 amp
 
2,000 amp
 
3,000 amp
 
4,000 amp
 
5,000 amp
 
6,000 amp
 Figure 5–24
Standard disconnect sizes. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
SUMMARY
 The electric power in the United States and Canada is generated as three phase with a 
frequency of 60 Hz.
 The voltages of a three-phase system are 120° out of phase with each other.
 The two basic types of three-phase connections are the wye and delta.
 In a wye-connected system, the line voltage is greater than the phase voltage by a factor 
of the  √ 
__
 
3  (1.732).

UNIT 5  Electrical Services   61
 In a wye-connected system, the line current and phase current are equal.
 In a delta-connected system, the line voltage and phase voltage are equal.
 In a delta-connected system, the line current is greater than the phase current by a factor 
of  √ 
__
 
3  .
 Some delta-connected systems can produce a high-leg that has one phase with a voltage 
that is 1.732 times greater than the other two-phase voltages.
 Open-delta systems use only two transformers.
 In an open-delta system, the total kVA capacity is only about 84% of the combined kVA 
capacity of the two transformers.
 Single-phase services produce voltages that are 180° out of phase with each other.
 Single-phase services generally provide a 120/240-volt connection by grounding the cen-
ter tap of a transformer secondary and using it as a neutral conductor.
 A single-pole circuit breaker is used to provide power to a 230-volt circuit.
 A two-pole circuit breaker is used to provide power to a 240-volt circuit.
 A three-pole circuit breaker is used to provide power to a three-phase circuit.
 Fuses are sometimes used instead of circuit breakers.
  Section 240.6 of the National Electrical Code® lists standard sizes of fuses and circuit 
 breakers.
KEY TERMS
alternator
arc-over
circuit breaker
delta
fuse
hertz
high-leg
neutral
open-delta system
rotor
single-phase
single-pole breaker
star
stator
three phase
three-pole breaker
two-conductor 
   romex
two-pole breaker
wye
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What is an alternator?
 
2. What controls the output voltage of an alternator?
 
3. What controls the frequency of the alternator?
 
4. How many degrees out of phase with each other are the voltages of a three-phase 
system?
 
5. What are the two major types of three-phase connections?
 
6. List the rules concerning line and phase values of current and voltage in a wye 
connection.

62   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
 
7. List the rules concerning line and phase values of current and voltage in a 
delta connection.
 
8. In a high-leg delta-connected system, what is the voltage between the high leg 
and neutral?
 
9. What type of three-phase transformer connection uses only two transformers?
 10. How many degrees out of phase are the voltages of a single-phase system?
 11. A two-conductor romex cable contains three wires. Which wire is not counted 
and why.
 12. What type of circuit breaker is used to make a 240-volt connection?
 13. Where does the grounding conductor connect in a panel?
 14. In what two electrical units are fuses rated?
 15. It has been calculated that a 290-amp fuse is needed to protect the circuit supplying 
an air conditioning compressor. What standard rating of fuse should be used?
 16. What size fuse disconnect will be used for the fuse in question 15?
 17. What is a dual-element fuse?

63
When installing air conditioning equipment it is 
important to use the proper size wire. If wire is used 
that is larger than needed, it is an unnecessary 
expense. If wire is used that is too small, it will cause 
excessive voltage drop and damage the equipment.
WIRE RESISTANCE
Most people think of wire as having zero resistance. 
In fact, many electrical calculations are made that 
assume the resistance of the wire is so little that it is 
negligible. In actual practice, however, all wire has 
resistance. There are four factors that determine the 
resistance of a piece of wire. The factors are:
 1. The diameter of the wire.
 2. The material the wire is made of.
 3. The length of the wire.
 4. The temperature of the wire.
Wire Size 
and Voltage 
Drop
UNIT 6
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 List factors that determine wire 
resistance
 Determine the resistance of a piece 
of wire
 Use the National Electrical Code ® to 
determine wire size
 Test an installation of excessive voltage 
drop on the conductors

64   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
AREA
The cross-sectional area of wire is measured in 
 circular mils. The circular mil area of a wire 
can be found by fi nding the diameter of the wire in 
thousandths of an inch (1 mil    
1 
______ 
1,000   inch) and 
squaring that number. (Squaring a number means 
to multiply that number by itself.) For example, 
assume a piece of wire is measured with a microme-
ter and is found to have a diameter of 8 thousandths 
of an inch (.008). The circular mil area of the wire 
is 64 (8  8  64). Notice that 64 is written as a 
whole number, not a decimal number. A wire that 
has a diameter of .064 inch has a circular mil area 
of 4096 (64  64  4,096).
The circular mil area of stranded wire is deter-
mined by fi nding the area of one of the strands and 
then multiplying by the number of strands. For 
example, assume that a wire has 24 strands of wire 
that are .012 inches in diameter. The area of one 
wire is 144 CM (circular mils). The entire conductor 
has a circular mil area of 3,456 CM (144  24  
3,456). Large wire is generally stranded to make it 
easier to bend.
The larger the diameter of a wire, the less resis-
tance it will have and the more current it can carry, 
Figure 6–1. Current fl owing through a wire is very 
similar to water fl owing through a pipe. A large wire 
can carry more current at a specifi c voltage than a 
small wire. A large pipe can carry more water at a 
specifi c pressure than a small pipe.
MATERIAL
A standard measurement used for fi nding the resis-
tance of wire is the mil-foot. A mil-foot of wire 
Less Current
More Current
Less Water
More Water
 Figure 6–1
Larger wire 
can carry more 
current. (Source: 
Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
is a piece of wire one circular mil in diameter and 
one foot long. If the resistance of a mil-foot of differ-
ent types of wire is found, a mathematical formula 
can be used to determine the resistance of different 
types, sizes, and lengths of wire. This formula is:
R  K  L/CM
Where: K 
 the ohms per mil-foot of the wire.
 
L 
 the length of the wire in feet.
 
CM  the circular mil area of the wire.
The table in Figure 6–2 gives the resistance of dif-
ferent types of wire in ohms per mil-foot. Using the 
table shown in Figure 6–3, the diameter and circu-
lar mil area for different sizes of wire can be found.
K  OHMS RESISTANCE PER MIL-FOOT 
(AT 70°F)
Aluminum 
17
Brass 
42
Cadmium Bronze 
12
Copper 
10.4
Copperclad Aluminum (20% Cu) 
15.2
Copperweld 
26–34
Iron 
60
Nichrome 
600
Silver 
9.6
Steel 
75
Tungsten 
33
 Figure 6–2
Larger wire can carry more current. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

UNIT 6  Wire Size and Voltage Drop   65
* Resistance figures are given for standard annealed copper.  For hard-drawn copper add 2%
American Wire Gauge Table
0000
000
00
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
460
410
365
325
289
258
229
204
182
162
144
128
114
102
91
81
72
64
57
51
45.3
40.3
35.9
32
28.5
25.4
22.6
20.1
17.9
15.9
14.2
12.6
11.3
10
8.93
7.95
7.08
6.31
5.62
5
4.45
3.96
3.53
3.15
-
2.5
-
1.97
211,600
167,800
133,100
105,500
83,690
66,370
52,640
41,740
33,100
26,250
20,820
16,510
13,090
10,380
8,234
6,530
5,178
4,107
3,257
2,583
2,048
1,624
1,288
1,022
810
642
510
404
320
254
202
160
126.7
100.5
79.7
63.2
50.1
39.8
31.5
25
19.8
15.7
12.5
9.9
0.049
0.0618
0.078
0.0983
0.1239
0.1563
0.1970
0.2485
0.3133
0.395
0.498
0.628
0.792
0.999
1.260
1.588
2.003
2.525
3.184
4.016
5.06
6.39
8.05
10.15
12.8
16.1
20.4
25.7
32.4
40.8
51.5
64.9
81.8
103.2
130.1
164.1
207
261
329
415
523
660
832
1049
(0.016)
(0.020)
(0.026)
(0.032)
(0.0406)
(0.0512)
(0.0646)
(0.0815)
(0.1027)
(0.129)
(0.163)
(0.206)
(0.260)
(0.327)
(0.413)
(0.520)
(0.657)
(0.828)
(1.044)
(1.317)
(1.66)
(2.09)
(2.64)
(3.33)
(4.2)
(5.3)
(6.7)
(8.4)
(10.6)
(13.4)
(16.9)
(21.3)
(26.8)
(33.8)
(42.6)
(53.8)
(68)
(86)
(108)
(136)
(171)
(216)
(273)
(344)
0.0596
0.0752
0.0948
0.1195
0.151
0.191
0.240
0.302
0.381
0.481
0.606
0.764
0.963
1.215
1.532
1.931
2.44
3.07
3.98
4.88
6.16
7.77
9.79
12.35
15.6
19.6
24.8
31.2
39.4
49.6
62.6
78.9
99.5
125.5
158.2
199.5
252
317
400
505
636
802
1012
1276
(0.0195)
(0.0246)
(0.031)
(0.0392)
(0.049)
(0.062)
(0.079)
(0.099)
(0.125)
(0.158)
(0.199)
(0.250)
(0.316)
(0.398)
(0.502)
(0.633)
(0.80)
(1.01)
(1.27)
(1.60)
(2.02)
(2.55)
(3.21)
(4.05)
(5.11)
(6.42)
(8.13)
(10.2)
(12.9)
(16.3)
(20.5)
(25.9)
(32.6)
(41.1)
(51.9)
(65.4)
(82.6)
(104)
(131)
(165)
(208)
(263)
(332)
(418)
0.0804
0.101
0.128
0.161
0.203
0.256
0.323
0.408
0.514
0.648
0.817
1.03
1.30
1.64
2.07
2.61
3.29
4.14
5.22
6.59
8.31
10.5
13.2
16.7
21.0
26.5
33.4
42.1
53.1
67.0
84.4
106
134
169
213
269
339
428
540
681
858
1080
1360
1720
(0.0263)
(0.033)
(0.042)
(0.053)
(0.066)
(0.084)
(0.106)
(0.134)
(0.168)
(0.212)
(0.268)
(0.338)
(0.426)
(0.538)
(0.678)
(0.856)
(1.08)
(1.36)
(1.71)
(2.16)
(2.72)
(3.44)
(4.33)
(5.47)
(6.88)
(8.69)
(10.9)
(13.8)
(17.4)
(22.0)
(27.7)
(34.7)
(43.9)
(55.4)
(69.8)
(88.2)
(111)
(140)
(177)
(223)
(281)
(354)
(446)
(564)
640
508
403
320
253
201
159
126
100
79.5
63.0
50.0
39.6
31.4
24.9
19.8
15.7
12.4
9.86
7.82
6.20
4.92
3.90
3.09
2.45
1.95
1.54
1.22
0.97
0.77
0.61
0.48
0.384
0.304
0.241
0.191
0.152
0.120
0.095
0.076
0.0600
0.0476
0.0377
0.0299
(95.2)
(75.5)
(59.9)
(47.6)
(37.6)
(29.9)
(23.6)
(18.7)
(14.9)
(11.8)
(9.37)
(7.43)
(5.89)
(4.67)
(3.70)
(2.94)
(2.33)
(1.84)
(1.47)
(1.16)
(0.922)
(0.713)
(0.580)
(0.459)
(0.364)
(0.290)
(0.229)
(0.181)
(0.14)
(0.11)
(0.09)
(0.07)
(0.06)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
195
154
122
97
76.9
61.0
48.4
38.4
30.4
24.1
19.1
15.2
12.0
9.55
7.57
6.00
4.80
3.80
3.00
2.40
1.90
1.50
1.20
0.94
0.745
0.591
0.468
0.371
0.295
0.234
0.185
0.147
0.117
0.092
0.073
0.058
0.046
0.037
0.029
0.023
0.0182
0.0145
0.0115
0.0091
(29.0)
(22.9)
(18.1)
(14.4)
(11.4)
(9.07)
(7.20)
(5.71)
(4.52)
(3.58)
(2.84)
(2.26)
(1.78)
(1.42)
(1.13)
(0.89)
 (0.71)
(0.56)
(0.45)
(0.36)
(0.28)
(0.22)
(0.18)
(0.14)
(0.11)
(0.09)
(0.07)
(0.05)
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
B & S
Gauge
No.
Area in
Circular
Mils
Diam.
in
Mils
Copper
68°F
(20°C)
*
Copper
167°F
(75°C)
*
Aluminum
68°F
(20°C)
Copper
Aluminum
Ohms per 1000 Ft.
(ohms per 100 meters)
Pounds per 1000 Ft.
(kg per 100 meters)
 Figure 6–3
American Wire Gauge table. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

66   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
PROBLEM 1: What is the resistance of a piece of #18 
AWG (American Wire Gauge) copper wire 
400 feet long?
SOLUTION: First, state the formula to be used.
R    K  L 
_____ 
CM  
Second, substitute known numeric values in the 
formula. The value of K can be found in the table 
shown in Figure 6–2. The K value for copper is 
10.4. The CM area of #18 AWG wire can be found 
from the chart in Figure 6–3. The circular mil area 
of #18 AWG wire is 1624 CM. If these values are 
substituted in the formula for letters, the formula 
will be:
R    10.4  400 
 
___________ 
1624 
 
R    4160 
_____ 
1624  
R  2.56 ohms
PROBLEM 2: What is the resistance of a piece of #12 
AWG aluminum wire 250 feet long?
SOLUTION:
R    K  L 
_____ 
CM  
R    17  250 
_________ 
6530  
R    4250 
_____ 
6530  
R  .6508 ohms
TEMPERATURE
The resistance of a piece of wire is also affected 
by temperature. As the temperature increases, 
the resistance of wire increases also. Notice that 
the charts in Figures 6–2 and Figure 6–3 state the 
resistance of wire at a specifi c temperature. Most 
wire tables will provide some means for determin-
ing the resistance of wire as temperature increases. 
Figure 6–4 shows Table 310.16 of the National Elec-
trical Code®. Notice that at the bottom of the table 
ampacity correction factors are given.
INSULATION
The type of insulation around the wire also 
partly determines the amount of current the wire 
is permitted to carry. Some types of insulation can 
withstand more heat than others, and are, there-
fore, permitted to carry more current. For example, 
in Table 310.16, the type of wire insulation is listed 
at the top of each column. Notice the different tem-
perature ratings for the types of insulation listed. 
Also notice the amount of current a wire is permit-
ted to carry for different types of insulation. Find a 
#2 AWG conductor on the far left-hand side of the 
wire table. Notice the different amounts of current 
this conductor is permitted to carry with different 
types of insulation.
VOLTAGE RATING
Wire also has a voltage rating. The voltage rating 
of wire has nothing to do with the type of material 
the wire is made of or its diameter. The voltage rat-
ing is determined by the type of insulation. Most wire 
used in industry has a voltage rating of 600 volts. 
The amount of voltage the insulation can effectively 
hold off is determined by the material the insulation 
is made of and its thickness.
SIZING CONDUCTORS 
FOR HERMETICALLY 
SEALED COMPRESSORS
Requirements for the installation of hermetically 
sealed compressors are covered in Article 440 of 
the National Electrical Code ®. Note that this sec-
tion covers hermetically sealed units only and does 
not apply to separate motor and compressor units. 
NEC ® Section 440.6(A) states that the rated-load 
current marked on the nameplate of the equipment 
is to be used in determining the rating or ampacity 
of the disconnecting means, branch circuit conduc-
tors, controller, fuses or circuit breakers, ground 
fault protection equipment, and overload protec-
tion. If the rated-load current is not shown on the 
equipment nameplate, the rated load current shown 
on the compressor is to be used. Note the difference 

UNIT 6  Wire Size and Voltage Drop   67
 Figure 6–4
(Reprinted with permission from NFPA 70™, National Electrical Code®, Copyright 2008, National Fire Protection Asso-
ciation, Quincy, MA 02269. This reprinted material is not the ofﬁ cial position of the National Fire Protection Association, 
which is represented by the standard in its entirety. National Electrical Code® and NEC ® are registered trademarks of 
the National Fire Protection Association, Inc., Quincy, MA  02269).
between the equipment nameplate and compressor 
nameplate. The equipment nameplate is generally 
shown on the unit itself, Figure 6–5. The compres-
sor nameplate is located on the compressor.
NEC® Section 440.6(A) Ex. 1 states that where 
so marked, the branch circuit selection current shall 
be used instead of the rated load current to deter-
mine the rating or ampacity of the disconnecting 

68   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
 Figure 6–5
Equipment nameplate. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
means, branch circuit conductors, controller, short 
circuit protective device, and ground fault protec-
tive device. NEC® Section 440.32 states that for a 
single motor compressor, the branch circuit con-
ductors shall have an ampacity not less than 125% 
of either the motor compressor rated load current 
or the branch circuit selection current, whichever 
is greater. As a general rule the branch circuit 
selection current will be greater than the compres-
sor rated load amps because the selection current 
includes any indoor and/or outdoor fans.
Termination Temperature
Another factor that must be taken into consider-
ation is the temperature rating of different termina-
tions. The termination is the point of attachment 
for conductors such as circuit breakers, disconnects, 
switches, and so forth. NEC® Section 110.14(C) basi-
cally states that the temperature rating of the termi-
nation cannot be exceeded. Although a wire with a 
higher temperature rating may be used, the ampacity 
of the wire must be selected on the basis of the lowest 
temperature rating in the circuit. Type THHN insula-
tion has a temperature rating of 90°C, but assume 
that it is connected to a device with a temperature 
rating of 75°C. The ampacity of the wire would have 
to be selected on the basis of 75°C, not 90°C.
Occasionally the temperature rating of a device 
will be listed on the device or in the manufacturer’s 
literature, but as a general rule it is not known. For 
this reason, the National Electrical Code® states that 
conductors for circuits rated at 100 amperes or less 
will be selected from the 60°C column, and con-
ductors rated over 100 amperes are to be selected 
from the 75°C column. An exception to this is if the 
insulation type is rated less than 75°C as is the case 
with type TW and UF. If either of these two types of 
insulation are employed, the ampere rating of the 
conductor must be determined from the 60°C col-
umn regardless of the circuit current.
EXAMPLE
Assume that an equipment nameplate lists the rated 
load amps (RLA) of the compressor at 14.8 amps 
and the circuit selection current at 22 amps. To 
determine the correct conductor size for this unit, 
multiply the larger of the two rating by 125%.
22  1.25  27.5 amps
The next step is to determine the conductor size from 
NEC® Table 310.16. It will be assumed that cop-
per conductors with type THWN insulation will be 
used for this installation. Although THWN insula-
tion is located in the 75°C column, the conductor 
size will be selected from the 60°C column because 
the total circuit current is less than 100 amperes. 
Table 310.16 indicates a #10 AWG conductor is the 
closest size without going under 27.5 amperes. A #10 
AWG conductor will be used for this installation.
The National Electrical Code® also requires that a 
disconnecting means be located within sight from 
and readily accessible to the air conditioning or 
refrigeration equipment, Figure 6–6. The NEC® does 
permit the disconnect to be installed on or within 
the equipment provided it is not installed on a panel 
that is designed to allow access to the equipment. 
The disconnect may be located away from the air 
conditioning or refrigeration equipment provided 
there is a working clearance of at least 30 inches 
to allow service accessibility. This is to enable the 
service technician to disconnect power from the unit 
without having to enter the building to fi nd the main 

UNIT 6  Wire Size and Voltage Drop   69
COMPRESSOR
DISCONNECT
INCOMING  LINE
 Figure 6–6
A disconnecting means must 
be located in sight of the 
 compressor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 6–7
Disconnect switch used for air conditioning equipment. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
power panel. A typical disconnect used for air condi-
tioning service is shown in Figure 6–7.
TESTING FOR EXCESSIVE 
VOLTAGE DROP
Testing a unit for excessive voltage can be done 
with a voltmeter. First, test the voltage at the panel 
with the unit turned off. Assume this voltage to be 
240 volts. Next, start the air conditioning unit and 
again check the voltage at the panel. If the voltage 
remains unchanged, it is an indication that there is 
no voltage drop at the panel and that all connections 
for the part of the circuit are good. If there is exces-
sive voltage drop at the panel, it is an indication of 
bad connections, or the service entrance is too small 
for the load. For this example, assume the voltage 
remains at 240 volts when the unit is turned on. 
Next, check the voltage at the unit, Figure 6–8. 
If there is a signifi cant voltage drop at the unit, it 
indicates that the wire size is too small and that too 
much voltage is being used to push current through 
the wire. This problem can be corrected by connect-
ing larger wires from the panel to the unit.

70   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
AC  VOLTMETER
AC  PANEL
AIR-CONDITIONING
UNIT
AC  VOLTMETER
 Figure 6–8
Testing for voltage drop. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
SUMMARY
 The resistance of wire is determined by four factors:
A. The diameter of the wire.
B. The material the wire is made of.
C. The length of the wire.
D. The temperature of the wire.
 The cross-sectional area of wire is measured in circular mils.
 Circular mil area is found by squaring the diameter of the wire.
 The standard measurement for wire resistance in the English system is the mil-foot.
 Different types of materials have different resistances per mil-foot.
 The wire tables in the National Electrical Code® are often used to determine the size wire 
needed for a particular installation.
 The voltage rating of wire is determined by the type of insulation.
 Excessive voltage drop can be determined by measuring the voltage at the source and at 
the load when the unit is in operation.
KEY TERMS
AWG (American Wire 
 Gauge)
circular mils
insulation
mil-foot
temperature
termination 
 temperature
voltage rating

UNIT 6  Wire Size and Voltage Drop   71
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. Name four factors that determine the resistance of wire.
 
2. A wire has a diameter of .057 inches. What is its circular mil area?
 
3. What is a mil-foot of wire?
 
4. When the temperature of wire increases, does its resistance increase or decrease?
 
5. What determines the voltage rating of wire?
 
6. What two factors determine the amount of voltage rating a certain type of insulation 
will have?
 
7. How much resistance does 75 feet of #24 AWG wire have?
 
8. If a current of 4 amps fl ows through the wire in question 7, how much voltage will be 
dropped by the wire?

72
Alternating-current circuits contain three basic 
types of loads. These are (1) resistive, (2) inductive, 
and (3) capacitive.
RESISTIVE CIRCUITS
The simplest of the AC loads is a circuit that con-
tains only pure resistance, Figure 7–1. In a pure-
resistive circuit, the voltage and current are in 
phase with each other, Figure 7–2. Voltage and 
current are in phase when they cross the zero line 
at the same point, and have their peak positive and 
negative values at the same time. A pure-resistive 
circuit is very similar to a direct-current circuit in 
the respect that true power or watts is equal to the 
voltage times the current. Examples of pure-resistive 
circuits are the heating elements of an electric 
range, an electric hot-water heater, and the resistive 
elements of an electric furnace.
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Discuss the voltage and current 
relationship in an AC circuit containing 
pure resistance and pure inductance
 Discuss the properties of an inductive 
circuit
 Calculate values of inductive reactance
 Calculate values of impedance in 
circuit containing resistance and 
inductance
 Discuss true power, apparent power, 
and reactive power
 Discuss the power factor of an 
alternating-current circuit
Inductance
UNIT 7

UNIT 7  Inductance   73
VOLTAGE
CURRENT
 Figure 7–1 
Pure-resistive circuit. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 7–3
A pure inductive circuit. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 7–4
Magnetic ﬁ eld expands. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 7–5
Magnetic ﬁ eld collapses. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 7–2
Current and voltage are in phase. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
INDUCTIVE CIRCUITS
An inductive circuit contains an inductor or coil as 
the load instead of a resistor, Figure 7–3. The two 
most common types of inductive circuits are motors 
and transformers. Inductors are measured in units 
called the henry. The unit of inductance is named 
in honor of Joseph Henry, a physicist who studied 
electricity. The electrical symbol for inductance is L.
Inductors differ from resistors in several ways. 
One way is that the current of an inductor is not 
limited by the resistance of the coil. When an induc-
tor is connected into an AC circuit and the volt-
age begins to rise from zero toward its peak value, 
a magnetic fi eld is created around the coil, 
Figure 7–4. As the expanding magnetic fi eld cuts 
through the wires of the coil, a voltage is induced in 
the coil. The voltage induced in a coil is always opposed 
to the voltage that creates it. As the applied voltage 
begins to drop from its peak value back toward zero, 
the magnetic fi eld around the inductor begins to 
collapse, Figure 7–5. Notice that the induced volt-
age is opposite in polarity to the applied voltage. 
An induced voltage is 180° out of phase with the 
applied voltage, Figure 7–6.

74   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
APPLIED  VOLTAGE
INDUCED  VOLTAGE
Because the induced voltage is opposed to the 
applied voltage, it will limit current fl ow through 
the circuit just as resistance will. Although the 
induced voltage of a coil will limit the current fl ow 
“like” resistance, it is not resistance and cannot be 
treated as resistance. The unit of measure used to 
describe the current-limiting effect of an induced 
voltage is reactance and is given the electrical 
symbol X. Because this reactance is caused by an 
inductance, it is called inductive reactance and 
is given the electrical symbol XL (pronounced X sub 
L). Inductive reactance is measured in ohms just as 
resistance is.
The inductive reactance of a coil is determined by 
two factors. These are:
 1. The inductance of the coil.
 2. The frequency of the applied voltage.
If these factors are known, a formula can be used to fi nd 
the inductive reactance of the coil. This formula is:
XL  2  π  F  L
XL  inductive reactance
π    the Greek letter Pi, which has a value 
of 3.1416
F   the frequency of the AC voltage
L    the inductance of the coil in henrys
EXAMPLE
In the circuit shown in Figure 7–7, a coil has an 
inductance of .7 henrys, and is connected to a 
120-volt, 60-Hz line. Find the current fl ow in the 
circuit.
 Figure 7–6
The induced voltage is opposed to 
the applied voltage. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
 Figure 7–7
Current ﬂ ow is limited by inductive reactance.
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
To solve the problem, the fi rst step is to fi nd the 
amount of inductive reactance in the circuit.
XL  2  π  F  L
X   2  3.1416  60  .7
XL  263.9 ohms
Now that the inductive reactance of the coil is 
known, the current fl ow in the circuit can be calcu-
lated. If the value of inductive reactance is used like 
resistance, the formula to fi nd current in a pure-
inductive circuit is I  E/XL.
I    120 
______ 
263.9  
I  .455 amps
VOLTAGE AND CURRENT 
RELATIONS
As stated previously, the voltage and current in a 
pure-resistive circuit are in phase with each other. 
In a pure-inductive circuit, however, the cur-
rent lags behind the voltage by 90°, Figure 7–8. 

UNIT 7  Inductance   75
In this type of circuit there is no true power or watts. 
In a resistive circuit, the resistor limits the cur-
rent fl ow by converting the energy of the moving 
electrons into heat. This conversion of one form of 
energy into another represents a true power loss. In 
an inductive circuit, the energy of the moving elec-
trons is stored in the magnetic fi eld created around 
the inductor. When the magnetic fi eld collapses, this 
energy is given back into the circuit. Notice that the 
resistor used the electrical energy by converting it 
into heat, but the inductor stored the energy and 
then returned it to the circuit.
IMPEDANCE
In an alternating-current circuit that contains only 
resistance, the current is limited by the value of the 
resistor only. In this type of circuit the current fl ow 
can be calculated using the Ohm’s law formula 
I  E/R.
In an AC circuit that contains only inductance, 
the current is limited only by the value of inductive 
reactance. In this type of circuit, the current fl ow 
can be calculated using the formula I  E/XL.
In a circuit like the one shown in Figure 7–9, 
there are elements of both resistance and inductive 
reactance contained in the same circuit. In this 
type of circuit, it cannot be said that the  current is 
limited by resistance, because there is also induc-
tive reactance. It can also not be said that the 
current is limited by inductive reactance because 
of the resistance. Alternating-current circuits use 
a different value to represent the total amount of 
opposition to current fl ow in the circuit regard-
less of what type of components are found in the 
circuit. This value is known as impedance and 
is given the symbol Z.
The resistor and inductor in Figure 7–9 are con-
nected in series. Because these two components are 
connected in series, they will be added. They can-
not be added in the normal way, however, because 
the inductance is not in phase with the resistance. 
Because inductive reactance is 90° out of phase with 
resistance, the total amount of opposition to current 
fl ow will be the value of the hypotenuse of the right 
triangle formed by the resistance and inductive reac-
tance, Figure 7–10. To fi nd the total value of imped-
ance in this circuit, the formula Z   √ 
_______ 
 R 2   X L 
2  can be 
 Figure 7–8
Current lags voltage by 90° in a pure inductive circuit.
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
VOLTAGE
CURRENT
 Figure 7–9
A series circuit containing resistance and inductance.
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 7–10
Impedance is the sum of resistance and inductive 
reactance. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

76   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
used. If the resistor has a value of 40 ohms and the 
inductor has an inductive reactance of 30 ohms, the 
impedance will be:
Z   √
_______ 
R2   X L 
 2  
Z   √
_________ 
402  30  
Z   √
__________ 
 
1600  90  
Z   √
_____ 
2500  
Z  50 ohms
APPARENT POWER
In a direct-current circuit, the true power or watts 
is always equal to the voltage multiplied by the cur-
rent because the current and voltage are never out 
of phase with each other. This also is true for an AC 
circuit that contains only pure resistance because 
the voltage and current are in phase.
In a circuit that contains pure inductance, how-
ever, there is no true power or watts. In this type 
of circuit, the voltage multiplied by the current 
equals a value known as VARs, which stands for 
 Volt-Amps Reactive. VARs is often referred to 
as wattless power.
The apparent power or volt-amps of an 
AC circuit is the applied voltage multiplied by the 
current fl ow in the circuit. The amount of apparent 
power as compared to the true power or VARs is 
determined by the elements of the circuit itself. In 
the circuit shown in Figure 7–11, the amount of true 
power is 400 watts. The amount of reactive power 
is 300 VARs. The apparent power is 500 volt-amps. 
Notice that the apparent power is found by adding 
the watts and VARs together in the same manner 
that the resistance and inductive reactance were 
added to fi nd the total value of impedance. Volt-amps 
can be calculated by the formula:
Volt-amps   √
____________ 
 
W 2  VARs2  
POWER FACTOR
The power factor of an alternating-current circuit 
is a ratio of the apparent power compared to the true 
power. Power factor is important because utility 
companies charge industries large penalties for a 
poor power factor. The power factor of the circuit 
shown in Figure 7–11 can be found by:
PF    W 
___ 
VA  
PF    400 
____ 
500  
PF  .8
PF  80%
Notice in this circuit, the power factor is 80%. This 
means 80% of the load is resistive and 20% is reac-
tive. If the load is pure resistive, the power factor will 
be 100% or unity.
Utility companies become very concerned about 
power factor because they must furnish the amount 
of current needed to produce the volt-amp value. 
The company, however, is charged by the amount 
of true power or watts used. In this instance, if 
the applied voltage is 120 volts, the utility com-
pany must supply 4.16 amps to operate the load 
(500 volt-amps/120 volts  4.16 amps). The actual 
amount of current being used to operate the load, 
however, is 3.33 amps (400 watts/120 volts  
3.33 amps). Because the air conditioning load is 
often the major part of the electrical power con-
sumed by an industry or offi ce building, power fac-
tor can become an important consideration to the 
service technician.
 Figure 7–11
Volt-amps is the vector sum of watts and VARs. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 7  Inductance   77
SUMMARY
 In a pure resistive circuit the current and voltage are in phase with each other.
 In a pure inductive circuit the current lags the voltage by 90°.
 Inductive reactance (XL) is the current-limiting property of inductance.
 Inductive reactance is actually a counter voltage, which opposes the applied or line 
 voltage.
 Inductive reactance is proportional to two factors:
A. The inductance of the coil.
B. The frequency of the applied voltage.
 Inductive reactance is measured in ohms like resistance.
 Impedance (Z) is a measurement of the total current limiting effect in an alternating-
current circuit.
 Impedance is a combination of all current limiting properties of an AC circuit and is mea-
sured in ohms.
 True power is measured in watts.
 Watts is a measurement of the amount of electrical energy converted to some other form 
such as heat or mechanical.
 VARs is a measure of the amount of power in a pure inductive circuit sometimes referred 
to as wattless power.
 Apparent power or volt amperes (VA) is a combination of true power or watts and VARs.
 In an AC circuit, apparent power is determined by multiplying the applied voltage by the 
circuit current.
 Power factor (PF) is a comparison of the amount of true power with the apparent power 
in an alternating-current circuit.
 Power factor is measured in a percent.
KEY TERMS
apparent power
henry
impedance
inductive reactance
in phase
magnetic fi eld
power factor
pure-inductive circuit
pure-resistive circuit
reactance
unity
VARs (Volt-Amps Reactive)
volt-amps
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. Name the three basic types of alternating-current loads.
 
2. What type of load always has its voltage and current in phase with each other?

78   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
 
3. In a pure-inductive circuit, how many degrees out of phase is the current with the 
voltage?
 
4. Does the current lead or lag the voltage in question 3?
 
5. What electrical value is used to measure inductance?
 
6. What is inductive reactance?
 
7. What electrical value is used to measure the total opposition to current fl ow in an 
AC circuit?
 
8. What is power factor?

79
The third type of alternating-current load to be dis-
cussed is capacitance. A capacitor can be made 
by separating two metal plates with an insulating 
material, Figure 8–1. The insulating material used to 
isolate the plates from each other is called the 
dielectric. There are three factors that determine 
how much capacitance a capacitor will have. These are:
 1. The surface area of the plates.
 2. The distance between the plates.
 3. The type of dielectric material used between 
the plates.
CHARGING A CAPACITOR
In Figure 8–2, the terminals of a capacitor have 
been connected to a battery. Electrons are nega-
tive particles. Therefore, the positive terminal of 
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Discuss the operating theory of 
a capacitor
 List the factors that determine the 
amount of capacitance a capacitor will 
have
 Discuss the voltage and current 
relationship in an AC circuit containing 
pure capacitance
 Discuss the voltage and current 
relationship in an AC circuit containing 
resistance and capacitance
 Compute values of capacitive 
reactance
 Compute values of impedance for 
circuits that contain both resistance 
and capacitive reactance
 Discuss power factor correction
 Compute the amount of capacitance 
needed to correct the power factor of 
a motor
 Discuss different types of capacitors 
and methods for testing
Capacitance
UNIT 8

80   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
PLATES
DIELECTRIC
 Figure 8–1
A capacitor is made with two metal 
plates separated by a dielectric. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 8–2
An electrostatic charge is stored in 
the atoms of the dielectric. (Source: 
Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 8–3
Dielectric stress is similar to drawing back a bow and 
arrow, and holding it. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
+
the battery attracts electrons from one plate of the 
capacitor. The negative terminal of the battery will 
cause electrons to fl ow to the other capacitor plate. 
This fl ow of current will continue until the voltage 
across the capacitor plates is equal to the battery 
voltage. If the battery is disconnected, the capacitor 
will be left in a charged state. CAUTION: It is the 
habit of some people to charge a capacitor to a high 
voltage and then hand the capacitor to another per-
son. While some people think this is comical, it is 
an extremely dangerous practice. Capacitors have 
the ability to supply an almost infi nite amount of 
current. Under certain conditions, a capacitor can 
have enough power to cause a person’s heart to go 
into fi brillation.
ELECTROSTATIC CHARGE
Notice the illustration of the atoms in the dielectric 
material in Figure 8–2. When a capacitor has been 
charged, the negative electrons of the dielectric 
material are repelled from the negative plate of the 
capacitor and attracted to the positive plate. This 
causes the electron orbit of the atoms in the dielec-
tric to extend. This places the atoms of the dielectric 
material in tension. This is known as dielectric 
stress. Placing the atoms of the dielectric under 
stress has the same effect as drawing back a bow and 
arrow and holding it, Figure 8–3.

UNIT 8  Capacitance   81
 Figure 8–4
A pure capacitive circuit. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
The amount of dielectric stress is determined by 
the voltage between the plates. The greater the volt-
age, the greater the dielectric stress. If the voltage 
becomes too great, the dielectric will break down 
and destroy the capacitor. This is the reason capaci-
tors have a voltage rating that must be followed.
The energy of a capacitor is stored in the dielec-
tric and is known as an electrostatic charge. It 
is this electrostatic charge that permits the capacitor 
to produce extremely high currents under certain 
conditions. If the leads of a charged capacitor are 
shorted together, it has the same effect as releasing 
the drawn bow in Figure 8–3. The arrow will be 
propelled forward at great speed. The same is true 
for the electrons of the capacitor. When the elec-
tron orbits of the dielectric snap back, the electrons 
stored on the negative capacitor plate are propelled 
toward the positive plate at great speed.
CAPACITOR RATINGS
Capacitors are rated in units called the farad. The 
farad is actually such a large amount of capacitance 
it is not practical to use. For this reason a unit called 
the micro-farad is generally used. A micro-farad 
is one millionth of a farad. The Greek lowercase 
letter mu is used to symbolize micro, μ. The term 
micro-farad is indicated by combining mu and low-
ercase f, μf. Because the letter mu is not included on 
a standard typewriter, the term micro-farad is some-
times shown as uf or mf. All of these terms mean the 
same thing.
Another term used is the pico-farad. This 
termis used for extremely small capacitors found 
in electronics applications. A pico-farad is one mil-
lionth of a micro-farad and is generally shown as 
μμf or pf.
When AC voltage is applied to a capacitor, 
 Figure 8–4, the plates of the capacitor are alter-
nately charged and discharged each time the cur-
rent changes direction of fl ow. When a capacitor 
is charged, the voltage across its plates becomes 
the same as this applied voltage. As the voltage 
across the plates of a capacitor increases, it offers 
resistance to the fl ow of current. The applied volt-
age must continually overcome the voltage of the 
capacitor to produce current fl ow. The current in 
a pure-capacitive circuit is limited by the 
voltage of the charged capacitor. Because current 
is limited by a counter voltage and not resistance, 
the counter voltage of the capacitor is referred to as 
reactance. Recall that the symbol for reactance is X. 
Because this reactance is caused by capacitance, it 
is called capacitive reactance and is symbol-
ized by XC (pronounced X sub c).
The amount of capacitive reactance in a circuit is 
determined by two factors. These are:
 1. Frequency of the AC voltage.
 2. The size of the capacitor.
If the frequency of the line and the capacitance rat-
ing of the capacitor are known, the capacitive reac-
tance can be found using the following formula:
XC    
1 
______________ 
 
2  π  F  C  
The value of capacitive reactance is measured in 
ohms. In the formula to fi nd capacitive reactance:
XC  Capacitive Reactance
π    The Greek letter Pi, which has a value 
of 3.1416
F    Frequency in Hz
C    The value of capacitance in farads. 
Because most capacitors are rated in 
micro-farads, be sure to write the capaci-
tance value in farads. This can be done 
by dividing the micro-farad rating by 
1,000,000, or moving the decimal point 
six places to the left. Example: to change 
a 50-μf capacitor to a value expressed in 
farads, move the decimal point after the 
50 six places to the left. This capacitor has 
a value of .000050 farads.

82   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
EXAMPLE
Find the current fl ow in the circuit shown in 
Figure 8–5.
Solution: To fi nd the current fl owing in this circuit, 
the amount of capacitive reactance of the capacitor 
must fi rst be found.
XC    
1 
______________ 
 
2  π  F  C  
XC    
1 
 
__________________________ 
 
 
2  3.1416  60  .000010  
XC    
1 
_________ 
.0037699  
XC  265.2 ohms
Now that the capacitive reactance of the circuit is 
known, the value of current can be found using the 
formula: I  E/XC.
I    120 
______ 
265.2  
I  .452 amps
CURRENT FLOW IN A CAPACITIVE 
CIRCUIT
Notice that a capacitor is constructed of two metal 
plates separated by an insulator. One of the metal 
plates is connected to one side of the circuit, and the 
other metal plate is connected to the other side of 
the circuit. Because there is an insulator separating 
the two plates, current cannot fl ow through a capac-
itor. When a capacitor is connected into a direct-
current circuit, current will fl ow until the capacitor 
has been charged to the value of the applied voltage, 
and then stop. When a capacitor is connected into 
an alternating-current circuit, current will “appear” 
to fl ow through the capacitor. This is because the 
plates of the capacitor are alternately charged and 
discharged each time the current reverses direction. 
To understand this concept better, refer to the water 
circuit shown in Figure 8–6. In this illustration, a 
water pump is connected to two tanks. The pump is 
used to pump water back and forth between the two 
tanks. When one tank becomes full, the direction 
of the pump is reversed and water is pumped from 
the full tank back into the empty tank. Notice that 
there is no complete loop in this hydraulic circuit 
for water to fl ow from one side of the pump to the 
other, but water does fl ow because it is continuously 
pumped from one tank to the other.
CURRENT AND VOLTAGE 
RELATIONSHIPS
In a pure-capacitive circuit, the voltage and cur-
rent are out of phase with each other. Figure 8–7 
shows that the current in a pure-capacitive circuit 
leads the voltage by 90°. Because the voltage and 
current are 90° out of phase with each other, there 
is no true power or watts consumed in a pure-
 capacitive circuit. The capacitor stores the energy 
in an  electro-static fi eld, and then returns it to the 
circuit at the end of each half cycle.
In the circuit shown in Figure 8–8, a resistor 
and capacitor are connected in series with each 
other. Since this circuit contains elements of both 
resistance and capacitive reactance, the current is 
limited by impedance. The impedance for a circuit 
 Figure 8–5
Capacitive reactance limits current ﬂ ow. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 Figure 8–6
Water ﬂ ows in this system in a manner similar to the 
way current ﬂ ows in a capacitive circuit. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
PUMP
TANK
TANK

UNIT 8  Capacitance   83
 Figure 8–7
Current leads voltage by 90° in a pure capacitive 
circuit. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 8–9
Impedance is the vector sum of R and XC. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 8–10
Capacitive and inductive current are 180° out of phase 
with each other. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 8–8
Impedance must be used to determine the current ﬂ ow 
in a circuit that contains resistance and capacitive 
 reactance. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
VOLTAGE
CURRENT
of this type can be found by using the formula 
Z   √
_______ 
R2   X  C 
2   . Notice this is the same basic for-
mula as the one used to fi nd the impedance of a 
circuit that contains both resistance and inductive 
 reactance. The impedance of the circuit shown in 
Figure 8–8 can be found by the following:
Z   √
_______ 
R 2  X C 
 2  
Z   √
_______ 
82  62  
Z   √
________ 
64  36  
Z   √
____ 
100  
Z  10 ohms
Figure 8–9 shows a vector diagram of the circuit in 
Figure 8–8.
POWER FACTOR CORRECTION
Because the current fl ow in a capacitive circuit leads 
the voltage by 90° and the current in an inductive 
circuit lags the voltage by 90°, the current of a 
capacitive circuit is in direct opposition to the cur-
rent of an inductive circuit. Figure 8–10 illustrates 
the currents of capacitive and inductive circuits 
CAPACITIVE  CURRENT
INDUCTIVE  CURRENT

84   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
as compared with each other. These two currents 
are 180° out of phase with each other. When the 
capacitive current is at its peak positive value, the 
 inductive current is at its peak negative value. When 
the capacitive current is at its peak negative value, 
the inductive current is at its peak positive value. 
Because these two currents are in direct opposition, 
one can be used to cancel the other.
The circuit shown in Figure 8–11 shows a par-
allel circuit that contains a resistor, an inductor, 
and a capacitor. The applied voltage of the circuit is 
120 volts at 60 Hz. Because this is a parallel circuit, 
the voltage applied to each component will be the 
same—120 volts. The resistor has a resistance of 
12 ohms. This permits a current fl ow of 10 amps 
through the resistor (120/12  10). The induc-
tor has an inductive reactance of 24 ohms. This 
permits a current fl ow through the inductor of 
5 amps (120/24  5). The capacitor has a capaci-
tive reactance of 24 ohms. This permits a current 
fl ow through the capacitor of 5 amps.
QUESTION
What is the total current fl ow in the circuit? In a 
parallel circuit, current is added. Therefore, it would 
appear that the current fl ow would be 20 amps 
(10 + 5 + 5  20). The currents of this circuit, how-
ever, are out of phase with each other. Figure 8–12 
shows a vector diagram of this circuit. Notice that 
the 5 amps of capacitive current is 180° out of phase 
with the 5 amps of inductive current. These two 
currents will cancel each other. The AC alternator 
sees only the resistance in this circuit. The current 
is, therefore, the same as the current fl ow through 
the resistor, or 10 amps.
 Figure 8–11
A parallel circuit has resistance, 
inductance, and capacitance. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 8–12
Capacitive current and inductive current are 180° out 
of phase with each other. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
POWER FACTOR CORRECTION 
OF A MOTOR
In the circuit shown in Figure 8–13, an AC induc-
tion motor is connected to a 120-volt line. A watt-
meter is used to measure the amount of true power 
in the circuit. For this example it will be assumed 
that the wattmeter has a reading of 720 watts. 
An ammeter has also been inserted in the circuit. 
Assume the ammeter has a reading of 10 amps. The 
apparent power or volt-amp value for this circuit is 
1,200 VA (120 volts  10 amps  1,200 VA). The 
power factor of this circuit can now be computed 
using the formula (PF  W/VA).
PF    W 
___ 
VA  
PF    720 
_____ 
1200  
PF  .6 or 60%.

UNIT 8  Capacitance   85
 Figure 8–13
Finding the power factor of a motor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
If the power factor of this motor is to be corrected, 
it must be determined how much of this circuit is 
comprised of true power and how much is composed 
of reactive power. Because the true power (watts) 
and the apparent power (volt-amps) is known, the 
reactive power (VARs) can be found using the fol-
lowing formula:
VARs   √
__________ 
VA2  W 2  
VARs   √
_____________ 
 
12002  7202  
VARs   √
_____________________ 
 
 
1,440,000  518,4002  
VARs   √
________ 
921,600  
VARs  960
Because a motor is an inductive device, the reactive 
power in this circuit can be canceled by an equal 
amount of capacitive VARs. If a capacitor of the cor-
rect value is connected in parallel with the motor, 
the power factor will be corrected. To fi nd the cor-
rect value of capacitance, determine the amount 
of capacitance needed to produce a VAR reading 
of 960. The amount of capacitive reactance can be 
found using the formula:
XC    E 2 
_____ 
VARs  
XC    1202 
_____ 
960  
XC  15 ohms
The amount of capacitance needed to produce 
15 ohms of capacitive reactance at 60 Hz can be 
calculated using the following formula:
Circuit Breaker
Watt Meter
Ammeter
C    
1 
______________ 
 
2  π  F  XC
  
C    
1 
 
_____________________ 
 
 
2  3.1416  60  15  
C    
1 
________ 
5654.88  
C  .0001768 farads
The answer for the value of C is in farads. To con-
vert farads to micro-farads, multiply the answer by 
1,000,000, or move the decimal point 6 places to 
the right .0001768 farads becomes 176.8 μf. If a 
capacitor of this value is connected in parallel with 
the motor as shown in Figure 8–14, the power fac-
tor will be corrected.
CAPACITOR TYPES
The most common types of capacitors used in the 
air conditioning field fall into two categories. One 
kind is known as an oil-filled type. Figure 8–15 
shows a photograph of this type of capacitor. 
The oil-filled capacitor is made with two 
metal foil plates separated by paper. The paper is 
soaked in a special dielectric oil. These capacitors 
are true AC capacitors and are generally used as 
the run capacitors on many single-phase air con-
ditioning compressors. They are also used as the 
starting capacitors on some units. The important 
ratings on these capacitors are the micro-farad 
rating and the voltage rating. The voltage rat-
ing of a capacitor should never be exceeded. It is 
permissible to use a capacitor of higher voltage 

86   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
Circuit Breaker
Watt Meter
Ammeter
Capacitor
rating, but never use a capacitor with less volt-
age rating.
The second type of capacitor frequently used in 
air conditioning systems is the AC electrolytic 
capacitor. The AC electrolytic capacitor is used as 
the starting capacitor on many small single-phase 
motors. This type of capacitor is designed to be used 
for a short period of time only. If an AC electrolytic 
capacitor were to be used in a continuous circuit 
such as the running capacitor of a compressor, it 
would fail in a short period of time. The advantage of 
the AC electrolytic capacitor is that a large amount of 
 Figure 8–14
A capacitor corrects the motor power factor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 8–15
Oil-ﬁ lled capacitor. (Courtesy Westinghouse Electric Corp.)
 Figure 8–16
Testing a capacitor with an ohmmeter. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
OHMMETER
capacitance can be housed in a small case size. This 
makes the AC electrolytic capacitor a good choice for 
starting circuits, because the capacitor is in the circuit 
for only a few seconds when the motor is started.
TESTING A CAPACITOR
Capacitors can be tested for a short with an ohm-
meter. If an ohmmeter is connected across the 
terminals of a capacitor as shown in Figure 8–16, 
the meter should show a defl ection up scale and 
then return to infi nity ohms. The defl ection up scale 

UNIT 8  Capacitance   87
 Figure 8–17
Digital meter capable of measuring capacitance. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 8–18
A dielectric test set. (Courtesy of 
Megger®)
indicates current fl ow to the capacitor when it is 
being charged by the ohmmeter battery. If the leads 
of the ohmmeter are reversed, the meter should 
defl ect twice as far up scale and then return to infi n-
ity ohms.
The ohmmeter test basically indicates if the capac-
itor is shorted or not. A short indicates the dielectric 
has been punctured. This test will not indicate a bro-
ken plate, which would result in a lower capacitance 
value. Many digital meters contain a capacitance test-
ing function, as shown in Figure 8–17. These meters 
actually measure the capacitance value, which can 
be compared to the rating marked on the capacitor.
Neither of these tests, however, can measure 
the dielectric strength. A capacitor may test OK 
with an ohmmeter or digital meter but break down 
when connected to line voltage. Ohmmeters and 
 common digital meters do not supply enough volt-
age to test the dielectric at rated voltage. To test 
the dielectric strength, a dielectric test set should 
be used, as shown in Figure 8–18. The dielectric 
test set is sometimes referred to as a hipot because 
it provides a high potential or high voltage. The 
dielectric tester can provide rated voltage to the 
capacitor, and a microamperes meter measures any 
leakage current.

88   SECTION 1  Basic Electricity
SUMMARY
 A capacitor can be constructed by separating two metal plates with an insulating  material.
 The insulating material is called the dielectric.
 Three factors that determine the amount of capacitance a capacitor will have are
A. The surface area of the plates.
B. The distance between the plates.
C. The type of dielectric material used.
 Most of the energy of a capacitor is stored in an electrostatic charge.
 Capacitors can produce extremely high current for a short period of time.
 The basic unit of capacitance is the farad.
 Capacitance values are generally rated in micro-farads (μf), which are one-millionth 
of a farad.
 In an AC circuit containing pure capacitance, the current is limited by capacitive 
 reactance.
 In a pure-capacitive circuit the current leads the voltage by 90 electrical degrees.
 Capacitors are often used to correct the power factor of a motor.
KEY TERMS
AC electrolytic  capacitor
capacitance
capacitive reactance
dielectric
dielectric stress
electrostatic charge
farad
micro-farad
oil-fi lled capacitor
pico-farad
pure-capacitive circuit
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What three factors determine the capacitance of a capacitor?
 
2. What is the dielectric of a capacitor?
 
3. In what type of fi eld is the energy of a capacitor stored?
 
4. In a pure-capacitive circuit, how many degrees are the current and voltage out of 
phase with each other?
 
5. Does a capacitive current lead the voltage or lag the voltage?
 
6. What limits the current in a pure capacitive circuit?
 
7. Name two common types of capacitors used in the air conditioning fi eld.
 
8. What type of capacitor is generally used as the running capacitor on many air 
 conditioning compressors?
 
9. What is the advantage of an AC electrolytic capacitor?
 10. What is the disadvantage of an AC electrolytic capacitor?

SECTION 2
Control 
Circuits

90
Schematics and wiring diagrams are the 
written language of control circuits. It will be impos-
sible for a service technician to become profi cient in 
trouble shooting electrical faults if he or she cannot 
read and interpret electrical diagrams. Learning to 
read electrical diagrams is not as diffi cult as many 
people fi rst believe it to be. Once a few basic princi-
ples are understood, reading schematics and wiring 
diagrams will become no more diffi cult than reading 
a newspaper.
TWO-WIRE CIRCUITS
Control circuits are divided into two basic types, the 
two-wire and the three-wire. Figure 9–1 shows a 
simple two-wire control circuit. In this circuit, 
a simple switch is used to control the power applied 
to a small motor. If the switch is open, there is no 
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Draw standard NEMA control symbols
 Deﬁ ne the meaning of a dashed line 
drawn between symbols
 Deﬁ ne a wiring diagram
 Deﬁ ne and read a schematic diagram
Schematics 
and Wiring 
Diagrams
SECTION 2
UNIT 9

UNIT 9  Schematics and Wiring Diagrams   91
MOTOR 
STARTER
M
PUSHBUTTON STATION
CONTROL
TRANSFORMER
FUSE
L1
L2
L3
MOTOR
 Figure 9–2
Basic three-wire control circuit. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 9–1
Two-wire control circuit. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
complete path for current fl ow, and the motor will 
not operate. If the switch is closed, power is supplied 
to the motor, and it then operates.
THREE-WIRE CIRCUITS
Three-wire control circuits are used because 
they are more fl exible than two-wire circuits. Three-
wire circuits are characterized by the fact that they 
are operated by a magnetic relay or motor starter. 
These circuits are generally controlled by one or 
more pilot devices. Three-wire control circuits 
receive their name from the fact that three conduc-
tors or wires are required to make connection from 
a start-stop pushbutton station to a motor starter, 
Figure 9–2.

92   SECTION 2  Control Circuits
ELECTRICAL SYMBOLS
When a person fi rst learns to read, he or she learns 
a set of symbols that are used to represent different 
sounds. This set of symbols is generally referred to 
as the alphabet. When learning to read electrical 
diagrams, it is necessary to learn the symbols used 
to represent different devices and components. The 
symbols shown below are commonly used on con-
trol schematics and wiring diagrams. These are not 
all the symbols used. Unfortunately, there is no set 
standard for the use of electrical symbols.
To better understand electrical symbols, it is help-
ful to understand some of the common terms used 
to describe these symbols. The terms movable 
and stationary contacts, for example, refer to 
electrical contacts located on different components. 
A simple switch contains both a movable and a 
stationary contact, Figure 9–3. Stationary contacts 
refer to contacts that cannot be moved or changed. 
Movable contacts can be moved from one position to 
another. The switch shown in Figure 9–3 can also 
be described as a normally open switch because:
 1. The movable contact is shown not touching 
the stationary contact.
 2. The movable contact is drawn below the sta-
tionary contact.
Control components are drawn in the position 
they should be in when the circuit is deenergized 
or turned off. Normally open means that there is 
no electrical connection or complete circuit made 
between the movable and stationary contacts of the 
switch.
The switch in Figure 9–3 can be described as a 
single-pole single-throw (SPST) switch. Single pole 
indicates that the switch contains only one movable 
contact. Single throw means that the movable con-
tact will complete a circuit when thrown or moved 
in only one direction.
A normally closed single-pole single-throw switch 
is shown in Figure 9–4. The switch is normally 
closed because:
 1. The movable contact is shown touching the 
stationary contact.
 2. The movable contact is drawn above the 
stationary contact.
STATIONARY 
CONTACT
MOVABLE
CONTACT
STATIONARY
CONTACT
MOVABLE
CONTACT
 Figure 9–3
Normally open single-pole single-throw switch. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 9–4
Normally closed single-pole single-throw switch. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
When a component is normally closed it indi-
cates that a complete circuit exists through the 
component.
Although these basic rules apply to switches, 
they do not necessarily apply to all control compo-
nents. When possible, components are generally 
drawn to indicate how they function. Pushbuttons, 
for example, are drawn differently than switches. 
A normally closed pushbutton is drawn with the 
movable contact below instead of above the sta-
tionary contacts, Figure 9–5. It is drawn in this 
manner to illustrate that when pressure is applied 
to the spring-loaded stationary contact it will cause 
the movable contact to move downward, break-
ing the connection between the two stationary 
contacts. A normally open pushbutton symbol is 
drawn with the movable contact above instead 
of below the stationary contacts. Pressure forces 
the movable contact downward, bridging the gap 
between the two stationary contacts and complet-
ing a circuit.

UNIT 9  Schematics and Wiring Diagrams   93
contact with the upper station-
ary contact. When the switch 
is thrown, contact will be made 
between the switch arm and the 
lower stationary contact. The 
switch arm or pole of the switch is 
generally referred to as the com-
mon because it can make contact 
to either of the two stationary 
contacts.
 8. Double-pole single-throw switch 
(DPST). Notice the dashed line, 
which indicates mechanical connec-
tion between the two switch arms.
 9. Double-pole double-throw switch 
(DPDT).
 10. Off-Automatic-Manual control 
switch. This switch is basically a 
single-pole double-throw that has 
a center off position.
 11. Normally open relay contact.
 12. Normally closed relay contact.
 13. Fuse
 14. Fuse
PRESSURE
PRESSURE
NORMALLY CLOSED PUSHBUTTON
NORMALLY OPEN PUSHBUTTON
MOVABLE CONTACT
STATIONARY CONTACTS
MOVABLE CONTACT
STATIONARY CONTACTS
 Figure 9–5
Common pushbutton 
symbols. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Most of the following symbols are approved by 
the National Electrical Manufacturers 
Association (NEMA):
 1. Normally closed push button. 
Generally used to represent a stop 
button.
 2. Normally open push button. 
Generally used to represent a start 
button.
 3. Double-acting push button. Con-
tains both normally closed and 
normally open contacts on one 
push button.
 4. Double-acting push button drawn 
differently but meaning the same 
as number 3.
 5. Double-acting push button. The 
dashed line indicates mechanical 
connection. This means that when 
one button is pushed, the other 
moves at the same time.
 6. Single-pole single-throw switch 
(SPST).
 7. Single-pole double-throw switch 
(SPDT). Notice this switch has only 
one pole, the switch arm, but it 
has two stationary contacts. In the 
diagram, the switch arm makes 

94   SECTION 2  Control Circuits
 15. Transformer
 16. Coil
 17. Coil (Generally used to represent 
the coil of a relay or motor starter 
in a control schematic.)
 18. Pilot light or lamp
 19. Lamp or light bulb
 20. Thermal heater element
 21. Thermal heater element.  (Generally 
used to represent the overload heater 
element in a motor control circuit.)
 22. Solenoid coil
 23. Fixed resistor
 24. Variable resistor
 25. Variable resistor
 26. Single-pole circuit breaker
 27. Double-pole circuit breaker
 28. Capacitor
 29. Normally closed fl oat switch
 30. Normally open fl oat switch
 31. Normally closed pressure switch
 32. Normally open pressure switch
 33. Normally closed tempera-
ture switch. (Normally closed 
 thermostat)
 34. Normally open temperature 
switch.
 35. Normally closed fl ow switch. 
This symbol is used to represent 
both liquid- and air-sensing fl ow 
switches.
 36. Normally open fl ow switch.
 37. Normally closed limit switch.
 38. Normally open limit switch.
 39. Normally closed ON-DELAY timer 
contact. Often shown on schemat-
ics as DOE, which stands for Delay 
On Energize.
 40. Normally open ON-DELAY timer 
contact.
 41. Normally closed OFF-DELAY timer 
contact. Often shown on sche-
matics as DODE, which stands for 
Delay on De-Energize.
 42. Normally open OFF-DELAY timer 
contact
 43. Battery

UNIT 9  Schematics and Wiring Diagrams   95
 44. Electrical ground
 45. Mechanical ground
 46. Wires crossing without connection
 47. Wires crossing without connection
 48. Wires connecting. The dot in the 
center of the cross is known as 
a node. This is used to indicate 
 connection.
 49. Rotary switch
The contact symbols shown are standard and rel-
atively simple to understand. There can be instances, 
however, in which symbols can be used to show 
something that is not apparent. For example, the 
symbol for a normally closed pressure switch is 
shown in Figure 9–6. Notice that this symbol not 
only shows the movable arm making contact with 
the stationary contact, but it also shows the mov-
able arm drawn above the stationary contact. In 
Figure 9–7, the contact arm is shown not making 
connection with the stationary contact. This sym-
bol, however, is not a normally open contact symbol 
because the contact arm is drawn above the station-
ary contact. This symbol indicates a normally closed 
held-open pressure switch. This symbol is indicating 
that the switch is actually connected as a normally 
closed switch, but pressure is used to keep the con-
tact open. If pressure decreases to a certain point, 
the switch contact will close.
Figure 9–8 shows a normally open pressure 
switch. Notice that the contact arm is drawn below 
the stationary contact. Figure 9–9 shows the same 
symbol except that the movable arm is making 
 connection with the stationary contact. This sym-
bol represents a normally open held-closed pressure 
switch. This switch symbol indicates that the pres-
sure switch is wired normally open, but pressure 
holds the contact closed. If the pressure decreases 
to a certain level, the switch will open and break 
connection to the rest of the circuit.
SCHEMATIC DIAGRAMS
Schematic diagrams show components in their electri-
cal sequence without regard for physical location. Sche-
matic diagrams are used to troubleshoot and install 
control circuits. Schematics are generally easier to 
read and understand than wiring diagrams.
 Figure 9–6
Normally closed pressure switch. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 9–7
Normally closed held-open pressure switch. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 Figure 9–8
Normally open pressure switch. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 9–9
Normally open held-closed pressure switch. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

96   SECTION 2  Control Circuits
WIRING DIAGRAMS
Wiring diagrams show components mounted in their 
general location with connecting wires. A wiring dia-
gram is used to represent how the circuit generally 
appears. To help illustrate the differences between 
wiring diagrams and schematics, a basic control cir-
cuit will fi rst be explained as a schematic and then 
shown as a wiring diagram.
READING SCHEMATIC DIAGRAMS
To read a schematic diagram, a few rules must fi rst 
be learned. Commit the following rules to memory:
 1. Reading a schematic diagram is similar to 
reading a book. It is read from left to right 
and from top to bottom.
 2. Electrical symbols are always shown in their 
off or deenergized position.
 3. Relay contact symbols are shown with the 
same numbers or letters that are used to 
designate the relay coil. All contact symbols 
that have the same number or letter as a coil 
are controlled by that coil regardless of where 
in the circuit they are located.
 4. When a relay is energized, or turned on, all 
of its contacts change position. If a contact is 
shown as normally open, it will close when 
the coil is energized. If the contact is shown 
normally closed, it will open when the coil is 
turned on.
 5. There must be a complete circuit before 
 current can fl ow through a component.
 6. Components used to provide a function of 
stop are generally wired normally closed and 
connected in series. Figure 9–10 illustrates 
this concept. Both switches A and B are nor-
mally closed and connected in series. If either 
switch is opened, connection to the lamp will 
be broken and current will stop fl owing in the 
circuit.
 7. Components used to provide the function of 
start are generally wired normally open and 
connected in parallel. In Figure 9–11, 
switches A and B are normally open and 
connected in parallel with each other. If 
either switch is closed, a current path will be 
provided for the lamp and it will turn on.
DASHED LINES
Often the service technician must be able to deter-
mine what dashed lines indicate. Schematic dia-
grams often contain dashed lines.
In the schematic diagram shown in Figure 9–12, 
dashed lines indicate several different conditions.
 1. Mechanical connection between two com-
ponents such as those shown in electrical 
symbols 5, 8, and 9. Each of these symbols 
show a dashed line connected between dif-
ferent components. The dashed line indicates 
that when one component is changed the 
other one is changed, at the same time. The 
double-acting push buttons illustrated in 
number 5 will both operate when one of 
them is pushed.
A
B
H
N
H
N
B
A
 Figure 9–10
Components used to perform 
the function of stop are normally 
closed and connected in series. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 9–11
Components used to perform 
the function of start are normally 
open and connected in parallel. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 9  Schematics and Wiring Diagrams   97
Connect  to  correct  voltage
Mechanical  connection
Field  wired  devices
Special  condition
 Figure 9–12
Dashed lines can represent different conditions. (Drawing courtesy of Carrier Corp.).

98   SECTION 2  Control Circuits
 2. Field wired or installed components.
 3. Components used only in special 
 circumstances.
 4. Factory wired or installed components.
At the top of the diagram, dashed lines indicate 
that only one set of the primary terminals is to be 
connected depending on the amount of input volt-
age. An input voltage of 480 volts, for example, 
would have one line connected to the H1 terminal 
and the other to the H4 terminal. An input volt-
age of 208 volts would have one line connected to 
the H1 terminal and the other connected to the H2 
terminal.
Another dashed line connected between two 
switches indicates that these two switches are 
mechanically connected. In reality, this would be a 
double-pole single-throw switch, Figure 9–13. The 
dashed line indicates that when one switch is opened 
or closed, the other one is opened or closed also.
Several components, such as 1M, 2M, and 3M 
are connected with dashed lines. The dashed lines 
in this instance indicates that these devices are fi eld 
wired and not part of the assembled unit. Wiring 
to these devices is connected during the installa-
tion of the equipment. It should be noted that some 
diagrams will use dashed lines to indicate factory-
installed wiring, and solid lines illustrate fi eld-
connected devices. There is no hard rule. It is generally 
necessary for the service person to determine the 
meaning of the lines on a particular schematic.
Another set of components shown in Figure 9–12 is 
surrounded by dashed lines. These dashed lines mark 
components that are used under special circumstances. 
Contactor coil, C2, and contact CR are installed only if 
the compressor motor utilizes part winding starting. If 
the motor does not employ part winding starting, these 
components will not be present.
EXAMPLE
The fi rst circuit to be discussed is a basic control cir-
cuit used throughout industry. Figure 9–14 shows a 
start-stop push button circuit. This schematic shows 
both the control circuit and the motor circuit. Sche-
matic diagrams do not always show both control 
and motor connections. Many schematic diagrams 
show only the control circuit.
 Figure 9–14
Start-stop pushbutton control circuit. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 9–13
Double-pole single-throw switch. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 9  Schematics and Wiring Diagrams   99
Notice in this schematic that there is no complete 
circuit to M motor starter coil because of the open 
start push button and open M auxiliary contacts. 
There is also no connection to the motor because 
of the open-M load contacts. The open-M contacts 
connected in parallel with the start button are small 
contacts intended to be used as part of the control 
circuit. This set of contacts is generally referred to as 
the holding, sealing, or maintaining contacts. These 
contacts are used to provide a continued circuit to 
the M coil when the start button is released.
The second set of M contacts is connected in 
series with the overload heater element and the 
motor, and are known as load contacts. These 
contacts are large and designed to carry the cur-
rent needed to operate the load. Notice that these 
contacts are normally open and there is no current 
path to the motor.
H
N
M
MOTOR
M
OL
M
 Figure 9–16
The stop button breaks the circuit.
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 9–15
Current path through the circuit.
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
When the start button is pushed, a path for current 
fl ow is provided to the M-motor starter coil. When the 
M coil energizes, both M contacts close, Figure 9–15. 
The small auxiliary contact provides a continued cur-
rent path to the motor starter coil when the start but-
ton is released and returns to its open position. The 
large M load contact closes and provides a complete 
circuit to the motor and the motor begins to run. The 
motor will continue to operate in this manner as long 
as the M coil remains energized.
If the stop button is pushed, Figure 9–16, the 
current path to the M coil is broken and the coil 
de-energizes. This causes both M contacts to return 
to their normally open position. When M holding 
contacts open, there is no longer a complete circuit 
provided to the coil when the stop button is returned 
to its normal position. The circuit remains in the off 
position until the start button is again pushed.

100   SECTION 2  Control Circuits
Notice that the overload contact is connected 
in series with the motor starter coil. If the overload 
contact should open, it has the same effect as press-
ing the stop button. The fuse is connected in series 
with both the control circuit and the motor. If the 
fuse should open, it has the effect of disconnecting 
power from the line.
A wiring diagram for the start-stop pushbut-
ton circuit is shown in Figure 9–17. Although this 
diagram looks completely different, it is electrically 
the same as the schematic diagram. Notice the push 
button symbols indicate double-acting push  buttons. 
The stop button, however, uses only the normally 
closed section and the start button uses only the 
 Figure 9–17
Wiring diagram of start-stop pushbutton control circuit.
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
normally open section. The motor starter shows 
three load contacts and two auxiliary contacts. One 
auxiliary contact is open and one is closed. Notice 
that only the open contact has been used.
The overload unit shows two different sections. 
One section contains the thermal heater element 
connected in series with the motor, and the nor-
mally closed contact is connected in series with the 
coil of the M-motor starter.
EXAMPLE
The circuit shown in Figure 9–18 controls the oper-
ation of an oil-fi red boiler. A high pressure pump 
motor is used to inject fuel oil into a combustion 
chamber where it is burned. A blower motor is used 
to supply combustion air to the chamber. The circuit 
will not permit fuel oil to be injected into the cham-
ber unless the blower motor is operating. The circuit 
also permits the blower motor to continue operation 
for a period of one minute after the thermostat is 
satisfi ed. This permits any residual smoke or fumes 
to be removed from the combustion chamber.
The fi rst step in understanding the operation 
of the circuit is to examine the components and 
determine what they control. The thermostat is a 
normally closed held open switch. It is normally 
closed because the movable contact is drawn above 
the stationary contact. The movable contact is 
not making connection to the stationary contact, 
however. This indicates that the contact is being 
held open. The thermal symbol indicates that the 
contact is controlled by temperature. The thermal 
symbol represents a bimetal helix. An increase in 
temperature causes the helix to expand and push 
upward on the contact. A decrease in temperature 
causes the helix to contract. If the helix contracts 
enough, the movable contact will make connection 
with the stationary contact and close the switch. 
This thermostat symbol indicates that an increase of 
temperature will open the switch and a decrease of 
temperature will close the switch. This is the normal 
operation of a heating thermostat.
The high temperature switch is a thermally acti-
vated switch also. The switch is shown normally 
closed. If the temperature should increase high 
enough, the switch will open and break connection 
to the high pressure pump motor relay and time 
delay relay.

UNIT 9  Schematics and Wiring Diagrams   101
The low water switch is a normally open held 
closed switch. The switch is normally open because 
the movable contact is drawn below the stationary 
contact. Because the movable contact is touching 
the station contact it is being held closed. This switch 
is drawn to indicate that a drop in liquid level will 
cause the switch contacts to open and break the cir-
cuit to the high pressure pump motor relay and time 
HPM
HPM
L2
HIGH  PRESSURE  PUMP
L1
BMR
THERMOSTAT
BMR
BLOWER  MOTOR
HIGH
TEMPERATURE
LOW
WATER
HP
PUMP
RELAY
FLOW
TRANSFORMER  240/24
HPM
OFF  DELAY
TIMER  1  MINUTE
BLOWER
MOTOR
RELAY
BMR
TDR
TDR
 Figure 9–18
Boiler control circuit. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
delay relay. One of the most dangerous  conditions for 
a boiler is a low water level. If the water level should 
drop below a preset point, the switch will open.
The fl ow switch is normally open. A fl ow of air 
causes the switch contacts to close. The fl ow switch 
is used to insure that there is a fl ow of combustion 
air into the combustion chamber before fuel oil is 
injected into the chamber.

102   SECTION 2  Control Circuits
The time delay contact (TDR) is connected in 
series with the blower motor relay coil. The symbol 
indicates that the timer is an off delay timer. The 
arrow always points in the direction the contacts 
will move after the delay period. The arrow indicates 
that the contacts will delay reopening after they 
have changed position.
HPM
HPM
L2
HIGH  PRESSURE  PUMP
L1
BMR
THERMOSTAT
BMR
BLOWER  MOTOR
HIGH
TEMPERATURE
LOW
WATER
HP
PUMP
RELAY
FLOW
TRANSFORMER  240/24
HPM
OFF  DELAY
TIMER  1  MINUTE
BLOWER
MOTOR
RELAY
BMR
TDR
TDR
CIRCUIT OPERATION
When the thermostat contact closes, a circuit is 
completed through the closed high temperature 
switch, low water switch, and coil of the time delay 
relay. Since the timer is an off delay timer, TDR 
contacts close immediately and energize the blower 
motor relay, Figure 9–19. This causes the BMR 
 Figure 9–19
The thermostat contacts close. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 9  Schematics and Wiring Diagrams   103
high pressure pump to the line. The circuit is now in 
full operation. The circuit will continue to operate in 
this manner until the thermostat contacts reopen, 
Figure 9–21. When the thermostat contacts reopen, 
power is disconnected from the high pressure pump 
motor relay and the time delay relay. Because the 
contacts to close and connect the blower motor to 
the power line.
The air fl ow produced by the blower motor causes 
the fl ow switch to close and energize the coil of the 
high pressure pump motor relay, Figure 9–20. This 
causes the HPM contacts to close and connect the 
 Figure 9–20
The circuit is in full operation. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
HPM
HPM
L2
HIGH  PRESSURE  PUMP
L1
BMR
THERMOSTAT
BMR
BLOWER  MOTOR
HIGH
TEMPERATURE
LOW
WATER
HP
PUMP
RELAY
FLOW
TRANSFORMER  240/24
HPM
OFF  DELAY
TIMER  1  MINUTE
BLOWER
MOTOR
RELAY
BMR
TDR
TDR

104   SECTION 2  Control Circuits
time delay relay is an off delay timer, it does not 
start timing until the coil is deenergized. The TDR 
contacts will remain closed for a period of 1 minute 
before reopening. This permits the blower motor to 
remove any smoke and fumes from the combustion 
chamber. When the TDR contacts open, the circuit 
is back in its original state as shown in Figure 9–18. 
If the high temperature switch or low water switch 
should open, it would have the same effect as open-
ing the thermostat.
HPM
HPM
L2
HIGH  PRESSURE  PUMP
L1
BMR
THERMOSTAT
BMR
BLOWER  MOTOR
HIGH
TEMPERATURE
LOW
WATER
HP
PUMP
RELAY
FLOW
TRANSFORMER  240/24
HPM
OFF  DELAY
TIMER  1  MINUTE
BLOWER
MOTOR
RELAY
BMR
TDR
TDR
 Figure 9–21
The thermostat contacts open. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 9  Schematics and Wiring Diagrams   105
SUMMARY
 Schematics and wiring diagrams are the written language of control systems.
 Motor control symbols are generally drawn to pictorially represent their function.
 The way a motor control symbol is drawn indicates how it is to be connected in a circuit.
 Schematic diagrams show components in their electrical sequence without regard for 
physical location.
 Wiring diagrams show a pictorial representation of the circuit with connecting wires.
 Schematics and wiring diagrams always show the circuit in its deenergized or off  position.
KEY TERMS
load
movable contact
National Electrical 
    Manufacturers 
    Association (NEMA)
node
normally closed
normally open
schematics
stationary contact
three-wire control circuits 
two-wire control circuit
wiring diagrams
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What are the two basic types of motor controls?
 
2. Defi ne a schematic diagram.
 
3. Defi ne a wiring diagram.
 
4. Components used for the function of stop are generally wired _________________ 
and connected in _________________.
 
5. Components used for the function of start are generally wired _________________ 
and connected in _________________.
 
6. When reading a schematic diagram, are the components shown in their energized or 
deenergized position?
 
7. What does this symbol represent?
 
  
 
8. What does this symbol represent?
 
  
 
9. What does a dashed line drawn between components represent?

106   SECTION 2  Control Circuits
 10. What is an auxiliary contact?
 11. Make a schematic drawing of a cooling thermostat that turns on the coil of a con-
tactor. Label the contactor CC, which stands for compressor contactor. Make sure 
that the circuit is drawn so that an increase in temperature will cause the contact to 
close.
 12. Draw a schematic that controls the operation of a sump pump. A fl oat switch is used 
to turn the pump on when the water rises to a high enough level. It is assumed that 
the fl oat switch has contacts rated high enough to control the motor without the use 
of a relay.
 13. Draw a schematic diagram for a low water level alarm. A fl oat switch is used to detect 
the level of water in a tank. If it should fall below a predetermined level, a warning 
light will come on and an alarm will sound.
 14. Draw a circuit for a low pressure cutoff switch. If the pressure falls below a certain 
level, it will cause a contactor coil to be disconnected. Label the contactor CC.
 15. Add a thermal switch to the circuit in question 14. The switch is to be installed so that 
a rise in temperature will disconnect the contactor coil.

107
In this unit, two schematic diagrams are discussed, 
including their operation and development into 
wiring diagrams. Developing a wiring diagram from 
a schematic is the same basic procedure that is 
followed when installing a control system. Under-
standing this process is also a great advantage when 
troubleshooting existing circuits.
DEVELOPING CIRCUIT 1
The fi rst circuit discussed is shown in Figure 10–1. 
In this circuit, a fan motor is controlled by relay 
FR (fan relay). The circuit is so designed that a 
switch can be used to turn the circuit completely 
off, operate the fan manually, or permit the fan 
to be operated by a thermostat. If the control 
switch is moved to the “MAN” position as shown in 
Figure 10–2, a complete circuit is provided to the 
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Discuss the operation of an electric 
circuit by interpreting a schematic 
diagram
 Place wire numbers on a schematic 
diagram and develop a wiring 
diagram from the schematic
Developing 
Wiring 
 Diagrams
UNIT 10

108   SECTION 2  Control Circuits
fan relay coil. Then the relay energizes, FR contact 
closes and connects the motor to the line. This set-
ting permits the fan to be operated at any time, 
regardless of the condition of the thermostat.
If the control switch is moved to the “AUTO” 
position as shown in Figure 10–3, the fan will be 
controlled by the action of the thermostat. When 
the temperature increases to a predetermined level, 
the thermostat contact will close. This completes a 
circuit to FR coil. When FR coil energizes, the FR 
contact closes and connects the fan motor to the 
line. When the temperature decreases suffi ciently, 
the thermostat contact opens and breaks the circuit 
to FR coil. When FR coil deenergizes, FR contact 
opens and disconnects the motor from the line.
This schematic will now be developed into a wir-
ing diagram. To aid in the connection of this circuit, 
a simple numbering system will be used. To use 
L1
N
FR
MOTOR
MAN
FUSE
OFF
AUTO
FR
 Figure 10–1
Fan control circuit. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 Figure 10–2
Fan relay coil is energized by 
control switch. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
L1
N
FR
MOTOR
MAN
FUSE
OFF
AUTO
FR
 Figure 10–3
Fan relay is controlled by the 
thermostat. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
L1
N
FR
MOTOR
MAN
FUSE
OFF
AUTO
FR

UNIT 10  Developing Wiring  Diagrams    109
 correspond to the numbers in the schematic. For 
example, the fuse in the schematic is shown with 
a 1 on one side and a 2 on the other side. The fuse 
in the wiring diagram is shown with a 1 on one 
side and a 2 on the other side. Notice the OFF- 
MANUAL-AUTOMATIC switch shown on the sche-
matic. The common terminal is numbered 2, the 
this numbering system, the following rules will be 
 followed:
 1. All components connected to the same line 
will receive the same number.
 2. Any time a component is gone through, the 
number will change.
 3. A set of numbers can be used only once.
Figure 10–4 shows the numbers placed on the 
schematic. Notice that a 1 is placed at the incom-
ing power line and a 1 is also placed at one side 
of the fuse. Because the fuse is a component, the 
number must change on the other side of it. There-
fore, the fuse has a 2 on the other side. There is 
also a 2 placed beside the common terminal of the 
OFF-MANUAL-AUTOMATIC switch, and a 2 placed 
beside one side of FR contact. Notice that all of these 
components have the same number because there is 
no break between them.
The AUTO side of the switch has been  numbered 3, 
and one side of the thermostat has also been 
 numbered 3. The other side of the thermostat is num-
bered 4, the MAN side of the switch is number 4, and 
one side of FR coil is numbered 4. The other side of the 
coil has been numbered 5, the neutral line is num-
bered 5, and one side of the motor is numbered 5. The 
other side of the motor is numbered 6, and the other 
side of FR contact is numbered 6.
Notice that all the points that are electrically con-
nected together have the same number. Notice also 
that no set of numbers was used more than once.
The components of the system are shown in 
Figure 10–5. Notice that numbers have been 
placed beside certain components. These numbers 
L1
N
FR
MOTOR
MAN
FUSE
OFF
AUTO
FR
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
2
6
6
5
5
4
5
 Figure 10–4
Schematic is numbered to aid in 
connection of the circuit. (Source: 
Delmar/Cengage Learning)
L1
MOTOR
1
1
2
6
FR
4
5
6
2
5
N
5
C
A
2
3
M
4
NC
C
THERMOSTAT
NO
4
3
 Figure 10–5
Circuit components are numbered with the same 
 numbers that appear on the schematic. (Source: Delmar/ 
Cengage Learning)

110   SECTION 2  Control Circuits
4 on one side and 5 on the other. One motor termi-
nal is numbered 5 and the other is numbered 6.
Now that the component parts have been num-
bered with the same numbers as those used on 
the schematic, connection can be made easily and 
quickly. To connect the circuit, connect all the 
like numbers. For example, all the number 1s will 
connect together, all the number 2s will connect 
together, and so forth. The connected circuit is 
shown in Figure 10–6.
DEVELOPMENT OF CIRCUIT 2
The schematic diagram for circuit 2 is shown in 
Figure 10–7. Notice this schematic shows both 
the control circuit and the motor connection. This 
circuit is designed to turn off a compressor if the 
 pressure in the system reaches a predetermined 
MAN terminal is numbered 4, and the AUTO ter-
minal is numbered 3. Now notice the same switch 
on the wiring diagram. The common terminal is 
numbered 2, the MAN terminal is numbered 4, and 
the AUTO terminal is numbered 3. The thermostat 
in the schematic has been numbered 3 on one ter-
minal and 4 on the other terminal. The thermostat 
shown in the wiring diagram has three terminals. 
One terminal is common, one terminal is marked 
NC, and the other terminal is marked NO. This is 
a common arrangement for many control com-
ponents. This shows that the thermostat is a single-
pole double-throw switch. Because the thermostat 
shown in the schematic is normally open, the 3 will 
be placed beside the common terminal, and the 
4 will be placed beside the NO contact. Notice that 
one of the contacts on FR relay is numbered 2 on 
one side and 6 on the other side. FR coil is numbered 
L1
MOTOR
1
1
2
6
FR
4
5
6
2
5
N
5
C
A
2
3
M 4
NC
C
THERMOSTAT
NO
4
3
 Figure 10–6
Like numbers are connected. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 10  Developing Wiring  Diagrams    111
the temperature decreases, the thermostat contacts 
open and deenergize M coil. When M coil deener-
gizes, M contacts open and disconnect the compres-
sor from the power line. Notice that in the normal 
action of this circuit, the compressor is controlled by 
the thermostat.
Now assume that the thermostat contacts are 
closed and that the compressor is connected to the 
power line. Also assume that the pressure in the 
system becomes too great and that the contacts 
of the pressure switch close. When the pressure 
switch contacts close, PSCR (pressure switch 
control relay) coil energizes. This causes both 
level. If the pressure becomes high enough to cause 
the pressure switch contacts to close, the compres-
sor motor will not only be disconnected from the 
power line, but a warning light will also be turned 
on. Once the warning light has been turned on, 
the system must be manually reset by the service 
technician before the compressor can be restarted 
by the thermostat. The operation of the circuit is as 
follows:
When the thermostat contact closes, a circuit 
is completed to M motor starter coil. When M 
coil energizes, M contacts close and connect the 
compressor to the three-phase power line. When 
 Figure 10–7
High pressure locks 
 compressor off. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

112   SECTION 2  Control Circuits
 thermostat if PSCR contact should reclose. Notice 
that the warning light is connected in parallel 
with the coil of CR relay. The warning light will be 
turned on as long as CR relay coil is turned on. As 
long as CR relay is energized, the compressor cannot 
be restarted by the thermostat.
Now assume that the pressure in the system has 
returned to normal and the problem that caused 
the excessive pressure has been corrected. When 
the pressure switch contact reopened, PSCR coil 
deenergized and reset both PSCR contacts to their 
normal position. When the service technician 
presses the reset button, CR coil deenergizes and 
both CR contacts return to their normal positions. 
PSCR contacts to change position. When the nor-
mally closed PSCR contact opens, the circuit to M 
coil is broken. This causes the compressor to be 
disconnected from the line. When the normally 
open PSCR contact closes, a circuit is completed to 
CR (control relay) coil. When CR coil energizes, 
both CR contacts change position. The normally 
open CR contact closes to maintain a circuit to 
CR coil in the event that the pressure in the system 
decreases and opens the pressure switch contacts. 
This would cause PSCR relay to deenergize and 
return both PSCR contacts to their normal posi-
tion. The normally closed CR contact will open. 
This prevents M coil from being energized by the 
 Figure 10–8
Schematic is numbered to aid in 
circuit connection. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
13
14
FUSE
PSCR
11
11
8
8
5
COMP.
T2
10
10
M
M
7
7
6
3
3
6
T1
L3
12
12
9
9
4
T3
2
2
5
L2
1
1
4
L1
4
CONTROL
TRANSFORMER
CIRCUIT
BREAKER
5
16
13
14
15
PS
15
16
CR
14
18
PSCR
14
14
22
18
CR
22
21
PSCR
THERMOSTAT
18
17
RESET
17
16
17
16
RR
M
21
20
CR
19
19
20
16
OL

UNIT 10  Developing Wiring  Diagrams    113
The control components are shown in 
Figure 10–9. Notice that the numbers on the 
components correspond with like numbers on 
the schematic diagram. For example, on the 
schematic diagram the primary of  the control 
transformer is numbered 4 and 5. The secondary 
leads are numbered 13 and 16. Notice the same 
is true on the wiring diagram. Note the number 
of  each component on the schematic and then 
The  circuit is now back in its original position and 
ready for normal operation.
This schematic diagram is now being developed 
into a wiring diagram. As before, the schematic is 
numbered in the same manner as the fi rst example. 
The numbered schematic is shown in Figure 10–8. 
Notice that all components that are electrically tied 
together have the same number. Also notice that no 
number set has been used more than once.
 Figure 10–9
Components are numbered the same in 
the schematic. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
T1
T2
T3
COMP.
13
14
10
11
12
M
20
19
7
9
8
7
12
11
10
16
19
6
8
5
9
4
C
NC
14
15
NO
PS
C
NC
14
22
NO
TEMP
4
13
5
16
17
16
R
3
3
6
L3
2
2
5
L2
1
1
4
L1
21
20
18
14
CR
17
16
22
21
18
14
PSCR
15
16
18
17

114   SECTION 2  Control Circuits
connecting like numbers. The circuit connection 
is shown in Figure 10–10. Again, notice that 
the wiring diagram appears to be completely 
 different from the schematic, but both are the 
same electrically.
find the corresponding number beside the proper 
component used on the wiring diagram.
Once the components of the wiring diagram have 
been numbered with the same numbers as those 
on the schematic, the circuit can be  connected by 
 Figure 10–10
Connection is made by 
 connecting like numbers. (Source: 
Delmar/Cengage Learning)
T1
T2
T3
COMP.
13
14
10
11
12
C
NC
14
15
NO
PS
C
NC
14
22
NO
TEMP
4
13
5
16
17
16
R
3
3
6
L3
2
2
5
L2
1
1
4
L1
18
17
CR
17
16
PSCR
15
16
21
20
18
14
22
21
18
14
M
20
19
7
9
8
7
12
11
10
16
19
6
8
5
9
4

UNIT 10  Developing Wiring  Diagrams    115
 Wiring diagrams are generally developed from a schematic diagram.
 All components in a schematic diagram are shown in their deenergized or off position.
 Wire numbers are often placed on schematic diagrams to aid in connecting a wiring  diagram.
 Three basic rules for placing wire numbers on a schematic diagram are:
A. All components connected to the same line will receive the same number.
B. Any time a component is gone through, the number will change.
C. A set of numbers can be used only once.
KEY TERMS
SUMMARY
FR (fan relay)
PSCR (pressure switch control relay)
REVIEW QUESTIONS
Refer to Figure 10–1 for the following questions.
 
1. Explain the action of the circuit if the thermostat should fail to operate.
 
2. Explain the action of the circuit if FR contacts should become shorted together.
Refer to Figure 10–7 for the following questions.
 
3. Explain the action of the circuit if the overload (OL) contact should open.
 
4. Explain the action of the circuit if the pressure switch contacts should 
become shorted.
 
5. Explain the action of the circuit if the CR coil should open.

This page intentionally left blank 

SECTION 3
Motors

118
Because three-phase power is not available to small 
business and residential locations, the air condition-
ing equipment for these areas is powered by single-
phase electric motors. The single-phase motors used 
in air conditioning systems are generally one of two 
types. These are the split-phase and the shaded-pole 
induction motor.
SPLIT-PHASE MOTORS
Split-phase motors fall into three general clas-
sifi cations. These are:
 1. The resistance-start induction-run 
motor,
 2. The capacitor-start induction-run 
motor,
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 List the basic types of split-phase 
motors
 Discuss two-phase power
 Discuss the operation of a resistance-
start induction run motor
 Discuss the operation of a capacitor-
start induction run motor
 Discuss the operation of a permanent-
split capacitor motor
 Reverse the direction of rotation of a 
split-phase motor
 Connect dual voltage motors for 
120- or 240-volt operation
 Identify the terminal markings of an 
oil-ﬁ lled capacitor and discuss the 
proper connection to a permanent 
split-capacitor motor
Split-Phase 
Motors
UNIT 11

UNIT 11  Split-Phase Motors   119
 3. The permanent-split capacitor motor 
(PSC). It should be noted that although all 
permanent-split capacitor motors contain a 
run capacitor, some are equipped with a sep-
arate starting capacitor to improve starting 
torque. The motors with the separate starting 
capacitor are often referred to as capacitor-
start capacitor-run motors.
Although all of these motors have different oper-
ating characteristics, they are similar in construc-
tion. Split-phase motors get their name from the 
manner in which they operate. These motors oper-
ate on the principle of a rotating magnetic fi eld. 
A rotating magnetic fi eld, however, cannot be pro-
duced with only one phase. Split-phase motors liter-
ally split single-phase power in order to imitate a 
two-phase power system. A rotating magnetic fi eld 
can be produced with two separate phases.
THE TWO-PHASE SYSTEM
In some parts of the world, two-phase power 
is produced. A two-phase system is produced by 
having an alternator with two sets of coils wound 
90° out of phase with each other, Figure 11–1. 
The voltages of a two-phase system are, therefore, 
90° out of phase with each other, Figure 11–2. The 
two out-of-phase voltages can be used to produce 
a rotating magnetic fi eld. Because there have to 
L2
C
B
N
A
S
L1
L1
L2
 Figure 11–1
Two-phase alternator. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 11–2
Two-phase voltages are 90° out of phase with each 
other. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
be two voltages or currents out of phase with each 
other to produce a rotating magnetic fi eld, single-
phase motors use two separate windings and create 
a phase difference between the currents in each of 
these windings. These motors literally “split” one 
phase and produce a second phase, hence the name 
split-phase motor.
RESISTANCE-START INDUCTION-
RUN AND CAPACITOR-START 
INDUCTION-RUN MOTORS
Resistance-start induction-run and capacitor-start 
induction-run motors are very similar in construc-
tion. The stator winding of both motors contains 
both a start winding and a run winding. The 
start winding is made of smaller wire and placed 
higher in the metal core material than the run wind-
ing, as shown in Figure 11–3. Since the start winding 
is made with smaller wire than the run winding, it 
will exhibit a higher resistance than the run wind-
ing. Placing the run winding deeper in the metal 
core material causes it to exhibit a greater amount 
of inductance that the start winding. Electrically, 
the winding appears similar to the circuit shown in 
Figure 11–4. The stator is constructed in this 

120   SECTION 3  Motors
Resistance-Start Induction-Run 
Motor
The rotating magnetic fi eld of the resistance-start 
induction-run motor is produced by the out-of-phase 
currents in the run and start windings. Since the 
run winding appears more inductive and less resis-
tive than the start winding, the current fl ow in the 
run winding will be close to 90 degrees out-of-phase 
with the applied voltage. The start winding appears 
more resistive and less inductive than the run wind-
ing, causing the start winding’s current to be less 
out-of-phase with the applied voltage, as shown in 
Figure 11–5. The phase-angle difference between 
current in the run winding and current in the start 
winding of a resistance-start induction-run motor is 
generally 35 to 40 degrees. This is enough phase-
angle difference to produce a weak rotating fi eld, 
and consequently a weak torque, to start the motor. 
Once the motor reaches about 75% of its rated 
speed, the start winding is disconnected from the 
circuit and the motor continues to operate on the 
run winding. In nonhermetically sealed motors, 
the start winding is generally disconnected with a 
centrifugal switch. A centrifugal switch is shown in 
Figure 11–6. The contacts of the centrifugal switch 
are connected in series with the start winding, as 
Start Winding
Run Winding
Start
Winding
Run
Winding
 Figure 11–3
Stator winding of a 
resistance-start induction-run 
or capacitor-start induction-
run motor. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 Figure 11–4
The run winding has more inductance and less 
 resistance than the start winding. The start winding 
has more resistance and less inductance than the 
run winding. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
manner to produce a phase shift between the cur-
rent fl owing through the run winding and the 
current fl owing through the start winding. Both 
the resistance-start and capacitor-start induction-
run motors start rotation by producing a rotating 
magnetic fi eld in the stator winding. Recall that a 
rotating magnetic fi eld cannot be produced with a 
single phase.

UNIT 11  Split-Phase Motors   121
causing the contacts to open and disconnect the 
start winding from power. The motor continues to 
operate on the run winding.
When the start winding is disconnected from the 
circuit, a rotating magnetic fi eld is no longer pro-
duced in the stator. This type of motor continues to 
operate because of current inducted in the squirrel 
cage windings in the rotor. Squirrel cage rotors are 
so named because they contain bars inside the rotor 
that would resemble a squirrel cage if the lamina-
tions were removed, as shown in Figure 11–8. 
 Figure 11–5
The run winding current and start winding current of a 
resistance-start induction-run motor will generally be 
 between 35 and 40 degrees out-of-phase with each other. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 11–6
A centrifugal switch is used to disconnect the start wind-
ings when the motor reaches about 75% of rated speed. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 11–7
The centrifugal switch contacts are connected in series 
with the start winding. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 11–8
Squirrel cage rotor. (Courtesy of Bodine Electric Co.).
Start Winding
Current
Voltage
Run Winding
Current
39°
Counter Weight
Contacts
shown in Figure 11–7. When the motor is at rest or 
not running, the contacts of the centrifugal switch 
are closed and provide a circuit to the start winding. 
When the motor is started and reaches about 75% 
of its rated speed, a counterweight on the  centrifugal 
switch moves outward because of centrifugal force, 
Run
Winding
Start
Winding
Centrifugal
Switch

122   SECTION 3  Motors
A squirrel cage is a device that is often placed inside 
the cage of small pets such as hamsters to permit 
them to exercise by running inside the squirrel 
cage. A squirrel cage rotor that has been cut in half 
clearly shows the bars and motor shaft, as shown in 
Figure 11–9. The bars of the turning squirrel cage 
rotor winding cut through lines of magnetic fl ux, 
causing an induced voltage in the rotor. Since the 
rotor bars are shorted together at each end, current 
fl ow through the rotor bars produces a magnetic 
fi eld in the rotor. Alternate magnetic fi elds are 
produced in the rotor, causing the motor to con-
tinue operating, as shown in Figure 11–10. This 
is the same principle that permits a three-phase 
motor to continue operating if one phase is lost 
and the motor is connected to single-phase power. 
The main difference is that the split-phase motor is 
designed to operate in this condition and the three-
phase motor is not. Resistance-start and capacitor-
start induction-run motors are rugged and will 
provide years of service with little maintenance. 
Their operating characteristics, however, are not 
as desirable as those of other types of single-phase 
motors. Due to the way they operate, they have a 
low power factor. They will draw almost as much 
current when the motor is running at no load as 
they will when the motor is running at full load. 
Typically, if the motor has a full-load current draw 
of 8 amperes, the no-load current may be 6.5 to 
7 amperes.
Core Material
Rotor Bars
Shaft
S
N
S
N
N
S
N
S
 Figure 11–10
The rotor continues to turn because of magnetic ﬁ elds 
produced by the current induced in the rotor of the 
motor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 11–9
Bars and shaft of a squirrel cage rotor. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Capacitor-Start Induction-Run 
Motors
Capacitor-start induction-run motors are very simi-
lar to resistance-start induction-run motors. The 
design of the stator winding is basically the same. 
The main difference is that a capacitor is con-
nected in series with the start winding, as shown in 
Figure 11–11. Inductive loads cause the current to 
lag the applied voltage. Capacitors, however, cause 
the current to lead the applied voltage. If the start-
ing capacitor is sized correctly, the start winding 
current will lead the applied voltage by an amount 
that will result in a 90-degree phase shift between 
the run winding current and the start winding 
current, producing an increase in the amount of 
starting torque, as shown in Figure 11–12. If the 
capacitance of the start capacitor is too great, it 
will cause the start winding current to shift more 
than 90 degrees out-of-phase with the run wind-
ing current and starting torque will be reduced. 
When replacing the start capacitor for this type 

UNIT 11  Split-Phase Motors   123
of motor, the micro-farad rating recommended by 
the manufacturer should be followed. It is permis-
sible to use a capacitor with a higher voltage rating, 
but never install a capacitor with a lower voltage 
rating. A capacitor-start induction-run motor is 
shown in Figure 11–13. A typical starting capacitor 
is shown in Figure 11–14.
TESTING THE STATOR WINDING
The stator winding of a single-phase motor is gen-
erally tested with an ohmmeter. The ohmmeter 
test can be used to determine if a winding is open 
or grounded. Many single-phase motors have one 
Run
Winding
Start
Winding
Start
Capacitor
Centrifugal Switch
 Figure 11–11
A capacitor is connected in series with the start 
 winding. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 11–12
The capacitor causes a 90-degree phase shift between 
run winding current and start winding current. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 11–13
A capacitor-start induction-run motor. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 Figure 11–14
Typical starting capacitor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Start Winding
Current
Voltage
Run Winding
Current
90°

124   SECTION 3  Motors
lead of the run and start windings connected as 
shown in Figure 11–15. To test the windings for 
an open, connect one ohmmeter lead to the com-
mon motor terminal, and the other meter lead to 
the run winding. The ohmmeter should indicate 
continuity through the winding. The resistance of 
the run winding of a single-phase motor can vary 
greatly from one motor to another. The winding 
resistance of a single-speed motor may be only one 
or two ohms, while the resistance of a multi-speed 
fan motor may be 10 to 15 ohms.
To test the start winding for an open, connect the 
ohmmeter leads to the common terminal and the 
S terminal. The start winding should indicate conti-
nuity, and should have a higher resistance than the 
run winding. This difference of resistance may not 
be great, but the start winding should have a higher 
resistance than the run winding.
To test the stator winding for a ground, connect 
one of the ohmmeter leads to the case of the motor, 
Figure 11–16. Alternately check each motor termi-
nal with the other ohmmeter lead. The ohmmeter 
should indicate no continuity between either wind-
ing and the case of the motor.
A shorted start winding can sometimes be 
detected by the fact that the motor will not start, but 
will run if the shaft is turned by hand. The motor 
will produce a humming sound but will not turn 
when power is fi rst applied to it. The shaft can be 
turned in either direction by hand and the motor 
will continue to run in that direction.
C
S
R
C
S
R
 Figure 11–15
Testing the split-phase motor for an open winding. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 11–16
Testing a split-phase motor for a grounded winding. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
REVERSING DIRECTION 
OF ROTATION
The direction of rotation of a split-phase motor can 
be reversed by changing the start winding leads or 
the run winding leads, but not both. The rotation is 
generally reversed by changing the start winding 
leads with respect to the run winding. Some motor 
manufacturers bring both start winding leads to the 
outside of the motor. This permits the service techni-
cian to decide the direction of rotation the motor is 
to turn when it is installed on the unit.
DUAL-VOLTAGE MOTORS
Single-phase motors can also be constructed to 
operate on two separate voltages. These motors 
are designed to be connected to 120 or 240 volts. 
A common connection for this type of motor con-
tains two run windings and one start winding, 
Figure 11–17. The run windings are labeled T1–T2, 
and T3–T4. The start winding is labeled T5 and T6. 
In the circuit shown in Figure 11–17, the windings 
have been connected for operation on a 240-volt 
line. Each winding is rated at 120 volts. The two 
run windings are connected in series, which causes 
each to have a voltage drop of 120 volts when con-
nected to 240 volts. Notice that the start winding 
has been connected in parallel with one of the run 
windings. This causes the start winding to have an 

UNIT 11  Split-Phase Motors   125
applied voltage of 120 volts also. Notice that each of 
the windings has 120 volts connected to it, which is 
the rating of the windings.
If the motor is to be operated on a 120 volt line, 
the windings are connected in parallel as shown 
in Figure 11–18. Because these windings are con-
nected in parallel, each will have 120 volts applied 
to it.
Some dual-voltage motors will contain two start 
windings as well as two run windings, as shown 
in Figure 11–19. The run windings are labeled T1 
through T4, the same as dual-voltage motors that 
contain only one start winding. One of the start 
windings is labeled T5 and T6. The second start 
winding is labeled T7 and T8. If the motor is to be 
connected for operation on 240 volts, the run wind-
ings are connected in series by connecting T2 and 
T3 together, and the start windings are connected 
in series by connecting T6 and T7 together. The 
 Figure 11–17
The run windings are connected in series for a high-
voltage connection. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
T5
T6
S
T
A
R
T
T1
T2
R
U
N
T3
T4
L2
L1
R
U
N
 Figure 11–18
Because these windings are connected in parallel, each 
will have 120 volts applied to it. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
START
T5
T6
RUN
T3
T4
RUN
N
H
T1
T2
 Figure 11–19
Some dual-voltage single-phase motors contain two 
start windings as well as two run windings. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
T1
T2
S
T
A
R
T
R
U
N
T5
T6
T3
T4
S
T
A
R
T
R
U
N
T7
T8
 Figure 11–20
The motor is connected for operation on 240 volts. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
T1
T2
S
T
A
R
T
R
U
N
T5
T6
T3
T4
S
T
A
R
T
R
U
N
T7
T8
240 Volts
start windings are then connected in parallel with 
the run windings, as shown in Figure 11–20. The 
direction of rotation can be changed by reversing 
T5 and T8.
If the motor is operated on 120 volts, the run and 
start windings are connected in parallel as shown in 
Figure 11–21. If the motor is to be reversed, leads 
T5 and T7 are changed with leads T6 and T8. Some 

126   SECTION 3  Motors
T1
R
U
N
R
U
N
S
T
A
R
T
S
T
A
R
T
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
120 Volts
 Figure 11–22
Connection leads of a dual-voltage single-phase motor. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 11–23
A schematic for a permanent-split capacitor motor. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 11–21
The motor is connected for 
 operation on 120 volts. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
manufacturers label the start winding leads T5 and 
T8 even if they contain only one start winding. The 
connection leads of a dual-voltage single-phase 
motor are shown in Figure 11–22.
MOTOR POWER CONSUMPTION
It should be noted that the motor does not use less 
energy when connected to 240 volts than it does 
when connected to 120 volts. Power is measured 
in watts, and the watts will be the same regardless 
of the connection. When the motor is connected to 
operate on 240 volts, it will have half the current 
draw as it does on a 120-volt connection. Therefore, 
the amount of power used is the same. For example, 
assume the motor has a current draw of 5 amps when 
connected to 240 volts and 10 amps when connected 
to 120 volts. Watts can be computed from multiply-
ing volts by amps. When the motor is connected 
to 240 volts, the amount of power used is 240  
5 = 1,200 watts. When the motor is connected to 
120 volts, the power used is 120  10 = 1,200 watts. 
The 240-volt connection is generally preferred, how-
ever, because the lower current draw causes less volt-
age drop on the line supplying power to the motor. If 
the motor is located a long distance from the panel, 
voltage drop of the wire can become very important 
to the operation of the unit.
PERMANENT-SPLIT 
CAPACITOR MOTOR
The permanent-split capacitor motor has greatly 
increased in popularity for use in the air condition-
ing fi eld over the past years. This type of split-phase 
motor does not disconnect the start windings from 
the circuit when it is running. This eliminates 
the need for a centrifugal switch or starting relay 
to disconnect the start windings from the circuit 
when the motor reaches about 75% of its full speed, 
 Figure 11–23. This motor has good  starting torque 
START
RUN
RUN
CAPACITOR
H
N

UNIT 11  Split-Phase Motors   127
 Figure 11–25
Permanent-split capacitor motor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 11–24
The run and start windings 
of a permanent-split capacitor 
motor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Start Windings
Run Winding
and good running torque. Because the capacitor 
remains in the circuit during operation, it helps 
correct power factor for the motor. The stator 
winding of the permanent-split capacitor (PSC) 
motor is different from the stator windings of the 
resistance-start induction-run or capacitor-start 
induction-run motors. The PSC motor stator wind-
ing still contains a run and start winding, but the 
start winding will generally have the same size 
wire and just as many turns as the run winding, as 
shown in Figure 11–24. The run winding is placed 
lower in the core material, which helps increase the 
inductance.
The capacitor used in this type of motor is 
generally the AC oil-fi lled type. A photograph of 
a permanent-split capacitor motor is shown in 
Figure 11–25. Because this capacitor remains con-
nected in the circuit, an AC electrolytic capacitor 
cannot be used to replace the run capacitor for this 
type of motor.
The permanent-split capacitor motor will some-
times use an extra capacitor to aid in starting. 
When this is done, the start capacitor is connected 
in parallel with the run capacitor. During the time 
of starting, both of these capacitors are connected 
in the circuit, Figure 11–26. When the motor has 
 accelerated to about 75% of full speed, the start 
capacitor is disconnected from the circuit. If the 
motor is an open type, the start capacitor will be 
disconnected by a centrifugal switch. If the motor 
is sealed, such as a hermetically sealed compressor, 
the start capacitor will be disconnected by a starting 
relay.

128   SECTION 3  Motors
START
CAPACITOR
START
RUN
RUN
CAPACITOR
H
N
Arrow
Dot
Dash
RUN  CAPACITOR
CIRCUIT  BREAKER
240  VOLTS
C
S
R
RUN
START
 Figure 11–26
An extra starting capacitor used with a permanent-split 
capacitor motor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 11–28
Identiﬁ ed capacitor terminal connected to motor start winding. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 11–27
The markings indicate the terminal that connects to the 
plate located closest to the case of the capacitor. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
IDENTIFYING CAPACITOR 
TERMINALS
Most run capacitors and some starting capacitors 
are of the oil-fi lled type, Figure 8–15. This is espe-
cially true for high current motors such as those 
used to operate compressors. Many manufacturers 
of oil-fi lled capacitors will identify one terminal with 
an arrow, a painted dot, or by stamping a dash in 
the capacitor can, Figure 11–27. This identifi ed 
terminal marks the connection to the plate that is 
located nearer to the metal container or can. It has 
long been known that when a capacitor’s dielectric 
breaks down and permits a short circuit to ground, 
it is most often the plate nearer to the outside case 
that becomes grounded. For this reason, it is desir-
able to connect the identifi ed capacitor terminal to 
the line side instead of to the motor start winding.
In Figure 11–28, the run capacitor has been con-
nected in such a manner that the identifi ed terminal 
is connected to the start winding of a compressor 

UNIT 11  Split-Phase Motors   129
RUN  CAPACITOR
CIRCUIT  BREAKER
240  VOLTS
C
S
R
RUN
START
 Figure 11–29
Identiﬁ ed capacitor terminal connected to the line. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
motor. If the capacitor shorts to ground, a current 
path would exist through the motor start winding. 
The start winding is an inductive-type load and 
inductive reactance will limit the value of current 
fl ow to ground. Since the fl ow of current is limited, 
it will take the circuit breaker or fuse time to open 
the circuit and disconnect the motor from the power 
line. This time delay can permit the start winding to 
overheat and become damaged.
In Figure 11–29, the run capacitor has been 
connected in such a manner that the identifi ed 
terminal is connected to the line side. If the capaci-
tor shorts to ground, a current path would exist 
directly to ground, bypassing the motor start wind-
ing. When the capacitor is connected in this man-
ner, the start winding does not limit current fl ow 
and allows the fuse or circuit breaker to open 
almost immediately.
SUMMARY
 Split-phase motors fall into three general classifi cations:
A. The resistance-start induction run.
B. The capacitor-start induction run.
C. The permanent-split capacitor motor.
 The voltages of a two-phase system are 90° out of phase with each other.
 Split-phase motors receive their name from the fact that they split the current fl ow 
through two windings to produce an out of phase condition that produces a rotating mag-
netic fi eld.
 The resistance-start induction run and capacitor-start induction run motors disconnect 
their start winding when they have accelerated to about 75% of their rated speed.
 Split-phase motors that are not hermetically sealed generally use a centrifugal switch to 
disconnect the start winding when the motor has reached about 75% of its rated speed.
 The direction of rotation of a split-phase motor can be reversed by changing the connec-
tions of the run winding or the start winding, but not both.
 Dual voltage split-phase motors can be connected to operate on 120 or 240 volts.

130   SECTION 3  Motors
 The capacitor-start induction run motor develops a higher starting torque than the 
 resistance-start induction run motor.
 The capacitor-start motor develops a higher starting torque by using the capacitor to pro-
duce a 90° phase shift between the current fl ow in the run winding and the current fl ow 
in the start winding.
 Maximum starting torque for the split-phase motor is produced when the run winding 
current and start winding current are 90° out of phase with each other.
 Permanent-split capacitor motors do not disconnect the start winding when the motor is 
in operation.
 Some permanent-split capacitor motors use an extra capacitor during the starting 
period.
 The identifying mark on an oil-fi lled capacitor should be connected to the line side of the 
circuit.
KEY TERMS
capacitor-start
    induction-run motor
capacitor-start
    capacitor-run motor
centrifugal switch
permanent-split
    capacitor motor (PSC)
resistance-start
    induction-run motor
rotating fi eld speed
run winding
split-phase motor
start winding
torque
two-phase power
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What is a split-phase motor?
 
2. What are the three basic types of split-phase motors?
 
3. Explain the difference in construction of run windings and start windings.
 
4. How many degrees out of phase should the current in the start winding be with the 
current in the run winding to develop maximum starting torque?
 
5. What type of capacitor is generally used with a capacitor start induction-run motor?
 
6. Can the micro-farad value of this capacitor be increased to improve starting torque?
 
7. What type of capacitor is used with a permanent-split capacitor motor?
 
8. Does the capacitor of a capacitor start induction-run motor help correct power 
 factor?
 
9. If necessary, can an AC electrolytic capacitor of higher voltage rating be used as the 
starting capacitor?
 10. What is a centrifugal switch used for?

The shaded-pole induction motor is another 
type of AC single-phase motor used to a large extent 
in the air conditioning fi eld. This motor is popular 
because of its simplicity and long life. The shaded-
pole motor contains no start winding or centrifugal 
switch. The rotating magnetic fi eld is created by a 
shading coil wound around one side of each pole 
piece.
THE SHADING COIL
The shading coil is wound around one end of the 
pole piece, Figure 12–1. The shading coil is actu-
ally a large loop of copper wire or a copper band. 
Both ends of the loop are connected together to 
form a complete circuit. The shading coil acts in 
the same manner as a transformer with a shorted 
secondary winding. When the voltage of the AC 
The Shaded-
Pole Induction 
Motor
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Discuss the operation of a shaded-pole 
induction motor
 Deﬁ ne a shading coil
 List common uses for the shaded-pole 
induction motor
131
UNIT 12

132   SECTION 3  Motors
the shading coil, there will be an opposition to the 
change of magnetic fl ux.
When the AC voltage reaches its peak value, it is no 
longer changing and there is no voltage being induced 
into the shaded coil. Since there is no current fl ow in 
the shading coil, there is no opposition to the magnetic 
fl ux. The magnetic fl ux of the pole piece is now uni-
form across the pole face, Figure 12–3.
When the AC voltage begins to decrease from its 
peak value back toward zero, the magnetic fi eld of 
the pole piece begins to collapse. A current is again 
induced into the shading coil. The induced current 
opposes the change of magnetic fl ux, Figure 12–4. 
This causes the magnetic fl ux to be concentrated in 
the shaded section of the pole piece.
When the AC voltage passes through zero and 
begins to increase in the negative direction, the same 
set of events happen, except that the polarity of the 
magnetic fi eld is reversed. If these events were to be 
waveform increases from zero toward its positive 
peak, a magnetic fi eld is created in the pole piece. 
As magnetic lines of fl ux cut through the shading 
coil, a voltage is induced in the coil. Because the coil 
is a low-resistance short circuit, a large amount of 
current fl ows in the loop. This current fl ow causes 
an opposition to the change of magnetic fl ux, 
Figure 12–2. As long as voltage is induced into 
SHADING  COIL
 Figure 12–1
A shaded pole. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
0
–
+
 Figure 12–2
The shading coil opposes a change of magnetic ﬂ ux as 
voltage increases. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
0
–
+
 Figure 12–3
There is no opposition to magnetic ﬂ ux when the volt-
age is not changing. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 12  The Shaded-Pole Induction Motor   133
the arrow in Figure 12–5. If the direction of rotation 
must be changed, it can be done by removing the 
stator winding and turning it around. This is not a 
common practice, however. As a general rule, the 
shaded-pole induction motor is considered to be 
nonreversible.
GENERAL OPERATING 
CHARACTERISTICS
The shaded-pole motor contains a standard 
 squirrel-cage rotor. The amount of torque produced 
is determined by the strength of the magnetic fi eld 
of the stator, the strength of the magnetic fi eld of the 
rotor, and the phase-angle difference between rotor 
current and stator current. The shaded-pole motor 
has a low starting torque and running torque. This 
motor is generally used in applications that do not 
require a large amount of starting torque, such as 
fans and blowers. Figure 12–6 shows a photograph 
of a shaded-pole induction motor.
seen in rapid order, it could be seen that the magnetic 
fi eld rotates across the face of the pole piece.
SPEED
The speed of the shaded-pole induction motor is 
determined by the same factors that determine 
the synchronous speed of other induction motors: 
frequency and number of stator poles. Shaded-pole 
motors are commonly wound as four- or six-pole 
motors. Figure 12–5 shows a drawing of a four-
pole motor.
REVERSING DIRECTION 
OF ROTATION
The direction the magnetic fi eld moves across the 
face of the pole piece is determined by the side of the 
pole piece that has the shaded coil. The rotor will 
turn in the direction of the shaded pole as shown by 
0
–
+
 Figure 12–4
The shading coil opposes a change of ﬂ ux when the 
voltage decreases. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
TO
AC
LINE
 Figure 12–5
A four-pole shaded-pole induction motor. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

134   SECTION 3  Motors
 Figure 12–6
Stator winding and rotor of a shaded-pole induction 
motor. (Courtesy of Westinghouse Electric Corp.).
SUMMARY
 The shaded-pole induction motor is popular because of its simplicity and long life.
 Shaded-pole induction motors do not contain a start winding or centrifugal switch.
 Shaded-pole induction motors operate on the principle of a rotating magnetic fi eld.
 A shading coil or loop is used to produce an out of phase fl ux across the face of the pole 
piece, thus producing a rotating magnetic fi eld.
 The speed of a shaded-pole induction motor is determined by the number of stator poles 
and the frequency of the applied voltage.
 Shaded-pole induction motors are generally considered to be nonreversible.
KEY TERMS
magnetic fl ux 
shaded-pole induction motor 
shading coil
opposition
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What is a shading coil?
 
2. What determines the synchronous speed of a shaded-pole motor?
 
3. In general, how is the direction of a shaded-pole induction motor reversed?
 
4. What type of rotor does the shaded-pole motor contain?
 
5. Name two advantages of the shaded-pole motor over the split-phase induction motor.

Multispeed AC motors have been used to a 
great extent in the air conditioning fi eld for many 
years. There are two basic types of multispeed 
motors used. One type is known as the conse-
quent pole motor. The other type is generally a 
permanent-split capacitor motor.
THE CONSEQUENT POLE MOTOR
The speed of the rotating magnetic fi eld of an AC 
induction motor can be changed in either of two 
ways. These are:
 1. Change the frequency of the AC voltage.
 2. Change the number of stator poles.
The consequent pole motor changes the motor 
speed by changing the number of its stator poles. 
The run winding in Figure 13–1 has been tapped 
Multispeed 
Motors
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Discuss the operation of a consequent 
pole motor
 List the factors that determine the 
synchronous ﬁ eld speed of an 
AC motor
 Discuss the operation of multispeed 
fan motors
 Connect a multispeed fan motor for 
operation at different speeds
135
UNIT 13

136   SECTION 3  Motors
changed by a small amount. This wide variation in 
speed makes the consequent pole motor unsuitable 
for some loads, such as fans and blowers.
The consequent pole motor, however, does have 
some advantages over the other type of multispeed 
motor. When the speed of the consequent pole motor 
is reduced, its torque increases. For this reason, the 
consequent pole motor can be used to operate heavy 
loads, such as two-speed compressors.
MULTISPEED FAN MOTORS
Multispeed fan motors have been used in the air 
conditioning industry for many years. These motors 
are generally wound for two to fi ve steps of speed, 
and are used to operate fans and squirrel-cage blow-
ers. A schematic drawing of a three-speed motor is 
shown in Figure 13–3. Notice that the run winding 
has been tapped to produce low, medium, and high 
speed. The start winding is connected in parallel 
with the run winding section. The other end of the 
start lead is connected to an external oil-fi lled run 
capacitor. This motor obtains a change in speed by 
inserting inductance in series with the run winding. 
The actual run winding for this motor is between 
the terminals marked High and C. The windings 
shown between High and Medium are connected in 
series with the main run winding. When the rotary 
switch is connected to the medium-speed position, 
the inductive reactance of this coil limits the amount 
in the center. If the AC line is connected to each end 
of the winding as shown, current fl ows through the 
winding in only one direction. Therefore, only one 
magnetic polarity is produced in the winding. If 
the winding is connected as shown in Figure 13–2, 
current fl ows in opposite directions in each half of 
the winding. Because current fl ows through each 
half of the winding in opposite directions, the polar-
ity of the magnetic fi eld is different in each half of the 
winding. The run winding now has two polarities 
instead of one. There are now two magnetic poles 
instead of one. If the windings of a two-pole motor 
were to be tapped in this manner, the motor could 
become a four-pole motor. The synchronous speed 
of a two-pole motor is 3,600 RPM, and the synchro-
nous speed of a four-pole motor is 1,800 RPM.
The consequent pole motor has the disadvantage 
of having a wide variation in speed. When the speed 
is changed, it changes from a synchronous speed 
of 3,600 RPM to 1,800 RPM. The speed cannot be 
L1
N
L2
N
 Figure 13–1
Center-tapped run winding. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
L1
S
L2
N
 Figure 13–2
Two magnetic poles are produced. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
LOW
MED.
HIGH
COMMON
L2
L1
 Figure 13–3
Three-speed fan motor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 13  Multispeed Motors   137
motor windings if the speed were to be reduced to 
this extent. This motor, however, has much higher 
impedance in its windings than most motors. The 
run windings of most split-phase motors has a wire 
resistance of 1 to 4 ohms. This motor will generally 
have a resistance of 10 to 15 ohms in its run wind-
ing. It is the high impedance of the windings that 
permits the motor to be operated in this manner 
without damage.
Because this motor is designed to slow down 
when load is added, it is not used to operate high-
torque loads. This type of motor is generally used 
to operate only low-torque loads, such as fans and 
blowers. The schematic in Figure 13–4 shows a 
multispeed fan motor and switch.
of current fl ow through the run winding. When the 
current of the run winding is reduced, the strength 
of the magnetic fi eld of the run winding is reduced 
and the motor produces less torque. This causes the 
motor speed to decrease.
If the rotary switch is changed to the low position, 
more inductance is connected in series with the run 
winding. This causes less current to fl ow through the 
winding and another reduction in torque. When the 
torque is reduced, the motor speed decreases again.
Common speeds for a four-pole motor of this 
type are 1,625, 1,500, and 1,350 RPM. Notice that 
this motor does not have the wide range between 
speeds as the consequent pole motor does. Most 
induction motors would overheat and damage the 
SWITCH  POSITION
LO
MED
HI
OFF
CONTACTS  MADE
L to C, L to LO
L to C, L to MED
L to C, L to HI
NONE
RED
BLU
BLK
GRN
WHT
GRN
BLK
(GROUND)
LO
MED
SWITCH
FAN  MOTOR
COMPRESSOR
OVERLOAD
CAPACITOR
THERMISTOR
THERMOSTAT
SERVICE  CORD
HI
C
L
R
BLU
S
YEL
YEL
YEL
PLAIN
C
B
BLU
°
BLU
A
GRN
RIBBED
(GROUND)
 Figure 13–4
A multispeed fan motor and switch. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

138   SECTION 3  Motors
unit converts the DC voltage back into three-phase 
alternating current by turning transistors on or off at 
the proper time and in the proper sequence. Assume, 
for example, that transistors Q1 and Q4 are switched 
on at the same time. This permits stator winding T1 
to be connected to a positive voltage and T2 to be 
connected to a negative voltage. Current can fl ow 
through Q4 to T2, through the motor stator winding 
and through T1 to Q1.
Now assume that transistors Q1 and Q4 are 
switched off and transistors Q3 and Q6 are switched 
on. Current will now fl ow through Q6 to stator 
winding T3, through the motor to T2, and through 
Q3 to the positive of the power supply.
Because the transistors are turned completely 
on or completely off, the waveform produced is a 
square wave instead of a sine wave, Figure 13–7. 
Induction motors will operate on a square wave 
VARIABLE FREQUENCY DRIVES
One of the factors that determines the speed of the 
rotating magnetic fi eld of an AC induction motor is 
the frequency of the applied voltage. If the frequency 
is changed, the speed of the rotating magnetic fi eld 
changes also. A four-pole stator will have a synchro-
nous speed (speed of the rotating magnetic fi eld) of 
1,800 RPM when connected to a 60-Hz line. If the 
frequency is lowered to 30 Hz, the synchronous 
speed decreases to 900 RPM.
When the frequency is lowered, care must be 
taken not to damage the stator windings. The 
current fl ow through the winding is limited to a 
great extent by inductive reactance. When the fre-
quency is lowered, inductive reactance is lowered 
also (XL  2πFL). For this reason, variable fre-
quency drives must employ some method of lower-
ing the applied voltage to the stator as frequency is 
reduced.
In the air conditioning fi eld, variable frequency 
drive is often used to control the speed of blower 
motors. This method of controlling air fl ow can be 
more effi cient than inserting dampers into the duct 
system. Variable frequency drives are very popular 
in zone controlled systems.
Most variable frequency drives operate by fi rst 
changing the AC voltage into DC and then changing 
it back to AC at the desired frequency. A variable fre-
quency drive is shown in Figure 13–5. There are sev-
eral methods used to change the DC voltage back into 
AC. The method employed is generally determined 
by the manufacturer, age of the  equipment, and the 
size motor the drive must control. Variable frequency 
drives intended to control the speed of motors up 
to 500 horsepower  generally use transistors. In 
the circuit shown in Figure 13–6, a three-phase 
bridge changes the three-phase  alternating-current 
into direct current. The bridge rectifi er uses SCRs 
(silicon  controlled  rectifi ers) instead of 
diodes. The SCRs permit the output voltage of the 
rectifi er to be controlled. As the frequency decreases, 
the SCRs fi re later in the cycle and lower the output 
voltage to the transistors. A choke coil and capaci-
tor bank are used to fi lter the output voltage before 
transistors Q1 through Q6 change the DC voltage 
back into AC. An electronic control unit is connected 
to the bases of transistor Q1 through Q6. The control 
 Figure 13–5
Variable frequency drive. (Courtesy of Toshiba Corp.). 

UNIT 13  Multispeed Motors   139
Some Related Problems
The circuit illustrated in Figure 13–6 employs the 
use of SCRs in the power supply and junction 
transistors in the output stage. SCR power supplies 
control the output voltage by chopping the incom-
ing waveform. This can cause harmonics on the 
line that cause overheating of transformers and 
motors, and can cause fuses to blow and circuit 
breakers to trip. When bipolar junction transistors 
are employed as switches, they are generally driven 
into saturation by supplying them with an exces-
sive amount of base-emitter current. Saturating 
the transistor causes the collector-emitter voltage 
to drop to between 0.04 and 0.03 volts. This small 
voltage drop allows the transistor to control large 
amounts of current without being destroyed. When 
a transistor is driven into saturation, however, it 
cannot recover or turn off as quickly as normal. 
This greatly limits the frequency response of the 
transistor.
IGBTs
Many transistor-controlled variable drives now 
employ a special type of transistor called an insu-
lated gate bipolar transistor (IGBT). IGBTs 
MOTOR
+
–
Q1
Q2
T1
Q3
Q4
T2
Q5
Q6
T3
L1
L2
L3
 Figure 13–6
Variable frequency drive using bipolar transistor to change the direct current back into alternating current. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 13–7
Square wave. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 13–8
Stepped wave. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
without much of a problem. Some manufacturers 
design units that will produce a stepped waveform 
as shown in Figure 13–8. The stepped waveform is 
used because it closely approximates a sine wave.

140   SECTION 3  Motors
the transistor is on for one-third of the time and off 
for two-thirds of the time. The voltage applied to the 
motor would be 210 volts (630/3).
Advantages and Disadvantages 
of IGBT Drives
A great advantage of drives using IGBTs is the 
fact that SCRs are generally not used in the power 
supply and this greatly reduces problems with line 
harmonics. The greatest disadvantage is that the 
fast switching rate of the transistors can cause volt-
age spikes in the range of 1,600 volts to be applied 
to the motor. These voltage spikes can destroy some 
motors. Line length from the drive to the motor is of 
great concern with drives using IGBTs. The shorter 
the line length the better.
Inverter Rated Motors
Because of the problem of excessive voltage spikes 
caused by IGBT drives, some manufacturers pro-
duce a motor that is “inverter rated.” These motors 
are specifi cally designed to be operated by variable 
have an insulated gate very similar to some types 
of fi eld effect transistors (FETs). Because the gate 
is insulated, it has a very high impedance. The 
IGBT is a voltage controlled device, not a current 
controlled device. This gives it the ability to turn off 
very quickly. IGBTs can be driven into saturation 
to provide a very low voltage drop between emitter 
and collector, but they do not suffer from the slow 
recovery time of common junction transistors.
Drives using IGBTs generally use diodes to rectify 
the AC voltage into DC, not SCR, Figure 13–9. The 
three-phase rectifi er supplies a constant DC volt-
age to the transistors. The output voltage to the 
motor is controlled by pulse width modulation 
(PWM). PWM is accomplished by turning the tran-
sistor on and off several times during each half cycle, 
Figure 13–10. The output voltage is an average of 
the peak or maximum voltage and the amount of 
time the transistor is turned on or off. Assume that 
480 volts 3 phase AC is rectifi ed to DC and fi ltered. 
The DC voltage applied to the IGBTs is approxi-
mately 630 volts. The output voltage to the motor 
is controlled by the switching of the transistors. 
Assume that the transistor is on for 10 microsec-
onds and off for 20 microseconds. In this example 
TO
MOTOR
IGBTs
CHOKE
DIODES
LINE
 Figure 13–9
Variable frequency drives using IGBTs generally use diodes in the rectiﬁ er instead of SCRs. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 13  Multispeed Motors   141
 5. The case size is larger than most three phase 
motors. The case size is larger because of the 
added insulating paper between the windings 
and the stator core. Also, a larger case size 
helps cool the motor by providing a larger 
surface area for the dissipation of heat.
Variable Frequency Drives 
Using SCRs and GTOs
Variable frequency drives intended to control 
motors over 500 horsepower generally use SCRs 
or GTOs (gate turn off device). GTOs are similar to 
SCRs except that conduction through the GTO can 
be stopped by applying a negative voltage, negative 
with respect to the cathode, to the gate. SCRs and 
frequency drives. They differ from standard motors 
in several ways:
 1. Many inverter rated motors contain a 
separate blow to provide continuous cooling 
for the motor regardless of the speed. Many 
motors use a fan connected to the motor shaft 
to help draw air though the motor. When 
the motor speed is reduced, the fan cannot 
maintain suffi cient air fl ow to cool the motor.
 2. Inverter rated motors generally have insu-
lating paper between the windings and the 
stator core, Figure 13–11. The high voltage 
spikes produce high currents that produce a 
high magnetic fi eld. This increased magnetic 
fi eld causes the motor windings to move. 
This movement can eventually cause the 
insulation to wear off the wire and produce 
a grounded motor winding.
 3. Inverter rated motors generally have phase 
paper added to the terminal leads. Phase 
paper is insulating paper added to the terminal 
leads that exit the motor. The high voltage 
spikes affect the beginning lead of a coil 
much more than the wire inside the coil. The 
coil is an inductor that naturally opposes a 
change of current. Most of the insulation 
stress caused by high voltage spikes occurs 
at the beginning of a winding.
 4. The magnet wire used in the construction 
of the motor windings has a higher rated 
insulation than other motors.
 Figure 13–10
Pulse width modulation is 
accomplished by turning the 
voltage on and off several 
times during each half cycle.
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
STATOR  CORE
INSULATING  PAPER
 Figure 13–11
Insulating paper is between the windings 
and the stator frame. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

142   SECTION 3  Motors
a bank of capacitors. To understand the operation 
of the circuit, assume that SCRs A and A' are gated 
on at the same time. Current will fl ow through the 
circuit as shown in Figure 13–13. Notice the direc-
tion of current fl ow through the load, and also that 
capacitor C1 has been charged to the polarity shown. 
When an SCR is gated on, it can only be turned off 
by permitting the current fl ow through the anode-
cathode section to drop below a certain level called 
the holding current level. As long as the current 
continues to fl ow through the anode-cathode the 
SCR will not turn off.
Now assume that SCRs B and B' are turned on. 
Because SCRs A and A' are still turned on, two 
current paths now exist through the circuit. The 
positive charge on capacitor C1, however, causes the 
negative electrons to see an easier path. The current 
will rush to charge the capacitor to the opposite 
GTOs are thyristors and have the ability to handle 
a greater amount of current than transistors. An 
example of a single-phase circuit used to convert 
DC voltage to AC voltage with SCRs is shown in 
 Figure 13–12. In this circuit, the SCRs are con-
nected to a control unit which controls the sequence 
and rate at which the SCRs are gated on. The circuit 
is constructed so that SCRs A and A' are gated on 
at the same time and SCRs B and B' are gated on 
at the same time. Inductors L1 and L2 are used for 
fi ltering and wave shaping. Diodes D1 through D4 
are clamping diodes and are used to prevent the 
output voltage from becoming excessive. Capacitor 
C1 is used to turn one set of SCRs off when the other 
set is gated on. This capacitor must be a true AC 
capacitor because it will be charged to the alternate 
polarity each half cycle. In a converter intended to 
handle large amounts of power, capacitor C1 will be 
D1
D2
D3
D4
B'
LOAD
C1
A'
L2
A
B
L1
+
DC  POWER
SUPPLY
 Figure 13–12
Changing DC to AC using SCRs. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 13  Multispeed Motors   143
is to provide speed control for an AC motor, most 
drives provide functions that other types of controls 
do not. Many variable frequency drives can provide 
the low speed torque characteristic that is so desir-
able in DC motors. It is this feature that permits AC 
squirrel-cage motors to replace DC motors for many 
applications.
Many variable frequency drives also provide cur-
rent limit and automatic speed regulation for the 
motor. Current limit is generally accomplished by 
connecting current transformers to the input of the 
drive and sensing the increase in current as load is 
added. Speed regulation is accomplished by sensing 
the speed of the motor and feeding this information 
back to the drive.
Another feature of variable frequency drives is 
acceleration and deceleration control, sometimes 
polarity, stopping the current fl owing through SCRs 
A and A' permitting them to turn off. The current 
now fl ows through SCRs B and B' and charges the 
capacitor to the opposite polarity, Figure 13–14. 
Notice that the current now fl ows through the load 
in the opposite direction, which produces alternat-
ing current across the load.
To produce the next half cycle of AC current, 
SCRs A and A' are gated on again. The positively 
charged side of the capacitor will now cause the 
current to stop fl owing through SCRs B and B' per-
mitting them to turn off. The current again fl ows 
through the load in the direction indicated in 
Figure 13–14. The frequency of the circuit is deter-
mined by the rate at which the SCRs are gated on.
FEATURES OF VARIABLE FREQUENCY CONTROL. Although 
the primary purpose of a variable  frequency drive 
D1
D2
D3
D4
B'
LOAD
+ C1 –
A'
L2
A
B
L1
+
DC  POWER
SUPPLY
 Figure 13–13
Current ﬂ ows through SCRs A and A'. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

144   SECTION 3  Motors
Some other adjustments that can usually be set 
by changing potentiometers or programming the 
unit are as follows:
Current Limit: These controls set the maxi-
mum amount of current the drive is permitted 
to deliver to the motor.
Volts per Hertz: This sets the ratio by which 
the voltage increases as frequency increases or 
decreases as frequency decreases.
Maximum Hertz: These controls set the 
maximum speed of the motor.
Minimum Hertz: This sets the minimum 
speed the motor is permitted to run.
called “ramping.” Ramping is used to accelerate 
or decelerate a motor over some period of time. 
Ramping permits the motor to bring the load up to 
speed slowly as opposed to simply connecting the 
motor directly to the line. Even if the speed control 
is set in the maximum position when the start 
button is pressed, ramping permits the motor to 
accelerate the load from zero to its maximum RPM 
over several seconds. This feature can be a real 
advantage for some types of loads, especially gear 
drive loads. In some units the amount of accel-
eration and deceleration time can be adjusted by 
setting potentiometers on the main control board. 
Other units are completely digitally controlled and 
the acceleration and deceleration times are pro-
grammed into the computer memory.
D1
D2
D3
D4
B'
LOAD
– C1 +
A'
L2
A
B
L1
+
DC  POWER
SUPPLY
 Figure 13–14
Current ﬂ ows through SCRs B and B'. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 13  Multispeed Motors   145
SUMMARY
 Consequent pole motors change speed by changing the number of stator poles.
 The disadvantage of consequent pole motors is that they have a wide range between 
speeds.
 The advantage of the consequent pole motor is that it maintains a high torque.
 Consequent pole motors are generally used to operate two-speed compressors because of 
their ability to maintain high torque.
 Multispeed fan motors insert inductance in series with the main run winding to produce a 
change of speed.
 The run windings of multispeed fan motors have a high resistance so they will not 
overheat when the motor slows down.
 Multispeed fan motors cannot be used to operate high torque loads.
 Variable frequency drives change the speed of the motor by changing the frequency of the 
applied voltage.
 The synchronous speed of an induction motor is the speed of the rotating magnetic fi eld.
 Synchronous speed is determined by two factors: number of stator poles per phase, and 
frequency of the applied voltage.
 When the frequency to the motor is reduced, the voltage must be reduced also.
 Variable frequency drives up to 500 horsepower generally use transistors to change the 
DC voltage back into AC voltage.
 Variable frequency drives above 500 horsepower generally use SCRs or GTOs to change 
the DC voltage back into AC voltage.
 Insulated gate bipolar transistors are used in many variable frequency drives because they 
can be switched on or off at a faster rate.
 Units employing IGBTs can produce voltage spikes on the motor as high as 1,600 volts.
 Inverter rated motors are designed to operate with variable frequency drives.
 Some variable frequency drives use potentiometers to change settings, and others are 
digital and must have the setting programmed into the drive.
KEY TERMS
consequent pole motor 
multispeed AC motors 
silicon controlled
harmonics 
polarity 
 rectifi ers (SCRs)
insulated gate bipolar  
pulse width 
tapped
 transistors (IGBTs) 
 modulation (PWM) 
two-speed compressors
 
 
variable frequency

146   SECTION 3  Motors
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. Name two ways of changing the speed of a rotating magnetic fi eld.
 
2. How does the consequent pole motor change speed?
 
3. Name a disadvantage of the consequent pole motor.
 
4. Name an advantage of a consequent pole motor.
 
5. How many steps of speed are common to a multispeed fan motor?
 
6. Refer to Figure 13–3. Explain what would happen to motor operation if the winding 
between low and medium should become open.
 
7. What is an advantage of the multispeed fan motor over the consequent pole motor?
 
8. What is a disadvantage of the multispeed fan motor when compared with the 
 consequent pole motor?
 
9. How much wire resistance is common for the run winding of most split-phase 
motors?
 10. How much wire resistance is common for the multispeed fan motor?
 11. What is synchronous speed?
 12. What is the disadvantage of a variable frequency drive unit that uses SCRs to convert 
the AC voltage into DC voltage?
 13. What is the disadvantage of driving a common bipolar junction transistor into 
 saturation?
 14. What is the main advantage of the insulated grate bipolar transistor over the  common 
bipolar junction transistor?
 15. What is an inverter rated motor?
TROUBLESHOOTING QUESTIONS
Refer to the schematic shown in Figure 13–4 to answer the following questions.
1. If the switch is set in the HI position, the thermostat will control the operation of:
A. The compressor only.
B. The fan motor only.
C. The speed of the fan motor.
D. Both the compressor and the speed of the fan motor.
2. When the switch is set in the HI position, both the fan motor and compressor operate. If 
the switch is changed to the MED or LOW position, the compressor continues to operate, 
but the fan motor stops. Which of the following could cause this problem?
A. The fan motor start winding is open.
B. The section of run winding between the red and blue wires is open in the fan motor.
C. The section of run winding between the blue and black wires is open in the fan motor.
D. The section of run winding between the black and white wires is open in the fan motor.

UNIT 13  Multispeed Motors   147
3. The fan motor will operate in any of its three speeds, but the compressor motor will not 
start. Which of the following could cause this problem?
A. The switch is not making connection between L and C.
B. The switch is not making connection between L and LO.
C. The switch is not making connection between L and MED.
D. The switch is not making connection between L and HI.
4. If it is assumed that this unit operates on 120 volts AC, how is the neutral conductor 
 identifi ed on the schematic shown in Figure 13–4?
A. The wire color is green.
B. The wire color is white.
C. The conductor is ribbed.
D. The conductor is plain.
5. If the unit is in operation and the overload protector should open:
A. Both the fan motor and compressor will stop operating.
B. Only the compressor will stop operating.
C. Only the fan motor will stop operating.
D. Both the fan motor and compressor will continue to operate.

148
There are three basic types of three-phase 
motors. These are:
 1. The squirrel-cage induction motor.
 2. The wound rotor induction motor.
 3. The synchronous motor.
The type of three-phase motor is determined by 
the rotor or rotating member. The stator windings 
for any of these motors is the same. In this unit, the 
basic principles of operation for three-phase motors 
will be discussed.
The principle of operation for all three-phase 
motors is the rotating magnetic fi eld. There 
are three factors that cause the magnetic fi eld to 
rotate. These are:
 1. The voltages of a three-phase system are 
120° out of phase with each other.
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 List the three major types of three-
phase motors
 Discuss the operating principle of a 
three-phase motor
 List the factors that determine 
synchronous speed
 Discuss the operation of dual-voltage 
motors
 Connect dual-voltage three-phase 
motors for operation on low voltage 
or high voltage
Three-Phase 
Motor 
Principles
UNIT 14

UNIT 14  Three-Phase Motor Principles   149
 2. The three voltages change polarity at regular 
intervals.
 3. The arrangement of the stator windings 
around the inside of the motor.
Figure 14–1A shows three AC voltages 120° out 
of phase with each other, and the stator winding of 
a three-phase motor. The stator illustrates a two-
pole, three-phase motor. Two-pole means that there 
are two poles per phase. AC motors do not generally 
have actual pole pieces as shown in Figure 14–1A, 
but they will be used here to aid in understanding 
how the rotating magnetic fi eld is created in a three-
phase motor. Notice that pole pieces 1A and 1B are 
located opposite each other. The same is true for 
poles 2A and 2B, and 3A and 3B. The pole pieces 
1A and 1B are wound with wire that is connected to 
phase one of the three-phase system. Notice also that 
the pole pieces are wound in such a manner that 
they will always have opposite magnetic  polarities. 
If pole piece 1A has a north magnetic polarity, pole 
piece 1B will have a south magnetic polarity at the 
same time.
The windings of pole pieces 2A and 2B are con-
nected to line 2 of the three-phase system. The 
windings of pole pieces 3A and 3B are connected to 
line 3 of the three-phase system. These pole pieces 
are also wound in such a manner as to have the 
opposite polarity of magnetism.
To understand how the magnetic fi eld rotates 
around the inside of the motor, refer to Figure 14–1B. 
Notice a line, labeled “A,” has been drawn through 
the three voltages of the system. This line is used 
to illustrate the condition of the three voltages 
at this point in time. The arrow drawn inside 
the motor indicates the greatest strength of the 
magnetic field at the same point in time. It is to be 
assumed that the arrow is pointing in the direction 
of the north magnetic fi eld. Notice in Figure 14–1B, 
that phase 1 is at its maximum positive peak, and 
that phases 2 and 3 are less than maximum. The 
magnetic fi eld is, therefore, strongest between pole 
pieces 1A and 1B.
In Figure 14–1C, line B indicates that the voltage 
of line 3 is zero. The voltage of line 1 is less than maxi-
mum positive; and line 2 is less than maximum nega-
tive. The magnetic fi eld at this point is concentrated 
between the pole pieces of phase 1 and phase 2.
L1
L2
L3
1A
2A
3A
2B
1B
3B
L1
L2
L3
 Figure 14–1A
Basic stator winding. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
L1
L2
L3
1A
2A
3A
2B
1B
3B
L1
L2
L3
A
 Figure 14–1B
The magnetic ﬁ eld is concentrated between the poles 
of phase 1. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

150   SECTION 3  Motors
In Figure 14–1D, line C indicates that line 2 is at 
its maximum negative peak and that lines 1 and 3 
are less than maximum positive. The magnetic fi eld 
at this point is concentrated between pole pieces 2A 
and 2B.
In Figure 14–1E, line D indicates that line 1 is 
zero. Lines 2 and 3 are less than maximum and in 
opposite directions. At this point, the magnetic fi eld 
is concentrated between the pole pieces of phase 2 
and phase 3.
In Figure 14–1F, line E indicates that phase 3 is 
at its maximum positive peak and lines 1 and 2 are 
less than maximum and in the opposite direction. 
The magnetic fi eld at this point is concentrated 
between pole pieces 3A and 3B.
In Figure 14–1G, line F indicates that phase 2 
is 0. Line 3 is less than maximum positive; and line 1 
is less than maximum negative. The magnetic fi eld 
at this time is concentrated between the pole pieces 
of phase 1 and phase 3.
L1
L2
L3
1A
2A
3A
2B
1B
3B
L1
L2
L3
B
 Figure 14–1C
The magnetic ﬁ eld is concentrated between 
phases 1 and 2. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
L1
L2
L3
1A
2A
3A
2B
1B
3B
L1
L2
L3
C
 Figure 14–1D
The magnetic ﬁ eld is concentrated between the poles 
of phase 1. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
L1
L2
L3
1A
2A
3A
2B
1B
3B
L1
L2
L3
D
 Figure 14–1E
The magnetic ﬁ eld is concentrated between phases 2 and 3. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 14  Three-Phase Motor Principles   151
In Figure 14–1H, line G indicates that phase 1 
is at its maximum negative peak; and phase 2 
and 3 are less than maximum and in the opposite 
direction. Notice that the magnetic fi eld is again 
concentrated between pole pieces 1A and 1B. This 
time, however, the magnetic polarity is reversed 
because the current has reversed in the stator 
winding.
In Figure 14–1I, line H indicates phase 2 is at its 
maximum positive peak and phases 1 and 3 are less 
than maximum and in the negative direction. The 
magnetic fi eld is concentrated between pole pieces 
2A and 2B.
In Figure 14–1J, line 1 indicates that phase 3 
is maximum negative; and phases 1 and 2 are less 
than maximum in the positive direction. The mag-
netic fi eld at this point is concentrated between pole 
pieces 3A and 3B.
In Figure 14–1K, line J indicates that phase 1 
is at its positive peak; and phases 2 and 3 are less 
than maximum and in the opposite direction. The 
L1
L2
L3
1A
2A
3A
2B
1B
3B
L1
L2
L3
E
 Figure 14–1F
The magnetic ﬁ eld is concentrated between the poles 
of phase 3. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
L1
L2
L3
1A
2A
3A
2B
1B
3B
L1
L2
L3
F
 Figure 14–1G
The magnetic ﬁ eld is concentrated between phases 1 and 3. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
L1
L2
L3
1A
2A
3A
2B
1B
3B
L1
L2
L3
G
 Figure 14–1H
The magnetic ﬁ eld is concentrated between the poles of 
phase 1. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

152   SECTION 3  Motors
 magnetic fi eld is again concentrated between pole 
pieces 1A and 1B. Notice that in one complete cycle 
of three-phase voltage, the magnetic fi eld has rotated 
360° around the inside of the stator winding.
If any two of the stator leads is connected to a 
different line, the relationship of the voltages will 
change and the magnetic fi eld will rotate in the 
opposite direction. The direction of rotation of a 
three-phase motor can be reversed by changing any 
two stator leads.
SYNCHRONOUS SPEED
The speed at which the magnetic fi eld rotates is 
known as the synchronous speed. The synchro-
nous speed of a three-phase motor is determined by 
two factors. These are:
 1. The number of stator poles.
 2. The frequency of the AC line.
Because 60 Hz is a standard frequency throughout 
the United States and Canada, the following gives 
L1
L2
L3
1A
2A
3A
2B
1B
3B
L1
L2
L3
H
 Figure 14–1I
The magnetic ﬁ eld is concentrated between the poles 
of phase 2. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
L1
L2
L3
1A
2A
3A
2B
1B
3B
L1
L2
L3
I
 Figure 14–1J
The magnetic ﬁ eld is concentrated between the poles 
of phase 3. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
L1
L2
L3
1A
2A
3A
2B
1B
3B
L1
L2
L3
J
 Figure 14–1K
The magnetic ﬁ eld has rotated 360°. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 14  Three-Phase Motor Principles   153
is a schematic diagram, and that when connecting 
a three-phase motor for operation at the proper 
voltage, the leads will look more like Figure 14–3. 
This fi gure illustrates the leads coming out of the 
terminal connection box on the motor. Some leads 
are numbered with metal or plastic bands on the 
wires, and some leads have numbers printed on the 
insulation of the wire.
Figure 14–4 shows the stator connection for 
 operation on a 480-volt line. Figure 14–5 shows 
the synchronous speeds for motors with different 
numbers of poles.
2 Poles 
3,600 RPM
4 Poles 
1,800 RPM
6 Poles 
1,200 RPM
8 Poles 
900 RPM
STATOR WINDINGS
The stator windings of three-phase motors are con-
nected in either a wye or delta. Some stators are 
designed in such a manner as to be connected in 
either wye or delta, depending on the operation of 
the motor. Some motors, for example, are started as a 
wye-connected stator to help reduce starting current, 
and then changed to a delta connection for running.
Many three-phase motors have dual-voltage sta-
tors. These stators are designed to be connected to 
240 volts or 480 volts. The leads of a dual-voltage 
stator use a standard numbering system. Figure 14–2 
shows a dual-voltage wye-connected stator. Notice 
the stator leads have been numbered in a spiral. This 
diagram shows that numbers 1 and 4 are opposite 
ends of the same coil. Lead number 7 begins another 
coil, and this coil is to be connected to the same 
phase as 1 and 4. Leads 2 and 5 are opposite ends 
of the same coil. Coil number 8 must be connected 
with the same phase as leads 2 and 5. Leads 3 and 
6 are opposite ends of a coil and must be connected 
with lead number 9. Keep in mind that Figure 14–2 
8
2
5
3
6
9
7
4
1
 Figure 14–2
Numbering a dual-voltage stator. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
3
4
1
6
9
7
8
5
2
 Figure 14–3
Leads of a dual-voltage motor. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

154   SECTION 3  Motors
the schematic equivalent of this connection. Notice 
that the windings have been connected in series. 
Figure 14–6 shows the stator connection for opera-
tion on a 240-volt line. Figure 14–7 shows the 
schematic equivalent of this connection. When 
the motor is to be operated on 240 volts, the stator 
windings are connected in parallel. Notice that leads 
4, 5, and 6 are connected together to form another 
center point. This centerpoint is electrically the same 
as the point where leads 7, 8, and 9 join together. 
Figure 14–8 shows the equivalent circuit.
L1
1
4
7
L2
2
5
8
L3
3
6
9
 Figure 14–4
High-voltage connection. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
8
2
5
3
6
9
7
4
1
 Figure 14–5
Windings connected in series. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
L1
1
4
7
L2
2
5
8
L3
3
6
9
 Figure 14–6
Low-voltage connection. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
8
2
5
3
L3
L1
L2
6
9
7
4
1
 Figure 14–7
Windings connected in parallel. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
When a motor is operated on a 240-volt line, 
the current draw of the motor is double the current 
draw of a 480-volt connection. For example, if a 
motor draws 10 amps of current when connected 
to 240 volts, it will draw 5 amps when connected 
to 480 volts. The reason for this is the difference of 
impedance in the windings between a 240-volt con-
nection and a 480-volt connection. For instance, 
assume the stator windings of a motor have an 

UNIT 14  Three-Phase Motor Principles   155
Rt    48  48 
________ 
48  48  
Rt    2304 
_____ 
96  
Rt  24 ohms
If 240 volts is applied to this connection, 10 amps of 
current will fl ow.
I    E 
__ 
R  
I    240 
____ 
24  
I  10 amps
If the windings are connected in series for operation 
on a 480-volt line as shown in Figure 14–10, the 
total impedance of the winding is 96 ohms.
Rt  R1  R2
Rt  48  48
Rt  96 ohms
If 480 volts is applied to this winding, 5 amps of 
 current will fl ow.
I    E 
__ 
R  
I    480 
____ 
96  
I  5 amps
8
2
5
L2
L3
L1
6
9
3
4
1
7
 Figure 14–8
Equivalent parallel circuit. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 14–9
Total impedance of a parallel connection. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
impedance of 48 ohms. If the stator windings are 
connected in parallel as shown in Figure 14–9, the 
total impedance of the windings is 24 ohms.
Rt    R1  R2 
________ 
R1  R2  
 Figure 14–10
Impedance adds in series. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

156   SECTION 3  Motors
DELTA CONNECTIONS
Three-phase motors are also connected in delta. The 
same standard numbering system is used for delta-
connected motors. If a dual-voltage motor is to be 
connected in delta, there must be 12 leads instead of 
9 leads brought out at the terminal box.
Figure 14–11 shows the schematic diagram of 
a motor connected for operation as a high-voltage 
delta. Notice that the stator windings for each phase 
have been connected in series for operation on high 
voltage. If the motor is to be connected for operation 
on a low voltage, the windings will be connected in 
parallel as shown in Figure 14–12. Figure 14–13 
shows an equivalent parallel connection.
SPECIAL CONNECTIONS
Some three-phase motors designed for operation on 
voltages higher than 600 volts may have more than 
9 or 12 leads brought out at the terminal box. A motor 
with 15 or 18 leads can be found in high-voltage 
installations. A 15-lead motor has 3 coils per phase 
instead of 2. Figure 14–14 shows the proper number 
sequence for a 15-lead motor. Notice the leads are 
numbered in the same spiral as a 9-lead motor.
8
11
2
5
L3
L2
L1
3
10
6
7
9
4
12
1
 Figure 14–11
High-voltage delta connection. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
8
11
2
5
3
10
6
7
9
4
12
1
 Figure 14–12
Low-voltage delta connection. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
2
8
11
5
9
12
7
1
10
4
6
3
 Figure 14–13
Equivalent parallel delta connection. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)

UNIT 14  Three-Phase Motor Principles   157
14
8
11
2
5
13
10
7
4
1
15
12
9
6
3
 Figure 14–14
Fifteen-lead motor. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
SUMMARY
 The three basic types of three-phase motors are:
A. Squirrel-cage induction.
B. Wound rotor induction.
C. Synchronous.
 All three-phase motors operate on the principle of a rotating magnetic fi eld.
 Three factors that cause a magnetic fi eld to rotate are:
A. The voltages of a three-phase system are 120° out of phase with each other.
B. The three voltages change polarity at regular intervals.
C. The arrangement of the stator winding around the inside of the motor.
 The speed of the rotating magnetic fi eld is determined by two factors:
A. The number of stator poles.
B. The frequency of the applied voltage.
 The ends of the stator windings are numbered in a standard manner.
 The stator windings of some three-phase motors are connected in a wye confi guration and 
some are connected in a delta confi guration.

158   SECTION 3  Motors
 When a dual-voltage motor is to be connected for operation at low voltage, the stator 
windings will be connected in parallel.
 When a dual-voltage motor is to be connected for operation on high voltage, the stator 
windings will be connected in series.
KEY TERMS
rotating magnetic fi eld
synchronous speed
three-phase motors
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What are the three basic types of three-phase motors?
 
2. Name three factors that produce a rotating magnetic fi eld.
 
3. What is synchronous speed?
 
4. What two factors determine the synchronous speed of a three-phase motor?
 
5. How is the direction of rotation of a three-phase motor changed?
 
6. What is the synchronous speed of a four-pole motor when connected to a 
60-Hz line?
 
7. A dual-voltage three-phase motor has a current draw of 50 amps when connected to 
a 240-volt line. How much current will fl ow if the motor is connected for operation 
on 480 volts?
 
8. If the stator windings of a three-phase motor are connected for operation on high 
voltage, will the windings be connected in series or parallel?
 
9. If a dual-voltage motor is connected for operation on low voltage, and the motor is 
then connected to high voltage, will the motor operate at a faster speed?
 10. Why does a dual-voltage motor draw more current when connected to low voltage 
than it does when connected to high voltage?

159
The squirrel-cage induction motor receives 
its name from the fact that the rotor contains a set 
of bars that resemble a squirrel cage. If the soft-iron 
laminations were to be removed from the rotor, 
it would be seen that the rotor contains a set of 
metal bars joined together at each end by a metal 
ring,  Figure 15–1. Figure 15–2 shows a complete 
squirrel-cage rotor and stator winding.
PRINCIPLE OF OPERATION
The squirrel-cage motor is an induction motor. This 
means that the current fl ow in the rotor is produced 
by induced voltage from the rotating magnetic fi eld 
of the stator. In Figure 15–3, a squirrel-cage rotor 
is shown inside the stator winding of a three-phase 
motor. It will be assumed that the motor shown in 
Figure 15–3 contains four poles per phase, which 
The 
 Squirrel-Cage 
Induction 
Motor
UNIT 15
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Discuss the principle of operation 
of a squirrel-cage three-phase motor
 List the factors that determine the 
amount of torque developed by 
a squirrel-cage motor
 Discuss code letters and their meaning
 Perform an ohmmeter test on a three-
phase squirrel-cage motor

160   SECTION 3  Motors
 Figure 15–1
Squirrel-cage bars. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 15–2
Rotor and stator of a three-phase squirrel-cage motor. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 15–3
Voltage is induced into the rotor by the rotating 
magnetic ﬁ eld. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
produces a  synchronous speed of 1,800 RPM (revo-
lutions per minute) when the stator is connected 
to a 60-Hz line. When power is fi rst connected to 
the stator, the rotor is not turning. The magnetic 
fi eld of the stator cuts the rotor bars at a rate 
of 1,800 RPM. Three factors that determine the 
amount of induced voltage follow:
 1. The strength of the magnetic fi eld.
 2. The number of turns of wire cut by the mag-
netic fi eld. (This is sometimes stated as length 
of conductor.)
 3. Speed of the cutting action.
Because the rotor is stationary at this time, maxi-
mum voltage is induced into the rotor. The induced 
voltage causes current to fl ow through the rotor 
bars. As current fl ows through the rotor, a magnetic 
fi eld is produced around each rotor bar. The mag-
netic fi eld of the rotor is attracted to the magnetic 
fi eld of the stator, and the rotor begins to turn in the 
same direction as the rotating magnetic fi eld.
As the speed of the rotor increases, the rotating 
magnetic fi eld cuts the rotor bars at a slower rate. 
For example, assume the rotor has accelerated to 
a speed of 600 RPM. The synchronous speed of 
the rotating magnetic fi eld is 1,800 RPM. There-
fore, the rotor is being cut at a rate of 1,200 RPM. 

UNIT 15  The  Squirrel-Cage Induction Motor   161
(1,800 RPM – 600 RPM  1,200 RPM). Because 
the rotor is being cut at a slower rate, less voltage 
is induced into the rotor. This produces less current 
fl ow through the rotor. When the current fl ow in 
the rotor is reduced, the current fl ow in the stator is 
reduced also.
As the rotor continues to accelerate, the rotating 
magnetic fi eld cuts the rotor bars at a slower rate. 
This causes less voltage to be induced into the rotor, 
and therefore, less current fl ow in the rotor. Notice 
that the maximum amount of induced voltage and 
current occurs when the rotor is not turning at the 
instant of start. This is the reason that AC induction 
motors require more current to start than to run.
TORQUE
Torque is the amount of turning or twisting force 
developed by a motor. It is generally measured in 
pound-inches or pound-feet depending on the appli-
cation. Imagine a bar one foot in length attached 
to the shaft of a motor. A torque of one pound-foot 
would be the force exerted by applying a pressure of 
one pound on the end of the bar.
The amount of torque produced by an AC induc-
tion motor is determined by three factors. These are:
 1. The strength of the magnetic fi eld of the stator.
 2. The strength of the magnetic fi eld of the rotor.
 3. The phase angle difference between stator 
and rotor fl ux.
Notice that one of the factors that determines the 
amount of torque produced by an induction motor is 
the strength of the magnetic fi eld of the rotor. An induc-
tion motor cannot run at synchronous speed. If the rotor 
was to accelerate to the speed of the rotating magnetic 
fi eld, there would be no cutting action of the squirrel-
cage bars and, therefore, no current fl ow in the rotor. 
If there was no current fl ow in the rotor, there could be 
no rotor magnetic fi eld and, therefore, no torque.
When an induction motor is operating with no 
load connected to it, it will run close to the synchro-
nous speed. For example, a four-pole motor that has 
a synchronous speed of 1,800 RPM could run at 
1,795 RPM at no load. The speed of an AC induc-
tion motor is determined by the amount of torque 
needed. When the motor is operating at no load, it 
will produce only the amount of torque needed to 
overcome its own friction and windage losses. This 
low torque requirement permits the motor to oper-
ate at a speed close to that of the rotating magnetic 
fi eld.
If a load is connected to the motor, it must fur-
nish more torque to operate the load. This causes 
the motor to slow down. When the motor speed 
decreases, the rotating magnetic fi eld cuts the 
rotor bars at a faster rate. This causes more volt-
age to be induced in the rotor and, therefore, more 
current. The increased current fl ow produces a 
stronger magnetic fi eld in the rotor, which causes 
more torque to be produced by the motor. As the 
current fl ow increases in the rotor, it causes more 
current fl ow to be produced in the stator. This is 
why motor current will increase as load is added 
to the motor.
Another factor that determines the amount 
of torque produced by an induction motor is the 
phase angle difference between rotor and stator 
fl ux. Motor torque is basically the attracting force 
of two magnetic fi elds. Imagine two bar magnets 
representing the magnetic fi elds of the stator and 
rotor, Figure 15–4. If the north end of one magnetic 
is placed close to the south end of the other, they 
will be attracted to each other, Figure 15–5. Torque 
can be compared to the amount of force necessary 
to separate the two magnets. When the magnets are 
in line with each other, as shown in Figure 15–5, 
the attraction is strongest and the amount of force 
necessary to separate them is the greatest. This com-
pares to the stator fl ux and rotor fl ux being in phase 
with each other.
 Figure 15–4
Stator and rotor magnetic 
ﬁ elds are compared to two 
bar magnets. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
STATOR  FIELD
ROTOR  FIELD

162   SECTION 3  Motors
STATOR  FIELD
ROTOR  FIELD
N
S
N
S
SEPARATING  FORCE
 Figure 15–5
Torque is the force attract-
ing the two magnets. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 15–6
Magnets are separated 
by an angle of 10°. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 15–7
Magnets are separated 
by an angle of 30°. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
SEPARATING  FORCE
10°
STATOR  FIELD
N
 S
ROTOR  FIELD
N
S
ROTOR  FIELD
N
S
SEPARATING  FORCE
30°
STATOR  FIELD
N
S
Now assume that the two magnets are placed 
at an angle of 10° to each other, Figure 15–6. 
The 10-degree angle produces a greater amount 
of separation between the two magnetic fi elds. The 
magnets can now be separated with less force. Now 
assume that the magnets are placed at a 30° angle 
to each other, Figure 15–7. The amount of force 
necessary to separate the two magnets is less than it 
was at a 10° angle. The greater the angle between 
the two magnets, the less force required to separate 
them. This corresponds to the phase angle difference 
between rotor and stator fl ux. The greater the phase 
angle between rotor and stator fl ux, the less torque 
that is developed by the motor.
CODE LETTERS
Squirrel-cage rotors are not all the same. Rotors are 
made with different types of bars. The type of rotor 
bars used in the construction of the rotor deter-
mines the operating characteristics of the motor. 
AC motors are given a code letter on their name-
plate. The code letter indicates the type of bars used 
in the rotor. Figure 15–8 shows a rotor with type 
“A” bars. A type “A” rotor has the highest resistance 
of any squirrel-cage rotor. This means that the start-
ing torque is high since the rotor current is closer to 
being 90° out of phase with the stator current than 
the other types of rotors. The high resistance of the 

UNIT 15  The  Squirrel-Cage Induction Motor   163
 Figure 15–8
Type “A” rotor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 15–9
Type “B-E” rotor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 15–10
Type “F-V” rotor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
rotor bars limits the amount of current fl ow in the 
rotor when starting. This produces a low starting 
current for the motor. A rotor with type “A” bars 
has very poor running characteristics, however. 
Because the bars are resistive, a large amount of 
voltage will have to be induced into the rotor to pro-
duce an increase in rotor current and, therefore, an 
increase in the rotor magnetic fi eld. This means that 
when load is added to the motor, the rotor must slow 
down a great amount to produce enough current in 
the rotor to increase the torque.
Figure 15–9 shows a rotor with bars similar to 
those found in rotors with code letters B through E. 
These rotor bars have lower resistance than the type 
“A” rotor. This rotor has fair starting torque, low 
starting current, and fair speed regulation.
Figure 15–10 shows a rotor with bars similar to 
those found in rotors with code letters F through 
V. This rotor has low starting torque, high starting 
current, and good running torque. This type of rotor 
also has good speed regulation.
The code letter found on the nameplate is also used 
to determine the amount of locked rotor current 
for the motor. Locked rotor current is the amount of 
current the motor will draw at the moment of starting. 
Figure 15–11 shows Table 430.7(B) of the National 
Electrical Code.® This table is used to determine the 
locked rotor current for a squirrel-cage rotor. To use 
the table, the horsepower, code letter, and voltage of 
the motor must be known. For this example, assume 

164   SECTION 3  Motors
MOTOR NAMEPLATE
HP 
Phase
10 
3
Volts 
Amps
240/480 
28/14
Hz 
FL Speed
60 
1,745 RPM
Code 
SF
J 
1.25
Frame 
Model No. 
XXXX 
XXXX
 Figure 15–11
(Reprinted with permission from NFPA 70-2008, 
National Electrical Code®, Copyright © 2008, 
National Fire Protection Association, Quincy, MA 
02169. This reprinted material is not the complete and 
ofﬁ cial position of the National Fire Protection Associa-
tion on the referenced subject, which is represented only 
by the standard in its entirety.) 
 Figure 15–12
Motor nameplate. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 15–13
Schematic symbol of a three-phase squirrel-cage 
 induction motor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
the motor is 10 horsepower, has a code letter J, and is 
operated on a 480-volt line. The table lists the locked 
rotor currents in kilovolt-amperes per horsepower. 
The table shows that code letter J is 7.1 to 7.99. 
For this calculation, a midvalue of 7.5 will be used. 
Because the values are listed in kilovolt-amperes, 7.5 
is actually 7,500 volt-amperes. To fi nd the locked 
rotor current, multiply the kVA rating by the horse-
power, and then divide by the voltage.
I  7500 VA  10 hp
I    75000 
______ 
480  
I  156.25 amps
THE NAMEPLATE
Electric motors have nameplates that give a great 
deal of information about the motor. Figure 15–12 
illustrates the nameplate of a three-phase induc-
tion motor. The nameplate shows that the motor is 
10 horsepower, it is a three-phase motor and oper-
ates on 240 or 480 volts. The full-load running 
current of the motor is 28 amps when operated on 
240 volts, or 14 amps when operated on 480 volts. 
The motor is designed to be operated on a 60-Hz AC 
voltage, and has a full-load speed of 1,745 RPM. 
The speed indicates that this motor has four poles 
per phase. Since the full-load speed is 1,745 RPM, 
the synchronous speed would be 1,800 RPM. The 
motor contains a type J squirrel-cage rotor, and has 
a service factor of 1.25. The service factor is used to 
determine the amperage rating of the overload pro-
tection for the motor. The frame indicates the type 
of mounting the motor has. Figure 15–13 shows the 
schematic symbol for a three-phase squirrel-cage 
induction motor.
TESTING THE MOTOR
Most service technicians test a three-phase motor 
with an ohmmeter. The ohmmeter can be used to 
check the stator winding for an open condition or 

UNIT 15  The  Squirrel-Cage Induction Motor   165
an ammeter can be used to measure the current 
draw of the motor. The current of each line should 
be equal and within the full-load current rating of 
the motor. If one line has a higher current reading 
than the others, it is an indication of a shorted stator 
winding. If it is not possible to operate the motor, an 
instrument that measures the actual inductance of 
the winding can be used. If one winding has a lower 
inductance than the others, it is shorted.
STARTING METHODS FOR 
SQUIRREL-CAGE MOTORS
There are several methods that can be employed to 
start three-phase squirrel-cage motors. These meth-
ods include:
 1. Across-the-line starting.
 2. Resistor/reactor starting.
 3. Autotransformer starting.
 4. Wye-delta starting.
 5. Part winding starting.
Across-the-Line Starting
The simplest of these methods is across-the-line 
starting. Across-the-line starting is accomplished 
by connecting the motor directly to the power line, 
Figure 15–16. This method of starting is used when 
the inrush current, called locked rotor current, is 
not so great as to adversely affect the power line. 
Across-the-line starting is employed for all small 
horsepower motors, and depending on the local 
power base, may be used for motors of several hun-
dred horsepower.
Resistor/Reactor Starting
Often it is necessary to reduce the inrush current 
during the starting period of large motors. One 
method of reducing the starting current is to con-
nect resistors or reactors (choke coils or inductors) 
in series with the motor during the starting period, 
Figure 15–17. This permits the resistance of the 
resistors or the inductive reactance of the reactors 
to limit the inrush current when the motor is fi rst 
started. After the motor has accelerated to near full 
 Figure 15–14
Testing the stator winding for opens. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 Figure 15–15
Testing the stator winding for grounds. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
OHMMETER
OHMMETER
a grounded condition. To test the stator winding 
for an open condition, check the continuity of each 
winding by measuring the resistance between each 
of the three windings as shown in Figure 15–14. 
The resistance of each pair of windings should be 
the same. To test for a grounded motor, connect 
one ohmmeter lead to the case of the motor, and the 
other lead to one of the motor leads. There should be 
no continuity between any of the leads and the case 
of the motor, Figure 15–15. The ohmmeter, how-
ever, will not generally detect a shorted winding. 
The resistance of the stator windings of most large 
horsepower motors is so low that they appear under 
normal conditions to be a short circuit to the ohm-
meter. To test for a shorted winding, some method 
must be used to measure the reactance of the wind-
ings instead of their resistance. If the motor will run, 

166   SECTION 3  Motors
L2
L1
CONTROL  TRANSFORMER
THERMOSTAT
C
OL
OL
OL
OL
L3
C
MOTOR
C
C
 Figure 15–16
Across-the-line starting is accomplished by connecting the motor directly to the power line. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
load speed, the resistors or reactors are shunted out 
of the circuit. Several methods may be employed 
for shunting the resistors or reactors out of the line. 
The circuit shown in Figure 15–17 uses a time delay 
relay to energize R contactor after some period of 
time. The circuit operates as follows:
• When the thermostat contact closes, the coils of 
the compressor contactor (C) and the on-delay 
timer (TR) energize.
• When the compressor contactor energizes, C con-
tacts close and connect the motor and reactors to 
the power line.
• After some period of time, timed contact TR closes 
and energizes the R contactor causing the R con-
tacts connected in parallel with the current limiting 
inductors to close and shunt the inductors out of the 
line. The motor is now connected to full voltage.
Autotransformer Starting
Autotransformer starting differs from resistor or 
reactor starting by decreasing the voltage applied 
to the motor during the starting period instead 
of inserting resistance or inductive reactance in 
series with the motor. It should be noted that when 
the voltage to the motor is reduced, the torque is 
reduced also. A 50% reduction of voltage will pro-
duce a 50% reduction of current also, but the torque 
is reduced to 25% of the value produced by full volt-
age starting.
Several methods can be employed when using 
autotransformer starting. Some starters used three 
transformers, but most use two transformers con-
nected in an open delta, Figure 15–18. In this 
circuit, notice the addition of the normally closed 
R contact connected in series with S coil and the 

UNIT 15  The  Squirrel-Cage Induction Motor   167
 Figure 15–17
Reactor starter for a three-phase squirrel-cage motor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
L2
L1
CONTROL  TRANSFORMER
TR
THERMOSTAT
C
R
OL
OL
OL
OL
TR
R
INDUCTOR
L3
C
MOTOR
R
C
R
C
normally closed S contact connected in series with 
the R coil. This is referred to as interlocking. 
Interlocking is used to prevent one contactor being 
energized while some other contactor is energized. 
In this circuit, coils R and S can never be energized 
at the same time. The circuit operates as follows: (It 
will be assumed that timer TR is set for a delay of 
3 seconds).
• When the thermostat contact closes, coils S and 
TR energize.
• All S contacts change position. The normally 
open S contacts close and connect the autotrans-
former to the line. The motor is now connected to 
reduced voltage. The normally closed S contact 
connected in series with the coil of the R contac-
tor opens and prevents the possibility of the R coil 
being energized.
• After a delay of 3 seconds, the TR timed contacts 
change position.
• The normally closed TR contact connected in 
series with the S coil opens and disconnects it from 
the line.
• When the S coil deenergizes, all S contacts return 
to their normal position. The autotransformer is 
now disconnected from the line and the contact 
connected is series with R coil is now closed.

168   SECTION 3  Motors
L2
L1
CONTROL  TRANSFORMER
TR
THERMOSTAT
S
TR
R
OL
OL
OL
OL
TR
S
TR
R
R
S
R
S
L3
S
S
R
S
MOTOR
• When the normally open TR contact closes, the R 
coil energizes and all R contacts change position.
• The normally open R contacts close and connect 
the motor directly to the power line. The normally 
closed R contact opens and prevents the possibil-
ity of S coil being energized at the same time.
Wye-Delta Starting
Wye-delta starting is also known as star-delta start-
ing. Wye-delta starting is used to reduce the inrush 
current during the starting period by connecting the 
stator windings of the motor in a wye confi guration 
 Figure 15–18
Autotransformer starter using an open delta connection. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 15  The  Squirrel-Cage Induction Motor   169
during the starting period and then reconnecting 
them in delta during the run period. If the stator 
windings are connected in wye, the inrush cur-
rent will be one-third the value it would be if they 
were connected in delta. Assume that the motor 
stator windings have an impedance of 2.5 ohms 
each. Now assume that the windings are connected 
in delta, Figure 15–19. It will also be assumed 
that the motor is connected to a line voltage of 
480 volts. In a delta connection, the phase voltage 
is the same as the line voltage. Therefore, when the 
C contacts close, 480 volts will be applied across 
2.5 ohms. This will produce a current in each phase of 
192 amperes.
IPHASE    480 
____ 
2.5  
In a delta connection, the line current is greater 
than the phase current by a factor of the square root 
of 3 (1.732). Therefore, the line current supplied to 
the motor is 332.5 amperes (192  1.732).
Now assume that the same stator windings are 
connected in wye, Figure 15–20. In a wye connec-
tion, the phase voltage is less than the line voltage 
by a factor of the square root of 3 (1.732). There-
fore, 277 volts is applied across each stator winding 
instead of 480 volts (480/1.732). This produces a 
phase current of 110.8 amperes. Because the stator 
windings are now connected in wye instead of delta, 
the line current is the same as the phase current. 
The motor inrush current has been reduced from 
332.5 amperes to 110.8 amperes by reconnecting 
the stator windings from delta to wye.
There are two conditions that must be met when 
wye-delta starting is to be used.
 1. The motor must be designed to operate with 
its stator windings connected in delta during 
the normal run period.
 2. All stator winding leads must be accessible 
at the terminal connection box. This would 
be leads T1 through T6 for a single voltage 
motor and T1 through T12 for a dual voltage 
motor.
Another consideration when using wye-delta start-
ing is that the overload heaters should be sized for 
the phase current value and not the line current 
value. The basic stator connection for wye-delta 
starting is shown in Figure 15–21. Notice that the 
overload heaters are connected in the phase wind-
ings not in the line leads.
 Figure 15–19
The stator windings are connected in delta. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
L1
C
L2
C
L3
C
 Figure 15–20
The stator windings are connected in wye. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
L1
C
L2
C
L3
C
 Figure 15–21
Stator connection for a single voltage wye-delta starter. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
L3
L1
L2
2C
1C
T4
OL
T5
T2
T1
OL
1C
2C
1C
OL
T3
T6
S
S
2C

170   SECTION 3  Motors
TR
CONTROL  TRANSFORMER
S
TR
S
2C
TR
THERMOSTAT
1C
2C
OL
A basic control schematic for a wye-delta starter 
is shown in Figure 15–22. To understand the opera-
tion of this circuit assume that timer TR has been set 
for a delay of 3 seconds.
• When the thermostat contact closes, a current path 
exists through coils 1C, TR, and S, Figure 15–23.
• The 1C load contacts close to supply power to the 
motor T leads.
• The S contacts change position also. The two S 
load contacts close and connect the stator wind-
ing in a wye confi guration by shorting T4, T5, 
and T6 together. The normally open S contact 
connected in series with coil 2C opens to provide 
interlocking protection.
• After a delay of 3 seconds, both TR contacts 
change position, Figure 15–24.
• The normally closed TR contact connected in 
series with S coil opens and deenergizes S  contactor 
causing all S contacts to return to their normal 
position. The normally closed S contact connected 
in series with coil 2C recloses to provide a current 
path to coil 2C.
• When the normally open TR contact connected 
in series with coil 2C closes, coil 2C energizes 
causing all 2C contacts to change position. The 
2C load contacts close and reconnect the motor 
stator windings in a delta confi guration. The nor-
mally closed 2C contact connected in series with 
S coil opens to provide interlocking  protection.
Part Winding Starters
Another method for reducing the starting current 
of large three-phase squirrel-cage motors is part 
winding starting. Motors intended for use with 
part winding starting contains two separate stator 
windings, Figure 15–25. Each winding is rated for 
 Figure 15–22
Basic control schematic for wye-delta starting. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 15  The  Squirrel-Cage Induction Motor   171
L3
L1
L2
2C
1C
T4
OL
T5
T2
T1
OL
1C
2C
1C
OL
T3
T6
S
S
2C
TR
CONTROL  TRANSFORMER
S
TR
S
2C
TR
THERMOSTAT
1C
2C
OL
 Figure 15–23
The stator windings are connected in wye during starting. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

172   SECTION 3  Motors
L3
L1
L2
2C
1C
T4
OL
T5
T2
T1
OL
1C
2C
1C
OL
T3
T6
S
S
2C
TR
CONTROL  TRANSFORMER
S
TR
S
2C
TR
THERMOSTAT
1C
2C
OL
 Figure 15–24
The stator windings are connected in delta during the run period. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 15  The  Squirrel-Cage Induction Motor   173
2C
T7
2C
T8
2C
T9
1C
L3
L2
L1
T1
1C
T2
1C
T3
the intended line voltage. The impedance of a sin-
gle stator winding is double that of the two wind-
ings connected in parallel. Dual voltage motors 
can also be used for part winding starting provided 
the line voltage corresponds to the low voltage 
rating of the motor. A 480/240-volt motor could 
employ part winding starting provided the motor 
is connected to 240 volts and not 480 volts. In 
this situation T4, T5, and T6 are connected and 
power is connected to T1, T2, and T3 during the 
starting period. After some period of time, power 
is also connected to T7, T8, and T9. This has the 
same effect as connecting the stator windings in 
parallel.
A basic circuit for part winding starting is shown 
in Figure 15–26. To understand the operation of 
the circuit, assume that timer TR has been set for a 
delay of 3 seconds.
• When the thermostat contact closes power is provided 
to coils C1 and TR, Figure 15–27. All 1C contacts 
close and connect T1, T2, and T3 to the power line.
• After a delay of 3 seconds, the normally open TR 
contact connected in series with 2C closes and 
energizes coil 2C, Figure 15–28.
• When the 2C load contacts close, power is con-
nected to T7, T8, and T9. This has the same effect 
as connecting the two windings in parallel.
 Figure 15–25
A motor intended for part windings starting contains two stator windings. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

174   SECTION 3  Motors
2C
T7
2C
T8
2C
T9
1C
L3
L2
L1
T1
1C
T2
1C
T3
CONTROL  TRANSFORMER
TR
THERMOSTAT
1C
TR
2C
OL
 Figure 15–26
Basic part winding starting circuit. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 15  The  Squirrel-Cage Induction Motor   175
CONTROL  TRANSFORMER
TR
THERMOSTAT
1C
TR
2C
OL
2C
T7
2C
T8
2C
T9
1C
L3
L2
L1
T1
1C
T2
1C
T3
 Figure 15–27
During the starting period only one stator winding is energized. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

176   SECTION 3  Motors
CONTROL  TRANSFORMER
TR
THERMOSTAT
1C
TR
2C
OL
2C
T7
2C
T8
2C
T9
1C
L3
L2
L1
T1
1C
T2
1C
T3
 Figure 15–28
During the run period both stator windings are connected. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 15  The  Squirrel-Cage Induction Motor   177
SUMMARY
 The squirrel-cage motor receives its name from the fact that the rotor contains a set of bars 
connected together at each end, and the entire assembly resembles a squirrel cage.
 Three factors that determine the amount of voltage induced into the rotor are:
A. The strength of the magnetic fi eld of the stator.
B. The number of stator bars contained in the rotor.
C. The difference in speed between the speed of the rotating magnetic fi eld and the speed 
of the rotor.
 The greatest amount of current draw for a squirrel-cage motor is during the starting 
period.
 Three factors that determine the amount of torque produced by a squirrel-cage motor 
are:
A. The strength of the magnetic fi eld of the stator.
B. The strength of the magnetic fi eld of the rotor.
C. The phase angle difference between stator current and rotor current.
 The direction of rotation of a squirrel-cage motor can be changed by reversing any two 
stator leads.
 The code letter found on the motor nameplate indicates the type of bars used in the con-
struction of the rotor.
 The simplest method of starting a squirrel-cage motor is across-the-line starting.
 Resistor/reactor starting is accomplished by connecting resistors or inductors in series 
with the motor during the starting period.
 Autotransformer starting reduces starting current by lowering the applied voltage to the 
motor during the starting period.
 If the applied voltage is reduced by 50% of normal during the starting period, the starting 
torque is reduced to 25% of normal.
 Wye-delta starting is accomplished by connecting the stator windings in wye during the 
starting period and changing them to a delta connection during the normal run time.
 A motor will draw one-third as much current during the starting period with its windings 
connected in wye as it will if they are connected in delta.
 Two requirements for motors intended for wye-delta starting are:
A. All stator winding leads must be brought out at the terminal connection box.
B. The motor must be designed to run with its stator windings connected in delta.
 Motors intended to be used for part winding starting have two separate stator windings.
 Dual voltage motors can be used for part winding starting provided the motor is connected 
for low voltage operation.

178   SECTION 3  Motors
KEY TERMS
code letter
interlocking
locked rotor current
nameplates
rotor bars
squirrel-cage induction motor
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What three factors determine the amount of torque produced by an AC induction 
motor?
 
2. When does an AC induction motor draw more current when starting than it does 
when running?
 
3. Why does the current fl ow to the motor increase when load is added to the motor?
 
4. What does the code letter found on the nameplate of the motor indicate?
 
5. At what degree angle between the stator current and the rotor current is the maxi-
mum torque developed?
 
6. What type of squirrel-cage rotor has the highest starting torque?
 
7. What type of squirrel-cage rotor has the best speed regulation?
 
8. Why can an induction motor never operate at synchronous speed?
 
9. What does the locked rotor current of a motor indicate?
 10. The nameplate of a squirrel-cage motor indicates that the motor has a full-load speed 
of 875 RPM. How many poles per phase does the motor have?
 11. What is the simplest of all starting methods for a squirrel-cage motor?
 12. Explain interlocking.
 13. How does autotransformer starting differ from resistor/reactor starting?
 14. A three-phase squirrel-cage induction motor has its stator windings connected in 
a delta connection. During the starting period, the motor has a current draw of 
360 amperes. If the stator windings were reconnected to form a wye connection dur-
ing the starting period how much starting current would the motor draw?
 15. What two conditions must be met before a motor can be used with a wye-delta 
starter?

Another type of three-phase induction motor used 
for operating large air conditioning units is the 
wound rotor induction motor. The stator 
winding of this motor is the same as the stator of 
a squirrel-cage induction motor. The rotor of the 
wound rotor motor, however, does not contain 
squirrel-cage bars. The rotor of this motor contains 
wound coils of wire as illustrated in Figure 16–1. 
The rotor will contain as many poles as there are 
stator poles. The motor shown in Figure 16–1 
would be for a two-pole stator. Notice that there are 
three separate windings on the rotor. The fi nish end 
of each winding is connected together. This forms 
a wye connection for the rotor winding. The start 
end of each winding is connected to a separate slip 
ring on the rotor shaft.
The slip rings permit the connection of external 
resistance to the rotor windings. Figure 16–2 shows 
The Wound 
Rotor Induction 
Motor
179
UNIT 16
 
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should be 
able to:
 Describe the construction of a wound 
rotor induction motor
 Discuss the difference in operation 
between wound rotor and squirrel-cage 
induction motors
 Discuss the starting and running 
characteristics of a wound rotor induction 
motor
 Connect a wound rotor induction motor 
for operation
 Draw the standard schematic symbol for 
a wound rotor induction motor
 Perform an ohmmeter test on a wound 
rotor induction motor

180   SECTION 3  Motors
wound rotor motor is that it limits the amount of 
inrush current when the motor is fi rst started. This 
eliminates the need for reduced voltage starters or 
wye-delta starting.
Another advantage of the wound rotor motor is 
its high starting torque. Because resistors are used 
to limit current fl ow in the rotor, the phase angle 
between the stator current and the rotor current 
is close to 90°. The schematic symbol for a wound 
rotor motor is shown in Figure 16–4.
MOTOR OPERATION
When power is applied to the stator winding, a rotat-
ing magnetic fi eld is created in the motor. This mag-
netic fi eld cuts through the windings of the rotor and 
induces a voltage into them. The amount of voltage 
induced in the rotor windings is  determined by the 
same three factors that determined the amount 
of voltage induced in the squirrel-cage rotor. The 
amount of current fl ow in the rotor is determined by 
the amount of induced voltage and the amount of 
resistance connected to the rotor (I  E/R). When 
current fl ows through the rotor, a magnetic fi eld 
is produced. This magnetic fi eld is attracted to the 
rotating magnetic fi eld of the stator.
As the rotor speed increases, the induced voltage 
decreases because of less cutting action between 
the rotor windings and rotating magnetic fi eld. 
This produces less current fl ow in the rotor and, 
therefore, less torque. If resistance is reduced, more 
current can fl ow, which will increase motor torque, 
and the rotor will increase in speed. This action 
continues until the rotor is operating at maximum 
speed and all resistance has been shorted out of the 
rotor circuit. When all of the resistance has been 
a schematic diagram of the stator connection and 
rotor connection of a wound rotor motor. Notice 
that the wye-connected stator winding is connected 
directly to the incoming power. The wye-connected 
rotor is connected to three variable resistors. The 
dashed line drawn between the resistors indicates 
that they are mechanically connected together. If 
the resistance of one is changed, the resistance of 
the other two changes also.
Resistance is connected to the slip rings by means 
of carbon brushes as shown in Figure 16–3. 
Because the resistance connection to the rotor is 
external, the amount of resistance used in the cir-
cuit can be controlled. This permits the amount 
of current fl ow in the rotor to be controlled. If the 
current fl ow in the rotor is limited by the amount 
of resistance connected in the circuit, the stator 
current is limited also. A great advantage of the 
 Figure 16–1 
A wound rotor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
POLE  PIECE
SLIP  RING
STATOR
ROTOR
L2
L1
L3
 Figure 16–2
A wye-connected stator and 
wye-connected rotor. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 16  The Wound Rotor Induction Motor   181
current fl ow to the stator. This method is known 
as current limit control. Another method detects 
the speed of the rotor. This method is known as 
slip frequency control. One of the most common 
methods uses time relays to control when resistance 
is shorted out of the circuit. This method is known 
as defi nite time control. Figure 16–5 shows a 
schematic diagram of a time-controlled starter for 
a wound rotor motor. In this schematic, the motor 
circuit is shown at the top of the diagram. A control 
transformer is used to step the line voltage down to 
the value of voltage used in the control circuit. The 
operation of the circuit is as follows:
 1. When the start button is pressed, a circuit 
is completed through M motor starter coil, 
TR1 coil, and the overload contact. When M 
coil energizes, all M contacts close. The three 
large load contacts located at the top of the 
diagram close and connect the stator winding 
to the line. The M contact located beneath 
the start button is known as the holding, 
sealing, or maintaining contact. Its 
job is to provide a continued circuit to the M 
coil when the start button is released. The 
motor now begins to run in its lowest speed. 
Maximum resistance is connected in the 
 rotor circuit.
 2. TR1 relay is a timer. For this example, it shall 
be assumed that all timers are set for a delay 
of 3 seconds. When TR1 coil energizes, it 
begins a time operation. After 3 seconds, TR1 
contact closes. This completes a circuit to S1 
coil and TR2 coil.
shorted out, the motor operates like a squirrel-cage 
induction motor.
STARTING
Most large wound rotor motors use a method of 
step starting as opposed to actual variable resis-
tors. Step starting is similar to shifting the gears 
in the transmission of an automobile. The trans-
mission is placed in fi rst gear when the car is fi rst 
started. As the car gains speed, the transmission is 
shifted to second gear, then third gear, and so on 
until the car is operating in its highest gear. When 
a wound rotor motor is step started, it begins with 
maximum resistance connected in the rotor circuit. 
As the motor speed increases, resistance is shorted 
out of the circuit until the windings of the rotor are 
shorted together. The number of steps can vary from 
one motor to another, depending on the size of the 
motor and how smooth a starting action is desired.
There are different control methods used to short 
out the steps of resistance when starting a wound 
rotor motor. Some controllers sense the amount of 
Wound Rotor
Slip Rings
Brushes
External Resistors
 Figure 16–3
External resistance is con-
nected to the rotor circuit 
with brushes and slip rings.
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 16–4
Schematic symbol of a wound rotor induction motor. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

182   SECTION 3  Motors
 6. After a 3-second time period, contact TR3 
closes and provides a complete circuit for coil 
S3. This causes both S3 contacts to close and 
short out the last set of resistors. The motor 
now accelerates to its highest speed.
 7. When the stop button is pressed, the circuit 
to coil M and coil TR1 is broken. When coil M 
deenergizes, all M contacts open. This discon-
nects the stator winding from the line. When 
TR1 coil deenergizes, contact TR1 opens 
immediately. This deenergizes coil S1 and 
coil TR2. When coil S1 deenergizes, both S1 
contacts return to their open position. 
 3. When S1 coil energizes, both S1 contacts 
close and short out the last three resistors in 
the rotor circuit. This causes the motor to 
 accelerate to the next higher speed. When 
TR2 coil energizes, it begins timing.
 4. At the end of a 3-second time period, TR2 
contact closes and completes a circuit to coil 
S2 and TR3.
 5. When S2 coil energizes, both S2 contacts 
close and short out the next set of resistors. 
This permits the motor to accelerate to a 
higher speed. When TR3 coil energizes, it 
begins its timing sequence.
T3
T2
T1
L1
L2
L3
M3
M
S3
S2
S1
M2
M1
S3
S2
S1
M
M
CONTROL
TRANSFORMER
OL
M
TR1
S1
TR2
S2
TR3
S3
M
START
STOP
FUSE
TR1
TR2
TR3
 Figure 16–5
Deﬁ nite time starting for a wound rotor motor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 16  The Wound Rotor Induction Motor   183
When coil TR1 deenergizes, contact TR2 
opens immediately. When contact TR2 
opens, it breaks the circuit to coil S2 and coil 
TR3. When coil S2 deenergizes, both S2 con-
tacts reopen.  Contact TR3 opens immediately 
when coil TR3 deenergizes. This causes coil 
S3 to deenergize and open both S3 contacts.
 8. If the fuse should blow, or the overload con-
tact open, it has the same effect as pressing 
the stop button.
TESTING A WOUND ROTOR 
MOTOR
Because the stator winding of the wound rotor 
motor is the same as the squirrel-cage motor, the 
OHMMETER
 Figure 16–6
Testing a rotor for an open winding. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
OHMMETER
 Figure 16–7
Testing a rotor for a grounded winding. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
same test procedure can be followed. Testing the 
rotor of a wound rotor motor is very similar to test-
ing the stator. The rotor can be tested for an open 
winding with an ohmmeter by checking the conti-
nuity between each of the slip rings, Figure 16–6. 
The resistance readings should be the same between 
each pair of slip rings. To test the rotor for a ground, 
connect one ohmmeter lead to the shaft, and con-
nect the other lead to each one of the slip rings, 
Figure 16–7. The ohmmeter should show no conti-
nuity between the rotor windings and ground. Like 
the stator winding, the rotor is diffi cult to test for 
a shorted winding. To test the rotor for a shorted 
winding it is generally necessary to use equipment 
that will measure the inductance of the winding 
instead of its resistance.
SUMMARY
 The stator winding of a wound rotor induction motor is the same as the stator winding of 
a squirrel-cage induction motor.
 The rotor of a wound rotor induction motor contains windings instead of squirrel-cage 
bars.
 The rotor of a wound rotor induction motor will contain as many poles per phase as the 
stator winding.

184   SECTION 3  Motors
 The fi nish ends of each winding of a wound rotor are connected together to form a wye 
connection and the other ends of each winding are connected to a slip ring on the shaft.
 Wound rotor induction motors are sometimes called slip ring motors because they contain 
three slip rings on their shaft.
 Wound rotor induction motors have a higher starting torque per amp of starting current 
than any other type of three-phase motor.
 The speed of a wound rotor induction motor can be controlled by permitting resistance to 
remain in the rotor circuit during operation.
 The brushes of a wound rotor induction motor are used to provide connection of the rotor 
windings to external resistors.
 The stator winding leads of a wound rotor induction motor are labeled T1, T2, and T3.
 The rotor leads of a wound rotor induction motor are labeled M1, M2, and M3.
KEY TERMS
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. How many slip rings are located on the shaft of the rotor of a wound rotor induction 
motor?
 
2. What is the purpose of the slip rings?
 
3. Name two advantages of the wound rotor motor over the squirrel-cage motor.
 
4. What two factors determine the amount of current fl ow in the rotor of a wound rotor 
motor?
 
5. What does the dashed line drawn between the three resistors shown in Figure 16–2 
indicate?
 
6. Why is the starting torque of a wound rotor induction motor higher than the starting 
torque of a squirrel-cage induction motor?
 
7. The stator of a wound rotor motor has a synchronous speed of 1,200 RPM when 
 connected to a 60-Hz line. How many poles per phase are there in the rotor?
 
8. Refer to Figure 16–5. Describe what would happen in this circuit if coil S1 should be 
open when the motor started.
 
9. Refer to Figure 16–5. Describe what would happen in this circuit if coil TR2 should be 
open when the motor is started.
 10. Refer to Figure 16–5. Describe what would happen in this circuit if holding contact M 
should become stuck together when the motor is started and not open.
carbon brushes
defi nite time control
holding, sealing, or 
 maintaining contact
slip ring
step starting
wound rotor induction 
 motor

UNIT 16  The Wound Rotor Induction Motor   185
TROUBLESHOOTING QUESTIONS
Refer to the schematic shown in Figure 16–5 to answer the following questions. It is to be assumed 
that all timers are set for a delay of 3 seconds.
1. When the start button is pressed, the motor starts in its lowest speed. After a delay of 
6 seconds, the motor accelerates to third speed and 3 seconds later accelerates to the 
fourth or highest speed. Which of the following could cause this problem?
A. Coil TR1 is open.
B. Timed contact TR1 did not close.
C. Coil S1 is open.
D. Coil TR2 is open.
2. When the start button is pressed, the motor starts and accelerates through all speeds 
 normally. When the stop button is pressed, the motor continues to operate normally. 
Which of the following could cause this condition?
A. The start button is shorted. (Shorted means contacts welded together.)
B. The stop button is shorted.
C. M auxiliary contact is shorted.
D. Any of the above.
3. When the start button is pressed, the motor accelerates through the fi rst three steps of 
speed normally. When the motor tries to accelerate to the fourth speed, however, the 
motor stops. It is found that the control circuit fuse has blown. Which of the following 
conditions could cause this problem?
A. The overload (OL) contact has shorted.
B. Coil S2 is shorted.
C. Coil TR3 is shorted.
D. Coil S3 is shorted.
4. When the start button is pressed, the motor immediately starts operating in third speed. 
Three seconds later, the motor accelerates to fourth speed. Which of the following could 
cause this condition?
A. TR2 timed contact is shorted.
B. TR3 timed contact is shorted.
C. S2 load contacts are shorted.
D. None of the above.
5. When the start button is pressed, the motor will not start. Which of the following could 
cause this condition?
A. The control transformer is defective.
B. The control circuit fuse is blown.
C. The overload contact is open.
D. All of the above.

The third type of three-phase motor to be discussed is 
the synchronous motor. This motor has several 
characteristics that no other type of motor has. Some 
of the characteristics of a synchronous motor are:
 1. The synchronous motor is not an induction 
motor. This means that it does not depend on 
induced voltage from the stator to produce a 
magnetic fi eld in the rotor.
 2. The synchronous motor will run at a con-
stant speed from no load to full load.
 3. The synchronous motor has the ability to not 
only correct its own power factor, but can 
also correct the power factor of other motors 
connected to the same line.
The synchronous motor has the same type 
of stator windings as the other two three-phase 
motors. The rotor of a synchronous motor has 
The 
Synchronous 
Motor
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Describe the construction of a 
synchronous motor
 Compare the operating characteristics 
of a synchronous motor with those of a 
squirrel-cage induction motor and 
a wound rotor induction motor
 Discuss the starting and running 
characteristics of a synchronous motor
 Describe the function of the ﬁ eld 
discharge resistor
 Discuss power factor correction using 
the synchronous motor
 Perform an ohmmeter test of 
a synchronous motor
186
UNIT 17

UNIT 17  The Synchronous Motor   187
slip rings on the rotor shaft, Figure 17–3. When 
DC is applied to the rotor, the windings on the rotor 
become electromagnets. The electromagnetic 
fi eld of the rotor locks in step with the rotating 
magnetic fi eld of the stator. The rotor will now turn 
at the same speed as the rotating magnetic fi eld. 
When the rotor begins to turn at the synchronous 
speed of the fi eld, there is no more cutting action 
between the fi eld and the amortisseur winding. This 
causes the current fl ow in the amortisseur winding 
to cease.
Notice that the synchronous motor starts as a 
squirrel-cage induction motor. Because the rotor 
bars used are type “A,” they have a relatively high 
resistance, which gives the motor good starting 
torque and low starting current. A synchronous 
motor must never be started with DC connected to 
the rotor. If DC is applied to the rotor, the fi eld poles 
of the rotor become electromagnets. When the sta-
tor is energized, the rotating magnetic fi eld begins 
turning at synchronous speed. The electromagnets 
of the rotor are attracted to the rotating magnetic 
fi eld of the stator and are alternately attracted and 
repelled 60 times a second. As a result, the rotor 
does not turn.
windings similar to the wound rotor induction 
motor, Figure 17–1. Notice that the winding in the 
rotor of a synchronous motor is different, however. 
The winding of a synchronous motor is one con-
tinuous set of coils instead of three different sets as 
is the case with the wound rotor motor. Notice also 
that the synchronous motor has only two slip rings 
on its shaft as opposed to three on the shaft of a 
wound rotor motor.
STARTING A SYNCHRONOUS 
MOTOR
The rotor of a synchronous motor also contains 
a set of type “A” squirrel-cage bars. This set of 
squirrel-cage bars is used to start the motor and is 
known as the amortisseur winding, Figure 17–2. 
When  power is fi rst connected to the stator, the 
rotating magnetic fi eld cuts through the type “A” 
squirrel-cage bars. The cutting action of the fi eld 
induces a current into the squirrel-cage bars. 
The current fl ow through the amortisseur winding 
produces a rotor magnetic fi eld that is attracted to 
the rotating magnetic fi eld of the stator. This causes 
the rotor to begin turning in the direction of rotation 
of the stator fi eld. When the rotor has accelerated 
to a speed that is close to the synchronous speed of 
the fi eld, DC is connected to the rotor through the 
 Figure 17–1
Rotor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 17–2
Amortisseur winding. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

188   SECTION 3  Motors
does not depend on induced voltage from the stator 
fi eld to produce a magnetic fi eld in the rotor. The 
magnetic fi eld of the rotor is produced by external 
DC applied to the rotor. This is the reason that the 
synchronous motor has the ability to operate at the 
speed of the rotating magnetic fi eld. As load is added 
to the motor, the magnetic fi eld of the rotor remains 
locked with the rotating magnetic fi eld and the rotor 
continues to turn at the same speed.
POWER FACTOR CORRECTION
The power factor of the synchronous motor can be 
changed by adjusting the DC excitation cur-
rent to the rotor. When the DC is adjusted to the 
point that the motor current is in phase with the 
voltage, the motor has a power factor of 100%. This 
is considered to be normal excitation for the motor. 
For this example, assume this current to be 10 amps. 
If the DC power supply is adjusted to a point that the 
excitation current is less than 10 amps, the rotor 
is under excited. This causes the motor to have a 
THE FIELD DISCHARGE RESISTOR
When the stator winding is fi rst energized, the rotat-
ing magnetic fi eld cuts through the rotor winding at 
a fast rate of speed. This causes a large amount of 
voltage to be induced into the winding of the rotor. 
To prevent this voltage from becoming excessive, a 
resistor is connected across the winding. This resis-
tor is known as the fi eld discharge resistor, 
Figure 17–4. It also helps to reduce the voltage 
induced into the rotor by the collapsing magnetic 
fi eld when the DC is disconnected from the rotor.
CONSTANT SPEED OPERATION
Although the synchronous motor starts as an 
induction motor, it does not operate as one. After 
the amortisseur winding has been used to accelerate 
the rotor to about 95% of the speed of the rotating 
magnetic fi eld, direct current is connected to the 
rotor and the electromagnets lock in step with the 
rotating fi eld. Notice that the synchronous motor 
+
 Figure 17–3
Direct current is applied to the 
rotor through the slip rings. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
FIELD  DISCHARGE  RESISTOR
+
 Figure 17–4
A ﬁ eld discharge resistor protects 
the rotor circuit. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)

UNIT 17  The Synchronous Motor   189
the ohmmeter. In coils designed for DC current, 
the resistance of the wire is used to limit the fl ow 
of current. For example, assume the specifi ca-
tions of a synchronous motor indicate that the DC 
excitation voltage should be 125 volts, and that 
maximum rotor current should be 10 amps. The 
resistance of the rotor can now be calculated by 
using Ohm’s law:
R   E 
__ I 
R   125 
____ 
10 
R  12.5 ohms
If the ohmmeter measures a rotor resistance close 
to 12.5 ohms, the rotor is good. If the ohmmeter 
measures a much lower resistance, however, the 
rotor is shorted.
lagging power factor like an induction motor. If the 
excitation current is adjusted above 10 amps, the 
rotor is overexcited. This causes the motor to have 
a leading power factor like a capacitor. When a syn-
chronous motor is operated at no load and used for 
power factor correction, it is generally referred to as 
a synchronous condenser. Utility companies 
generally charge industries extra for poor power 
factor in the plant. For this reason, synchronous 
motors are often used when a large horsepower 
motor must be used. Commercial and industrial air
conditioning systems are often the largest single 
load in a plant or building. It is not uncommon to 
fi nd synchronous motors being used to operate the 
compressors of large air-conditioning systems.
THE POWER SUPPLY
DC power supply of a synchronous motor can be pro-
vided by several methods. The most common of these 
methods is either a small DC generator mounted to 
the shaft of the motor, or an electronic power supply 
that converts the AC line voltage to DC voltage.
TESTING THE SYNCHRONOUS 
MOTOR
The procedure for testing the stator winding of a 
synchronous motor is the same as that described 
for testing the stator of a squirrel-cage induction 
motor. The rotor can be tested with an ohmmeter 
for an open winding or a grounded winding. To 
test the rotor for an open winding, connect one of 
the ohmmeter leads to each of the slip rings on the 
rotor shaft, Figure 17–5. Since the rotor winding of 
a synchronous motor is intended for DC current, the 
resistance of the wire will be high as compared with 
the wire resistance of a wound rotor motor. Owing 
to the fact that alternating current fl ows in the rotor 
of a wound rotor motor, the current is limited by the 
inductance of the coil and not its resistance.
To test the rotor for a grounded winding, connect 
one ohmmeter lead to the shaft of the motor, and the 
other lead to one of the slip rings. There should be 
no continuity between the winding and the motor 
shaft, Figure 17–6.
Because the resistance of the rotor is relatively 
high, a shorted winding can often be found with 
 Figure 17–5
Testing the rotor for an open winding. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
 Figure 17–6
Testing the rotor for a grounded winding. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

190   SECTION 3  Motors
 2. The speed of the armature.
 3. The strength of the electromagnets.
Because the amount of DC current that fl ows 
through the windings of the electromagnets deter-
mines their strength, the output voltage of the 
three-phase armature can be controlled by the DC 
excitation current.
The output voltage of the alternator winding is 
then rectifi ed to direct current with a three-phase 
bridge rectifi er, Figure 17–9. The bridge rectifi er 
and all protective devices such as fuses are mounted 
on the motor shaft with the armature winding. The 
output of the bridge rectifi er is connected to the 
THE BRUSHLESS EXCITER
Many large synchronous motors use a brush-
less exciter instead of slip rings and brushes. The 
brushless exciter is constructed by incorporat-
ing a small three-phase alternator winding on the 
shaft of the motor, Figure 17–7. The three-phase 
winding is placed inside the fi eld of electromagnets, 
Figure 17–8. A variable source of direct current is 
used to control the strength of the electromagnets. 
The amount of voltage induced into the armature 
winding is determined by three factors:
 1. The number of turns of wire in the armature 
winding.
MAIN  ROTOR
SMALL  ARMATURE
WINDING
 Figure 17–7
A brushless exciter contains a small three-phase 
winding on the motor shaft. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
ELECTROMAGNET
ARMATURE  WINDING
 Figure 17–8
The armature winding is between two electromagnets. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
OUTPUT
TO
ROTOR
ARMATURE
+
–
BRIDGE  RECTIFIER
 Figure 17–9
The output of the armature winding is connected to a three-phase bridge rectiﬁ er. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 17  The Synchronous Motor   191
The rotor of a large synchronous motor is shown 
in Figure 17–10. The amortisseur winding and the 
brushless exciter winding can be seen in the photo-
graph.
winding of the main rotor. The amount of DC exci-
tation in the rotor of the synchronous motor is now 
controlled by the amount of DC excitation current 
supplied to the windings of the electromagnets.
Amortisseur Winding
Brushless Exciter Winding
 Figure 17–10
Rotor of a large synchro-
nous motor. (Courtesy of Electric 
Machinery Corp.)
SUMMARY
 The synchronous motor is not an induction motor.
 The synchronous motor must have an external source of direct current supplied to the 
rotor during normal operation.
 The DC current supplied to the rotor is known as the excitation current.
 Synchronous motors operate at a constant speed from no load to full load.
 Synchronous motors run at the speed of the rotating magnetic fi eld.
 The two factors that determine the speed of a synchronous motor are:
A. Number of stator poles per phase.
B. Frequency of the applied voltage.
 Synchronous motors use a special squirrel-cage winding called the amortisseur winding 
for starting.
 A synchronous motor can be made to have a leading power factor by over excitation of the 
rotor current.

192   SECTION 3  Motors
QUESTIONS
 
1. Name three characteristics of a synchronous motor that the squirrel-cage induction 
motor and the wound rotor motor do not have.
 
2. What is an amortisseur winding?
 
3. How many slip rings are located on the shaft of a synchronous motor?
 
4. How many slip rings are located on the shaft of a wound rotor induction motor?
 
5. Is a synchronous motor started with DC excitation voltage applied to the rotor?
 
6. What is the fi eld discharge resistor used for?
 
7. A synchronous motor has an eight-pole stator. What will be the speed of the rotor 
when it is under full load?
 
8. How is it possible to know when a synchronous motor has normal excitation applied 
to its rotor?
 
9. How can a synchronous motor be made to have a leading power factor?
 10. What is a synchronous condenser?
KEY TERMS
amortisseur
brushless exciter
DC excitation current
electromagnetic fi eld
fi eld discharge resistor
synchronous condenser
synchronous motor
R E V I E W 

193
Brushless direct current motors have become 
very popular for operating variable speed air han-
dlers found in many residential central heating and 
cooling systems. The typical air handler is powered 
by a multispeed motor that can generally operate at 
three speeds. When the fan motor is started, how-
ever, it operates at its set speed until it is turned off. 
Basically, the blower motor is either full on or com-
pletely off. Variable speed air handlers permit the 
motor to operate at different speeds in accord with 
the demands of the system. Many variable speed air 
handlers are operated at a low speed continuously 
to maintain air circulation throughout the dwelling 
at all times. When the heating or cooling system 
turns on, the fan speed can be increased gradually 
and in steps instead of all at once.
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Describe the operation of a brushless 
DC motor
 Discuss applications for brushless 
DC motors
 List differences in construction between 
brushless DC motors and other types 
of motors
 Discuss the operation and advantages 
of variable speed air handlers
Brushless DC 
Motors
UNIT 18

194   SECTION 3  Motors
Variable speed air handlers exhibit several advan-
tages over air handlers that operate at a single speed. 
Some of these advantages are:
Dust collection. Single speed air handlers 
pull dust through the fi lter at a high rate of 
speed. This lessens the fi lter’s ability to trap 
dust particles. Variable speed air handlers 
operate at a very low speed most of the time, 
causing more dust particles to be collected by 
the fi lter.
Less temperature variation. Typically, the 
inside temperature will vary from three to fi ve 
degrees before the heating or cooling system 
turns on. The variable speed air handler can 
be operated at different speeds between the 
cycling of the heating or cooling system to 
provide more or less air fl ow as needed. This 
can greatly reduce the temperature variation 
and permits the temperature to remain closer 
to the comfort zone setting.
Better humidity control during cooling. 
When the air-conditioning compressor starts, 
the speed of the air handler is increased gradu-
ally instead of all at once. This permits the 
warm air to fl ow across the evaporator coil 
at a slower rate, permitting the coil to rapidly 
cool down. This rapid cooldown results in 
increased moisture removal.
THE BRUSHLESS DC MOTOR
The brushless DC motor operates by converting 
direct current into three-phase alternating cur-
rent at different frequencies. The motor contains a 
permanent magnet rotor, a stator, and the 
electronics necessary to change direct current into 
three-phase alternating current, Figure 18–1. The 
speed of the motor is determined by the frequency of 
the three-phase current. The motor operates on the 
principle of a rotating magnetic fi eld very similar to 
that of a three-phase induction motor. The brush-
less DC motor, however, is not an induction motor. 
It does not depend on current being induced into the 
rotor to produce a rotor magnetic fi eld. Because per-
manent magnets supply the rotor magnetic fi eld, the 
brushless DC motor does not exhibit the high inrush 
current during starting that is a  characteristic of 
 Figure 18–1
Brushless DC motor. (Courtesy of GE ECM™ Technologies).
induction type motors. The starting current and the 
running current of the motor are basically the same. 
This feature greatly reduces the current-handling 
requirement of the electronic components needed to 
change direct current into three-phase alternating 
current.
The factors that determine the amount of torque 
produced by the brushless DC motor are the same as 
those for any other electric motor:
 1. Strength of the magnetic fi eld of the stator.
 2. Strength of the magnetic fi eld of the rotor.
 3. Phase angle difference between rotor and sta-
tor fl ux.
Because the rotor magnetic fi eld is supplied by per-
manent magnets, the fl ux of the rotor and stator are 
always in phase with each other. This produces a 
strong torque for this type of motor.
The electronic components necessary to change 
single-phase alternating current into direct cur-
rent and then into three-phase alternating current 
are located inside the motor housing, Figure 18–2. 
Most variable frequency type controls fi rst change 
alternating current into direct current because it is 
a simpler process to produce multiphase alternat-
ing current from direct current than to change the 
frequency and number of phases of an existing alter-
nating current source.
Brushless DC motors are operated in one of two 
modes, the thermostat mode or the variable speed 
mode. When used in the thermostat mode, the 
motor is controlled by a 24-VAC signal from the 
thermostat. When used in the variable speed mode, 
the motor is controlled by a pulse width modulating 
signal.

UNIT 18  Brushless DC Motors   195
 Figure 18–2
Electronic control unit for a brushless 
DC motor. (Courtesy of GE ECM™ Technologies).
The motor is provided with two terminal connec-
tions. One is a 16-pin connector and is called the 
control connector. This connector receives the 
information necessary to control the operation of 
the motor. The other connection is a 5-pin connec-
tor and is called the power connector. This con-
nector provides the power to operate the motor. A 
pin connection diagram is shown in Figure 18–3.
Brushless DC motors can generally be obtained 
in 1/3, 1/2, 3/4, or 1 horsepower ratings. They can 
exhibit effi ciency as high as 82% and can operate on 
120/240 and 277 VAC at 50 or 60 Hz. The speed 
range is from 300 to 1,200 RPM. Although the 
motor can be operated at 1,200 RPM, it is gener-
ally recommended not to operate the motor above 
1,050 RPM when used for continuous operation.
 Figure 18–3
Pin connection diagram for a brushless 
DC motor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

196   SECTION 3  Motors
Electronic Control
The brushless DC motor is controlled by a circuit 
board located in the air handler. The board supplies 
both direct current to the motor and the signals that 
determine motor speed. Some boards are preset at 
the factory for the specifi c type of air handler unit. 
Other boards contain DIP (Dual Inline Package) 
switches that permit the air handler to be set for 
different operating conditions. Typical DIP switch 
confi gurations for some  systems are:
Switches 1 and 2. Set for system tonnage.
Switches 3 and 4. Set for 300, 400, or 450 cfm/ton.
Switches 5 and 6. Set for time delay or mode.
Switches 7 and 8. Set for desired heating fl ow.
SUMMARY
 Brushless DC motors are generally used to power the blower in variable speed air 
 handlers.
 The circuitry necessary to change single-phase alternating current into three-phase 
alternating current is located inside the motor housing.
 Brushless DC motors operate on the principle of a rotating magnetic fi eld.
 Brushless DC motors are not induction motors. They do not depend on an inducted 
current to produce a magnetic fi eld in the rotor.
 Brushless DC motors are operated in one of two modes.
 Brushless DC motors can have effi ciencies as high as 82%.
 Because brushless DC motors are not induction motors, they do not exhibit the high 
starting current associated with induction-type motors.
KEY TERMS
brushless
control connector
frequency
permanent magnet rotor
power connector
rapid cooldown
rotating magnetic fi eld
variable speed
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What is the operating voltage of a brushless DC motor?
 
2. What is the recommended maximum operating speed for a brushless DC motor when 
used for continuous operation?
 
3. If the motor is to be operated on 120 VAC, what must be done to permit the motor to 
operate on this voltage?
 
4. Referring to the power connector, which pins are used to connect AC line voltage to 
the motor?
 
5. When the brushless DC motor is used in the thermostat mode, what controls the 
operation of the motor?

UNIT 18  Brushless DC Motors   197
 
6. Name three factors that determine the amount of torque produced by a brushless 
DC motor.
 
7. Referring to the control connector, to which pin would Y/Y2 be connected?
 
8. Name three advantages of a variable speed air handler over a single speed air 
 handler.

This page intentionally left blank 

SECTION 4
Transformers

Transformers are one of the most common devices 
found in the HVAC fi eld. They range in size from 
occupying a space of less than 1 cubic inch to 
requiring rail cars to move them after they have 
been broken into sections. Their ratings can range 
from mVA (millivolt amps) to GVA (gigavolt amps).
A transformer is a magnetically operated machine 
that can change values of voltage, current, and 
impedance without a change of frequency.
Transformers are the most effi cient machines 
known. Their effi ciencies commonly range from 
90% to 99% at full load. Transformers can be 
divided into several classifi cations such as:
 A. Isolation.
 B. Auto.
 C. Current.
200
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Discuss the different types of 
transformers
 Calculate values of voltage, current, 
and turns for single-phase transformers 
using formulas
 Calculate values of voltage, current, 
and turns for a single-phase 
transformer using the turns ratio
 Connect a transformer and test the 
voltage output of different windings
UNIT 19
Isolation 
Transformers

UNIT 19  Isolation Transformers   201
NS  Number of turns in the secondary
EP  Voltage of the primary
ES  Voltage of the secondary
IP  Current in the primary
IS  Current in the secondary
 EP 
__ 
ES
     NP 
___ 
NS
     EP 
__ 
ES
     IS 
__ 
Ip
     NP 
___ 
NS
     IS 
__ 
Ip
  
or
EP  NS  ES  NP
EP  IP  ES  IS
NP  IP  NS  IS
The primary winding of a transformer is the 
power input winding. It is the winding that is con-
nected to the incoming power supply. The second-
ary winding is the load winding or output winding. 
It is the side of the transformer that is connected 
to the driven load, Figure 19–2. Any winding of a 
transformer can be used as a primary or secondary 
winding provided its voltage or current rating is not 
exceeded. Transformers can also be operated at a 
lower voltage than their rating indicates, but they 
cannot be connected to a higher voltage. Assume 
the transformer shown in Figure 19–2, for example, 
has a primary voltage rating of 480 volts and the 
secondary has a voltage rating of 240 volts. Now 
assume that the primary winding is connected to 
a 120-volt source. No damage would occur to the 
transformer, but the secondary winding would pro-
duce only 60 volts.
ISOLATION TRANSFORMERS
The transformers shown in Figures 19–1 and 19–2 
are isolation transformers. This means that 
the secondary winding is physically and electri-
cally isolated from the primary winding. There is 
A basic law concerning transformers is that all 
values of a transformer are proportional to its turns 
ratio. This does not mean that the exact number 
of turns of wire on each winding must be known 
to determine different values of voltage and cur-
rent for a transformer. What must be known is the 
ratio of turns. For example, assume a transformer 
has two windings. One winding, the primary, has 
1,000 turns of wire and the other, the secondary, 
has 250 turns of wire, Figure 19–1. The turns ratio 
of this transformer is 4 to 1 or 4:1 (1,000/250  4). 
This indicates there are four turns of wire on the pri-
mary for every one turn of wire on the secondary.
TRANSFORMER FORMULAS
There are different formulas that can be used to fi nd 
the values of voltage and current for a transformer. 
The following is a list of standard formulas:
Where:
NP  Number of turns in the primary
SECONDARY
250  TURNS
PRIMARY
1,000  TURNS
 Figure 19–1
All values of a transformer are proportional to its turns 
ratio. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
SECONDARY
LOAD
PRIMARY
 Figure 19–2
Isolation transformer. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

202   SECTION 4  Transformers
no electrical connection between the primary and 
secondary winding. This transformer is magneti-
cally coupled, not electrically coupled. This “line 
isolation” is often a very desirable characteristic. 
Because there is no electrical connection between 
the load and power supply, the transformer becomes 
a fi lter between the two. The isolation transformer 
will greatly reduce any voltage spikes that originate 
on the supply side before they are transferred to the 
load side. Some isolation transformers are built with 
a turns ratio of 1:1. A transformer of this type will 
have the same input and output voltage and is used 
for the purpose of isolation only.
The reason that the transformer can greatly 
reduce any voltage spikes before they reach the 
secondary is because of the rise time of current 
through an inductor. The current in an inductor 
rises at an exponential rate, Figure 19–3. As the 
current increases in value, the expanding magnetic 
fi eld cuts through the conductors of the coil and 
induces a voltage that is opposed to the applied volt-
age. The amount of induced voltage is proportional 
to the rate of change of current. This simply means 
EXPONENTIAL  CURVE
CURRENT
TIME
 Figure 19–3
The current through 
an inductor rises at 
an exponential rate. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
that the faster the current attempts to increase, the 
greater the opposition to that increase will be. Spike 
voltages and currents are generally of very short 
duration, which means that they increase in value 
very rapidly, Figure 19–4. This rapid change of value 
causes the opposition to the change to increase just 
as rapidly. By the time the spike has been transferred 
to the secondary winding of the transformer, it has 
been eliminated or greatly reduced, Figure 19–5.
Another purpose of isolation transformers is to 
remove some piece of electrical equipment from 
ground. It is sometimes desirable that a piece of 
electrical equipment not be connected directly to 
ground. This is often done as a safety precaution 
to eliminate the hazard of an accidental contact 
between a person at ground potential and the 
ungrounded conductor. If the case of the equipment 
should come in contact with the ungrounded con-
ductor, the isolation transformer would prevent a 
circuit being completed to ground through someone 
touching the case of the equipment. Many alter-
nating current circuits have one side connected to 
ground. A familiar example of this is the common 

UNIT 19  Isolation Transformers   203
TRANSFORMER CONSTRUCTION
The basic construction of an isolation transformer is 
shown in Figure 19–7. A metal core is used to provide 
good magnetic coupling between the two windings. 
The core is generally made of laminations stacked 
together. Laminating the core helps reduce power 
losses due to eddy current induction. Figure 19–7 
shows the basic design of electrically separated 
 winding.
TRANSFORMER CORE TYPES
There are several different types of cores used in the 
construction of transformers. Most cores are made 
from thin steel punchings laminated together to 
form a solid metal core. Laminated cores are pre-
ferred because a thin layer of oxide forms on the sur-
face of each lamination, which acts as an insulator 
to reduce the formation of eddy currents inside the 
core material. The amount of core material needed 
for a particular transformer is determined by the 
power rating of the transformer. The amount of core 
material must be suffi cient to prevent saturation 
at full load. The type and shape of the core gener-
ally determines the amount of magnetic coupling 
between the windings and to some extent the effi -
ciency of the transformer.
DURATION  OF
VOLTAGE  SPIKE
SINE  WAVE 
VOLTAGE
SPIKE  VOLTAGE
 Figure 19–4
Voltage spikes are generally of short duration. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
SECONDARY
LOAD
PRIMARY
 Figure 19–5
The isolation transformer greatly reduces 
the voltage spike. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
120-volt circuit with a grounded neutral conduc-
tor, Figure 19–6. An isolation transformer can be 
used to remove a piece of equipment from circuit 
ground.

204   SECTION 4  Transformers
shell type has a metal core piece through the middle 
of the window, Figure 19–9. The primary and sec-
ondary windings are wound around the center core 
piece with the low voltage winding being closest to 
the metal core. This arrangement permits the trans-
former to be surrounded by the core, which provides 
The transformer illustrated in Figure 19–8 is known 
as a core transformer. The windings are placed 
around each end of the core material. The metal core pro-
vides a good magnetic path between the two windings.
The shell transformer is constructed in a 
similar manner as the core type, except that the 
120  VAC
EQUIPMENT
EQUIPMENT  HAS
NO  CONNECTION
TO  GROUND
GROUNDED  LINE
UNGROUNDED  LINE
 Figure 19–6
Isolation transformer 
used to remove a 
piece of electrical 
equipment from 
ground. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
WINDING
IRON  CORE
WINDING
 Figure 19–7
Basic construction of an isolation 
transformer. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
COIL
COIL
CORE
 Figure 19–8
Core-type transformer. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)

UNIT 19  Isolation Transformers   205
through its center around which the primary and 
secondary windings are wound. The H core, how-
ever, surrounds the windings on four sides instead 
of two. This extra metal helps reduce stray leakage 
fl ux and improve the effi ciency of the transformer. 
The H-type core is often found on high voltage dis-
tribution transformers.
The tape wound or toroid core, Figure 19–12, 
is constructed by tightly winding one long continu-
ous silicon steel tape into a spiral. The tape may or 
may not be housed in a plastic container depend-
ing on the application. This type core does not 
require steel punchings that are then laminated 
together. Because the core is one continuous length 
excellent magnetic coupling. When the trans-
former is in operation, all the magnetic fl ux must 
pass through the center core piece. It then divides 
through the two outer core pieces. Shell type cores 
are sometimes referred to as E-I cores because the 
steel punchings used to construct the core are in the 
shape of an E and an I, Figure 19–10.
The H-type core shown in Figure 19–11 is simi-
lar to the shell type core in that it has an iron core 
 Figure 19–9
Shell-type transformer. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
I  LAMINATION
E  LAMINATION
 Figure 19–10
Shell-type cores are made of E and I laminations. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 19–11
Transformer with H-type core. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 19–12
Toroid transformer. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

206   SECTION 4  Transformers
transformers with a large kVA rating will appear to 
be almost a short circuit when measured with an 
ohmmeter. When connected to power, however, the 
actual no load current is generally relatively small.
EXCITATION CURRENT
There will always be some amount of current fl ow in 
the primary of a transformer even if there is no load 
connected to the secondary. This is called the exci-
tation current of the transformer. The excitation 
current is the amount of current required to magne-
tize the core of the transformer. The excitation cur-
rent remains constant from no load to full load. As 
a general rule, the excitation current is such a small 
part of the full load current, it is often omitted when 
making calculations.
MUTUAL INDUCTION
Because the secondary windings are wound on the 
same core as the primary, the magnetic fi eld pro-
duced by the primary winding cuts the windings 
of the secondary also, Figure 19–14. This continu-
ally changing magnetic fi eld induces a voltage into 
the secondary winding. The ability of one coil to 
induce a voltage into another coil is called mutual 
induction. The amount of voltage induced in 
the secondary is determined by the number of 
turns of wire in the secondary as compared with 
of metal, fl ux leakage is kept to a minimum. The tape 
wound core is one of the most effi cient core designs 
available.
BASIC OPERATING PRINCIPLES
In Figure 19–13, one winding of the transformer 
has been connected to an alternating current sup-
ply, and the other winding has been connected to 
a load. As current increases from zero to its peak 
positive point, a magnetic fi eld expands outward 
around the coil. When the current decreases from 
its peak positive point toward zero, the magnetic 
fi eld collapses. When the current increases toward 
its negative peak, the magnetic fi eld again expands, 
but with an opposite polarity of that previously. The 
fi eld again collapses when the current decreases 
from its negative peak toward zero. This continually 
expanding and collapsing magnetic fi eld cuts the 
windings of the primary and induces a voltage into 
it. This induced voltage opposes the applied voltage 
and limits the current fl ow of the primary. When 
a coil induces a voltage into itself, it is known as 
self-induction. It is this induced voltage, induc-
tive reactance, that limits the fl ow of current in the 
primary winding. If the resistance of the primary 
winding is measured with an ohmmeter, it will indi-
cate only the resistance of the wire used to construct 
the winding and will not give an indication of the 
actual current limiting effect of the winding. Most 
MAGNETIC
FIELD
 Figure 19–13
Magnetic ﬁ eld produced 
by alternating current. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 19  Isolation Transformers   207
next problem is to calculate the current fl ow in the 
secondary and primary windings. The current fl ow 
of the secondary can be computed using Ohm’s law 
since the voltage and impedance are known.
I    E 
__ 
Z  
I    30 
___ 
5  
I  6 amps
Now that the amount of current fl ow in the second-
ary is known, the primary current can be computed 
using the formula:
 EP 
__ 
ES
     IS 
__ 
IP
  
 120 
____ 
30     6 
__ 
IP
  
120 IP  180
IP  1.5 amps
Notice that the primary voltage is higher than the 
secondary voltage, but the primary current is much 
less than the secondary current. A good rule for 
transformers is that power in must equal power out. 
If the primary voltage and current are multiplied 
together, it should equal the product of the voltage 
and current of the secondary:
Primary
120  1.5  180 volt amps
Secondary
30  6  180 volt amps
the  primary. For example, assume the primary has 
240 turns of wire and is connected to 120 volts 
AC. This gives the transformer a volts-per-turn 
ratio of 0.5 (120 volts per 240 turns  0.5 volt per 
turn). Now assume the secondary winding contains 
100 turns of wire. Because the transformer has a 
 volts-per-turn ratio of 0.5, the secondary voltage 
will be 50 volts (100  0.5  50).
TRANSFORMER CALCULATIONS
In the following examples, values of voltage, cur-
rent, and turns for different transformers will be 
computed.
EXAMPLE
Assume the isolation transformer shown in 
Figure 19–2 has 240 turns of wire on the primary 
and 60 turns of wire on the secondary. This is a ratio 
of 4:1 (240/60  4). Now assume that 120 volts is 
connected to the primary winding. What is the volt-
age of the secondary winding?
  EP 
__ 
ES
     NP 
___ 
NS
  
 120 
____ 
ES
     240 
____ 
60  
ES  30 volts
The transformer in this example is known as a 
step-down transformer because it has a lower 
secondary voltage than primary voltage.
Now assume that the load connected to the 
secondary winding has an impedance of 5 . The 
 Figure 19–14
The magnetic ﬁ eld of the primary 
induces a voltage into the 
secondary. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

208   SECTION 4  Transformers
120 IP  150
IP  1.25 amps
Notice that the amount of power input equals the 
amount of power output.
Primary
120  1.25  150 volt amps
Secondary
600  0.25  150 volt amps
CALCULATING TRANSFORMER 
VALUES USING THE TURNS RATIO
As illustrated in the previous examples, transformer 
values of voltage, current, and turns can be com-
puted using formulas. It is also possible to compute 
these same values using the turns ratio. There are 
several ways in which turns ratios can be expressed. 
One method is to use a whole number value such as 
13:5 or 6:21. The fi rst ratio indicates that one wind-
ing has 13 turns of wire for every 5 turns of wire in 
the other winding. The second ratio indicates that 
there are 6 turns of wire in one winding for every 
21 turns in the other.
A second method is to use the number 1 as a 
base. When using this method, the number 1 is 
always assigned to the winding with the lowest volt-
age rating. The ratio is found by dividing the higher 
voltage by the lower voltage. The number on the 
left side of the ratio represents the primary winding, 
and the number on the right of the ratio represents 
the secondary winding. For example, assume a 
transformer has a primary rated at 240 volts and 
a secondary rated at 96 volts, Figure 19–15. The 
EXAMPLE
In the next example, assume that the primary wind-
ing contains 240 turns of wire and the secondary 
contains 1,200 turns of wire. This is a turns ratio of 
1:5 (1,200/240  5). Now assume that 120 volts 
is connected to the primary winding. Compute the 
voltage output of the secondary winding.
 EP 
__ 
ES
     NP 
___ 
NS
  
 120 
____ 
ES
     240 
_____ 
1200  
240 ES  144,000
ES  600 volts
Notice that the secondary voltage of this trans-
former is higher than the primary voltage. This type of 
transformer is known as a step-up transformer.
Now assume that the load connected to the 
secondary has an impedance of 2,400 . Find the 
amount of current fl ow in the primary and second-
ary windings. The current fl ow in the secondary 
winding can be computed using Ohm’s law.
I    E 
__ 
Z  
I    600 
_____ 
2400  
I  0.25 amp
Now that the amount of current fl ow in the second-
ary is known, the primary current can be computed 
using the formula:
 EP 
__ 
ES
     IS 
__ 
IP
  
 120 
____ 
600     0.25 
_____ 
IP
  
LOAD
24  OHMS
240  VAC
96  VAC
RATIO:  2.5:1
 Figure 19–15
Computing transformer values using 
the turns ratio. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)

UNIT 19  Isolation Transformers   209
Now assume that the secondary winding contains 
150 turns of wire. The primary turns can also 
be found by using the turns ratio. Because the 
primary voltage is higher than the secondary volt-
age, the primary must have more turns of wire. 
Because the primary must contain more turns of 
wire, the secondary turns will be multiplied by the 
turns ratio.
NP  NS  Turns Ratio
NP  150  2.5
NP  375 turns
In the next example, assume a transformer has 
a primary voltage of 120 volts and a secondary 
voltage of 500 volts. The secondary has a load 
impedance of 1,200 . The secondary contains 
800 turns of wire, Figure 19–16. The turns ratio 
can be found by dividing the higher voltage by the 
lower voltage.
Ratio    500 
____ 
120  
Ratio  1:4.17
The secondary current can be found using 
Ohm’s law.
IS    500 
_____ 
1200  
IS  0.417 amp
In this example, the primary voltage is lower 
than the secondary voltage. Therefore, the primary 
current must be higher. To fi nd the primary current, 
multiply the secondary current by the turns ratio.
IP  IS  Turns Ratio
IP  0.417  4.17
IP  1.74 amps
turns ratio can be computed by dividing the higher 
voltage by the lower voltage.
Ratio    240 
____ 
96  
Ratio  2.5:1
Notice in this example that the primary winding has 
the higher voltage rating and the secondary has the 
lower. Therefore, the 2.5 is placed on the left and the 
base unit, 1, is placed on the right. This ratio indicates 
that there are 2.5 turns of wire in the primary winding 
for every 1 turn of wire in the secondary.
Now assume that there is a resistance of 24  
connected to the secondary winding. The amount of 
secondary current can be found using Ohm’s law.
IS    96 
___ 
24  
IS  4 amps
The primary current can be found using the turns 
ratio. Recall that the volt amps of the primary must 
equal the volt amps of the secondary. Because the pri-
mary voltage is greater, the primary current will have 
to be less than the secondary current. Therefore, the 
secondary current will be divided by the turns ratio.
IP    
IS 
__________ 
Turns Ratio  
IP    4 
___ 
25  
IP  1.6 amps
To check the answer, fi nd the volt amps of the 
primary and secondary.
Primary
240  1.6  384
Secondary
96  4  384
ES  120
IS
NS  800
EP  120
IP
NP
Z  =  1200Ω
RATIO:
 Figure 19–16
Calculating transformer values. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

210   SECTION 4  Transformers
designed in such a manner that it can be connected 
to different primary voltages without changing the 
value of the secondary voltage. In this example, it 
is assumed that the secondary winding has a total 
of 120 turns of wire. To maintain the proper turns 
ratio, the primary would have 600 turns of wire 
between C and 120; 1,040 turns between C and 
208; and 1,200 turns between C and 240.
The transformer shown in Figure 19–19 contains 
a single primary winding. The secondary winding, 
however, has been tapped at several points. One of 
the secondary lead wires is labeled C and is com-
mon to the other lead wires. When rated voltage 
is applied to the primary, voltages of 12, 24, and 
48 volts can be obtained at the secondary. It should 
also be noted that this arrangement of taps permits 
the transformer to be used as a center tapped trans-
former for two of the voltages. If a load is placed 
across the lead wires labeled C and 24, the lead wire 
labeled 12 becomes a center tap. If a load is placed 
across the C and 48 lead wires, the 24-lead wire 
becomes a center tap.
In this example, it is assumed the primary wind-
ing has 300 turns of wire. In order to produce the 
proper turns ratio, it would require 30 turns of wire 
between C and 12, 60 turns of wire between C and 
24, and 120 turns of wire between C and 48.
The transformer shown in Figure 19–20 is similar 
to the transformer in Figure 19–19. The transformer 
in Figure 19–20, however, has multiple secondary 
windings instead of a single secondary winding with 
multiple taps. The advantage of the transformer in 
Figure 19–20 is that the secondary windings are 
electrically isolated from each other. These secondary 
windings can be either step-up or step-down depend-
ing on the application of the transformer.
To check this answer, compute the volt amps of 
both windings.
Primary
120  1.74  208.8
Secondary
500  0.417  208.8
The slight difference in answers is caused by round-
ing off the values.
Because the primary voltage is less than the 
secondary voltage, the turns of wire in the primary 
will be less also. The primary turns will be found by 
dividing the turns of wire in the secondary by the 
turns ratio.
NP    
NS 
__________ 
Turns Ratio  
NP    800 
_____ 
4.17  
NP  192 turns
Figure 19–17 shows the transformer with all 
completed values.
MULTIPLE TAPPED WINDINGS
It is not uncommon for transformers to be designed 
with windings that have more than one set of lead 
wires connected to the primary or secondary. The 
transformer shown in Figure 19–18 contains a 
secondary winding rated at 24 volts. The primary 
winding contains several taps, however. One of the 
primary lead wires is labeled C and is the common 
for the other leads. The other leads are labeled 120, 
208, and 240, respectively. This transformer is 
ES 500
IS 0.417
NS 800
EP 120
IP 1.74
NP 192
Z  =  1-200Ω
RATIO:  1:4.17
 Figure 19–17
Transformer with completed 
 values. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 19  Isolation Transformers   211
24V
120  TURNS
240V
208V
120V
C
1200  TURNS
1040  TURNS
600  TURNS
PRIMARY  WINDING
SECONDARY  WINDING
 Figure 19–18
Transformer with multiple 
tap primary winding. (Source: 
Delmar/Cengage Learning)
120V
300  TURNS
48V
24V
12V
C
120  TURNS
60  TURNS
30  TURNS
30  TURNS
60  TURNS
 Figure 19–19
Transformer secondary with multiple taps. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

212   SECTION 4  Transformers
The current fl ow in the fi rst secondary can be com-
puted using Ohm’s law.
IS1    560 
_____ 
1000  
IS1  0.56 amps
The number of turns of wire in the fi rst second-
ary winding will be found using the turns ratio. 
Because this secondary has a higher voltage than 
the primary, it must have more turns of wire. The 
number of primary turns will be multiplied by the 
turns ratio.
NS1  NP  Turns Ratio
NS1  300  4.67
NS1  1,401 turns
The amount of primary current needed to supply 
this secondary winding can be found using the turns 
ratio also. Because the primary has less voltage, it 
will require more current. The primary current can 
be determined by multiplying the secondary current 
by the turns ratio.
IP(FIRST SECONDARY)  IS1  Turns Ratio
IP(FIRST SECONDARY)  0.56  4.67
IP(FIRST SECONDARY)  2.61 amps
COMPUTING VALUES FOR 
TRANSFORMERS WITH 
MULTIPLE SECONDARIES
When computing the values of a transformer with 
multiple secondary windings, each secondary must 
be treated as a different transformer. For example, the 
transformer in Figure 19–21 contains one primary 
winding and three secondary windings. The primary 
is connected to 120 volts AC and contains 300 turns 
of wire. One secondary has an output voltage of 
560 volts and a load impedance of 1,000 . The sec-
ond secondary has an output voltage of 208 volts and a 
load impedance of 400 , and the third secondary has 
an output voltage of 24 volts and a load impedance of 
6 . The current, turns of wire, and ratio for each sec-
ondary and the current of the primary will be found.
SOLUTION: The ﬁ rst step will be to compute the turns 
ratio of the ﬁ rst secondary. The turns ratio can be 
found by dividing the smaller voltage into the larger.
Ratio    ES1 
___ 
EP
  
Ratio    560 
____ 
120  
Ratio  1:4.67
PRIMARY
WINDING
SECONDARY
WINDINGS
 Figure 19–20
Transformer with 
multiple secondary 
windings. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

UNIT 19  Isolation Transformers   213
computed by multiplying the secondary current by 
the turns ratio.
IP(SECOND SECONDARY)  IS2  Turns Ratio
IP(SECOND SECONDARY)  0.52  1.732
IP(SECOND SECONDARY)  0.9 amp
The turns ratio of the third secondary winding 
will be computed in the same way as the other two. 
The larger voltage will be divided by the smaller.
Ratio    120 
____ 
24  
Ratio  5:1
The primary current will be found using Ohm’s 
law.
IS3    24 
___ 
6  
IS3  4 amps
Because the output voltage of the third secondary is 
less than that of the primary, the number of turns 
of wire for this secondary will be fewer than the pri-
mary turns. To fi nd the number of secondary turns, 
divide the primary turns by the turns ratio.
NS3    
NP 
__________ 
Turns Ratio  
The turns ratio of the second secondary winding 
will be found by dividing the higher voltage by the 
lower voltage.
Ratio    208 
____ 
120  
Ratio  1:1.73
The amount of current fl ow in this secondary can be 
determined using Ohm’s law.
IS2    208 
____ 
400  
IS2  0.52 amp
Because the voltage of this secondary is greater 
than the primary, it will have more turns of wire 
than the primary. The turns of this secondary will 
be found by multiplying the turns of the primary by 
the turns ratio.
NS2  NP  Turns Ratio
NS2  300  1.73
NS2  519 turns
The voltage of the primary is less than this 
secondary. The primary will, therefore, require a 
greater amount of current. The amount of primary 
current required to operate this secondary will be 
ES1 = 560
IS1 
NS1 
RATIO 
ES2 = 208
IS2 
NS2 
RATIO 
Z1 = 1,000 Ω
EP = 120
IP 
NP = 300T
Z2 = 400 Ω
ES3 = 24
IS3 
NS3 
RATIO 
Z3 = 6 Ω
 Figure 19–21
Computing values for a trans-
former with multiple secondary 
windings. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

214   SECTION 4  Transformers
DISTRIBUTION TRANSFORMERS
A very common type of isolation transformer is the 
distribution transformer, Figure 19–23. This trans-
former is used to supply power to most homes and 
many businesses. In this example, it is assumed that 
the primary is connected to a 7,200 volt line. The 
secondary is 240 volts with a center tap. The center 
tap is grounded and becomes the neutral conduc-
tor. If voltage is measured across the entire second-
ary, a voltage of 240 volts will be seen. If voltage is 
measured from either line to the center tap, half of 
the secondary voltage, or 120 volts, will be seen, 
Figure 19–24. Loads that are intended to operate on 
240 volts, such as water heaters, electric resistance 
heating units, and central air conditioners are con-
nected directly across the lines of the secondary. 
Loads intended to operate on 120 volts connect from 
the center tap or neutral to one of the secondary 
lines. The function of the neutral is to carry the dif-
ference in current between the two secondary lines 
and maintain a balanced voltage. In the example 
shown in Figure 19–25, it is assumed that one of 
the secondary lines has a current fl ow of 30 amperes 
and the other has current fl ow of 24 amperes. The 
neutral will conduct the sum of the unbalanced load. 
NS3    300 
____ 
5  
NS3  60 turns
The primary has a higher voltage than this second-
ary. The primary current will, therefore, be less than 
the secondary current by the amount of the turns 
ratio.
IP(THIRD SECONDARY)    
IS3 
__________ 
Turns Ratio  
IP(THIRD SECONDARY)    4 
__ 
5  
IP(THIRD SECONDARY)  0.8 amp
The primary must supply current to each of 
the three secondary windings. Therefore, the total 
amount of primary current will be the sum of the 
currents required to supply each secondary.
IP(TOTAL)  IP1  IP2  IP3
IP(TOTAL)  2.61  0.9  0.8
IP(TOTAL)  4.31 amps
The transformer with all computed values is shown 
in Figure 19–22.
ES1 = 560
IS1 
= 0.56
NS1 = 1401
RATIO 1:4.67
ES2 = 208
IS2 
= 0.52
NS2 = 519
RATIO 1:1.73
Z1 = 1,000 Ω
EP = 120
IP 
= 4.31
NP = 300T
Z2 = 400 Ω
ES3 = 24
IS3 
= 4
NS3 = 60
RATIO 5:1
Z3 = 6 Ω
 Figure 19–22
The transformer with all computed 
values. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 19  Isolation Transformers   215
In this example, the neutral current will be 6 amperes 
(30 – 24  6).
TESTING THE TRANSFORMER
There are several tests that can be made to deter-
mine the condition of the transformer. A simple 
test for grounds, shorts, or opens can be made with 
an ohmmeter, Figure 19–26. Ohmmeter A is con-
nected to one lead of the primary and one lead of 
the secondary. This test checks for shorted windings 
between the primary and secondary. The ohmmeter 
should indicate infi nity. If there is more than one 
primary or secondary winding, all isolated windings 
should be tested for shorts. Ohmmeter B illustrates 
testing the windings for grounds. One lead of the 
ohmmeter is connected to the case of the trans-
former and the other is connected to the winding. 
All windings should be tested for grounds and the 
ohmmeter should indicate infi nity for each wind-
ing. Ohmmeter C illustrates testing the windings 
for continuity. The wire resistance of the winding 
should be indicated by the ohmmeter. Each winding 
should be tested for continuity. If the transformer 
appears to be in good condition after the ohmmeter 
120
120
240
7,200 VAC
 Figure 19–23
Distribution transformer. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
120  VOLTS
120  VOLTS
240  VOLTS
 Figure 19–24
The voltage from either line to neutral is 120 volts. 
The voltage across the entire secondary winding is 
240 volts. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
120  VAC
120  VAC
24A
30A
6A
 Figure 19–25
The neutral carries the sum of the unbalanced current. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

216   SECTION 4  Transformers
DETERMINING MAXIMUM 
CURRENT
Notice that the nameplate does not list the current 
rating of the windings. Because power input must 
equal power output, the current rating for a wind-
ing can be determined by dividing the kVA rating 
by the winding voltage. For example, assume a 
transformer has a kVA rating of 0.5 kVA, a primary 
voltage of 480 volts, and a secondary voltage of 
120 volts. To determine the maximum current that 
can be supplied by the secondary, divide the kVA 
rating by the secondary voltage.
IS    kVA 
____ 
ES
  
IS    500 
____ 
120  
IS  4.16 amps
test, it should then be tested for shorts and grounds 
with a megohmmeter or “megger.” A megger will 
reveal problems of insulation breakdown that an 
ohmmeter will not.
TRANSFORMER RATINGS
Most transformers contain a nameplate that lists 
information concerning the transformer. The infor-
mation listed is generally determined by the size, 
type, and manufacturer. Almost all nameplates will 
list the primary voltage, secondary voltage, and kVA 
rating. Transformers are rated in kilovolt amps and 
not kilowatts because the true power is determined 
by the power factor of the load. Other information 
that may or may not be listed is frequency, tempera-
ture rise in °C, % impedance (%Z), type of insulating 
oil, gallon of insulating oil, serial number, type num-
ber, model number, and whether the transformer is 
single phase or three phase.
B
C
A
 Figure 19–26
Testing a transformer with 
an ohmmeter. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

UNIT 19  Isolation Transformers   217
direction of current fl ow causes the molecules of 
iron in the core to realign themselves each time the 
current changes direction. The molecules of iron 
are continually rubbing against each other as they 
realign magnetically. The friction of the molecules 
rubbing together causes heat, which is a power 
loss. Hysteresis loss is proportional to frequency. 
The higher the frequency, the greater the loss. A 
special steel called silicon steel is often used in 
transformer cores to help reduce hysteresis loss. The 
power loss due to hysteresis and eddy currents is 
often called core loss.
Magnetic fl ux leakage does not produce heat, but 
does constitute a power loss. Flux leakage is caused 
by magnetic lines of fl ux radiating away from the 
transformer and not cutting the secondary wind-
ings. Flux leakage can be reduced by better core 
designs.
The primary current can be computed in the 
same way.
IP    kVA 
____ 
EP
  
IP    500 
____ 
480  
IP  1.04 amps
Transformers with multiple secondary windings 
will generally have the current rating listed with the 
voltage rating.
TRANSFORMER LOSSES
Although transformers are probably the most effi -
cient machines known, they are not perfect. A 
transformer operating at 90% effi ciency has a power 
loss of 10%. Some of these losses are I2R losses, eddy 
current losses, hysteresis losses, and magnetic fl ux 
leakage. Most of these losses result in heat produc-
tion. Recall that I2R is one of the formulas for fi nd-
ing power or watts. In the case of a transformer, it 
describes the power loss associated with heat due 
to the resistance of the wire in both primary and 
secondary windings.
Eddy currents are currents that are induced into 
the metal core material by the changing magnetic 
fi eld as alternating current produces a changing 
fl ux. Eddy currents are so named because they cir-
culate around inside the metal in a similar manner 
as the swirling eddies in a river, Figure 19–27. These 
swirling currents produce heat, which is a power 
loss. Transformers are constructed with laminated 
cores to help reduce eddy currents. The surface of 
each lamination forms a layer of iron oxide, which 
acts as an insulator to help prevent the formation of 
eddy currents.
Hysteresis losses are losses due to molecular fric-
tion. As discussed previously, the reversal of the 
 Figure 19–27
Eddy currents circulate inside the core material. (Source: 
Delmar/Cengage Learning)

218   SECTION 4  Transformers
SUMMARY
 All values of voltage, current, and impedance in a transformer are proportional to the 
turns ratio.
 Transformers can change values of voltage, current, and impedance, but cannot change 
the frequency.
 The primary winding of a transformer is connected to the power line.
 The secondary winding is connected to the load.
 A transformer that has a lower secondary voltage than primary voltage is a step-down 
transformer.
 A transformer that has a higher secondary voltage than primary voltage is a step-up 
transformer.
 An isolation transformer has its primary and secondary windings electrically and 
mechanically separated from each other.
 When a coil induces a voltage into itself, it is known as self-induction.
 When a coil induces a voltage into another coil, it is known as mutual induction.
 Either winding of a transformer can be used as the primary or secondary as long as its 
voltage or current ratings are not exceeded.
 Isolation transformers help fi lter voltage and current spikes between the primary and sec-
ondary side.
KEY TERMS
core transformer 
mutual induction 
step-down transformer
E-I core 
self-induction 
step-up transformer
excitation current 
shell transformer 
tape wound or toroid
isolation transformer 
silicon steel 
    core
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What is a transformer?
 
2. What are common effi ciencies for transformers?
 
3. What is an isolation transformer?
 
4. All values of a transformer are proportional to its ___________  ___________
 
5. A transformer has a primary voltage of 480 volts and a secondary voltage of 20 volts. 
What is the turns ratio of the transformer?
 
6. If the secondary of the transformer in question 5 supplies a current of 9.6 amperes to 
a load, what is the primary current? (Disregard excitation current.)
 
7. Explain the difference between a step-up and a step-down transformer.

UNIT 19  Isolation Transformers   219
 
8. A transformer has a primary voltage of 240 volts and a secondary voltage of 48 volts. 
What is the turns ratio of this transformer?
 
9. A transformer has an output of 750 volt amps. The primary voltage is 120 volts. 
What is the primary current?
 10. A transformer has a turns ratio of 1:6. The primary current is 18 amperes. What is 
the secondary current?
PRACTICE PROBLEMS
Refer to Figure 19–28 to answer the following questions. Find all missing values.
ES   
__________
IS   
__________
NS   
__________
EP   
__________ 
IP   
__________ 
NP   
__________
Z  __________ Ω
RATIO:  __________ 
 Figure 19–28
Practice problems 1 through 6. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 1. 
 3. 
 5. 
EP  120
ES  24
IP 
IS 
NP  300
NS 
Ratio:
Z  3 Ω
EP  _____
ES  160
IP  _____
IS  _____
NP  _____
NS  80
Ratio: 1:2.5
Z  12 Ω
EP  _____
ES  _____
IP  16.5
IS  3.25
NP  _____
NS  450
Ratio: _____
Z  56 Ω
 2. 
EP  240
ES  320
IP 
IS 
NP 
NS  280
Ratio:
Z  500 Ω
 4. 
EP  48
ES  240
IP  _____
IS  _____
NP  220
NS  _____
Ratio: _____
Z  360 Ω
 6. 
EP  480
ES  _____
IP  _____
IS  _____
NP  275
NS  525
Ratio:
Z  1.2 kΩ

220   SECTION 4  Transformers
Refer to Figure 19–29 to answer the following questions. Find all missing values.
ES1 _________
IS1 
_________
NS1 _________
RATIO_________
ES2 _________
IS2 
_________
NS2 _________
RATIO_________
Z1 _________   Ω
EP ____________
IP 
____________
NP ____________
Z2 _________   Ω
ES3 _________
IS3 
_________
NS3 _________
RATIO_________
Z3 _________   Ω
 Figure 19–29
Practice problems 7 and 8. (Source: 
Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 7. 
 8. 
EP  208
ES1  320
ES2  120
ES3  24
IP  ____
IS1  ____
IS2  ____
IS3  ____
NP  800
NS1  ____
NS2  ____
NS3  ____
Ratio1 ____
Ratio2 ____
Ratio3 ____
R1  12 kΩ
R2  6 Ω
R3  8 Ω
EP  277
ES1  480
ES2  208
ES3  120
IP  ____
IS1  ____
IS2  ____
IS3  ____
NP  350
NS1  ____
NS2  ____
NS3  ____
Ratio1 ____
Ratio2 ____
Ratio3 ____
R1  200 Ω
R2  60 Ω
R3  24 Ω

221
The word auto means self. An autotransformer is 
literally a self-transformer. It uses the same 
winding as both the primary and secondary. Recall 
that the defi nition of a primary winding is a 
winding that is connected to the source of power, 
and the defi nition of a secondary winding is a 
winding that is connected to a load. Autotransform-
ers have very high effi ciencies, most in the range of 
95% to 98%.
In Figure 20–1, the entire winding is connected 
to the power source, and part of the winding is con-
nected to the load. In this illustration, all the turns 
of wire form the primary and part of the turns form 
the secondary. Because the secondary part of the 
winding contains fewer turns than the primary sec-
tion, the secondary will produce less voltage. This 
autotransformer is a step-down transformer.
OBJECTIVES
After reading this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Discuss the operation of an 
autotransformer
 List differences between isolation 
transformers and autotransformers
 Compute values of voltage, current, 
and turns ratios for autotransformers
 Connect an autotransformer for 
operation
Autotransformers
UNIT 20

222   SECTION 4  Transformers
SECONDARY
WINDING
PRIMARY
WINDING
 Figure 20–1
Autotransformer used as a 
step-down transformer. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 20–2
Autotransformer used as a 
step-up transformer. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
SECONDARY
WINDING
PRIMARY
WINDING
In Figure 20–2, the primary section is connected 
across part of a winding and the secondary is con-
nected across the entire winding. In this illustration 
the secondary section contains more windings than 
the primary. This autotransformer is a step-up 
transformer. Notice that autotransformers, like iso-
lation transformers, can be used as step-up or step-
down transformers.
DETERMINING VOLTAGE VALUES
Autotransformers are not limited to a single second-
ary winding. Many autotransformers have mul-
tiple taps to provide different voltages as shown in 
Figure 20–3. In this example, there are 40 turns of 
wire between taps A and B, 80 turns of wire between 
taps B and C, 100 turns of wire between taps C and D, 

UNIT 20  Autotransformers   223
 Figure 20–3
Autotransformer with multiple taps. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
60  TURNS
E
PRIMARY
WINDING
D
100  TURNS
C
80  TURNS
B
40  TURNS
A
and 60 turns of wire between taps D and E. The pri-
mary section of the windings is connected between 
taps B and E. It will be assumed that the primary 
is connected to a source of 120 volts. The voltage 
across each set of taps will be determined.
There is generally more than one method that can 
be employed to determine values of a transformer. 
Because the number of turns between each tap is 
known, the volts-per-turn method will be used in 
this example. The volts-per-turn for any transformer is 
determined by the primary winding. In this illustration, 
the primary winding is connected across taps B and E. 
The primary turns are, therefore, the sum of the turns 
between taps B and E (80  100  60  240 turns). 
Because 120 volts is connected across 240 turns, 
this transformer will have a volts-per-turn ratio of 
0.5 (240 turns/120 volts  0.5 volts-per-turn). To 
determine the amount of voltage between each set 
of taps, it becomes a simple matter of multiplying the 
number of turns by the volts-per-turn.
A–B (40 turns  0.5  20 volts)
A–C (120 turns  0.5  60 volts)
A–D (220 turns  0.5  110 volts)
A–E (280 turns  0.5  140 volts)
B–C (80 turns  0.5  40 volts)
B–D (180 turns  0.5  90 volts)
B–E (240 turns  0.5  120 volts)
C–D (100 turns  0.5  50 volts)
C–E (160 turns  0.5  80 volts)
D–E (60 turns  0.5  30 volts)
USING TRANSFORMER FORMULAS
The values of voltage and current for autotrans-
formers can also be determined by using standard 
transformer formulas. The primary winding of the 
transformer shown in Figure 20–4 is between points 
B and N, and has a voltage of 120 volts applied to it. 
If the turns of wire are counted between points B 
and N, it can be seen that there are 120 turns of 
wire. Now assume that the selector switch is set to 
point D. The load is now connected between points 
D and N. The secondary of this transformer contains 
40 turns of wire. If the amount of voltage applied to 
the load is to be computed, the following formula 
can be used.
 EP 
__ 
ES
     NP 
___ 
NS
  
 120 
____ 
ES
     120 
____ 
40  
120 ES  4800
ES  40 volts

224   SECTION 4  Transformers
40  TURNS
D
40  TURNS
C
40  TURNS
B
40  TURNS
A
A
N
120  VAC
LOAD
B
C
D
Assume that the load connected to the secondary 
has an impedance of 10 Ω. The amount of current 
fl ow in the secondary circuit can be computed using 
the formula:
I   E 
__ 
Z  
I   40 
___ 
10
  
I  4 amps
The primary current can be computed by using the 
same formula that was used to compute primary 
current for an isolation type of transformer.
 EP 
__ 
ES
     IS 
__ 
IP
  
120 IP  160
 120 
____ 
40    4 
__ 
Ip
 
IP  1.333 amps
The amount of power input and output for the auto-
transformer must also be the same.
 Figure 20–4
Determining voltage 
and current values. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Primary
120  1.333  160 volt-amps
Secondary
40  4  160 volt-amps
Now assume that the rotary switch is connected to 
point A. The load is now connected to 160 turns 
of wire. The voltage applied to the load can be 
 computed by:
 EP 
__ 
ES
     NP 
___ 
NS
  
 120 
____ 
ES
     120 
____ 
60  
120 ES  19,200
ES  160 volts
The amount of secondary current can be computed 
using the formula:
I   E 
__ 
Z  
I   160 
____ 
10
  
I  16 amps

UNIT 20  Autotransformers   225
The primary current can be computed using the 
formula:
 EP 
__ 
ES
     IS 
__ 
IP
  
 120 
____ 
160    16 
___ 
IP
  
120 IP  2,560
IP  21.333 amps
The answers can be checked by determining if 
the power in and power out are the same.
Primary
120  21.333  2,560 volt-amps
Secondary
160  16  2,560 volt-amps
CURRENT RELATIONSHIPS
An autotransformer with a 2:1 turns ratio is shown 
in Figure 20–5. It is assumed that a voltage of 
480 volts is connected across the entire winding. 
Because the transformer has a turns ratio of 2:1, 
a voltage of 240 volts will be supplied to the load. 
Ammeters connected in series with each winding 
indicate the current fl ow in the circuit. It is assumed 
that the load produces a current fl ow of 4 amperes 
on the secondary. Note that a current fl ow of 
2 amperes is supplied to the primary.
IPRIMARY    ISECONDARY 
________ 
Ratio  
Ip    4 
__ 
2  
Ip  2 amperes
If the rotary switch shown in Figure 20–4 were to 
be removed and replaced with a sliding tap that 
made contact directly to the transformer winding, 
the turns ratio could be adjusted continuously. 
This type of transformer is commonly referred to 
as a Variac or Powerstat depending on the man-
ufacturer. The windings are wrapped around a 
tape-wound toroid core inside a plastic case. The 
tops of the windings have been milled fl at, similar 
to a commutator. A carbon brush makes con-
tact with the windings. When the brush is moved 
across the windings, the turns ratio changes, which 
changes the output voltage. This type of autotrans-
former provides a very effi cient means of controlling 
AC voltage.
Autotransformers are often used by power com-
panies to provide a small increase or decrease to the 
line voltage. They help provide voltage regulation to 
large power lines.
SECONDARY
WINDING
240  VAC
480  VAC
PRIMARY
WINDING
2  AMPS
2  AMPS
4  AMPS
 Figure 20–5
Current divides between primary and 
secondary. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

226   SECTION 4  Transformers
SUMMARY
 The autotransformer has only one winding that is used as both the primary and  secondary.
 Autotransformers have effi ciencies that range from about 95% to 98%.
 Values of voltage, current, and turns can be computed in the same manner as an isolation 
transformer.
 Autotransformers can be step-up or step-down transformers.
 Autotransformers can be made to provide a variable output voltage by connecting a 
sliding tap to the windings.
 Autotransformers have the disadvantage of no line isolation between primary and  secondary.
 One of the simplest ways of computing values of voltage for an autotransformer when the 
turns are known is to use the volts-per-turn method.
KEY TERMS
The autotransformer does have one disadvan-
tage. Because the load is connected to one side of 
the power line, there is no line isolation between 
the incoming power and the load. This can cause 
 problems with certain types of equipment and must 
be a consideration when designing a power system.
line isolation
multiple taps
primary winding
secondary winding
self-transformer
step-down
step-up
volts-per-turn
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. An AC power source is connected across 325 turns of an autotransformer and the 
load is connected across 260 turns. What is the turns ratio of this transformer?
 
2. Is the transformer in question 1 a step-up or a step-down transformer?
 
3. An autotransformer has a turns ratio of 3.2:1. A voltage of 208 volts is connected 
across the primary. What is the voltage of the secondary?
 
4. A load impedance of 52 Ω is connected to the secondary winding of the transformer 
in question 3. How much current will fl ow in the secondary?
 
5. How much current will fl ow in the primary of the transformer in question 4?
 
6. The autotransformer shown in Figure 20–3 has the following number of turns 
between windings: A–B (120 turns), B–C (180 turns), C–D (250 turns), and D–E 
(300 turns). A voltage of 240 volts is connected across B and E. Find the voltages 
between each of the following pairs of points:
 
A–B ________ 
A–C ________ 
A–D ________ 
A–E ________
 
B–C ________ 
B–D ________ 
B–E ________ 
C–D ________
 
C–E ________ 
D–E ________

227
Current transformers differ from voltage transform-
ers in that the primary winding is generally part of 
the power line. The primary winding of a current 
transformer must be connected in series with the 
load, Figure 21–1. Current transformers are used 
to change the full scale range of AC ammeters. 
Most in-line ammeters (ammeters that must be 
connected directly into the line) that have multiple 
range values used a current transformer to provide 
the different ranges, Figure 21–2. The full scale value 
of the ammeter is changed by changing the turns 
ratio. Assume that the ammeter illustrated in Fig-
ure 21–2 is to provide range values of 5 amperes, 
2.5 amperes, 1 ampere, and 0.5 ampere. Also 
assume that the meter movement requires a current 
fl ow of 100 mA (0.100) to defl ect the meter full scale 
and that the primary of the current transformer 
contains 5 turns of wire. Transformer formulas can 
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Discuss the operation of a current 
transformer
 Describe how current transformers 
differ from voltage transformers
 Discuss safety precautions that should 
be observed when using current 
transformers
 Connect a current transformer in 
a circuit
Current 
 Transformers
UNIT 21

228   SECTION 4  Transformers
LOAD
CURRENT  TRANSFORMER
LOAD
ALTERNATOR
AC  AMMETER
CURRENT  TRANSFORMER
be used to determine the number of secondary turns 
needed to produce the desired ranges. Turns needed 
for a full scale range of 5 amperes.
 NP 
___ 
NS
     IS 
__ 
IP
  
 5 
___ 
NS
     0.1 
____ 
5  
0.1NS  25
NS  250 turns
Turns needed for a full scale range of 2.5 amperes.
 5 
___ 
NS
     0.1 
____ 
2.5  
0.1NS  12.5
NS  125 turns
Turns needed for a full scale range of 1 ampere.
 5 
___ 
NS
     0.1 
____ 
1  
0.1NS  5
NS  50 turns
Turns needed for a full scale range of 
0.5 ampere.
 5 
___ 
NS
     0.1 
____ 
0.5  
0.1NS  2.5
NS  25 turns
When a large amount of AC current must be 
measured, a different type of current transformer 
is connected in the power line. These transform-
ers have ratios that start at 100:5 and can have 
ratios of several thousand to fi ve. These current 
transformers, generally referred to in industry 
as CTs, have a standard secondary current rating 
of 5 amps AC. They are designed to be operated 
with a 5 amp AC ammeter connected directly to 
their secondary winding, which produces a short 
circuit. CTs are designed to operate with the sec-
ondary winding shorted. The secondary winding 
of a CT should never be opened when there is 
power applied to the primary. This will cause the 
transformer to produce a step-up in voltage which 
could be high enough to kill anyone who comes in 
contact with it.
 Figure 21–1
The primary winding of a current 
transformer is connected in series 
with a load. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
 Figure 21–2
A current transformer is used 
to change the range of an 
AC ammeter. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)

UNIT 21  Current  Transformers   229
 Figure 21–3
Current transformer used to 
change the scale factor of an 
AC ammeter. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
 Figure 21–4
The primary conductor loops through 
the CT to produce a second turn, 
changing the turns ratio. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
LOAD
ALTERNATOR
CURRENT
TRANSFORMER
POWER  LINE  
ACTS  AS  A  
PRIMARY  WINDING  
OF  ONE  TURN
5  AMPS  AC
LOAD
ALTERNATOR
5  AMPS  AC
A current transformer of this type is basically 
a toroid transformer. A toroid transformer is con-
structed with a hollow core similar to a donut in that 
it has a hole in the middle. When current transform-
ers are used, the main power line is inserted through 
the opening in the transformer, Figure 21–3. The 
power line acts as the primary of the transformer 
and is considered to be one turn.
The turns ratio of the transformer can be changed 
by looping the power wire through the opening in 
the transformer to produce a primary winding of 
more than one turn. For example, assume a  current 
transformer has a ratio of 600:5. If the primary 
power wire is inserted through the opening, it will 
require a current of 600 amps to defl ect the meter 
full scale. If the primary power conductor is looped 
around and inserted through the window a sec-
ond time, the primary now contains two turns of 
wire instead of one, Figure 21–4. It now requires 
300 amps of current fl ow in the primary to defl ect 
the meter full scale. If the primary conductor is 
looped through the opening a third time, it would 
require only 200 amps of current fl ow to defl ect the 
meter full scale.

230   SECTION 4  Transformers
CLAMP-ON AMMETERS
Many service technicians use the clamp-on type 
of AC ammeter. To use this type of meter, the jaw 
of the meter is clamped around one of the conduc-
tors supplying power to the load, Figure 21–5. The 
meter is clamped around only one of the lines. If 
the meter is clamped around more than one line, the 
magnetic fi elds of the wires cancel each other and 
the meter indicates zero.
This type of meter uses a current transformer to 
operate the meter. The jaw of the meter is part of the 
core material of the transformer. When the meter 
is connected around the current carrying wire, the 
changing magnetic fi eld produced by the AC cur-
rent induces a voltage into the current transformer. 
The strength of the magnetic fi eld and its frequency 
determines the amount of voltage induced in the 
current transformer. Because 60 Hz is a standard 
frequency throughout the United States and Can-
ada, the amount of induced voltage is proportional 
to the strength of the magnetic fi eld.
The clamp-on type ammeter can have dif-
ferent range settings by changing the turns ratio of 
the secondary of the transformer just as the in-line 
ammeter does. The primary of the transformer is the 
conductor the movable jaw is connected around. If 
the ammeter is connected around one wire, the pri-
mary has one turn of wire as compared to the turns 
of the secondary. The turn’s ratio can be changed in 
ALTERNATOR
MOTOR
 Figure 21–5
The clamp-on ammeter connects around one conductor. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 21–6
Looping the conductor around 
the jaw of the ammeter changes 
the ratio. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
the same manner as changing the ratio of the CT. If 
two turns of wire are wrapped around the jaw of the 
ammeter, Figure 21–6, the primary winding now 
contains two turns instead of one, and the turns 
ratio of the transformer is changed. The ammeter 
will now indicate double the amount of current in 
the circuit. The reading on the scale of the meter 
would have to be divided by two to get the correct 
reading. The ability to change the turns ratio of a 
clamp-on ammeter can be very useful for measuring 
low currents.

UNIT 21  Current  Transformers   231
5 amperes
clamp-on ammeter
CTs
current transformers
in-line ammeters
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. Explain the difference in connection between the primary winding of a voltage trans-
former and the primary winding of a current transformer.
 
2. What is the standard current rating for the secondary winding of a CT?
 
3. Why should the secondary winding of a CT never be disconnected from its load when 
there is current fl ow in the primary?
 
4. A current transformer has a ratio of 600:5. If three loops of wire are wound through 
the transformer core, how much primary current is required to produce 5 amperes of 
current in the secondary winding?
 
5. Assume that a primary current of 75 amperes fl ows through the windings of the 
transformer in question 4. How much current will fl ow in the secondary winding?
 
6. What type of core is generally used in the construction of a CT?
 
7. A current transformer has 4 turns of wire in its primary winding. How many turns of 
wire are needed in the secondary winding to produce a current of 2 amperes when a 
current of 60 amperes fl ows in the primary winding?
SUMMARY
 Current transformers have their primary winding connected in series with a load.
 Current transformers are often used to provide multiple scale values for in-line AC ammeters.
 Current transformers are often referred to as CTs.
 CTs are used to measure large amounts of AC current.
 CTs have a standard secondary current value of 5 amperes.
 CTs are designed to be operated with their secondary winding shorted.
 The short circuit connected across the secondary of the CT should never be removed when 
power is connected to the circuit because the secondary voltage can become very high.
 Many clamp-on AC ammeters operate on the principle of a current transformer.
 The movable jaw of the clamp-on ammeter is the core of the transformer.
 The secondary current value of a current transformer can be changed by changing the 
turns of wire of the primary.
KEY TERMS

232   SECTION 4  Transformers
 
8. A 1500:5 CT develops a voltage of 3 volts across the primary winding. If the secondary 
should be disconnected from its load, how much voltage would be developed across the 
secondary terminals?
 
9. A CT has a current fl ow of 80 amperes in its primary winding and a current of 
2 amperes in its secondary winding. What is the ratio of the CT?
 10. What is the most common use for a CT?

SECTION 5
Control 
Components

Overload relays are designed to protect the motor 
circuit from damage due to overloads. Most over-
load relays are operated by heat. Since the overload 
unit must be sensitive to motor current, the heater 
of the overload relay is connected in series with the 
motor. In this manner, the amount of current that 
fl ows through the motor winding also fl ows through 
the overload heater. There are two basic types of 
overload units used in the air conditioning fi eld, the 
solder-melting type and the bimetal type.
SOLDER-MELTING TYPE 
OVERLOAD RELAY
The solder-melting type of overload unit is used to a 
large extent on commercial and industrial air con-
ditioning units. This type of overload unit contains 
234
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Explain why motors should be 
protected from an overload condition
 List the different types of overload 
protectors
 Describe the operation of a solder-
melting and bimetal type overload
 Connect an overload relay into a 
motor circuit
 Perform an ohmmeter test on an 
overload relay
UNIT 22
Overloads

UNIT 22  Overloads   235
The ratchet wheel is used to mechanically hold 
a set of spring-loaded contacts closed as shown in 
 Figure 22–4. When the solder melts, the ratchet 
wheel is free to turn and the spring causes the 
contacts to open. The normally closed contacts are 
connected in series with the coil of the motor starter 
used to control the motor the overload relay is pro-
tecting, Figure 22–5. When the overload contacts 
open, the motor starter coil deenergizes and discon-
nects the motor from the line.
Notice that this overload relay has two separate 
sections, the heater section that is connected in 
series with the motor, and the contact section, 
a ratchet wheel that is held stationary by solder. 
Figure 22–1 illustrates the principle of operation. 
A serrated wheel is attached to a shaft. The shaft is 
inserted in a hollow tube. The shaft would be free 
to rotate inside the tube except for the solder that 
bonds the two units together.
An electric heating element is wound around 
the tube as shown in Figure 22–2. The heating 
element is connected in series with the motor, 
Figure 22–3. The current that fl ows through the 
motor windings also fl ows through the heating ele-
ment. The heating element is calibrated to produce 
a certain amount of heat when a predetermined 
amount of current fl ows through it. As long as the 
current fl owing through it does not exceed a certain 
amount, there is not enough heat produced to melt 
the solder. If the motor should become overloaded, 
an excessive amount of current will fl ow through 
the heater and the solder will melt. When the solder 
melts, the shaft is free to turn.
 Figure 22–1
Shaft is held stationary by solder. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
SOLDER
SHAFT
RACHET  WHEEL
TUBE
 Figure 22–2
An electric heating element is wound around the tube.
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
HEATING
ELEMENT
 Figure 22–3
The overload heater is 
connected in series with the 
motor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
OL
HEATER
L1
N
MOTOR
 Figure 22–4
The ratchet wheel holds the contacts closed. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
RACHET
WHEEL
OVERLOAD
CONTACTS
SPRING

236   SECTION 5  Control Components
which is connected in series with the coil of the 
motor starter. Notice also that the overload contacts 
are not used to disconnect the motor from the line. 
They are used to disconnect the motor starter coil 
from the line. This type of overload relay has a set of 
small auxiliary contacts that are intended to inter-
rupt the current fl ow in the control circuit only. 
After the overload has tripped, it must be allowed to 
cool down enough for the solder to re-harden before 
it can be reset. This is generally true of any type of 
thermal overload. Figure 22–6 shows a photograph 
of this type of overload.
BIMETAL TYPE OF OVERLOAD
The bimetal type of overload operates very similarly 
to the solder-melting type except a bimetal strip 
is used to cause the contacts to open, Figure 22–7. 
In this unit, the bimetal strip is used to  mechanically 
 Figure 22–5
When the overload  contact opens, 
the motor is  disconnected from the 
line. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 22–6
Solder-melting type of overload relay. (Source: 
Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Heater
Serrated Wheel
Contacts
BIMETAL  STRIP
OVERLOAD
CONTACTS
OVERLOAD
HEATER
SPRING
 Figure 22–7
Bimetal type of overload. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 22  Overloads   237
hold the spring-loaded contacts closed. If the cur-
rent fl ow through the heater becomes excessive, 
the bimetal strip will warp and permit the spring 
to open the contacts. After the overload unit has 
tripped, the bimetal strip must be allowed some time 
to cool before it can be reset. This type of unit has 
an advantage over the solder-melting type in that it 
can be adjusted for manual reset or automatic reset, 
Figure 22–8. The solder-melting type of overload 
unit must be manually reset.
PROTECTING THREE-PHASE 
MOTORS
Each phase of a three-phase motor should be pro-
tected by an overload relay. There are two methods 
employed to provide this protection. One method 
is to connect a single overload relay like those 
shown in Figures 22–6 and 22–8 into each phase; 
see Figure 22–9. When this is done, the three sets 
of overload contacts are connected in series with 
each other, as shown in Figure 22–10. Because the 
overload contacts are connected in series, if any one 
set of contacts should open, the starter coil will be 
disconnected, causing the load contacts to open and 
disconnect the motor from the line.
The second method used to protect three-phase 
motors is with a three-phase overload relay. This 
overload relay contains three separate heaters but 
only one set of overload contacts, Figure 22–11. If 
any one of the heaters should trip, it will open the 
set of contacts and disconnect the starter coil from 
the line, Figure 22–12.
Contacts
Push Rod
Bimetal Strip
Heater
Adjustment Knob
 Figure 22–8
Bimetal-type overload relay. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 22–9
Three single overload relays are used to protect a 
three-phase motor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
PROTECTING SINGLE-PHASE 
MOTORS
Single-phase motors are generally protected with a 
small automatic reset overload, Figure 22–13. 
These units are constructed in one of two ways. One 
unit has a small heater connected in series with 
the motor current, Figure 22–14. In this unit the 
bimetal strip is constructed of a spring metal that 
provides a snap action when it warps. Notice that the 

238   SECTION 5  Control Components
contacts are connected directly to the bimetal strip. 
This means that the motor current not only fl ows 
through the heating element, but also through the 
bimetal strip. If the motor current becomes exces-
sive, the heater causes the bimetal strip to snap the 
C
C
OL
OL
OL
C
OL
C
OL
OL
COMPRESSOR
L1
L2
L3
CONTROL TRANSFORMER
THERMOSTAT
LOW PRESSURE
CUT OFF
 Figure 22–10
When three single overload relays are employed to protect a three-phase motor, all normally closed overload contacts 
are connected in series. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 22–11
Three-phase overload relay. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
contacts open and disconnect the motor from the 
line. Notice that the contacts of this unit are used to 
interrupt the motor current. When the bimetal strip 
has cooled enough, it snaps back to its original posi-
tion and recloses the contacts.
The second type of small overload unit does not 
contain a heating element, Figure 22–15. In this 
type of unit, the bimetal strip is used as the heating 
element. As current fl ows through the bimetal strip, 
it begins to heat. If motor current does not become 
excessive, the bimetal strip does not become heated 
enough to cause the contacts to open. If the current 
does become excessive, however, the contacts snap 
open and disconnect the motor from the line.
These overload units can be tested with an ohm-
meter for a complete circuit. If the ohmmeter indi-
cates no continuity through them when they are 
cool, they are defective and must be replaced. Care 
must be taken to replace these units with the  correct 
size. Overload units are designed to open their 
contacts when the motor current reaches 115% 
to 125% of full-load current. The exact rating is 

UNIT 22  Overloads   239
 determined by the national electrical code. If an 
overload unit of too small a rating is installed, it will 
trip when there is no overload on the motor. If an 
overload unit of too high a value is used, the motor 
may be destroyed before the overload contacts open 
and disconnect the motor.
C
C
OL
OL
C
OL
C
OL
COMPRESSOR
L1
L2
L3
CONTROL TRANSFORMER
THERMOSTAT
LOW PRESSURE
CUT OFF
 Figure 22–12
A three-phase overload relay contains three heaters and one set of contacts. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 22–13
Bimetal overload often used on fractional horsepower 
single-phase motors. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 22–14
Small overload unit with heater. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
BIMETAL  STRIP
HEATER
MOTOR
L1
L2
 Figure 22–15
Small overload unit without heater. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
MOTOR
L1
L2

240   SECTION 5  Control Components
Notice that all of the overload units discussed are 
operated by sensing heat. For this reason, a heavy 
motor overload will cause more heat production 
and the unit will trip faster than it will under a 
light overload. Another factor that can affect these 
units is ambient air temperature. Overload 
relays will trip faster in hot weather than they will 
in cool weather. In certain parts of the country, it 
is often necessary to replace the heater elements of 
industrial-type overload units to match the season. 
In winter it may be desirable to use a slightly smaller 
heater element than normal, and in summer it may 
be necessary to use a slightly larger heater.
PROTECTING LARGE MOTORS
Large horsepower motors often have current 
draws that are much greater than the rating of any 
standard overload heating element. When this is 
the case, current transformers are used to  supply 
 current to the overload heaters, Figure 22–16. 
Assume that the motor operating a large compres-
sor has a nameplate current of 234 amperes. Now 
assume that three current transformers with a ratio 
of 300:5 are to be used to reduce the current to the 
overload heaters. The current rating of the overload 
heater can be calculated using the ratio of the cur-
rent transformer.
 300 
____ 
5     234 
____ 
X  
300 X  1170
X  3.9 amps
If the overload heaters are sized for a motor with a 
running current of 3.9 amperes the motor will be 
protected. Two NEMA size 5 starters are shown in 
Figure 22–17. These starters contain current trans-
formers used to reduce the current to the overload 
heaters.
MOTOR
OVERLOAD
RELAY
CURRENT
TRANSFORMERS
LOAD  CONTACTS
 Figure 22–16
Current  transformers reduce the motor current. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 22  Overloads   241
 Figure 22–17
NEMA size 5 
 starters with current 
 transformers. (Source: 
Delmar/Cengage Learning)
SUMMARY
 Overload relays are designed to protect the motor against an overload condition.
 Most overload relays sense motor current by connecting an electric heater in series with 
the motor.
 Two basic types of overload relays are:
A. Solder-melting type.
B. Bimetal strip type.
 Solder-melting type overload relays permit the electric heater to melt solder at a predeter-
mined temperature and open a set of contacts.
 The bimetal strip type of overload relays open a set of contacts when the electric heating 
element causes a bimetal strip to warp a certain amount.
 Overload relays contain two separate sections, the heater section and the contact section.
 The contacts of an overload relay are connected in series with a motor starter coil.
 Because overload relays operate by sensing heat, they are affected by ambient temperature.

242   SECTION 5  Control Components
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What are the two basic types of industrial overload units?
 
2. What is the advantage of the bimetal type of industrial overload unit?
 
3. Industrial overload units are divided into two sections. What are they?
 
4. At what percentage of full-load motor current are overload units generally set to 
trip?
 
5. When using an industrial type of overload unit, what are the contacts connected in 
series with?
 
6. What is the difference between the two types of small overload units?
 
7. In the small overload unit that does not contain a heater, what is used to sense the 
current fl ow through the motor?
ambient air 
    temperature
automatic reset 
    overload
bimetal strip
bimetal type
contact section
heater section
heating element
overloads
solder-melting type
KEY TERMS

243
The relay is a magnetically operated switch. This 
switch, however, can have multiple sets of contacts, 
and the contacts can be open or closed. The advan-
tage of the relay is control. A single pilot device can 
be used to control the input or coil of the relay, and 
the output or contacts can control several different 
devices. An example of this is shown in the circuit 
of Figure 23–1. A fl ow switch is used to control 
the coil of a magnetic relay. When the fl ow switch 
closes, the coil of relay FSCR (fl ow switch con-
trol relay) is connected to the line. When current 
fl ows through the coil, the relay is energized, and 
all FSCR contacts change position. Notice that one 
FSCR contact is connected in series with the com-
pressor motor. This contact does not actually start 
the motor, but it permits the thermostat to control 
the motor. This particular type of control is known 
as interlocking. Interlocking is used to prevent 
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Describe the construction of a relay
 Discuss the principle of operation of 
relays and contactors
 Discuss different types of relays and 
contactors
 Describe the difference between a 
contactor and a motor starter
Relays, 
 Contactors, 
and Motor 
Starters
UNIT 23

244   SECTION 5  Control Components
illustrated in Figure 23–2. A coil of wire is wound 
around an iron core. When current fl ows through 
the coil, a magnetic fi eld is developed in the iron 
core. The magnetic fi eld of the iron core attracts 
the movable arm, known as the armature, and 
overcomes the strength of the spring holding the 
arm away from the iron core. Notice that a movable 
contact is connected to the armature. In its present 
position, the movable contact makes connection 
with a stationary contact. This contact set is nor-
mally closed. When the armature is attracted to the 
iron core, the movable contact breaks connection 
with one stationary contact and makes connec-
tion with another. This relay has both a normally 
open and normally closed set of contacts. Notice 
that the movable contact is common to both of the 
some function from happening until some other 
function has occurred. In this case, the thermostat 
cannot start the compressor until there is airfl ow in 
the system.
The second FSCR contact is normally open. 
When the FSCR coil energizes, this contact closes 
and turns on a green pilot light to indicate there 
is airfl ow in the system. The third FSCR contact is 
normally closed. It is used to turn off a red pilot light, 
which indicates there is no airfl ow in the system.
PRINCIPLE OF OPERATION
The relay operates on the solenoid principle. A 
solenoid is an electrical device that converts elec-
trical energy to linear motion. This principle is 
 Figure 23–1
One relay controls several de-
vices. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 23–2
Simple relay. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
CORE
SPRING
ARMATURE
COIL
SHADING  COIL
STATIONARY
CONTACTS
MOVABLE
CONTACT

UNIT 23  Relays,  Contactors, and Motor Starters   245
a continuous magnetic fl ow to the armature when 
the voltage of the AC waveform is zero. DC-operated 
relays do not contain a shading coil since the mag-
netic fl ux is constant.
Another type of relay is shown in Figure 23–4. 
This relay uses a plunger-type of solenoid. Notice 
that the coil is surrounded by the iron core. There is 
an opening in the iron core through which the shaft 
of the armature can pass. When the coil is ener-
gized, the armature is attracted to both ends of the 
core. This creates a stronger magnetic fi eld than the 
relay discussed in Figure 23–2. Notice the shading 
coils around both ends of the core. Notice also that 
the core and armature are constructed of laminated 
sheets. The core and armature are laminated to help 
prevent the induction of eddy currents into the 
core. Eddy currents are currents induced in the core 
material by the magnetic fi eld of the coil. Eddy cur-
rents are generally unwanted because they heat the 
core and cause a power loss.
The plunger-type of solenoid is generally used 
with relays that use double-break contacts. A 
 double-break contact is one that breaks con-
nection at two points as shown in Figure 23–5. 
Notice there are two stationary contacts and one 
movable contact. The movable contact is used to 
bridge the gap between the two stationary contacts. 
This type of contact arrangement is preferred for 
relays that must control high voltage and current. 
stationary contacts. The movable contact would be 
the common and the stationary contacts would be 
labeled normally open and normally closed. A sche-
matic of this type of relay is shown in Figure 23–3. 
This illustration shows a relay with only one set of 
contacts. In practice, it is common to fi nd this type 
of relay with several sets of contacts.
Notice in Figure 23–2 that a shading coil has 
been added to the iron core. The shading coil is used 
with AC relays to prevent contact chatter and hum. 
The shading coil operates in the same way it does 
in the shaded-pole motor. It opposes a change of 
magnetic fl ux. The shading coil is used to provide 
 Figure 23–3
Schematic of a simple 
relay. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 Figure 23–4
Plunger type of  solenoid. (Source: 
Delmar/Cengage Learning)
ARMATURE
COIL
MOVABLE
CONTACTS
SHADING  
COIL
LAMINATED
CORE

246   SECTION 5  Control Components
A contactor is very similar to a relay except that 
a contactor contains large-load contacts designed to 
control large amounts of current. In the heating 
and airconditioning fi eld, contactors are often used 
to connect power to resistance heater banks. A 
photograph of a contactor is shown in Figure 23–6. 
Contactors may contain auxiliary contacts as well 
as load contacts.
Motor starters are basically contactors with 
the addition of overload relays. Motor starters gen-
erally contain auxiliary contacts as well as load 
contacts. The auxiliary contacts are used as part of 
the control circuit, and the load contacts are used 
to connect the motor to the line. A photograph of a 
motor starter is shown in Figure 23–7.
Notice that the surface of the contact is curved. 
This curved surface provides a wiping action when 
the contacts make connection. The wiping action 
helps to keep contact surfaces clean. Contact sur-
faces should never be fi led fl at. This would permit oil 
and dirt to collect on the surface of the contact and 
cause poor connection.
CONTACTORS AND MOTOR 
STARTERS
The term relay is often used to describe any type of 
magnetically operated switch. A relay is actually a 
control device that contains small auxiliary contacts 
designed to operate only low-current loads.
STATIONARY  CONTACTS
MOVABLE  CONTACT
 Figure 23–5
A set of double-beak contacts. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 23–7
Motor starter with overload relays. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
 Figure 23–6
Contactor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 23  Relays,  Contactors, and Motor Starters   247
SUMMARY
 A relay is a magnetically operated switch.
 A relay is a single-input multi-output device.
 Relays can have contacts that are normally open or normally closed.
 On a schematic diagram, the contacts of a relay are always shown in the deenergized 
condition.
 Interlocking is used to prevent some function from happening until some other function 
has occurred.
 Most relays are basically electric solenoids with a set of contacts attached.
 A solenoid is a device that converts electrical energy into linear motion.
 AC relays used shading coils on the iron core to prevent contact chatter.
 Contact surfaces are generally curved to provide a wiping action.
 A relay is actually a control device that has only small auxiliary contacts that are used as 
part of the control circuit or to operate low current devices.
 Contactors contain large load contacts intended to connect the load to the line.
 Motor starters are contactors with the addition of overload relays.
KEY TERMS
armature
contactor
double-break contact
eddy currents
FSCR (fl ow switch 
     control relay)
interlocking
motor starters
plunger-type
relay
solenoid
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What is a solenoid?
 
2. What type of relays contains a shading coil?
 
3. What purpose does the shading coil serve?
 
4. What is the movable part of a relay called?
 
5. Why is the core material of a relay laminated?
 
6. What are eddy currents?
 
7. What effect do eddy currents have on a relay?
 
8. Why are contact surfaces curved?
 
9. What is the difference between a relay and a contactor?
 10. What is the difference between a contactor and a motor starter?

248
The solid-state relay is a device that has 
become increasingly popular for switching applica-
tions. The solid-state relay has no moving parts, 
it is resistant to shock and vibration, and is sealed 
against dirt and moisture. The greatest advantage 
of the solid-state relay, however, is the fact that 
the control input voltage is isolated from the line 
device the relay is intended to control. Refer to 
Figure 24–1.
Solid-state relays can be used to control either a 
DC load or an AC load. If the relay is designed to con-
trol a DC load, a power transistor is used to con-
nect the load to the line as shown in Figure 24–2. 
The relay shown in Figure 24–2 has a light-
emitting diode (LED) connected to the input or 
control voltage. When the input voltage turns the 
LED on, a photo detector connected to the base of 
the transistor turns the transistor on and connects 
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Describe the construction of a solid-
state relay
 Discuss the principle of opto-isolation
 Describe the internal devices used for 
a relay intended to control a DC and 
an AC load
 Describe zero switching
 Connect a solid-state relay in a circuit
The Solid-
State Relay
UNIT 24

UNIT 24  The Solid-State Relay   249
this example, an LED is used as the control device 
just as it was in the previous example. When the 
photo detector “sees” the LED, it triggers the gate of 
the triac and connects the load to the line.
Although opto-isolation is probably the most 
common method used for the control of a solid-state 
relay, it is not the only method used. Some relays 
use a small reed relay to control the output. Refer 
to Figure 24–4. A small set of reed contacts are con-
nected to the gate of the triac. The control circuit 
is connected to the coil of the reed relay. When the 
control voltage causes a current to fl ow through the 
the load to the line. This optical coupling is a very 
common method used with solid-state relays. The 
relays that use this method of coupling are referred 
to as being opto-isolated, which means the load 
side of the relay is optically isolated from the control 
side of the relay. Because a light beam is used as the 
control medium, no voltage spikes or electrical noise 
produced on the load side of the relay can be trans-
mitted to the control side of the relay.
Solid-state relays intended for use as AC control-
lers have a triac connected to the load circuit in 
place of a power transistor. Refer to Figure 24–3. In 
INPUT
120  VOLTS  AC
LOAD
 Figure 24–1
Solid-state relay. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 Figure 24–2
Power transistor used to 
control DC load. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
INPUT
VOLTS  DC
LOAD
 Figure 24–3
Triac used to control an AC load. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
INPUT
120  VOLTS  AC
LOAD
INPUT
120  VOLTS  AC
LOAD
 Figure 24–4
Reed relay controls the output. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

250   SECTION 5  Control Components
coil, a magnetic fi eld is produced around the coil of 
the relay. This magnetic fi eld closes the reed con-
tacts, which causes the triac to turn on. In this type 
of solid-state relay, a magnetic fi eld is used to isolate 
the control circuit from the load circuit instead of a 
light beam.
The control voltage for most solid-state relays 
ranges from about 3 to 32 volts and can be DC 
or AC. If a triac is used as the control device, load 
voltage ratings of 120 to 240 VAC are common 
and current ratings can range from 5 to 25 amps. 
Many solid-state relays have a feature known as 
zero switching. Zero switching means that if 
the relay is told to turn off when the AC voltage is 
in the middle of a cycle, it will continue to conduct 
until the AC voltage drops to a zero level and then 
turn off. For example, assume the AC voltage is at 
its positive peak value when the gate tells the triac 
to turn off. The triac will continue to conduct until 
the AC voltage drops to a zero level before actually 
turning off. Zero switching can be a great advantage 
when used with some inductive loads such as trans-
formers. The core material of a transformer can be 
left saturated on one end of the fl ux swing if power 
is removed from the primary winding when the AC 
voltage is at its positive or negative peak. This can 
cause inrush currents of up to 600% of the normal 
operating current when power is restored to the 
primary.
Solid-state relays are available in different case 
styles and power ratings. Figure 24–5 shows a 
typical solid-state relay. Some solid-state relays are 
designed to be used as time-delay relays. One of the 
most common uses for the solid-state relay is the I/O 
(eye-oh) track of a programmable controller, which 
is to be covered in a later unit.
 Figure 24–5
Solid-state relays. (Courtesy of International Rectiﬁ er).
SUMMARY
 Solid-state relays have no moving parts.
 Solid-state relays are sealed against dirt and moisture and are resistant to mechanical 
shock and vibration.
 The control side of a solid-state relay is totally isolated from the load side.
 Solid-state relays used to control AC loads use a triac connected in series with the load.
 Solid-state relays used to control DC loads use a power transistor connected in series with 
the load.
 Many solid-state relays use a light-emitting diode (LED) as the control device.
 Opto-isolation is used to separate the load side of the circuit from the control side. This 
prevents any electrical noise from being transferred from the load side to the control side 
of the circuit.
 Solid-state relays are generally used in the I/O track of programmable controllers.

UNIT 24  The Solid-State Relay   251
KEY TERMS
light-emitting 
    diode (LED)
opto-isolated
power transistor
reed relay
solid-state relay
triac
zero switching
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What electronic component is used to control the output of a solid-state relay used to 
control a DC voltage?
 
2. What electronic component is used to control the output of a solid-state relay used to 
control an AC voltage?
 
3. Explain opto-isolation.
 
4. Explain magnetic isolation.
 
5. What is meant by zero switching?

252
The transformer is a device that has the ability to 
change the value of AC voltage and current without 
a change of frequency. Most of the transformers 
used in the air conditioning and refrigeration fi eld 
are known as isolation transformers. This 
means that the primary and secondary windings 
are magnetically coupled but electrically isolated 
from each other. Figure 25–1 illustrates the basic 
principle of operation of a transformer. This trans-
former contains two separate windings, the primary 
and the secondary. The primary is the winding that 
is connected to the power source and brings power 
to the transformer. The secondary winding is used 
to supply power to the load. Notice that there is no 
electrical connection between the two windings. If 
one lead of an ohmmeter is connected to one of the 
primary leads and the other ohmmeter lead is con-
nected to one of the secondary leads, the  ohmmeter 
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Discuss the principle of operation 
of a transformer
 Deﬁ ne mutual induction
 Discuss the voltage and current 
relationships in a transformer
 Find values of voltage, current, 
and turns of wire using transformer 
formulas and Ohm’s law
 Connect an industrial control 
transformer for operation on low and 
high voltage
 Perform an ohmmeter test on a control 
transformer
The Control 
Transformer
UNIT 25

UNIT 25  The Control Transformer   253
SECONDARY
LAMINATED  CORE
TO  LOAD
PRIMARY
should indicate no continuity between the two 
windings.
PRINCIPLE OF OPERATION
The transformer operates by magnetic induction. 
When current fl ows through the primary winding, 
a magnetic fi eld is created in the winding. Because 
the secondary winding is wound on the same core 
as the primary, the magnetic fi eld of the primary 
induces a voltage into the secondary. This action 
is known as mutual induction. The amount of 
voltage induced into the secondary is determined 
by the ratio of the number of turns of wire in the 
primary as compared with the number of turns of 
wire in the secondary. For example, assume that the 
 primary winding shown in Figure 25–1 contains 
120 turns of wire and is connected to 120 volts AC. 
This means that each turn of the primary has a volt-
age drop of 1 volt. If the secondary winding also has 
120 turns of wire, and 1 volt is induced into each 
turn, then the output voltage of the secondary is 
120 volts also. This transformer has a turns ratio of 
1:1, which is to say that the primary contains 1 turn 
of wire for each turn of wire in the secondary.
Now assume that the number of turns of wire in 
the secondary has been changed to 60. If the number 
of turns in the primary has not been changed, there 
 Figure 25–1
A basic transformer. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 25–2
Schematic for transformer. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
is still 1 volt for each turn of wire. This will produce a 
secondary voltage of 60 volts (60  1  60).
If the number of turns of wire on the secondary 
is changed to 240, the output voltage of the sec-
ondary will be 240 volts (240  1  240). Notice 
that the transformer has the ability to increase or 
decrease the amount of the secondary voltage. If 
the voltage of the secondary is less than the primary 
voltage, the transformer is known as a step-down 
transformer. If the secondary voltage is greater 
than the primary voltage, it is known as a step-up 
transformer.
VOLTAGE AND CURRENT 
RELATIONSHIPS
It would fi rst appear that the transformer has the 
ability to give more than it receives. This is not the 
case, however. Transformers are extremely effi cient 
devices; they generally operate at 95% to 98% effi -
ciency. For this reason, when working with trans-
formers it is generally assumed that the power out 
of the transformer is equal to the power being put 
into the transformer.
Figure 25–2 shows the schematic symbol for a 
transformer. The primary has been connected to 
120 volts. The secondary has a voltage of 480 volts 
and is connected to a load resistor of 960 ohms. 

254   SECTION 5  Control Components
This transformer has a turns ratio of 1:4, which is 
to say that there is 1 turn of wire in the primary for 
every 4 turns of wire in the secondary. The amount 
of current in the secondary (IS) can be computed by 
using Ohm’s law.
I    E 
__ 
R  
I    480 
____ 
960  
I  .5 amp
Question: If the secondary of this transformer has a 
current fl ow of .5 amp, how much current is required 
in the primary? There are actually several methods 
that can be used to solve this problem. The most 
accepted method is to use the formulas shown in 
Figure 25–3. Because both the primary and second-
ary voltages are known, the formula that contains 
voltage and current will be used to solve the problem.
 
Ep 
__ 
ES
     IS 
__ 
Ip
  
 120 
____ 
480     .5 
__ 
Ip
  
120 Ip  240
IP  2
Notice that the transformer must have a current 
draw of 2 amps on the primary to supply a current 
of .5 amps at the secondary. If the power (volts  
amps) is computed for both the primary and the sec-
ondary, it will be seen that they are equal.
Primary
120  2  240
Secondary
480  .5  240
The number of turns of wire can now be computed.
 
Ep 
__ 
ES
     NP 
___ 
NS
  
 120 
____ 
480     500 
____ 
NS
  
120 NS  240,000
NS  2000
Notice that the secondary has 2000 turns of wire 
compared to 500 turns in the primary. This is 
 consistent with the turns ratio, which states there 
is 1 turn of wire in the primary for every 4 turns in 
the secondary.
The transformer shown in Figure 25–4 is a step-
down transformer that has a primary voltage of 
120 volts and a secondary voltage of 24 volts. The 
secondary is connected to a load resistance of 6 ohms. 
The current fl ow in the secondary winding is:
I    E 
__ 
R  
I    24 
___ 
6  
I  4 amps
Now that the secondary current is known, the 
amount of primary current can be computed.
 
Ep 
__ 
ES
     IS 
__ 
Ip
  
 120 
____ 
24      4 
__ 
Ip
  
120 Ip  96
Ip .8 amp
If the amount of power for the primary and that for 
the secondary are computed, it will be seen that they 
are the same.
 
EP 
___ 
ES
     
NP 
___ 
NS
    
EP 
___ 
ES
     
IP 
__ 
IS
    
NP 
___ 
NS
     
IS 
__ 
IP
  
EP — Voltage of the primary
ES — Voltage of the secondary
NP — Number of turns of wire in the primary
NS — Number of turns of wire in the secondary
IP — Current ﬂ ow in the primary
IS — Current ﬂ ow in the secondary 
 Figure 25–3
Transformer formulas. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 25  The Control Transformer   255
 Figure 25–4
Step-down transformer. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Primary
120  .8  96
Secondary
24  4  96
The number of turns of wire in the secondary can 
now be computed.
 
Ep 
__ 
ES
     
Np 
___ 
Ns
  
 120 
____ 
24     500 
____ 
NS
  
120 NS  12000
NS  100
Notice that the number of turns of wire in the sec-
ondary, 100, as compared with the turns of wire in 
the primary, 500, is consistent with the turns ratio 
of 5:1.
RESIDENTIAL CONTROL 
TRANSFORMERS
Control transformers are used to change the 
value of line voltage to the value needed for the 
control circuit. Most residential air conditioning 
systems operate on a control voltage of 24 volts 
AC. The amount of current needed will vary from 
one system to another, but it is generally less than 
1 amp. The primary voltage for residential control 
transformers is 120 or 240 volts. A photograph of a 
control transformer used in residential applications 
is shown in Figure 25–5. The primary lead wires 
for most of these transformers will be black in color. 
The color of the secondary leads will vary from one 
manufacturer to another.
 Figure 25–5
A 24-volt transformer. (Courtesy of Honeywell Inc.).
INDUSTRIAL CONTROL 
TRANSFORMERS
Most industrial and commercial air conditioning 
systems operate on 240 or 480 volts. The control 
voltage for most of these units is 120 or 24 volts AC. 
Most industrial control transformers contain two 
primary windings and one or two secondary wind-
ings. In the following explanation, it will be assumed 
that the transformer has two primary windings and 
one secondary winding. In this type of transformer, 
each primary winding has a voltage rating of 
240 volts, and the secondary winding has a volt-
age rating of 120 volts. There is a turns ratio of 
2:1 between each of the primary windings and the 
secondary winding.
There is a standard for marking the terminals of 
control transformers. One of the primary windings 

256   SECTION 5  Control Components
240  VOLTS  AC
H1
H2
H3
H4
X1
X2
120  VOLTS  AC
 Figure 25–6
Primaries connected in parallel for 240-volt operation.
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 25–7
Primaries connected in series 
for 480-volt operation.
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
480  VOLTS  AC
H4
H1
H2
H3
X1
X2
120  VOLTS  AC
X2
X1
H3
H4
H2
H1
will be identifi ed with terminal markings of H1 and 
H2. The other primary winding will be identifi ed 
with terminal markings of H3 and H4. The second-
ary winding will be identifi ed with terminal mark-
ings of X1 and X2.
If the transformer is to be used to change a pri-
mary voltage of 240 volts into 120 volts, the two 
primary windings will be connected in parallel as 
shown in Figure 25–6. Because the two primary 
windings are connected in parallel, each will receive 
the same voltage. This will produce a turns ratio 
of 2:1 between the primary windings and the sec-
ondary windings. If 240 volts is connected to the 
primary of a 2:1 ratio transformer, the secondary 
voltage will be 120 volts.
If the transformer is to be used to change 480 volts 
to 120 volts, the primary windings will be connected 
in series as shown in Figure 25–7. In this connection, 
H2 of one primary winding is connected to H3 of the 
other primary winding. This series connection of the 
two windings produces a turns ratio of 4:1. When 
480 volts is connected to the primary, 120 volts will 
be produced in the secondary.
The primary windings of most control trans-
formers have leads H2 and H3 crossed as shown 
in Figure 25–8. This is done to aid in the connec-
tion of the primary. For example, if it is desired to 
operate the transformer with the primary wind-
ings connected in parallel, a metal link is used to 
connect leads H1 and H3 together. Another metal 
link is used to connect leads H2 and H4 together, 
 Figure 25–8
Primary leads are crossed. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 25  The Control Transformer   257
Figure 25–9. Compare this lead connection with the 
schematic shown in Figure 25–6.
If it is desired to connect the primary windings 
for operation on 480 volts, terminals H2 and H3 
are joined together with a metal link, Figure 25–10. 
Compare this connection with the schematic shown 
in Figure 25–7. A photograph of an industrial con-
trol transformer is shown in Figure 25–11.
TESTING THE TRANSFORMER
An ohmmeter is generally used to test the windings 
of the transformer. To test the transformer, check 
for continuity through each set of windings. For 
example, there should be continuity between leads 
H1 and H2; H3 and H4; and X1 and X2. There 
should be no continuity between any of the wind-
ings such as H1 and H3, or H1 and X1. Also check 
 Figure 25–9
Metal links used to make a 240-volt connection. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 25–11
Industrial control transformer. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 25–10
Metal link used to make a 480-volt connection. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
X2
X1
H3
H4
H2
H1
X2
X1
H3
H2
for a grounded winding by testing to be sure there is 
no continuity between any of the windings and the 
case of the transformer.
The output voltage of the transformer should be 
tested with an AC voltmeter. If the output voltage 
is not close to the rated voltage, the transformer 
is probably defective. If the transformer is tested 
without a load connected to the secondary, it is nor-
mal for the secondary voltage to be slightly higher 
than the rated voltage. For example, a 24-volt 
transformer may have an output voltage as high 
as 28 volts without load connected to it. The volt-
age rating of the transformer assumes it is supply-
ing full-rated current to the load. If the voltage is 
tested when the transformer is under full load, the 
rated voltage should be seen. Notice the use of the 
 control transformer in the schematic shown in 
 Figure 25–12.

258   SECTION 5  Control Components
E1
T
Y2
Y1
W1
W2
W3
G
R
LPC
56
55
90
57
7
5
53
51
6
COIL
RR
RR
HPC 52
50
60
CC
61
68
BRN
BRN
RED
BLU (208V  TAP)  SEE NOTE 7
30, 90
TRANSFORMER  208-230-24V
24V
LINE  VOLTAGE
BLK
60
EFC
30A
9
29
30
5A
10
5A
CCH
WHITE
RED DOT
OR ARROW
24
BRN
TOP
BLK 26
CFM-1
25
CAP-1
WHITE
34
BRN
TOP
BLK 36
CFM-2
35
42
41
41
CC
11
1,9,4
31
CMT
CAP-2
OL
13
3,10,6
CC
L3
OL
COMP
L1
L2
OL
CC
12
2.5
16
6,RED
EFC
15
87
5
EFC
4,BLK
14
TOP
88
86
EFC
LEGEND
CMT
CONDENSER  MOTOR  THERMOSTAT
CAPACITOR
COMPRESSOR  CONTACTOR
CRANKCASE  HEATER
CONDENSER  FAN  MOTOR
COMPRESSOR
EVAPORATOR  FAN  CONTACTOR
FUSE
RESET  RELAY
TRANSFORMER
TERMINAL  BLOCK
TERMINAL  OVERLOAD  PROTECTOR
TERMINAL  STRIP
EVAPORATOR  FAN  MOTOR
LOW  PRESSURE  CONTROL
HIGH  PRESSURE  CONTROL
OVERLOAD  PROTECTOR
CAP
CC
CCH
CFM
COMP
EFC
F
RR
T
TB
TOP
TS
EFM
LPC
HPC
OL
WARINIG
DISCONNECT  ELECTRICAL   POWER
SOURCE  TO  PREVENT  INJURY  OR
DEATH  FROM  ELECTRICAL  SHOCK
CAUTION
USE  COPPER  CONDUCTORS  ONLY
TO  PREVENT  EQUIPMENT  DAMAGE
 Figure 25–12
Control transformer used to provide low voltage for the control circuit. (Schematic courtesy of Trane Corp.). 
SUMMARY
 A transformer is a device that can change values of AC voltage and current without a 
change of frequency.
 Isolation transformers have their primary and secondary sides physically and electrically 
separated from each other.
 Isolation transformers operate on the principle of mutual induction.
 The primary is the winding of the transformer that is connected to the incoming 
power line.
 The secondary is the winding that is connected to the load.
 All values of voltage and current in a transformer are proportional to the turns ratio.
 A step-up transformer will have a higher secondary voltage than primary voltage.
 A step-down transformer will have a lower secondary voltage than primary voltage.

UNIT 25  The Control Transformer   259
KEY TERMS
control transformers
isolation transformers
mutual induction
transformer
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What is an isolation transformer?
 
2. Defi ne a step-up transformer.
 
3. Defi ne a step-down transformer.
 
4. The primary of a transformer is connected to 120 volts AC. The secondary has a volt-
age of 30 volts and is connected to a resistance of 5 ohms. How much current will fl ow 
in the primary of the transformer?
 
5. What is the amount of control voltage used in most residential air conditioning 
 systems?
 
6. What is the amount of control voltage used in most industrial air conditioning 
 systems?
 
7. What is the color of the primary leads of most control transformers used for residential 
service?
 
8. How many primary windings are generally contained in an industrial control 
 transformer?
 
9. What is the turns ratio of each of these primary windings as compared with the 
 secondary winding?
 10. When an industrial control transformer is to be operated on 480 volts, are the 
 primary windings connected in parallel or in series?

260
When a split-phase motor is started, it is often nec-
essary to disconnect the start windings when the 
motor reaches about 75% of full speed. In an open 
case motor, this job is generally done by the cen-
trifugal switch. Some single-phase motors are her-
metically sealed, however, and a centrifugal switch 
cannot be used. When this is the case, a starting 
relay must be used. A starting relay is located 
away from the motor and is used to disconnect the 
start windings when the motor has reached about 
75% of its full speed. There are four basic types of 
starting relays in general use:
 1. The hot-wire relay.
 2. The current relay.
 3. The potential relay.
 4. The solid-state relay.
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 List the common types of starting relays
 Describe the operation of a hot-wire 
relay
 Connect a hot-wire relay in a circuit
 Describe the operation of a current 
relay
 Connect a current relay in a circuit
 Describe the operation of a potential 
relay
 Connect a potential relay in a circuit
 Describe the operation of a solid-state 
starting relay
 Connect a solid-state starting relay in 
a circuit
 Describe the operation, construction, 
and connection of a solid-state hard 
starting kit
Starting 
Relays
UNIT 26

UNIT 26  Starting Relays   261
THE HOT-WIRE RELAY
The hot-wire relay is so named because it uses a 
length of resistive wire connected in series with the 
motor to sense motor current. A diagram of this type 
of relay is shown in Figure 26–1. When the thermo-
stat contact closes, current can fl ow from line 1 to 
terminal L of the relay. Current then fl ows through 
the resistive wire, the movable arm, and the normally 
closed contacts to the run and start windings. When 
current fl ows through the resistive wire, its tempera-
ture increases. This increase of temperature causes 
the wire to expand in length. When the length of the 
resistive wire increases, the movable arm is forced 
to move down. As the arm moves down, tension is 
applied to the springs of both contacts. The relay 
is so designed that the start contact will snap open 
fi rst. When the start winding is disconnected, the 
current fl ow to the motor will decrease. If the motor 
current is not excessive, the resistive wire will not 
expand enough to cause the run contact to open. If 
the current fl ow is excessive, however, the wire will 
continue to expand and the contact connected in 
series with the run winding will open.
Notice that this type of relay is used as both a 
starting relay and an overload relay. One disadvan-
tage of the hot-wire relay is that it must be permitted 
to cool after each operation. A motor using this type 
of starting relay cannot be started in rapid succes-
sion. Figure 26–2 shows a photograph of the hot-
wire type of starting relay.
M
S
MOTOR
START  CAPACITOR
L2 L1
R
U
N
S
T
A
R
T
C
M
S
OVERLOAD
CONTACT
L
SPRING  METAL
RESISTIVE  WIRE
START-WINDING
CONTACT
SPRING
 Figure 26–1
Hot-wire relay connection. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 26–2
Hot-wire type of starting relay. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

262   SECTION 5  Control Components
R
S
STARTING
CAPACITOR
START  CONTACTS
CURRENT  RELAY
COIL
THERMOSTAT
C
L2
L1
Testing this relay is diffi cult. An ohmmeter can 
be used to check for continuity between the L ter-
minal and the start and main winding terminals. 
To properly test this relay, an ammeter should be 
used to make certain the start contact opens and 
disconnects the start winding. If the relay is open-
ing on overload, the ammeter can be used to check 
the current draw of the motor. This will determine 
if the motor is actually overloaded, or if the relay is 
opening when it should not. A good rule to follow 
concerning starting relays is to always test them if 
the motor has been damaged. It makes poor busi-
ness sense to damage a new motor because of not 
checking the starting relay.
When replacing this relay, it is necessary to use 
the correct replacement. Because the relay is oper-
ated by motor current, it has been designed to open 
its contacts when a specifi c amount of current fl ows 
through the circuit. The relay must, therefore, be 
matched to the characteristics of the motor it is 
intended to control.
THE CURRENT RELAY
The current relay also operates by sensing the 
amount of current fl ow in the circuit. This type of 
relay operates on the principle of a magnetic fi eld 
instead of expanding metal. The current relay con-
tains a coil of a few turns of large wire, and a set of 
normally open contacts, Figure 26–3. The coil of the 
relay is connected in series with the run winding of 
the motor as shown in Figure 26–4. The contacts 
are connected in series with the start winding. 
When the thermostat contact closes and connects 
 Figure 26–4
Current relay connection. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 26–3
Current type of starting relay. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
power to the motor, the starting contacts of the 
relay are open. Because no power is applied to the 
start winding, the motor cannot start. This causes 
a current of about three times the normal full-load 
current to fl ow in the run winding. The high current 
fl ow through the coil of the start relay produces a 
strong magnetic fi eld. The magnetic fi eld is strong 
enough to cause the solenoid to close the starting 
contacts. When the starting contacts close, power 
is applied to the start winding and the motor begins 
to turn. As the motor accelerates, the current fl ow 
through the run winding decreases rapidly. When 
the current fl ow through the relay coil decreases, 

UNIT 26  Starting Relays   263
the strength of the magnetic fi eld becomes weaker. 
When the motor has reached about 75% of full 
speed, the magnetic fi eld is weak enough to permit 
the solenoid to reopen the starting contacts. This 
disconnects the start winding from the circuit and 
the motor continues to operate normally.
Notice that the current relay is used to disconnect 
the start windings only and does not provide over-
load protection. A motor using this type of start-
ing relay must be provided with separate overload 
protection.
If it is necessary to replace this type of relay, the cor-
rect size must be used. The current relay is matched 
to the characteristics of the motor it is designed to be 
used with. This type of relay is also sensitive to the 
position it is mounted in. The current relay generally 
uses the force of gravity to open the starting contacts. 
When installing a new relay, it must be mounted in 
the correct position. If it is installed upside down, the 
starting contacts will be closed instead of open.
When testing this type of relay, an ohmmeter 
can be used to check the continuity of the contacts. 
When the relay is held in the correct position, the 
ohmmeter should show an open circuit across the 
contacts. If it does not, the contacts are shorted. If 
the relay is held upside down, the contacts should 
indicate continuity. The coil of the relay is generally 
exposed and a visual inspection will reveal shorted 
windings. The best method of testing the relay is 
with an ammeter. If the ammeter is used to measure 
the current fl ow to the start winding, it can be seen 
if the motor starts and the relay contacts disconnect 
the start winding.
 Figure 26–6
Potential relay connection. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 26–5
Potential starting relay. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
S
SR
SR
R
THERMOSTAT
C
L2
L1
START
CAPACITOR
RUN
CAPACITOR
THE POTENTIAL RELAY
The potential (voltage) relay operates by sens-
ing an increase in the voltage developed in the start 
winding when the motor is operating. A potential 
relay is shown in Figure 26–5. A schematic diagram 
for a potential starting relay circuit is shown in 
Figure 26–6. In this circuit, the potential relay is 
used to disconnect the starting capacitor from the 
circuit when the motor reaches about 75% of its 
full speed. SR (starting relay) coil is connected in 

264   SECTION 5  Control Components
 parallel with the start winding of the motor. A nor-
mally closed SR contact is connected in series with 
the starting capacitor. When the thermostat contact 
closes, power is applied to both the run and start 
windings of the motor. Notice that both the run 
capacitor and the start capacitor are in the circuit 
at this time.
The rotating magnetic fi eld of the stator cuts 
through the bars of the squirrel-cage rotor and 
induces a current into them. The current fl ow in the 
rotor produces a magnetic fi eld around the rotor. 
As the rotor begins to turn, its magnetic fi eld cuts 
through the start winding and induces a voltage 
into it. The induced voltage causes the total voltage 
across the start winding to be higher than the volt-
age applied by the line. When the motor has acceler-
ated to about 75% of full speed, the induced voltage 
in the start winding is high enough to energize SR 
coil. When SR coil energizes, SR contact opens and 
disconnects the start capacitor from the circuit, 
Figure 26–7.
Notice that this type of relay depends on the 
induced voltage created in the start winding by the 
magnetic fi eld of the rotor and the run winding. 
The start winding acts like the secondary winding 
of a transformer and produces a step-up in voltage. 
For this reason, the amount of voltage necessary to 
energize the coil of a potential relay is greater than 
line voltage. Once the relay has been energized it 
can be held in by less voltage than that required to 
energize it. The potential relay is primarily used to 
disconnect the starting capacitor of a permanent-
split capacitor motor, as shown in Figure 26–6. 
Although the potential relay is still in use, it is being 
replaced by the solid-state relay.
The potential type of starting relay is often used 
with compressors that use the permanent-split 
capacitor start motor. The coil of the relay can be 
tested for an open circuit with an ohmmeter. When 
the ohmmeter is connected across the coil, it should 
indicate continuity. The actual amount of resis-
tance can vary from one type of relay to another. 
The best method for testing the starting relay is with 
an ammeter. If an ammeter is connected to the start 
capacitor, it can be seen if the capacitor is energized 
when the motor is started, and if the relay discon-
nects it from the circuit.
SOLID-STATE STARTING RELAYS
Another type of starting relay is known as the 
 solid-state starting relay, Figure 26–8. This 
relay is intended to replace the current-type start-
ing relay and has several advantages over the 
 current relay. Some of these advantages are:
 1. The solid-state relay contains no moving 
parts and no contacts, which can become 
burned or pitted.
 2. The solid-state relay can be used to replace al-
most any current relay. This interchangeabil-
ity makes it possible for the service technician 
to stock only a few solid-state relays instead 
of a large number of current relays.
The solid-state starting relay is actually an elec-
tronic component known as a thermistor. A 
thermistor is a device that exhibits a change of 
resistance with a change of temperature. This par-
ticular thermistor has a positive coeffi cient of resis-
tance, which means that the resistance of the device 
will increase with an increase of temperature. 
AUTHOR’S NOTE: A couple of things need 
to be pointed out concerning the schematic in 
Figure 26-7. One is that there is a mistake in the 
terminal numbers of the potential relay. Termi-
nal numbers 1 and 2 should be switched. The 
terminal shown as 2 is actually terminal 1, and 
the terminal shown as 1 is actually terminal 2. 
The second is not a mistake, but due to how the 
schematic was drawn it could cause confusion. 
Notice that the low-pressure switch has been 
drawn upside down. The switch appears to be 
a normally closed switch. In reality, it is a nor-
mally open held-closed switch. If the switch were 
drawn properly, it would be apparent that the 
switch is actually a normally open held-closed 
switch. Although this schematic does contain a 
mistake and a component not drawn properly, 
I chose to retain it in the text. This is an excellent 
example of problems that occur in the fi eld. The 
service technician must be aware that mistakes 
like this do happen.

UNIT 26  Starting Relays   265
-
.
.
4
5
2
1
6
-
 Figure 26–7
A potential relay is used to disconnect the start windings of the compressor when the motor reaches about 75% of full speed. (Courtesy of Lennox Industries Inc.).

266   SECTION 5  Control Components
THERMOSTAT
N
S
C
R
MOTOR
START
RELAY
S
120  VAC
M
RUN
START
L1
 Figure 26–8
Solid-state starting relay. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 26–9
Solid-state starting relay connection. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
resistance to change from a very low value of 3 or 
4 ohms to several thousand ohms. This increase 
of resistance is very sudden and has the effect of 
opening a set of contacts connected in series with 
the start winding. Although the start winding is 
never completely disconnected from the power line, 
the amount of current fl ow through it is very small, 
typically 0.03 to 0.05 amps, and does not affect the 
operation of the motor. This small amount of leak-
age current maintains the temperature of the 
thermistor and prevents it from returning to a low 
resistance. After power has been disconnected from 
the motor, a cool-down period of about 2 minutes 
should be allowed before restarting. This cool-down 
period is needed for the thermistor to return to a low 
value of resistance.
TESTING THE SOLID-STATE 
STARTING RELAY
A continuity test can be made with an ohmmeter. 
If the probes of an ohmmeter are connected to the 
M and S terminals of the relay, a low value of resis-
tance, typically 2 to 5 ohms, should be seen. The 
most accurate test is made by connecting the relay 
in the motor circuit. A clamp-on ammeter set to its 
lowest scale can be used to measure the current in 
the start winding. After the motor has been started, 
the ammeter should give an indication very close to 
zero amps.
SOLID-STATE HARD 
STARTING KIT
Another device that uses a solid-state relay, the 
solid-state hard starting kit, is shown in 
Figure 26–10. This device is intended to increase 
The schematic diagram in Figure 26–9 illustrates 
the connection for a solid-state starting relay. Notice 
that this is the same basic connection used for the 
connection of a current starting relay, Figure 26–4. 
The solid-state relay, however, does not contain a coil 
or contacts. When the solid-state relay is used, a cur-
rent path exists between the line connection terminal 
and the terminal marked M for MAIN  winding. The 
thermistor is connected between the line connection 
and the terminal marked S for START winding.
When power is fi rst applied to the circuit, the 
thermistor has a relatively low resistance. This 
permits current to fl ow through both the start and 
run windings of the motor. The temperature of the 
thermistor increases because of the current fl owing 
through it. The increase of temperature causes the 

UNIT 26  Starting Relays   267
 Figure 26–10
Hard starting kit increases starting 
torque of permanent-split capacitor 
 motors. (Courtesy of Motors & Armatures, Inc.)
 Figure 26–11
Hard starting kit. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
THERMOSTAT
N
S
C
R
MOTOR
120  VAC
RUN
START
L1
RUN  CAPACITOR
ELECTROLYTIC
CAPACITOR
SOLID
STATE
RELAY
the starting torque of a permanent-split capacitor 
motor. The kit contains a solid-state relay and an 
AC electrolytic capacitor similar to those used as 
the starting capacitor for a capacitor-start induc-
tion run motor. The kit connects directly across the 
terminals of the existing run capacitor as shown in 
Figure 26–11. When the thermostat contact closes 
and connects power to the motor circuit, the resis-
tance of the solid-state relay is very low. A current 
path exists through the run winding, run capacitor, 
solid-state relay, electrolytic capacitor, and start 
winding. Because the run capacitor and electrolytic 
capacitor are connected in parallel, their values of 
capacitance add, providing extra capacitance to 
the motor during the starting period. The current 
fl owing through the solid-state relay and electro-
lytic capacitor causes the temperature of the relay 
to increase, resulting in an increase in resistance. 
The increased resistance reduces the current fl ow 
through the electrolytic capacitor to a very low 
value. This has the effect of disconnecting the 
electrolytic capacitor from the circuit. The leakage 
current through the relay and electrolytic capacitor 
prevents the relay from returning to a low value of 
resistance. After power has been disconnected from 
the motor circuit, a cool down period of 2 to 3 min-
utes should be given to permit the solid-state relay 
to return to a low value of resistance.

268   SECTION 5  Control Components
SUMMARY
 Starting relays are used to disconnect the start winding of a hermetically sealed split-phase 
motor.
 The four basic types of starting relays are:
A. The hot-wire relay.
B. The current relay.
C. The potential relay.
D. The solid-state relay.
 The hot-wire relay senses motor current by connecting a piece of resistive wire in series 
with the motor. The motor current heats the wire, causing it to expand and open a set 
of contacts.
 Hot-wire relays can also provide overload protection for the motor.
 Current relays use a coil connected in series with the motor run winding. The 
magnetic fi eld of the coil is used to close a set of contacts connected in series with the 
start  winding.
 The potential relay is used primarily with permanent-split capacitor motors.
 The coil of the potential relay is connected in parallel with the motor start winding.
 The contact of the potential relay is connected in series with the starting capacitor.
 Solid-state starting relays are generally used to replace current starting relays.
 Solid-state starting relays use a thermistor, which rapidly changes its resistance 
when heated.
 Solid-state hard starting kits generally consist of an AC electrolytic capacitor and a solid-
state starting relay that connect in parallel with the existing run capacitor.
KEY TERMS
current relay
hot-wire relay
leakage current
potential relay
solid-state hard starting kit
solid-state starting relay
starting relay
thermistor
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What are the four types of starting relays?
 
2. On what type of motor is it necessary to use a starting relay?
 
3. What principle is used to operate the hot-wire relay?
 
4. What principle is used to operate the current relay?
 
5. What type of starting relay does not sense motor current to operate?
 
6. What type of starting relay can be used for overload protection for the motor?
 
7. What type of motor can the potential relay be used with?

UNIT 26  Starting Relays   269
 
8. Is the start contact of a hot-wire relay open or closed when power is fi rst applied to the 
motor?
 
9. Is the start contact of a current relay open or closed when power is fi rst applied to the 
motor?
 10. Refer to the circuit shown in Figure 26–4. What would happen if the coil of the cur-
rent relay were open when the thermostat connected power to the motor circuit?
TROUBLESHOOTING QUESTIONS
Refer to the schematic shown in Figure 26–7 to answer the following questions.
NOTE: The “TIMED OFF CONTROL” shown in the schematic is a short-cycle timer, which will be 
discussed in Unit 36.
1. What voltage is used to operate the coil of the compressor contactor?
A. 208 VAC
B. 230 VAC
C. 60 VAC
D. 24 VAC
2. This schematic does not show the thermostat connection, which is relatively common 
with air conditioning schematics. In which wire would the thermostat contact normally 
be connected?
A. L1
B. L2
C. The blue wire
D. The yellow wire
3. Which of the following components is not controlled by the operation of the compressor 
contactor?
A. Self-regulating crankcase heater
B. The fan motor
C. The compressor
D. All circuit components are controlled by the compressor contactor.
4. To which line is the common of the compressor connected?
A. The blue wire of the 24-volt circuit.
B. The yellow wire of the 24-volt circuit.
C. Line 1 of the main power.
D. Line 2 of the main power.
5. Assume that this unit is a model 651V-3P. How many capacitors are connected to the 
compressor start winding during the initial starting period?
A. 1
B. 2
C. 3
D. None

270
The use of small variable-speed motors has 
increased greatly in the last few years. These motors 
are commonly used to operate light loads such as 
ceiling fans and blower motors. There are two types 
of motors used for these applications, the shaded-
pole and the permanent-split capacitor motor. 
These motors are used because they operate with-
out having to disconnect a set of start windings 
with a centrifugal switch or starting relay. Motors 
intended to be used in this manner are wound with 
high-impedance stator windings. The high imped-
ance of the stator limits the current fl ow through 
the motor when the speed of the rotor is decreased. 
Speed control for these motors is accomplished by 
controlling the amount of voltage applied to the 
motor, or by inserting impedance in series with the 
stator winding.
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Describe different types of variable-
speed motors
 Discuss autotransformer control
 Connect an autotransformer speed 
controller in a circuit
 Discuss the use of a triac to control 
motor speed
 Connect a triac speed controller in 
a circuit
 Discuss the operation of a series 
impedance speed control
 Connect a series impedance speed 
controller in a circuit
Variable-
Speed Motor 
Control
UNIT 27

UNIT 27  Variable-Speed Motor Control   271
VARIABLE-VOLTAGE CONTROL
The amount of voltage applied to the motor can 
be controlled by several methods. One method is 
to use an autotransformer with several taps, 
 Figure 27–1. This type of controller has several steps 
of speed control. Notice that the applied voltage, 
120 volts in this illustration, is connected across 
the entire transformer winding. When the rotary 
switch is moved to the fi rst tap, 30 volts is applied 
to the motor. This produces the lowest motor speed 
for this controller. When the rotary switch is moved 
to the second tap, 60 volts is applied to the motor. 
This provides an increase in motor speed. When the 
switch has been moved to the last position, the full 
120 volts is applied to the motor operating it at the 
highest speed.
Another type of variable-voltage control uses 
a triac to control the amount of voltage applied to 
the motor, Figure 27–2. This type of speed control 
provides a more linear control since the voltage can 
be adjusted from 0 to the full applied voltage. At 
fi rst appearance, many people assume this control-
ler to be a variable resistor connected in series 
with the motor. A variable resistor large enough to 
control even a small motor would produce several 
hundred watts of heat and could never be mounted 
in a switch box. The variable resistor in this circuit 
is used to control the amount of phase shift for 
the triac. The triac controls the amount of voltage 
applied to the motor by turning on at different times 
during the AC cycle.
A triac speed control is very similar to a triac light 
dimmer used in many homes. A light dimmer, how-
ever, should never be used as a motor speed control-
ler. Triac light dimmers are intended to be used with 
resistive loads such as incandescent lamps. Light 
dimmer circuits will sometimes permit one half of 
the triac to start conducting before the other half. 
The wave form shown in Figure 27–3 illustrates 
this condition. Notice that only part of the positive 
half of the waveform is being conducted to the load. 
Since only positive voltage is being applied to the 
load, it is DC. Operating a resistive load, such as 
an incandescent lamp with DC, will do no damage. 
Operating an inductive load such as the winding of 
a motor can do a great deal of damage, however. 
When direct current is applied to a motor winding, 
there is no inductive reactance to limit the current. 
The actual wire resistance of the stator is the only 
current limiting factor. The motor winding or the 
30  VOLTS
60  VOLTS
90  VOLTS
120  VOLTS
OFF
MOTOR
 Figure 27–1
Autotransformer controls motor voltage. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
MOTOR
 Figure 27–2
Triac used to control motor speed. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 27–3
Triac conducts only the positive half of the waveform.
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

272   SECTION 5  Control Components
 Figure 27–5
Series inductor changes impedance of 
circuit. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
OFF
MOTOR
1ST
2ND
3RD
4TH
controller can easily be destroyed if direct current is 
applied to the motor. For this reason only triac con-
trollers designed for use with inductive loads should 
be used for motor control. A photograph of a triac 
speed controller is shown in Figure 27–4.
SERIES IMPEDANCE CONTROL
Another common method of controlling the speed 
of small AC motors is to connect impedance in series 
with the stator winding. This is the same basic 
method of control used with multi-speed fan motors. 
The circuit in Figure 27–5 shows a tapped inductor 
connected in series with the motor. When the motor 
is fi rst started, it is connected directly to the full 
voltage of the circuit. As the rotary switch is moved 
from one position to another, steps of inductance 
are connected in series with the motor. As more 
inductance is connected in series with the stator, 
the amount of current fl ow decreases. This produces 
a weaker magnetic fi eld in the stator. Rotor slip 
increases because of the weaker magnetic fi eld and 
causes the motor speed to decrease. A photograph of 
this type of controller is shown in Figure 27–6.
 Figure 27–4
Triac speed control. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 27–6
Fan speed control using a tapped inductor connected in 
series with the motor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 27  Variable-Speed Motor Control   273
SUMMARY
 The two main types of single-phase AC motors used for variable-speed control are the 
permanent-split capacitor motor and the shaded-pole motor.
 Permanent-split capacitor motors and shaded-pole motors are generally used for variable-
speed control because they do not have to disconnect the start windings when the motor 
reaches a certain speed.
 Variable-speed control for small motors is accomplished by controlling the amount of 
 voltage applied to the motor or by inserting impedance in series with the motor.
 Two common methods used to control the voltage applied to the motor are autotrans-
former control and triac control.
 Only triac controllers designed for use as motor speed controllers should be used for motor 
speed control.
 Series impedance control is accomplished by connecting a tapped inductor in series with 
the motor.
KEY TERMS
autotransformer
rotor slip
variable resistor
variable-speed motors
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What two types of small AC motors are used with variable-voltage speed control?
 
2. Why are these two types of motors used?
 
3. Name two methods of variable-voltage control for small AC motors.
 
4. What solid-state device is used to control the voltage applied to the motor?
 
5. Why is it necessary to use only controllers designed for use with inductive loads?
 
6. Name a method other than variable voltage used to control the speed of small 
AC motors.

274
Many of the refrigeration appliances used in the 
home are “frost-free.” The frost-free appliance could 
more accurately be termed “automatic defrost.” 
The brain of the frost-free appliance is the defrost 
timer. The job of this timer is to disconnect the 
compressor circuit and connect a resistive heat-
ing element located near the evaporator at 
regular time intervals. The defrost heater is ther-
mostatically controlled and is used to melt any frost 
formation on the evaporator. The defrost heater is 
permitted to operate for some length of time before 
the timer disconnects it from the circuit and permits 
the compressor to operate again.
TIMER CONSTRUCTION
The defrost timer is operated by a single-phase syn-
chronous motor like those used to operate electric 
wall clocks, Figure 28–1. The contacts are operated 
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Describe the construction of a 
defrost timer
 Discuss the operation of a continuous 
run and cumulative compressor 
run timer
 Connect a defrost timer for 
continuous run
 Connect a defrost timer for cumulative 
compressor run
 Discuss the operation of commercial 
defrost timers
 Perform an ohmmeter test on a 
defrost timer
The Defrost 
Timer
UNIT 28

UNIT 28  The Defrost Timer   275
brought outside the case. This permits the timer to 
be connected in one of two ways, which are:
 1. The continuous run timer.
 2. The cumulative compressor run timer.
It should be noted that the schematic draw-
ing can be a little misleading. In the schematic 
shown, the timer contact can only make connection 
between terminals 1 and 4, or terminals 1 and 2. In 
actual practice, a common problem with this timer 
is that the movable contact becomes stuck between 
terminals 4 and 2. This causes the compressor and 
defrost heater to operate at the same time.
THE CONTINUOUS RUN TIMER
The schematic for the continuous run timer is 
shown in Figure 28–3. Notice in this circuit that the 
pigtail lead of the motor has been connected to ter-
minal 1, and that terminal 1 is connected directly to 
the power source. Terminal 3 is connected directly 
to the neutral. This places the timer motor directly 
across the power source, which permits the motor to 
operate on a continuous basis.
Figure 28–4 shows the operation of the timer in 
the compressor run cycle. Notice there is a current 
path through the timer motor and a path through 
the timer contact to the thermostat. This permits 
power to be applied to the compressor and evapora-
tor motor when the thermostat closes.
Figure 28–5 shows the operation of the circuit 
when the timer changes the contact and activates the 
defrost cycle. Notice there is still a complete circuit 
through the timer motor. When the timer contact 
changes position, the circuit to the thermostat is open 
and the circuit to the defrost heater is closed. The 
heater can now melt any frost accumulation on the 
evaporator. At the end of the defrost cycle, the timer 
contact returns to its normal position and permits the 
compressor to be operated by the thermostat.
THE CUMULATIVE COMPRESSOR 
RUN TIMER
The cumulative compressor run timer circuit gets its 
name from the fact that the timer motor is permitted 
to operate only when the compressor is in operation 
and the thermostat is closed. The schematic for this 
circuit is shown in Figure 28–6. Notice that the 
by a cam that is gear driven by the clock motor. 
A schematic drawing of the timer is shown in 
 Figure 28–2. Notice that terminal 1 is connected to 
the common of a single-pole double-throw switch. 
Terminals 2 and 4 are connected to stationary con-
tacts of the switch. In the normal operating mode, 
the switch makes connection between contacts 
1 and 4. When the defrost cycle is activated, the 
contact will change position and make connection 
between terminals 1 and 2. Terminal 3 is connected 
to one lead of the motor. The other motor lead is 
 Figure 28–1
Defrost timer. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 28–2
Schematic of a defrost timer. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

276   SECTION 5  Control Components
H
N
R
S
C
COMPRESSOR
START
RELAY
EVAPORATOR  FAN
DEFROST
THERMOSTAT
OVERLOAD
THERMOSTAT
TIMER
120  VAC  60  Hz
DEFROST
HEATER
1
4
3
2
H
N
R
S
C
COMPRESSOR
START
RELAY
EVAPORATOR  FAN
DEFROST
THERMOSTAT
OVERLOAD
THERMOSTAT
TIMER
120  VAC  60  Hz
DEFROST
HEATER
1
4
3
2
 Figure 28–3
Schematic of a defrost timer used in a 
 continuous run circuit. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 28–4
Current path during cooling operation. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 28  The Defrost Timer   277
 Figure 28–5
Current path during defrost 
 operation. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 28–6
Defrost timer connected in 
a cumulative compressor run circuit. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
H
N
R
S
C
COMPRESSOR
START
RELAY
EVAPORATOR  FAN
DEFROST
THERMOSTAT
OVERLOAD
THERMOSTAT
TIMER
120  VAC  60  Hz
DEFROST
HEATER
1
4
3
2
H
N
R
S
C
START
RELAY
EVAPORATOR  FAN
DEFROST
THERMOSTAT
OVERLOAD
THERMOSTAT
TIMER
DEFROST
HEATER
1
4
2
3

278   SECTION 5  Control Components
 pigtail lead of the clock motor has been  connected to 
terminal 2 instead of terminal 1. Figure 28–7 shows 
the current path during compressor operation. The 
timer contact is making connection between ter-
minals 1 and 4. This permits power to be applied 
to the thermostat. When the thermostat contact 
closes, current is permitted to fl ow through the 
compressor motor, the evaporator fan motor, and 
the defrost timer motor. In this circuit, the timer 
motor is connected in series with the defrost heater. 
The operation of the timer motor is not affected, 
however, because the impedance of the timer motor 
is much greater than the resistance of the heater. 
For this reason almost all the voltage of this circuit 
is dropped across the timer motor. The impedance of 
the timer motor also limits the current fl ow through 
the defrost heater to such an extent that it does not 
become warm.
Figure 28–8 shows the current path through the 
circuit when the defrost cycle has been activated. 
Notice in this circuit that the defrost heater is con-
nected directly to the power line. This permits the 
heater to operate at full power and melt any frost 
accumulation on the evaporator. There is also a 
 current path through the timer motor and run wind-
ing of the compressor motor. In this circuit, the timer 
motor is connected in series with the run winding 
of the compressor. As before, the impedance of the 
timer motor is much greater than the impedance 
of the run winding of the compressor. This permits 
almost all the voltage in this circuit to be applied 
across the timer motor. At the end of the defrost 
cycle, the timer contact returns to its normal posi-
tion and the compressor is permitted to operate.
TESTING THE TIMER
An ohmmeter can be used to check the continuity 
of the contacts and the motor winding. However, 
to really test the timer for operation takes time. The 
cam can be manually turned to the position so that 
the defrost cycle is turned on. This can be checked 
with a voltmeter to determine when full circuit volt-
age is applied to terminal 2. It is then necessary to 
H
N
R
S
C
START
RELAY
COMPRESSOR
EVAPORATOR  FAN
DEFROST
THERMOSTAT
OVERLOAD
THERMOSTAT
TIMER
DEFROST
HEATER
1
4
2
3
 Figure 28–7
Current path during the cooling cycle.
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 28  The Defrost Timer   279
H
N
R
S
C
START
RELAY
COMPRESSOR
EVAPORATOR  FAN
DEFROST
THERMOSTAT
OVERLOAD
THERMOSTAT
TIMER
DEFROST
HEATER
1
4
2
3
 Figure 28–8
Current path during the defrost cycle. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
wait long enough for the timer to open the contact 
to the defrost heater and reconnect the compressor 
circuit. If the thermostat is closed, the compressor 
will start when the timer contact changes position. 
This test shows that the timer motor is operating 
and that the contact does change position.
COMMERCIAL DEFROST TIMERS
Many large commercial refrigeration units often 
use a separate timer clock to control the defrost 
cycle. This has several advantages over the previ-
ously discussed defrost timer. When this method is 
used, the timer clock is connected directly across 
the power line as shown in Figure 28–9. This sepa-
rates the operation of the timer from the operation 
of the compressor. In this way, the defrost cycle 
can be started during periods when the unit is in 
minimum use.
Timers of this type, Figure 28–10, generally 
have two timed settings. One determines the time 
of day or night the timer turns on. The second set-
ting determines how long the timer is permitted 
to remain on. The timer shown in this example 
can be started on even numbered hours of the 
day or night. The center knob sets how long the 
contacts are energized before they return to their 
normal position. Once turned on, the contacts 
can be set to remain in their energized position 
for a minimum of two minutes to a maximum of 
120 minutes.
This timer has a separate timer release solenoid 
incorporated into its design. When the timer release 
solenoid is energized, it causes the contacts to return 
to their normal reenergized position immediately. 
This permits the action of some type of external limit 
switch, such as a temperature or pressure switch, to 
terminate the defrost cycle.

280   SECTION 5  Control Components
 Figure 28–9
Schematic diagram of a commercial defrost timer. 
 (Courtesy of Paragon Electric Company, Inc.).
 Figure 28–10
Commercial defrost timer. (Courtesy of Paragon Electric Company, Inc.). 

UNIT 28  The Defrost Timer   281
SUMMARY
 Frost-free appliances use a defrost timer to control the operation of the defrost cycle.
 The function of the defrost timer is to disconnect the compressor from the circuit and 
 connect a resistive heater located near the evaporator at regular intervals.
 The defrost timer is a cam-operated timer powered by a small single-phase synchronous 
motor similar to an electric clock motor.
 Two basic connections for a defrost timer are:
A. The continuous run timer.
B. The cumulative compressor run timer.
 The motor of the continuous run timer is connected directly to the power line and runs at 
all times.
 The motor of the cumulative compressor run timer is connected in such a manner that it 
runs only during the time the compressor motor is in operation.
 Commercial defrost timers often use a separate time clock to control the defrost cycle.
KEY TERMS
cam
continuous run timer
cumulative compressor 
 run timer
defrost timer
evaporator
resistive heating element
timer clock
R E V I E W 
QUESTIONS
 
1. What type of motor is used to operate the timer?
 
2. Why is one of the motor leads brought outside the timer?
 
3. Name two ways of connecting the defrost timer.
 
4. What function does the defrost heater perform?
 
5. To which terminal is the pigtail lead of the timer motor connected if the timer is to 
operate continuously?

Thermostats are temperature-sensitive switches. 
They use a variety of methods to sense temperature, 
and can be found with different contact arrange-
ments. Some thermostats are designed to be used 
with low-voltage systems, generally 24 volts; and 
others are designed to be connected directly to line 
voltage and operate motors and heating units. The 
advantage of low-voltage thermostats is that they 
are more economical and safer to use inside the 
home.
BIMETAL THERMOSTATS
One of the most common methods of sensing tem-
perature is with a bimetal strip. When used as 
the temperature sensing element of a thermostat, 
the bimetal strip is generally bent in a spiral that 
282
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Deﬁ ne a thermostat
 Describe the operation of bimetal 
thermostats
 Discuss the operation of a contact-type 
and mercury-contact thermostat
 Discuss the operation of heating and 
cooling thermostats
 Describe the operation of the fan 
switch
 Discuss the operation of the heat 
anticipator and cooling anticipator
 Discuss the operation of line voltage, 
programmable, staging, and 
differential thermostats
 Connect a thermostat in a circuit
UNIT 29
The 
Thermostat

UNIT 29  The Thermostat   283
MERCURY CONTACT 
THERMOSTAT
Another type of contact used with the bimetal type 
of thermostat is the mercury contact. In this type of 
thermostat, a small pool of mercury is sealed inside 
resembles a clock spring. If a contact is attached 
to the end of the strip and another contact is held 
stationary, a thermostat is formed, Figure 29–1. A 
small permanent magnet is used to provide a snap 
action for the contacts.
This type of thermostat is inexpensive and has 
the advantage of not having to be mounted in 
a level position. The greatest enemy of an open-
contact thermostat is dirt. This is especially true for 
thermostats designed for low-voltage operation. If 
poor thermostat contact is suspected, the contacts 
should be cleaned. This can be done with a strip 
of hard paper, such as typing paper, and alcohol. 
Soak a strip of hard paper in alcohol and place the 
strip between the contacts. Close the contacts and 
draw the strip through the closed contacts. This 
will generally remove any accumulation of dirt and 
oil. After cleaning, the contacts should be buffed to 
remove any alcohol residue. This can be done by 
drawing a piece of dry hard paper through the con-
tacts several times. This type of thermostat is shown 
in Figure 29–2.
To avoid the problem of dirty contacts, the con-
tacts of some thermostats are enclosed inside a 
glass tube, Figure 29–3. Because the contacts are 
enclosed in glass, they are stationary. The bimetal 
strip is attached to a permanent magnet instead of 
a contact. In the case of a double acting thermostat, 
there are two magnets attached to the bimetal strip. 
When the magnet is close enough to the glass tube, 
it is attracted to the metal contacts and causes the 
contacts to close with a snap action.
MAGNET
 Figure 29–1
Contacts operated by a bimetal strip. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
 Figure 29–2
Open-contact thermostat. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 29–3
Contacts are enclosed inside a glass tube. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

284   SECTION 5  Control Components
can sometimes be a problem in homes that do not 
remain level. A mercury type thermostat is shown 
in Figure 29–6.
Mercury type thermostats are particularly sen-
sitive to the way they are mounted. If they are to 
operate correctly, they must be mounted level. The 
manufacturer’s instructions will generally show 
how the thermostat should be checked with a level-
ing device.
HEATING AND COOLING 
THERMOSTATS
Many thermostats are designed to be used for both 
heating and cooling applications. This can be done 
with thermostats that contain both a normally 
open and normally closed contact. A simple sche-
matic diagram of this type of thermostat is shown 
in Figure 29–7. Notice the thermostat contact is a 
single-pole double-throw type. The selector switch 
is a double-pole type. The dashed line indicates 
mechanical intertie. With the selector switch in 
the position shown, the thermostat is being used 
for heating. If the selector switch is changed, the 
a glass container. A set of contacts is also sealed in 
the glass. Most mercury-type contacts are made to be 
single-pole double-throw, which means there are a 
common terminal, a normally open terminal, and 
a normally closed terminal. Figure 29–4 illustrates 
this type of contact. Notice in this example that the 
pool of mercury makes connection with the com-
mon terminal, located in the center, and the nor-
mally closed terminal. If the glass bulb is tilted in the 
other direction, the mercury will fl ow to the opposite 
end and make connection between the common ter-
minal and the normally open contact.
The mercury contact has the advantage of 
being sealed in glass and not subjected to dirt 
and oil. When this type of contact is used with a 
bimetal strip, it is generally mounted as shown in 
Figure 29–5. This type of thermostat uses the weight 
of the mercury to provide a snap action for the con-
tact instead of a magnet. When the bimetal strip 
has turned far enough to permit the mercury to 
fl ow from one end of the glass bulb to the other, the 
weight of the mercury prevents any spring action of 
the bimetal strip from snapping the contact open. 
A mercury thermostat, however, must be mounted 
in a level position if it is to operate properly. This 
NO
INSULATOR
MERCURY
NC
C
 Figure 29–4
Mercury contacts. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
MERCURY  CONTACTS
BIMETAL  STRIP
 Figure 29–5
Mercury-type thermostat. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 29–6
Mercury thermostat. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 29  The Thermostat   285
 controlled by the thermostat. If the switch is thrown 
in the  opposite direction, the fan relay is connected 
directly to the control voltage.
THE HEAT ANTICIPATOR
The heat anticipator is a small resistance heater 
located near the bimetal strip. The function of 
this heater is to slightly preheat the bimetal strip 
and prevent overrun of the heating system. For 
example, many heating systems, such as fuel oil or 
gas, operate by heating a metal container called a 
heat exchanger. When the temperature of the heat 
exchanger reaches a high enough level, a thermo-
statically controlled switch causes the blower to 
turn on and blow air across the heat exchanger. The 
moving air causes heat to be removed from the heat 
exchanger to the living area. When the thermostat 
is satisfi ed, the heating unit is turned off. The blower 
will continue to operate, however, until the excess 
heat has been removed from the heat exchanger.
Now assume that the thermostat has been set 
for a temperature of 75 degrees. If the heating 
unit is permitted to operate until the temperature 
reaches 75 degrees, the fi nal temperature of the 
living area may be from 3 to 5 degrees higher than 
 bottom movable contact will break connection with 
its stationary contact, and the top movable contact 
will make connection with its stationary contact. 
Notice that changing this switch will also change 
the sense of the thermostat. In the heating position, 
the thermostat activates the heating unit when the 
contact closes because of a decrease in temperature. 
In the cooling position, the thermostat activates the 
air conditioning unit when the contact makes con-
nection because of an increase in temperature.
THE FAN SWITCH
Many thermostats are designed to permit manual 
control of the blower fan. This is done to permit the 
blower fan to be operated separately. Some people 
fi nd it desirable to operate the blower fan con-
tinuously to provide circulation of air throughout 
the building. This is especially true for buildings 
equipped with electronic air cleaners (precipitators) 
or for buildings that must remove undesirable ele-
ments such as smoke in an offi ce building or night 
club. A schematic diagram of this type of circuit 
is shown in Figure 29–8. The fan switch is a 
single-pole double-throw switch. When the switch 
is in one position, it permits the fan relay to be 
THERMOSTAT
R
COOL
TO  AIR-CONDITIONING
CONTROL  UNIT
HEAT
TO  HEATING
CONTROL  UNIT
SELECTOR
SWITCH
 Figure 29–7
Dual operation of a thermostat. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
TO  THERMOSTAT
AUTO
FAN  SWITCH
FAN  RELAY  COIL
MAN
Y
NEUTRAL
FR
G
 Figure 29–8
Fan switch. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

286   SECTION 5  Control Components
THE COOLING ANTICIPATOR
A device that operates in a similar manner to the 
heat anticipator is the cooling anticipator. 
The cooling anticipator is a resistive heating ele-
ment that operates in an opposite sense to the heat 
anticipator. The cooling anticipator operates while 
the thermostat contacts are open and the air con-
ditioning unit is not running. The cooling anticipa-
tor heats the thermostat slightly and causes it to 
close its contacts before the ambient temperature 
increases enough to close them.
The circuit shown in Figure 29–9 displays the 
current path of the heat anticipator for a heating 
and cooling thermostat during the heating cycle. 
In this mode of operation, current fl ows through 
the heat anticipator while the thermostat contact is 
closed and the heating unit is in operation.
In Figure 29–10, the thermostat has been 
switched to the cooling mode. Notice that a current 
path exists through the cooling anticipator when 
the thermostat setting by the time enough heat has 
been removed from the heat exchanger to cause the 
blower to turn off.
If the heat anticipator has been properly set, 
however, it will cause the thermostat to turn off 
several degrees before the room temperature has 
reached the thermostat setting. This permits the 
excess heat of the heat exchanger to raise the tem-
perature to the desired level without overrunning 
the thermostat setting.
The setting of the heat anticipator is controlled 
by a sliding contact. There are markings such as .2, 
.25, .3, .35, and .4. The sliding contact is generally 
set at the number that corresponds to the current 
rating of the control system. The current rating can 
generally be located in the service information or on 
the control unit itself. The heat anticipator does not 
have to be set at that position, however. The service 
technician should set it to operate the unit for longer 
or shorter periods depending on the desires of the 
customer.
JUMPER
TRANS-
FORMER
COOL
HEAT
HEAT
ANTICIPATOR
COOLING
ANTICIPATOR
FAN
AUTO
ON
FAN
RELAY
COOLING
SYSTEM
HEATING
SYSTEM
 Figure 29–9
Current path for heat 
anticipator. (Source: 
Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 29  The Thermostat   287
the thermostat contact is open and the air condi-
tioning unit is not in operation. When the ther-
mostat contact closes, a low resistance path exists 
around the cooling anticipator. This stops the fl ow 
of current through it while the air conditioning unit 
is in operation.
LINE VOLTAGE THERMOSTATS
Line voltage thermostats are generally used 
to control loads such as blower fans and heating 
elements. This means that the thermostat must 
contain contacts that are capable of handling the 
current needed to operate these loads without 
an intervening relay. This type of thermostat is 
shown in Figure 29–11. Many of these thermo-
stats use the pressure of refrigerant in a sealed 
system to sense temperature, Figure 29–12. When 
the temperature increases, the pressure in the 
system increases also. The increase in pressure 
causes the bellows to expand. When the bellows 
expands far enough, it activates a set of spring-
loaded contacts.
JUMPER
TRANS-
FORMER
COOL
HEAT
HEAT
ANTICIPATOR
COOLING
ANTICIPATOR
FAN
AUTO
ON
FAN
RELAY
COOLING
SYSTEM
HEATING
SYSTEM
 Figure 29–10
Current path for 
 cooling anticipator. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
 Figure 29–11
Line voltage thermostat. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Although line voltage thermostats can be used 
for many applications, they do not contain a heat 
anticipator and are not as accurate as low voltage 
thermostats.

288   SECTION 5  Control Components
PROGRAMMABLE THERMOSTATS
The term programmable is a catch word that has 
taken on many meanings. In the case of ther-
mostats, the term programmable generally means 
that a thermostat can be set to operate at different 
temperature settings at different times. Program-
mable thermostats range in complexity from 
units that use a simple time clock to units that are 
operated by integrated circuits (ICS) and permit the 
temperature to be set to any desired level at any 
desired time. A programmable thermostat is shown 
in Figure 29–13. This thermostat uses a quartz-
operated time clock and two separate thermostat 
units. The time clock is used to operate a switch. The 
setting of the clock determines the position of the 
switch at any particular time. A schematic for this 
type of circuit is shown in Figure 29–14. Notice that 
SPRING-LOADED
CONTACTS
BELLOWS
 Figure 29–12
Thermostat contacts are operated by 
pressure. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 29–13
Programmable thermostat. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
THERMOSTAT  B
THERMOSTAT  A
TO  CONTROL
CIRCUIT
R
+
–
CLOCK
 Figure 29–14
Schematic for a programmable 
 thermostat. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 29  The Thermostat   289
for several different conditions or events. Many per-
mit the thermostat to be programmed differently for 
each day. The temperature can be set differently for 
different times of the day. Most electronic thermo-
stats provide a variety of functions and options that 
are set by the homeowner. An electronic thermostat 
is shown in Figure 29–15.
STAGING THERMOSTATS
Staging thermostats are similar to program-
mable thermostats in that they contain two separate 
sets of contacts. Unlike the programmable ther-
mostat, however, the staging thermostat contains 
only one bimetal strip, which is used to control the 
action of both sets of contacts. One set of contacts 
is designed to operate slightly behind the other set. 
A good example of how a staging thermostat is used 
can be found in a heat-pump system. Assume that 
the fi rst contact is used to operate the compressor 
relay, and the second contact is used to operate the 
contactor, which controls the electric resistance 
heating strips. When the temperature decreases, 
the fi rst thermostat contact closes and connects the 
compressor to the line. If the compressor is able to 
provide enough heat to the dwelling, the second 
contact will never make connection. If, however, 
the position of the clock-operated switch determines 
which thermostat is used to control the system. 
To understand the operation of this system, assume 
that thermostat A has been set for a temperature of 
95 degrees, and thermostat B is set for 75 degrees. 
The time clock has been set to permit thermostat A 
to control the air conditioning system when there is 
no one in the residence. One hour before people are 
to return home, the time clock changes the contact 
and thermostat B is used to control the system. 
Because thermostat B has been set for 75 degrees, 
the residence will have been cooled to that tempera-
ture when the people arrive.
The programmable thermostat can reduce energy 
consumption by maintaining a desired temperature 
only during the hours the dwelling is occupied. The 
temperature can be maintained at an uncomfort-
able level the rest of the time, which permits the air 
conditioning unit to operate much less.
Electronic Programmable 
Thermostats
Many programmable thermostats are solid state and 
do not contain mechanical contacts. These units 
generally employ electronic devices such as thermis-
tors to sense temperature. They can be programmed 
 Figure 29–15
Electronic thermostat. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

290   SECTION 5  Control Components
the outside temperature is low enough that the 
heat pump cannot provide enough heat, the second 
thermostat contact will close and permit the electric 
heat strip to operate.
THE DIFFERENTIAL THERMOSTAT
The differential thermostat is used primar-
ily with solar-powered heating systems. A differ-
ential thermostat is shown in Figure 29–16. This 
thermostat uses two separate temperature sensors 
and is activated by the difference of temperature 
between them. A solar hot-water system is shown in 
Figure 29–17. A solar collector is used to heat the 
water. A storage tank stores the heated water and 
acts as a heat exchanger for the domestic hot water 
for the home. The system is controlled by the differ-
ential thermostat. When the temperature of the col-
lector becomes greater than the temperature of the 
water in the storage tank by so many degrees, the 
thermostat activates the pump motor. The pump 
motor circulates water from the storage tank to the 
collector, and from the collector back to the tank. 
When the temperature of the collector is within a 
certain amount of the water temperature, the ther-
mostat turns the pump off. In this way, water is cir-
culated through the collector only when the collector 
is at a higher temperature than the stored water. 
 Figure 29–16
Differential thermostat. (Courtesy of Independent Energy Corp.)
 Figure 29–17
Solar hot-water system controlled by a differential thermostat. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
PUMP
TEMP.
SENSOR
SOLAR
COLLECTOR
TEMP.
SENSOR
STORAGE
TANK
DOMESTIC  HOT  WATER
DIFF.
THERM.
A common setting for the differential thermostat 
is 20 and 5. This means that the thermostat will 
turn the pump on when the collector is 20 degrees 
hotter than the stored water, and turn the pump off 
when the collector is only 5 degrees hotter than the 
stored water.

UNIT 29  The Thermostat   291
E 
 Emergency heat relay on heat pumps
G 
Fan
K1  Switched side, Second source—Class 2 
power
K2  Unswitched side, Second source—Class 2 
power
L 
Indicator circuits or system monitors
O 
 Damper (cooling) or reversing valve on heat 
pump (cooling)
R 
 Switched side, Class 2 power (single 
source)
RC  Switched side, Class 2 power, Cooling side
RH  Switched side, Class 2 power, Heating side
T 
 Outdoor thermostat
TT 
 One side, Class 2 circuit-switch—Heat
TT 
 Other side, Class 2 circuit-switch—Heat
W 
 Heating
W1  1st Stage heating
W2  2nd Stage heating
W3  3rd Stage heating
X 
Lockout reset
Y 
Cooling
Y1 1st Stage cooling
Y2 2nd Stage cooling
Y3 3rd Stage cooling
NOTE: Class 2 power sources are generally low 
voltage and low power. They are not capable of 
supplying enough power to create a fi re hazard or 
a shock hazard.
Some manufacturers do not use the letters R, 
G, Y, and W, but use letters V, F, C, and H. The V 
terminal stands for voltage and is the same as the R 
terminal. The F terminal stands for “fan” and is the 
same as the G terminal. Terminal C stands for “com-
pressor” and is the same as the Y terminal, and the 
H stands for “heat” and corresponds to the W ter-
minal. A chart illustrating the thermostat terminal 
identifi cation for different manufacturers is shown 
in Figure 29–20.
TESTING THE THERMOSTAT
It is possible to perform a simple test to deter-
mine if a problem exists in a thermostat. A jumper 
wire is used to bypass parts of the thermostat. A 
basic heating and cooling thermostat is shown in 
Figure 29–21. To perform the test, use a jumper 
Some differential thermostats provide extra fea-
tures, such as antifreeze protection. Antifreeze 
protection turns the pump on and circulates warm 
water through the collector when its temperature is 
near freezing. This does cool the warmed water, but 
cooling the water is generally preferred to damaging 
the collector. Some solar systems used a separate 
water supply for the collector. These systems use a 
mixture of antifreeze and water in the collector loop 
to avoid freezing problems.
THERMOSTAT TERMINAL 
IDENTIFICATION
Thermostats generally contain letters that are used 
to identify the terminal connections. The most com-
mon letters are R, G, Y, W, B, and O. The letters 
stand for common colors of thermostat wire.
R    Red
G    Green
Y    Yellow
W  White
B    Blue or Black
O    Orange
The B and O terminals are seldom used. The B terminal 
connects to a heating damper and the O terminal 
connects to a cooling damper. The other terminals con-
nect as follows:
R   –  One side of the control transformer (generally 
24 volts)
G   – Fan relay
Y   – Compressor relay
W – Heating relay
Some heating/cooling thermostats use RC and RH 
instead of R. When these thermostats are used for 
both heating and cooling, terminals RC and RH are 
connected with a jumper, Figure 29–18.
Heat pump thermostats generally contain ter-
minals not found on common heating/cooling 
thermostats. Figure 29–19 illustrates the terminal 
connections for a common heat pump thermostat.
A listing of thermostat terminals and their mean-
ings follows:
A 
General purpose (could be anything)
B 
 Damper (heating) or Reversing solenoid on 
heat pumps (heating)
C 
 Unswitched side, Class 2 power
DF 
 Defrost

292   SECTION 5  Control Components
is made from one of the R terminals and the Y 
terminal, the compressor relay should energize, 
and when connection is made from one of the 
R terminals and the G terminal, the fan relay 
should energize.
wire to make connection from the power input 
terminal, RC or RH to the G, Y, and W terminals one 
at a time, Figure 29–22. When connection is made 
from one of the R terminals and the W terminal, the 
heating relay should energize. When  connection 
RH
HEAT/COOL
SWITCH
COOL
COOLING
ANTICIPATOR
AUTO
ON
FAN
HEAT
ANTICIPATOR
HEAT
W
RC
Y
G
HEAT
RELAY
COMP.
RELAY
FAN
RELAY
JUMPER
TRANSFORMER
 Figure 29–18
Thermostat terminal identiﬁ cation for a common heating/cooling thermostat. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 29  The Thermostat   293
OUTSIDE  TEMPERATURE
FR
HIGH  PRESSURE
TRANSFORMER
R
G
B
X
Y
E
W2
CC
HR
CR
CONTROLS
REVERSING VALVE
AIR
TEMPERA-
TURE
COIL
TEMPERA-
TURE
THERMOSTAT
DFC
DR
 Figure 29–19
Typical thermostat connection for a heat pump. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

294   SECTION 5  Control Components
MANUFACTURER
TYPE
COMMON
COOLING
HEATING
FAN
Cam-Stat
T17
R
Y
W
G
Cont. Corp.
360
R
Y
W
G
General
T91
V
C
H
F&G
General
T199
R
Y
W
G
Honeywell
T834
R
Y
W
G
Honeywell
T87
R
Y
W
G
White-Rogers
IF56
R
Y
W
G
 Figure 29–20
Typical thermostat markings. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
RH
HEAT/COOL
SWITCH
COOL
COOLING
ANTICIPATOR
AUTO
ON
FAN
HEAT
ANTICIPATOR
HEAT
W
RC
Y
G
HEAT
RELAY
COMP.
RELAY
FAN
RELAY
 Figure 29–21
Basic heating and cooling thermostat. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 29  The Thermostat   295
RH
HEAT/COOL
SWITCH
COOL
COOLING
ANTICIPATOR
AUTO
ON
FAN
HEAT
ANTICIPATOR
HEAT
HEAT
RELAY
COMP.
RELAY
FAN
RELAY
W
RC
Y
G
 Figure 29–22
Testing a thermostat. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
SUMMARY
 Thermostats are temperature-sensitive switches.
 Most thermostats are intended to be used on low voltage control systems.
 A bimetal strip is often used to sense the temperature.
 Bimetal strips are generally bent in a spiral and resemble a clock spring. This is done to 
permit a longer length to fi t into a small area.
 Contact thermostats have one stationary contact and one movable contact. The movable 
contact is attached to the bimetal strip.
 Contact-type thermostats use a small permanent magnet to provide a snap action when 
the contact opens or closes.

296   SECTION 5  Control Components
 Mercury-type thermostats operate by enclosing a pool of mercury inside a glass envelope. 
The glass envelope is attached to a bimetal strip.
 The weight of the mercury provides the snap action for the contacts when they open 
or close.
 Some thermostats are designed to be used as both a heating and cooling thermostat.
 The heat anticipator is a small resistive heater located near the bimetal strip. Its purpose 
is to open the contacts before the temperature actually reaches the thermostat setting.
 The cooling anticipator is a small resistive heater located near the bimetal strip of an 
air conditioning thermostat. It operates when the thermostat contacts are open and 
causes them to close before the ambient temperature becomes high enough to close 
the contacts.
 Some thermostats contain a fan switch, which permits the blower fan to be operated 
independently of the heating or cooling system.
 Line voltage thermostats are made with large contacts and can be used to connect a load 
to the line.
 Programmable thermostats contain more than one set of contacts and can be set to 
operate at different temperature settings at different times.
 Staging thermostats contain more than one set of contacts and are generally used with 
heat-pump systems. The fi rst set of contacts is used to turn on the compressor and the 
second set of contacts is used to turn on the strip heaters.
KEY TERMS
antifreeze protection
cooling anticipator
contact
differential 
    thermostat
fan switch
heat anticipator
line voltage thermostat
programmable 
    thermostat
staging thermostat
thermostats
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What is a thermostat?
 
2. What is the advantage of an open-contact thermostat?
 
3. What is the disadvantage of an open-contact thermostat?
 
4. What is the advantage of a mercury thermostat?
 
5. What is used to provide a snap action for the contacts in an open-contact type 
of thermostat?
 
6. What is used to provide a snap action for the mercury thermostat?

UNIT 29  The Thermostat   297
 
7. What method of sensing temperature is often used with line voltage thermostats?
 
8. What is a programmable thermostat?
 
9. What is the advantage of the programmable thermostat?
 10. What is a differential thermostat?
 11. What are differential thermostats generally used to control?
 12. What is antifreeze protection in reference to a differential thermostat?
 13. What is the advantage of a low-voltage thermostat over a line voltage thermostat?
 14. What is the purpose of the heat anticipator?
 15. How is the setting of the heat anticipator generally determined?
 16. To what does the G terminal on a typical heating/cooling thermostat connect?
 17. Some thermostats contain terminals marked RC and RH. What must be done if this 
thermostat is used for both heating and cooling?
 18. A thermostat has a terminal marked C. To what does this terminal connect?

High- and low-pressure switches are used to sense 
the amount of pressure in an air conditioning and 
refrigeration system. They are used to disconnect 
the compressor from the power line if the pressure 
should become too high or too low. Most of the pres-
sure switches used for air conditioning are operated 
by a bellows. A tube is attached to one end of the 
bellows and the other end is connected to the dis-
charge or suction side of the compressor, depending 
on which type of pressure switch is used.
THE HIGH-PRESSURE SWITCH
Figure 30–1 illustrates the operation of a high-
pressure switch. The bellows is connected to 
the discharge side of the compressor via the tube. 
As the pressure of the system increases, the bellows 
298
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Describe the operation of high-
pressure switches
 Describe the operation of low-pressure 
switches
 Make connection of a high-pressure 
switch
 Make connection of a low-pressure 
switch
UNIT 30
Pressure 
Switches

UNIT 30  Pressure Switches   299
expands. The bellows is used to activate a spring-
loaded normally closed switch. If the pressure 
should become too great, the bellows will expand 
far enough to open the switch. The normally closed 
pressure switch is connected in series with the com-
pressor circuit shown in Figure 30–2. The pressure 
switch may be connected in series with the compres-
sor, or in series with the compressor control relay, 
depending on the type of control circuit.
THE LOW-PRESSURE SWITCH
The low-pressure switch is very similar in 
construction to the high-pressure switch. The 
low-pressure switch, however, is connected to the 
BELLOWS
DISCHARGE
SUCTION
COMP.
SNAP
ACTION
SWITCH
 Figure 30–1
Pressure switch connected to sense high pressure. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 30–2
The pressure switch opens when 
the pressure becomes too high. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
L1
L2
COMP.
 Figure 30–3
The pressure switch opens when 
the pressure becomes too low. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
L1
L2
COMP.
low-pressure or suction side of the compressor. 
The low-pressure switch is used to disconnect the 
compressor from the circuit if the pressure on the 
suction side should become too low. Figure 30–3 
illustrates this type of circuit. The low-pressure 
switch is a normally open held-closed switch. The 
switch is held in the closed position by the pres-
sure of the system. If the pressure should drop low 
enough, the switch will open and disconnect the 
compressor from the circuit. As with the high-
pressure switch, the low-pressure switch can be 
used to disconnect the compressor from the line 
or disconnect the compressor relay, depending on 
the type of control circuit. A low-pressure switch is 
shown in Figure 30–4.

300   SECTION 5  Control Components
CONSTRUCTION
Most of the pressure switches used for com-
mercial or industrial systems are adjustable, 
Figure 30–5. This feature allows the service tech-
nician to use the switch on different systems. For 
example, the pressure settings are different for dif-
ferent types of refrigerant. Figure 30–6 shows a 
table of common pressure settings for high- and 
low-pressure switches used with different types of 
refrigerant.
A dual-pressure switch is shown in 
Figure 30–7. This switch incorporates both high- 
and  low-pressure switches in the same housing. 
Some manufacturers use a nonadjustable type 
of pressure switch. This switch is commonly found 
on central units designed for residential use. This 
 Figure 30–4
Low-pressure switch. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 30–5
Adjustable pressure switch. (Courtesy of Johnson  Controls Inc.)
PRESSURE SWITCH SETTINGS
Type of 
Refrigerant
High Pressure
 Cut out 
Cut in
Low Pressure
Cut out 
Cut in
12
275
145
15
35
22
380
300
38
68
500
280
200
22
46
 Figure 30–6
Pressure switch settings. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
type of switch is shown in Figure 30–8. The advan-
tage of this type of switch is that it is inexpensive. 
When replacing this type of pressure switch, how-
ever, it must be matched to the refrigerant system. 
High- and low-pressure switches are shown in the 
schematic in Figure 30–9.

UNIT 30  Pressure Switches   301
 Figure 30–7
Dual pressure switch. (Courtesy of Johnson Controls Inc.)
 Figure 30–8
Nonadjustable pressure switch. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
E1
T
Y2
Y1
W1
W2
W3
G
R
LPC
56
55
90
57
7
5
53
51
6
COIL
RR
RR
HPC 52
50
60
CC
61
68
BRN
BRN
RED
BLU (208V  TAP)  SEE NOTE 7
30, 90
TRANSFORMER  208-230-24V
24V
LINE  VOLTAGE
BLK
60
EFC
30A
9
29
30
5A
10
5A
CCH
WHITE
RED DOT
OR ARROW
24
BRN
TOP
BLK 26
CFM-1
25
CAP-1
WHITE
34
BRN
TOP
BLK 36
CFM-2
35
42
41
41
CC
11
1,9,4
31
CMT
CAP-2
OL
13
3,10,6
CC
L3
OL
COMP
L1
L2
OL
CC
12
2.5
16
6,RED
EFC
15
87
5
EFC
4,BLK
14
TOP
88
86
EFC
LEGEND
CMT
CONDENSER  MOTOR  THERMOSTAT
CAPACITOR
COMPRESSOR  CONTACTOR
CRANKCASE  HEATER
CONDENSER  FAN  MOTOR
COMPRESSOR
EVAPORATOR  FAN  CONTACTOR
FUSE
RESET  RELAY
TRANSFORMER
TERMINAL  BLOCK
THERMAL  OVERLOAD  PROTECTOR
TERMINAL  STRIP
EVAPORATOR  FAN  MOTOR
LOW-PRESSURE  CONTROL
HIGH-PRESSURE  CONTROL
OVERLOAD  PROTECTOR
CAP
CC
CCH
CFM
COMP
EFC
F
RR
T
TB
TOP
TS
EFM
LPC
HPC
OL
WARNING
DISCONNECT  ELECTRICAL   POWER
SOURCE  TO  PREVENT  INJURY  OR
DEATH  FROM  ELECTRICAL  SHOCK
CAUTION
USE  COPPER  CONDUCTORS  ONLY
TO  PREVENT  EQUIPMENT  DAMAGE
 Figure 30–9
High- and low-pressure switches are used to disconnect the compressor contactor. (Courtesy of Trane Corp.)

302   SECTION 5  Control Components
SUMMARY
 High- and low-pressure switches are used to sense the pressure in an air conditioning and 
refrigeration system.
 High- and low-pressure switches generally use a bellows, which expands and contracts 
with a change of pressure. The bellows operates a set of contacts.
 High-pressure switches are normally closed switches that open when the pressure 
becomes too high. The switch is connected in series with the coil of the compressor relay.
 Low-pressure switches are normally open held-closed switches that open when the pres-
sure drops below a certain level. Low-pressure switches are connected in series with the 
coil of the compressor relay also.
 Some pressure switches can be adjusted and some cannot.
KEY TERMS
adjustable
bellows
dual-pressure switch
high-pressure switch
low-pressure switch
nonadjustable
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What device is used to construct most of the pressure switches used in the air 
conditioning fi eld?
 
2. What type of contact is used with a high-pressure switch?
 
3. What type of contact is used with a low-pressure switch?
 
4. Where in the refrigerant system is the high-pressure switch connected?
 
5. Where in the refrigerant system is the low-pressure switch connected?

UNIT 30  Pressure Switches   303
TROUBLESHOOTING QUESTIONS
Refer to the schematic shown in Figure 30–9 to answer the following questions.
1. Is the compressor in this unit operated by a single-phase or a three-phase motor?
A. Single-phase
B. Three-phase
2. In order for the compressor contactor to energize, the thermostat (not shown) must make 
contact between which terminals?
A. R and G
B. R and T
C. R and E1
D. R and Y2
3. Are the condenser fan motors single-phase or three-phase?
A. Single-phase
B. Three-phase
4. In order to energize the EFC contactor coil, connection should be made between which 
terminals?
A. E1 and G
B. T and G
C. Y1 and G
D. R and G
5. Is the evaporator fan motor single-phase or three-phase?
A. Single-phase
B. Three-phase

304
The type of fl ow switch used in air conditioning 
systems senses the fl ow of air instead of the fl ow of 
liquid. The fl ow switch is often referred to as a sail 
switch because it operates on the principle of a sail. 
The fl ow switch is constructed from a snap-action 
microswitch. A metal arm is attached to the micro-
switch. A piece of thin metal or plastic is connected 
to the metal arm. The thin piece of metal or plastic 
has a large surface area and offers resistance to the 
fl ow of air. When a large amount of airfl ow passes 
across the sail, enough force is produced to cause 
the metal arm to operate the contacts of the switch. 
A fl ow switch is shown in Figure 31–1.
The fl ow switch is used to give a positive indi-
cation that the evaporator or condenser fan is 
operating before the compressor is permitted to 
operate. The airfl ow switch is the only positive 
method of indicating that the fan is actually in 
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Describe the operation of a ﬂ ow switch
 Draw the standard NEMA symbol for 
a ﬂ ow switch
 Connect a ﬂ ow switch in a circuit
The Flow 
Switch
UNIT 31

UNIT 31  The Flow Switch   305
THERMOSTAT
CR
CONTROL  RELAY
L2
L1
OL
CR
CFM
CONDENSER  FAN  MOTOR  RELAY
CR
EFM
EVAPORATOR  FAN  MOTOR  RELAY
CR
COMP
COMPRESSOR  RELAY
CFM
EFM
operation. For example, in the circuit shown in 
Figure 31–2, the thermostat controls the operation 
of a control relay (CR). When the thermostat 
closes its contacts, CR coil energizes. This causes 
all CR contacts to close. When the fi rst CR contact 
closes, CFM (condenser fan motor) relay 
energizes and starts the condenser fan motor. When 
the second CR contact closes, EFM (evaporator 
fan motor) relay coil energizes and starts the 
evaporator fan motor. The third CR contact cannot 
energize the compressor relay coil, however, 
because it is interlocked with CFM and EFM relays. 
The compressor relay coil can be energized only 
after the condenser fan and evaporator fan relay 
coils have energized.
The idea behind this type of control is to ensure 
that the compressor cannot be started until both 
the condenser and evaporator fans are operating. 
This control circuit, however, does not fulfi ll that 
requirement. This circuit does not sense if the fans 
are actually operating. It does sense if the relay coils, 
which control those fan motors, are energized. This 
circuit cannot detect if a fan motor is not operating, 
or if a belt is broken between the motor and the fan.
The circuit shown in Figure 31–3 has been 
modifi ed from the circuit in Figure 31–2. Notice in 
this circuit that the normally open CFM and EFM 
contacts connected in series with the compressor 
relay have been replaced with airfl ow switches CFS 
(condenser fl ow switch) and EFS (evapora-
tor fl ow switch). These switches are operated by 
the force of air created by the condenser fan or the 
evaporator fan. In this circuit, the compressor can 
be started only after the condenser and evaporator 
fans are actually operating. If the circuit is in opera-
tion and one of the fans should stop, the compressor 
 Figure 31–1
Airﬂ ow switch. (Courtesy of Honeywell Inc.).
 Figure 31–2
Compressor is interlocked with 
condenser and evaporator 
fan relays. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

306   SECTION 5  Control Components
THERMOSTAT
CR
CONTROL  RELAY
L2
L1
OL
CR
CFM
CONDENSER  FAN  MOTOR  RELAY
CR
EFM
EVAPORATOR  FAN  MOTOR  RELAY
CR
COMP
COMPRESSOR  RELAY
CFS
EFS
relay will be disconnected from the circuit. This will 
disconnect the compressor motor from the circuit.
Another type of fl ow switch is shown in 
 Figure 31–4. This switch is actually a pressure switch 
that detects the increase in air pressure inside the 
duct when the blower is in operation. The switch 
can be adjusted for more or less sensitivity. The 
switch contacts connect in the same manner as 
shown in Figure 31–3.
 Figure 31–3
Compressor is interlocked with 
airﬂ ow switches. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 Figure 31–4
Flow switch senses the increase of air pressure inside 
the duct when the blower is in operation. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

UNIT 31  The Flow Switch   307
SUMMARY
 Some fl ow switches sense the fl ow of liquid and some are made to sense the fl ow of air.
 Airfl ow switches are sometimes referred to as sail switches.
 Airfl ow switches are generally used to ensure that air is moving across the evaporator coil 
before the compressor is permitted to start.
 Flow switch contacts are generally normally open and are connected in series with the coil 
of the compressor relay.
KEY TERMS
CFM (condenser fan 
 motor) relay
CFS (condenser fl ow 
 switch)
compressor relay coil
CR (control relay)
EFM (evaporator fan 
 motor) relay
EFS (evaporator fl ow 
 switch)
fl ow switch
sail switch
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What is a common name for the airfl ow switch?
 
2. What function does the airfl ow switch perform in a circuit?
 
3. What is interlocking in a control circuit?

308
The control of humidity can be very important in 
some heating and air conditioning systems. Some 
industries, such as mills that knit polyester and 
nylon fi bers, must maintain a constant humidity 
because these materials contract and expand with 
a change of humidity. The control of humidity is 
also important in heating systems. The amount of 
humidity in the air has a great effect on the comfort 
of the living area. If the humidity is to be maintained 
at a constant level, some device must be used to 
detect the amount of humidity and then operate 
some type of control.
The humidistat is a device that can sense the 
amount of humidity in the air and activate a set of 
contacts if the humidity should become too high or 
too low. The two most common materials used to 
sense humidity are hair and nylon. The materials 
contract and expand with a change in the amount 
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Discuss the operation of a humidistat
 Discuss how the humidistat is 
connected into the control circuit
 Connect a humidistat in a circuit
The Humidistat
UNIT 32

UNIT 32  The Humidistat   309
of humidity in the air. A humidistat using hair as 
the sense element is shown in Figure 32–1.
If a humidifi er is used in a central-heating or 
air conditioning system, it is generally operated only 
when the blower is in operation. For this reason, 
some means is used to interlock the humidifi er with 
the blower. The circuit shown in Figure 32–2 uses 
a humidistat to control the operation of a solenoid 
coil. The solenoid coil operates a valve that supplies 
water to the humidifi er. Notice that the solenoid coil 
is interlocked with an airfl ow switch. The coil can be 
energized only when the sail switch indicates there 
is airfl ow in the system. Some controls use a com-
bination of a humidistat and a sail switch. Nylon 
strips are used to sense the amount of humidity in 
the air and a plastic sail is used to sense the fl ow of 
air in the duct.
HUMIDISTAT
24  VOLTS
SOL.
SAIL  SWITCH
 Figure 32–1
Humidistat. (Courtesy of Honeywell Inc.).
 Figure 32–2
Humidiﬁ er is interlocked with 
an airﬂ ow switch. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
SUMMARY
 A humidistat is used to control the amount of humidity in the air.
 The amount of humidity in the air greatly affects the comfort of the living area.
 The humidistat is a device that senses the amount of humidity in the surrounding air and 
controls a set of contacts.
 The two most common materials used to sense humidity are hair and nylon.
 A humidifi er used in a central air conditioning system is generally permitted to operate 
only when the blower is in operation.
KEY TERMS
hair
humidistat
nylon

310   SECTION 5  Control Components
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What is a humidistat?
 
2. What are the two most common materials used to sense humidity?
 
3. What type of control is often used to interlock the humidifi er with the blower?

311
The blower fan of a heating system is generally 
not permitted to operate until the heat exchanger 
reaches a high enough temperature to ensure that 
cold air will not be delivered into the living area. Fan 
switches are generally operated by a bimetal strip 
that closes a set of contacts when the temperature of 
the heat exchanger reaches a high enough level. A 
fan switch of this type is shown in Figure 33–1. The 
control shown on the face of the switch is used to 
determine the temperature at which the fan will turn 
off. The temperature at which the switch contacts 
will close is determined by the manufacturer. Longer 
operation time of the fan will generally increase the 
overall effi ciency of the heating unit because more 
of the heat is delivered to the living area and less 
escapes to unheated areas. Some people, however, 
do not like the cooler air being delivered by the 
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Discuss the operation of a fan-limit 
switch
 Describe different types of fan and 
limit switches
 Draw the schematic symbol for a limit 
switch
 Test a fan or limit switch with an 
ohmmeter
 Connect a fan-limit switch in a circuit
UNIT 33
Fan-Limit 
Switches

312   SECTION 5  Control Components
blower at the end of a heating cycle. For this reason, 
the switch can be set to turn off sooner and prevent 
this problem.
Some fan switches are designed with large 
enough contacts to permit them to control the oper-
ation of the blower motor without a fan relay. Other 
fan switches have small auxiliary contacts and are 
used to control the coil of a fan relay. The circuit in 
Figure 33–2 shows a fan switch being used to con-
trol a blower motor. Notice the schematic symbol 
is the same as a thermostat. This symbol is used 
because it is a thermally activated switch.
Another type of fan switch is shown in 
Figure 33–3. This type of switch does not sense the 
heat of a heat exchanger to close a set of contacts. 
 Figure 33–1
Fan switch. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
120  VOLTS
FAN  SWITCH
MOTOR
 Figure 33–2
Fan switch controls the  operation of 
the motor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 33–3
Time-delay fan switch. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
This switch is basically a timer. It uses a small resis-
tance heater that is controlled by the thermostat. 
The heater causes a bimetal strip to bend. When the 
strip has bent far enough, it closes a set of spring-
loaded contacts and connects the motor to the line. 
A schematic of this relay is shown in Figure 33–4. 
Notice that this switch has two sections that are 
isolated from each other. The 24-volt section is con-
nected to the heating element. The 120-volt section 
is connected to the switch contacts. When con-
necting this type of fan switch, care must be taken 
not to connect the terminals to the wrong voltage. 
The advantage of this type of switch is that it can 
be used to replace almost any type of thermally 
 operated fan switch because it can be mounted 
almost anywhere.
Another type of fan switch is shown in 
Figure 33–5. This switch is used to control the speed 
of a fan motor as opposed to turning it on or off. This 
switch is more common to an air conditioning sys-
tem than a heating system. It is used to control the 
speed of the condenser fan. Some systems decrease 
the speed of the condenser fan if the temperature 
of the condenser drops too low. A low condenser 
temperature will cause a low head pressure. This 
switch is basically a single-pole double-throw switch, 

UNIT 33  Fan-Limit Switches   313
 Figure 33–6. When the condenser temperature is 
low, the motor is connected to low-speed operation. 
When the condenser temperature increases, the 
motor is connected for high-speed operation.
LIMIT SWITCHES
One type of limit switch is used as a safety cut-off 
switch for a heating system. Limit switches are gen-
erally a bimetal-operated switch. Two types of limit 
switches are shown in Figure 33–7. Limit switches 
contain a normally closed contact, which is con-
nected in series with the system control. They are 
not, however, connected in series with the blower 
fan, Figure 33–8. Notice that the blower motor can 
operate independently of the burner control. This 
permits the blower to cool down the heating unit 
if the high-limit switch should open and turn the 
blower off.
120  VOLTS
24  VOLTS
HEATING
ELEMENT
BIMETAL
STRIP
SNAP-ACTION
SWITCH
BLOWER
MOTOR
THERMOSTAT
 Figure 33–4
Timer used as a fan switch. (Source: 
Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 33–5
Bimetal fan-speed switch. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
L1
L2
HIGH
LOW
BLOWER
MOTOR
 Figure 33–6
Condenser speed-control switch. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

314   SECTION 5  Control Components
FAN-LIMIT SWITCH
The fan-limit switch contains both a fan 
switch and a high-limit switch in one housing, 
Figure 33–9. This type of switch uses a bimetal 
strip formed in the shape of a spiral. When the 
bimetal is heated, it causes a cam to rotate. When 
the cam has turned far enough, the normally open 
fan switch closes and connects the blower fan to 
 Figure 33–7
High-limit switches. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
L1
L2
FAN  SWITCH
BLOWER
MOTOR
HIGH  LIMIT
BURNER
CONTROL
 Figure 33–8
Limit switch is connected in series 
with the burner control. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
the line, Figure 33–10. If the system is operating 
properly, the blower fan prevents the temperature 
of the heat exchanger from rising high enough to 
open the high-limit switch contacts. If the blower 
fan does not operate, however, the temperature of 
the heat exchanger will increase enough to open 
the normally closed limit switch. This will cause the 
burner to turn off and prevent damage to the heat-
ing system.

UNIT 33  Fan-Limit Switches   315
 Figure 33–9
Fan-limit switch. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
L1
L2
FAN  SWITCH
BLOWER
MOTOR
HIGH  LIMIT
BURNER
CONTROL
 Figure 33–10
Schematic for fan-limit switch. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
SUMMARY
 The blower fan of a heating system is generally not permitted to operate until the heat 
exchanger has reached a high enough temperature.
 Fan switches are generally operated by a bimetal strip that closes a set of contacts.
 Some fan switches can be adjusted to operate longer or turn off sooner.
 Some fan switches are designed with large enough contacts to control the operation of the 
blower motor without the use of a fan relay.
 Some fan and limit switches are constructed as one unit and others are constructed as 
separate units.
 Limit switches are generally used to stop the operation of the heating system if the 
 temperature should become too high.

316   SECTION 5  Control Components
KEY TERMS
fan-limit switch
fan switches
limit switch
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. Why do some fan switches permit the temperature at which the switch will turn on 
and off to be set?
 
2. What type of sensing device do most fan switches use to determine when the tempera-
ture is high enough to start the blower fan?
 
3. What type of contact arrangement is used for switches that control the speed of a 
condenser fan motor?
 
4. What is the most common use for a high-limit switch?
 
5. Why is the blower fan not connected in series with the limit switch?

317
Many of the larger air conditioning units use a 
forced-oil system for the compressor instead of a 
splash system. When a forced-oil system is used, an 
oil-pressure failure switch is often employed 
to protect the compressor from insuffi cient oil pres-
sure. The oil-pressure failure switch actually con-
tains several control functions in the same unit. 
These functions include a differential pressure 
switch, a timer, and a set of control contacts.
THE DIFFERENTIAL 
PRESSURE SWITCH
The actual oil pressure in a compressor is the differ-
ence in pressure between the suction pressure and 
the discharge pressure of the oil pump. For example, 
if the suction pressure is 35 psi, and the oil pump 
discharge pressure is 65 psi, the actual amount of 
UNIT 34
The Oil-
 Pressure 
 Failure Switch
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Discuss why the oil-pressure failure 
switch is necessary on large air 
conditioning systems
 Discuss differential pressure
 Describe the operation of the time-
delay circuit
 Connect an oil-pressure failure switch 
for operation on a 120- or 240-volt 
system

318   SECTION 5  Control Components
oil pressure in the system is 30 psi (65 – 35  30). If 
the oil-pressure failure switch is to be used to mea-
sure the actual oil pressure in the system, it must be 
able to measure the difference between these two 
pressures. This is accomplished with a differential 
pressure switch. Figure 34–1 illustrates the opera-
tion of an oil-pressure failure switch. Notice in this 
illustration that two bellows are employed. One bel-
lows is connected to the suction side of the compres-
sor. The other bellows is connected to the oil pump 
discharge. If the oil pressure is low, the bellows con-
nected to the suction side of the compressor forces 
the differential pressure switch to remain closed. If 
the oil pressure increases high enough above the 
pressure of the suction line, the oil pressure bellows 
will provide enough force to overcome the force of 
the suction line bellows and open the differential 
pressure switch. Notice that the differential  pressure 
switch remains closed until there is enough oil 
 pressure to open it.
THE TIME-DELAY CIRCUIT
The differential pressure switch is used to control 
the time-delay circuit. The time-delay circuit 
consists of a current-limiting resistor, a resis-
tance heating element, and a bimetal strip. Most oil 
pressure failure switches are designed to be used 
on 120- or 240-volt connections. This selection is 
made possible by the value of the current-limiting 
resistor. Notice that this resistor is center tapped. If 
240 volts is to be applied to the circuit, the full value 
of the current-limiting resistor is connected in series 
with the heater. If the circuit is 120 volts, the line is 
connected to the center tap position of the current-
limiting resistor. Because the value of the resistor 
BIMETAL
STRIP
RESET
BUTTON
H
E
A
T
E
R
MOTOR
STARTER
COIL
TO  OIL  PUMP
DISCHARGE
OL
TO  SUCTION  LINE
240
120
CURRENT
LIMITING
RESISTOR
DIFFERENTIAL
PRESSURE 
SWITCH
CONTROL  CONTACTS
240  VOLTS
 Figure 34–1
Schematic of oil-pressure failure switch. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 34  The Oil- Pressure  Failure Switch   319
is cut in half for the 120-volt connection, the same 
amount of current will fl ow through the heater for 
either line voltage.
The resistance heater is used to heat the bimetal 
strip. If the heater is permitted to operate long 
enough, the bimetal strip will warp away, and the 
control contact will open. The time-delay circuit is 
necessary to permit the compressor to operate long 
enough for oil pressure to build up in the system. 
When the oil pressure reaches a high enough level, 
the differential pressure switch opens and discon-
nects the heater from the circuit. This stops the 
warping action of the bimetal strip and the control 
contacts do not open.
THE CONTROL CONTACTS
Notice that the control contacts are connected in 
series with the motor starter coil to the compressor. 
If the control contacts should open, the circuit to 
the motor starter will be broken and the compressor 
will be disconnected from the line. Notice that the 
control contacts provide power to the heater of the 
timer. If the control contacts should open, power 
cannot be applied to the heater circuit until the 
contacts are closed. Once the contacts have opened, 
they must be manually reset by the reset button.
SPECIFICATIONS
The normal usable oil pressure for most reciprocat-
ing compressors is generally between 35 and 45 psi. 
The differential pressure control permits the cut-in 
and cut-out points to be set. A common setting for 
this type of switch is cut in at 18 psi and cut out at 
12 psi. This means that the differential pressure 
switch contacts will open when the oil pressure 
becomes 18 psi greater than the pressure of the suc-
tion line and will close when the oil pressure drops 
to a point that it is only 12 psi above the suction 
line pressure. The amount of time delay is set by the 
manufacturer and is generally about 2 minutes. An 
oil-pressure failure switch is shown in Figure 34–2.
 Figure 34–2
Oil-pressure failure switch. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
SUMMARY
 Many large air conditioning compressors use a forced-oil system instead of a splash system.
 The oil-pressure failure switch is used to protect the compressor from insuffi cient 
oil pressure.
 The oil-pressure failure switch senses the difference in pressure between the oil pump and 
suction pressure of the compressor.
 A time-delay circuit is used to stop the compressor if the oil pressure has not reached a 
suffi cient level within a certain time.
 A current-limiting resistor permits the oil-pressure failure switch to be connected to 120 
or 240 volts.
 The control contacts of the oil-pressure failure switch are connected in series with the coil 
of the compressor starter relay.
 Most reciprocating compressors operate with an oil pressure of 35 to 45 psi.
 Oil-pressure failure switches are generally set to cut in at about 18 psi and to cut out at 
about 12 psi.

320   SECTION 5  Control Components
KEY TERMS
control contacts
current-limiting 
 resistor
differential pressure 
 switch
oil-pressure failure 
 switch
time-delay circuit
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. How can the actual amount of useful oil pressure in a compressor be found?
 
2. What is the function of the current-limiting resistor?
 
3. Why is the current-limiting resistor center tapped?
 
4. Does a high enough oil pressure open the differential pressure switch contacts or 
close them?
 
5. What is the function of the heater?
 
6. Explain the sequence of events that take place if the oil pressure does not become great 
enough to disconnect the heater circuit.
 
7. What is the cut-in point?
 
8. What is the cut-out point?
 
9. Is the timer circuit connected in series with the motor starter coil?
 10. Are the overload contacts connected in series with the motor starter coil?

321
A solenoid valve is an electrically operated valve. 
These valves are used to control the fl ow of gases 
or liquids. They range in complexity from a simple 
on-off valve to 4-way reversing valves used on heat-
pump systems. A simple plunger-type of solenoid 
valve is shown in Figure 35–1. This type of valve 
is often used to control the fl ow of gas or liquid in 
an air conditioning system. The plunger of the sole-
noid is used to lift the valve off its seat. The valve is 
held closed by a spring when it is in its normal or 
deenergized position. When the coil is energized, the 
plunger lifts the valve off the seat and liquid or gas 
is permitted to fl ow from the inlet to the outlet. 
When the coil is deenergized, the spring returns the 
valve to the seat and stops the fl ow of liquid or gas.
Notice that the valve is marked with an inlet and 
outlet side. The inlet is connected to the side of the 
system with the highest pressure. In this way, the 
UNIT 35
Solenoid 
Valves
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Deﬁ ne a solenoid
 Properly connect the inlet and outlet of 
a solenoid valve
 Describe the operation of a 4-way, or 
reversing, valve
 Make the proper electrical connections 
for a solenoid valve

322   SECTION 5  Control Components
pressure of the system is used to help keep the valve 
closed. If the valve should be reversed and pressure 
applied to the outlet side, the pressure of the system 
could be enough to overcome the tension of the 
spring and lift the plunger off the seat. This would 
cause the valve to leak.
THE REVERSING VALVE
A very common solenoid valve used in the air 
conditioning fi eld is the 4-way valve or revers-
ing valve. Reversing valves are used to change 
the direction of fl ow of refrigerant in a heat-pump 
system. Figure 35–2 shows the direction of refriger-
ant fl ow when the heat-pump unit is in the cooling 
cycle. Notice that the high-pressure gas leaving 
the compressor enters the reversing valve. It is 
then directed to the outside coil being used as the 
condenser during the cooling cycle. Liquid refriger-
ant fl ows from the outside coil to the metering 
device where it is changed to a low-pressure liq-
uid. The low-pressure liquid then enters the inside 
coil where it attracts heat from the inside air and 
changes to a gas. It then fl ows to the reversing 
valve. The reversing valve directs the fl ow to the 
accumulator and back to the compressor.
If the unit is now to be used for heating, the fl ow 
of refrigerant must be reversed through the system, 
Figure 35–3. Notice that the fl ow of hot, high-
pressure gas is still from the discharge side of the 
compressor to the reversing valve. In this example, 
however, the fl ow of high-pressure gas is directed 
to the inside coil, which is now being used as the 
condenser. Liquid refrigerant leaves the inside coil 
and fl ows to the metering valve. The refrigerant 
is changed into a low-pressure liquid after going 
through the metering valve and fl owing to the out-
side coil. Heat is then added to the liquid from the 
surrounding outside air. The gas then fl ows to 
the reversing valve, the accumulator, and back to 
the suction line of the compressor.
INLET
OUTLET
PLUNGER
COIL
SPRING
 Figure 35–1
Solenoid valve. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
SUCTION
LINE
COMPRESSOR
ACCUMULATOR
OUTSIDE
COIL
INSIDE
COIL
METERING
DEVICE
DISCHARGE
LINE
REVERSING
VALVE
 Figure 35–2
Refrigerant ﬂ ow during the 
cooling cycle. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 35  Solenoid Valves   323
Notice in both examples that the direction of 
refrigerant fl ow from and to the compressor is the 
same. The reversing valve was used to change the 
direction of fl ow.
REVERSING VALVE OPERATION
The 4-way reversing valve is actually two valves that 
operate together. There is a main valve that actually 
controls the fl ow of refrigerant in the system, and a 
pilot valve that controls the operation of the main 
valve, Figure 35–4. The force needed to operate the 
main valve is provided by the compressor. The valve 
shown in Figure 35–4 has a sliding valve body that 
is used to control the fl ow of refrigerant through the 
system. In the illustration shown, the system is being 
used in the cooling cycle. Notice that on each side of 
the valve there is a small passage called an orifi ce. 
The orifi ce provides a path for a very small amount 
of refrigerant to fl ow. Notice also that there is a small 
capillary tube connected from each end of the valve 
body to the pilot valve and a third capillary tube 
connected from the pilot valve to the suction line of 
the compressor. In the position shown, the plunger 
of the pilot valve is blocking the capillary from the 
left side of the main valve body. The capillary tube 
connected to the right side of the main valve is con-
nected to the suction side of the compressor through 
the pilot valve. With the plunger of the pilot valve in 
this position, a high pressure is formed on the left side 
of the main valve and a low pressure is formed on 
the right side. The high pressure created on the left 
side of the main valve forces the main valve to slide 
to the right. With the main valve in this position, the 
discharge line of the compressor is connected to 
the outside coil and the inside coil is connected to the 
suction side of the compressor.
If the solenoid coil is energized, the plunger of 
the pilot valve will change to the position shown in 
Figure 35–5. The plunger now blocks the capillary 
tube connected to the right side of the main valve 
body. The capillary tube connected on the left side 
of the main valve is now connected to the suction 
line of the compressor through the pilot valve. This 
causes a high pressure to be created on the right 
side of the main valve and a low pressure on the 
left side. The high pressure forces the main valve 
to slide to the left. When the reversing valve is in 
this position, the discharge side of the compressor 
is connected to the inside coil and the suction line 
is connected to the outside coil. The unit is now in 
the heating cycle.
SUCTION
LINE
COMPRESSOR
ACCUMULATOR
OUTSIDE
COIL
INSIDE
COIL
METERING
DEVICE
DISCHARGE
LINE
REVERSING
VALVE
 Figure 35–3
Refrigerant ﬂ ow during the 
heating cycle. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

324   SECTION 5  Control Components
HIGH  PRESSURE
ORIFICE
LOW  PRESSURE
MAIN  VALVE
ORIFICE
TO  OUTSIDE  COIL
TO
COMPRESSOR
SUCTION
TO  COMPRESSOR
DISCHARGE
TO  INSIDE  COIL
COIL
SPRING
PILOT  VALVE
 Figure 35–4
Reversing valve 
set for the 
cooling cycle. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
LOW  PRESSURE
HIGH  PRESSURE
TO  OUTSIDE  COIL
TO
COMPRESSOR
SUCTION
TO  COMPRESSOR
DISCHARGE
TO  INSIDE  COIL
 Figure 35–5
Reversing valve 
set for the 
heating cycle. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)

UNIT 35  Solenoid Valves   325
SUMMARY
 A solenoid valve is an electrically operated valve.
 The inlet and outlet side of a valve should never be reversed.
 Four-way valves are used to reverse the fl ow of refrigerant in a heat pump system.
 Reversing valves are actually two valves that operate together.
 The solenoid coil of a 4-way valve actually operates a pilot valve that is used to operate the 
main valve.
 The force needed to operate the main valve is provided by the compressor.
The valve illustrated in this example shows 
the valve is in the cooling cycle when the sole-
noid is deenergized and in the heating cycle when 
energized. This has been standard for many years 
for heat-pump systems. Now, however, some 
manufacturers are reversing this procedure. Some 
reversing valves are made in such a manner that 
when the valve is deenergized the unit is in the 
heating cycle. This was done so that valve failure 
would result in the unit being in the heating cycle. 
It is felt that heat is necessary to life while air con-
ditioning is not. A 4-way reversing valve is shown 
in Figure 35–6.
 Figure 35–6
Reversing valve. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
4-way valve
inlet
metering device
orifi ce
outlet
pilot valve
reversing valve
solenoid coil
solenoid valve
KEY TERMS

326   SECTION 5  Control Components
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What is a solenoid valve?
 
2. Why is it important not to reverse the connection of the inlet and outlet side of a 
solenoid valve?
 
3. What is used to cause the plunger to close when the solenoid coil is deenergized?
 
4. What is the function of a 4-way reversing valve?
 
5. What is the function of the pilot valve?
 
6. What is the function of the main valve?
 
7. What is actually used to change the position of the main valve from one setting 
to another?

327
Short cycling is a condition that occurs when the 
compressor is restarted immediately after it has been 
turned off. This causes the compressor to restart 
against a high head pressure. Trying to restart a 
compressor in this manner can cause damage to 
the compressor, motor winding, or at the very least, 
open a circuit breaker or overload relay. After a 
compressor has been turned off, enough time should 
be permitted to pass to allow the pressure in the 
 system to equalize before it is restarted.
CAUSES OF SHORT CYCLING
Short cycling can be caused by several situations. 
For example, a loose thermostat wire can cause a 
bad connection that will cause the compressor to 
alternately start and stop. A momentary interrup-
tion of the power line can cause the compressor to 
UNIT 36
The Short-
 Cycle Timer
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Deﬁ ne the condition known as short 
cycling
 List reasons that short cycling occurs
 Describe the construction of a 
short-cycle timer
 Describe the circuit operation of a 
short-cycle timer
 Connect a short-cycle timer in the 
circuit

328   SECTION 5  Control Components
stop and then restart when power is restored. People 
can also cause short cycling. Assume, for example, 
that the air conditioning system is in operation. 
Now assume that someone changes the thermostat 
setting and causes the thermostat contact to open 
and stop the compressor. Now assume that the 
person changes his mind and again changes the 
thermostat so that the compressor tries to restart. 
Regardless of the reason or causes of short cycling, 
it should be avoided whenever possible.
THE SHORT-CYCLING TIMER
The short-cycling timer is a cam-operated, 
motor driven, on-delay timer. A photograph of a 
short-cycling timer is shown in Figure 36–1. This 
timer is used in conjunction with a relay generally 
referred to as a holding relay. The timer contains a 
set of double-pole double-throw contacts (DPDT). 
A basic schematic of a short-cycling timer circuit is 
shown in Figure 36–2. Notice the two sets of double-
throw contacts labeled A and B. The dashed line 
L2
L1
HR2
B2
B
TM
TIMER  MOTOR
B1
A2
A
C
COMPRESSOR
CONTACTOR
CR
24 V
240 V
CONTROL
TRANSFORMER
CONTROL
RELAY
THERMOSTAT
HR
HOLDING  RELAY
A1
HR1
CR
 Figure 36–1
Short-cycling timer. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 36–2
Basic schematic of a short-cycle 
timer circuit. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

UNIT 36  The Short- Cycle Timer   329
between the contacts indicates mechanical connec-
tion so that they operate together. Notice also the 
holding relay labeled HR. The circuit is controlled by 
the operation of the thermostat.
CIRCUIT OPERATION
To understand the operation of this circuit, refer to 
the schematic shown in Figure 36–3. The arrows 
indicate the paths for current fl ow. Notice there 
is a path from line L1 through the primary of the 
control transformer and back to L2. This provides 
24 volts for the operation of the control circuit. 
When the thermostat contacts close, a circuit is 
 provided through the coil of the control relay (CR). 
This causes contact CR to close and provides a cur-
rent fl ow path to the short-cycle timer. Notice there 
are two paths of current fl ow at the timer. The cur-
rent enters the A1 terminal and fl ows to the B1 con-
tact terminal. The current can then fl ow through 
the contact to terminal B and then to the timer 
motor. There is also a current path from terminal 
A1 to A. The current can then fl ow from A to the 
holding relay (HR).
The holding relay energizes and changes both HR 
contacts as shown in Figure 36–4. The now closed 
HR 1 contact is used as a holding contact. Notice 
that current is also fl owing through the timer motor. 
The timer motor is geared to permit a delay of about 
3 minutes before the contacts change position.
A1
A2
A
B1
B
B2
L1
L2
CR
HR1
HR
C
TM
CR
HR2
THERMOSTAT
 Figure 36–3
The thermostat energizes the control relay. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

330   SECTION 5  Control Components
Figure 36–5 illustrates the operation of the 
circuit when the timer contacts change position. 
Notice that current now fl ows through the closed 
CR contact and the closed HR contact to contact A. 
Current can now fl ow to contact A2 and then to the 
compressor contactor. When the compressor con-
tactor energizes, it connects the compressor to the 
line. Notice that contact B2 is connected to the now 
open HR2 contact. Because there is no current fl ow 
to the timer motor, the timing operation is stopped 
for as long as the thermostat maintains a circuit to 
CR relay.
After the thermostat has been satisfi ed, it will 
reopen and deenergize CR relay coil. This causes CR 
contact to open and deenergize HR relay coil. When 
HR relay deenergizes, HR2 contacts will again close 
and current fl ow is provided through the B2 and B 
contact to the timer motor, Figure 36–6. The timer 
motor now operates and resets the contacts to their 
original position as shown in Figure 36–2. The cir-
cuit is now ready for another operation sequence. 
If the thermostat momentarily opens and then 
recloses, or if there is a momentary loss of power, 
the holding relay will deenergize and the timer 
will have to time out before the compressor can be 
reconnected to the line. About 1 minute is required 
for the timer to reset.
ELECTRONIC SHORT-CYCLE 
TIMERS
Many short-cycle timers use electronic components 
to affect a time delay. These units are relatively 
simple to install and set. All logic functions are con-
tained within the timer, eliminating the need for a 
holding relay. Electronic short-cycle timers can be 
obtained that operate as delay-on-make or as 
delay-on-break.
L2
L1
HR2
B2
B
TM
B1
A2
A
C
CR
THERMOSTAT
HR
A1
HR1
CR
 Figure 36–4
The holding relay and the timer 
motor are energized. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

UNIT 36  The Short- Cycle Timer   331
The Delay-on-Make 
Short-Cycle Timer
Delay-on-make timers are basically on-delay timers. 
They connect in series with the coil of the compres-
sor contactor, Figure 36–7. When the thermostat 
contacts close and apply power to the timer, the 
timer starts timing for the period of time set on the 
timer. After the time delay period, power is applied 
to the coil of the compressor contactor and the 
compressor starts. The delay-on-make timer is not 
as popular as the delay-on-break timer because the 
A1
A2
A
B1
B
B2
L1
L2
CR
HR1
HR
C
TM
CR
HR2
THERMOSTAT
 Figure 36–5
The compressor contactor energizes when the timer contacts change position. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
delay-on-make timer will not permit the compres-
sor to start when the thermostat contacts are fi rst 
closed. A delay-on-make short-cycle timer is shown 
in Figure 36–8.
The Delay-on-Break 
Short-Cycle Timer
The delay-on-break short-cycle timer begins its tim-
ing sequence when the thermostat contacts open 
instead of close. This permits the delay-on-break 
timer to start the compressor instantly when the 

332   SECTION 5  Control Components
L2
L1
HR2
B2
B
TM
B1
A2
A
C
CR
THERMOSTAT
HR
A1
HR1
CR
 Figure 36–6
When the thermostat deener-
gizes, current is provided to the 
timer motor to reset the contacts. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
TRANSFORMER
COMPRESSOR
CONTACTOR
THERMOSTAT
SHORT  CYCLE  TIMER
C
3
1
 Figure 36–7
Delay-on-make short-cycle timer connection. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 36  The Short- Cycle Timer   333
thermostat contacts close. If the power is inter-
rupted, the timer must time out before power can be 
reapplied to the compressor contactor. The delay-
on-brake short cycle time has three connection 
terminals instead of two, Figure 36–9. A delay-on-
break short-cycle timer is shown in Figure 36–10.
Line Monitors and 
Short-Cycle Timers
Some electronic controls combine more than one 
function in a single unit. The control shown in 
Figure 36–11 is a combination line monitor and 
 Figure 36–8
Delay-on-make short-cycle timer. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
TRANSFORMER
COMPRESSOR  CONTACTOR
THERMOSTAT
SHORT-CYCLE  TIMER
C
3
1
2
 Figure 36–9
Delay-on-break short-cycle timer connection. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 36–10
Delay-on-break short cycle timer. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

334   SECTION 5  Control Components
short-cycle timer. Voltage values of 95 to 135 volts 
AC or 190 to 260 volts AC can be selected. Control 
voltage can range from 18 to 240 volts AC. A sche-
matic connection diagram for this control is shown 
in Figure 36–12.
A three-phase line monitor and short-cycle timer 
control is shown in Figure 36–13. This unit per-
forms the same basic function as the single-phase 
unit except that it monitors three line voltages. Like 
the single-phase control, the three-phase control 
has settings for different voltage ranges and delay 
times for the short-cycle timer.
Another three-phase line monitor is shown in 
Figures 36–14A and 36–14B. This monitor does 
not provide short-cycle protection. Its function is 
 Figure 36–11
Single-phase line monitor and short-cycle timer. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
short-cycle timer for a single-phase unit. The con-
trol monitors the line voltage for a high or low 
condition. A 5-second time delay is built into the 
unit in the event a voltage fault is encountered. 
This prevents the control from opening the circuit 
to the coil of the compressor contactor in the event 
of a momentary line fl uctuation that can occur as a 
result of a heavy load being connected to the power 
line. The voltage drop due to the starting of a large 
motor is a good example of a momentary voltage 
fl uctuation.
This control also acts as a short-cycle timer. 
There are two control knobs on the control unit. 
One is set to the line voltage value the control is 
connected to and the other sets the delay time of the 

UNIT 36  The Short- Cycle Timer   335
LOAD
CC
CC
4
3
95–135  VAC
AC  INPUT  VOLTAGE
CONNECT  
TO  TERMINAL  
3  OR  4
190–260  VAC
2
7
6
5
9
 Figure 36–12
Connection for a single-phase line 
monitor and short-cycle timer. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 36–13
Three-phase line monitor and 
short-cycle timer. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

336   SECTION 5  Control Components
to monitor the line voltages and disconnect the 
compressor from the line if a problem should exist. 
The monitor is designed to plug into an eight-pin 
tube socket. A set of contacts are connected in 
series with the coil of the compressor contactor. 
In the event of a line problem, the contacts open 
and the contactor disconnects the compressor 
from the line.
 Figure 36–14A
The monitor is designed to plug into an eight-pin tube 
socket. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 36–14B
Voltage adjustment for the three-phase line monitor. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
SUMMARY
 Short cycling is a condition that occurs when a compressor is restarted immediately after 
it has been stopped.
 Short cycling can cause the compressor to try to restart against a high head pressure and 
damage the compressor motor.
 A short-cycling timer can be installed to prevent short cycling.
 The short-cycling timer is a cam-operated, motor driven, on-delay timer.
 The short-cycling timer is controlled by the thermostat.

UNIT 36  The Short- Cycle Timer   337
KEY TERMS
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What is short cycling?
 
2. What is used to provide the timing operation for the short-cycle timer?
 
3. What type of contacts are used in the short-cycle timer?
 
4. How many and what type of contacts must the holding relay have?
 
5. What does the dashed line drawn between the two sets of timer contacts represent?
delay-on-break
delay-on-make
holding relay (HR)
short cycling
short-cycling timer
timer motor

In the air conditioning and refrigeration fi eld, the 
ability to sense and measure temperature is of great 
importance. There are numerous methods used to 
sense the temperature. In fact, there has probably 
been more emphasis on the ability to measure tem-
perature than any other quantity. This unit will deal 
with some of these methods.
EXPANSION OF METAL
A very common and reliable method for sensing 
temperature is by the expansion of metal. It has 
been known for many years that metal expands 
when heated. The amount of expansion is propor-
tional to two things:
 1. The type of metal used.
 2. The amount of heat.
338
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 List two factors that determine the 
amount of expansion that occurs when 
metal is heated
 Describe the construction and use of a 
bimetal strip
 Describe how a bimetal strip can be 
used to construct a thermometer and to 
operate a set of contacts
 Describe the operation of a 
thermocouple
 List two factors that determine the 
amount of voltage produced by a 
thermocouple
 Discuss the operation of a resistance 
temperature detector (RTD)
 Discuss the operation of thermistors
 Describe methods to measure 
temperature
UNIT 37
Methods 
of Sensing 
 Temperature

UNIT 37  Methods of Sensing  Temperature   339
Consider the metal bar shown in Figure 37–1. 
When the bar is heated, its length expands. When 
the metal is permitted to cool, it will contract. 
Although the amount of the movement due to con-
traction and expansion is small, a simple mechani-
cal principle can be used to increase the amount of 
movement, Figure 37–2.
The metal bar is mechanically held at one end. 
This permits the amount of expansion to be in only 
one direction. When the metal is heated and the 
bar expands, it pushes against the mechanical arm. 
A small movement of the bar causes a great amount 
of movement in the mechanical arm. This increased 
movement of the arm can be used to indicate the 
temperature of the bar, or it can be used to oper-
ate a switch as shown. It should be understood 
that illustrations are used to convey a principle. In 
actual practice, the switch shown in Figure 37–2 
would be spring loaded to provide a “snap” action 
for the contacts. Electrical contacts must never be 
permitted to open or close slowly. This produces 
poor contact pressure and will cause the contacts 
to burn, or cause erratic operation of the equipment 
 Figure 37–1
Metal expands when heated. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
C
NO
NC
 Figure 37–2
Expanding metal operates a set of 
contacts. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 37–3
A mercury thermometer operates by the expansion of 
metal. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
they are intended to control. A device that uses this 
principle is one type of starting relay known as the 
hot-wire relay. This starting relay was covered in an 
earlier chapter.
Another very common device that operates on 
the principle of expansion and contraction of metal 
is the mercury thermometer. Mercury is a metal 
that remains in a liquid state at room temperature. 
If the mercury is confi ned in a narrow glass tube 
as shown in Figure 37–3, it will rise up the tube 
as it expands due to heat. If the tube is calibrated 
correctly, it provides an accurate measurement for 
temperature.

340   SECTION 5  Control Components
will be produced by a change of temperature. If one 
end of the strip is mechanically held, and a pointer 
is attached to the center of the spiral, a change 
in temperature will cause the pointer to rotate. If 
a calibrated scale is placed behind the pointer, it 
becomes a thermometer. If the center of the spiral 
is held, and a contact is attached to the end of the 
bimetal strip, it becomes a thermostat. As stated 
previously, electrical contacts cannot be permitted 
to open or close slowly. This type of thermostat uses 
a small permanent magnet to provide a snap action 
for the contact, Figure 37–7. When the moving 
contact reaches a point that is close to the station-
ary contact, the magnet attracts the metal strip and 
causes a sudden closing of the contacts. When the 
bimetal strip cools, it attempts to pull itself away 
from the magnet. When the force of the bimetal strip 
becomes strong enough, it overcomes the force of 
the magnet and the contacts snap open. This type 
of thermostat is inexpensive and has been used in 
homes for many years.
THE THERMOCOUPLE
The thermocouple is made by joining two dis-
similar metals together at one end. When the joined 
end of the thermocouple is heated, a voltage is pro-
duced at the opposite end, Figure 37–8. The amount 
of voltage produced is proportional to:
 1. The types of metals used to produce the ther-
mocouple.
 2. The difference in temperature of the two 
junctions.
The chart in Figure 37–9 shows common types of 
thermocouples. The metals the thermocouples are 
THE BIMETAL STRIP
The bimetal strip is another device that operates by 
the expansion of metal. It is probably the most com-
mon heat-sensing device used in the production of 
thermometers and thermostats. The bimetal strip 
is made by bonding two dissimilar types of metal 
together, Figure 37–4. Because these metals are 
not alike, they have different expansion rates. This 
difference causes the strip to bend or wrap when 
heated, Figure 37–5.
The bimetal strip is often formed into a spiral 
shape as shown in Figure 37–6. The spiral permits 
a longer bimetal strip to be used in a small space. 
The longer the strip is, the more movement that 
 Figure 37–4
A bimetal strip. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 37–5
A bimetal strip warps with a change of temperature. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
50
25
0
75
100
 Figure 37–6
A bimetal strip used as a  thermometer. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
PERMANENT
MAGNET
 Figure 37–7
A bimetal strip used to operate a set of contacts. (Source: 
Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 37  Methods of Sensing  Temperature   341
a voltage of about 7.9 millivolts. At a temperature 
of –300 degrees, it produces a voltage of about 
–7.5 millivolts. This indicates that at temperatures 
below 32 degrees Fahrenheit the iron wire becomes 
the negative lead and the constantan wire becomes 
the positive-voltage lead.
Because thermocouples produce such low volt-
ages, they are often connected in series as shown 
in Figure 37–10. This series connection permits the 
voltages to add and produce a higher output volt-
age. This connection is known as a thermopile.
constructed from are shown as well as their normal 
temperature range.
The amount of voltage produced by a thermo-
couple is small, generally on the order of millivolts 
(1 millivolt  .001 volt). The polarity of the voltage 
of a thermocouple is determined by the tempera-
ture. For example, a type “J” thermocouple produces 
zero volts at about 32 degrees Fahrenheit. At tem-
peratures above 32 degrees, the iron wire is positive 
and the constantan wire is negative. At a tempera-
ture of 300 degrees, this thermocouple will produce 
 Figure 37–8
A thermocouple produces a voltage when the two ends 
are at different temperatures. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
TYPE
MATERIAL
DEGREES F
DEGREES C
J
Iron
Constantan
−328 to +32
+32 to +1432
−200 to 0
0 to 778
K
Chromel
Alumel
−328 to +32
+32 to +2472
−200 to 0
0 to 1356
T
Copper
Constantan
−328 to +32
+32 to +752
−200 to 0
0 to 400
E
Chromal
Constantan
−328 to +32
+32 to +1832
−200 to 0
0 to 1000
R
Platinum
13% Rhodium
Platinum
+32 to +3232
0 to 1778
S
Platinum
10% Rhodium
Platinum
+32 to +3232
0 to 1778
B
Platinum
30% Rhodium
Platinum
6% Rhodium
+992 to +3352
533 to 1800
 Figure 37–9
Thermocouple chart. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 37–10
Thermocouple. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

342   SECTION 5  Control Components
RTD probe. The temperature is given in degrees 
 Celsius and resistance is given in ohms.
THERMISTORS
The term thermistor is derived from the words ther-
mal and resistor. Thermistors are actually thermally 
sensitive semiconductor devices. There are two 
basic types of thermistors. One type has a nega-
tive temperature coeffi cient (NTC) and the 
other has a positive temperature coeffi cient 
(PTC). A thermistor that has a negative tempera-
ture coeffi cient will decrease its resistance as the 
temperature increases. A thermistor that has a posi-
tive temperature coeffi cient will increase its resis-
tance as temperature increases. The NTC thermistor 
is the most widely used.
Thermistors are highly nonlinear devices. For 
this reason, they are diffi cult to use for measuring 
temperature. Devices that measure temperature 
with a thermistor must be calibrated for the particu-
lar type of thermistor being used. If the thermistor is 
ever replaced, it has to be an exact replacement or 
the circuit will no longer operate correctly. Because 
of their nonlinear characteristic, thermistors are 
often used as set point detectors as opposed to actual 
temperature measurement. A set point detector 
is a device that activates some process or circuit 
when the temperature reaches a certain level. For 
example, assume a thermistor has been placed 
inside the stator of a motor used to operate a com-
pressor. If the motor should become overheated, the 
windings of the motor could be severely damaged or 
destroyed. The thermistor can be used to detect the 
temperature of the windings. When the resistance 
of the thermistor falls to a certain level, NTC type, 
a set of contacts connected in series with the motor 
starter coil of the compressor, opens. When the com-
pressor motor starter deenergizes, the compressor is 
disconnected from the power line. Thermistors can 
be operated in temperatures that range from about 
–100 to 300 degrees Fahrenheit.
THE PN JUNCTION
Another device that has the ability to measure tem-
perature is the PN junction or diode. The diode 
is becoming a very popular device for measuring 
temperature because it is accurate and linear.
RESISTANCE TEMPERATURE 
DETECTORS
The resistance temperature detector (RTD) 
is made of platinum wire. The resistance of platinum 
changes greatly with temperature. When platinum 
is heated, its resistance increases at a very predictable 
rate. This makes the RTD an ideal device for mea-
suring temperature very accurately. RTDs are used 
to measure temperatures that range from –328 to 
1166 degrees Fahrenheit (–200 to 630 degrees 
Celsius). RTDs are made in different styles to perform 
different functions. Figure 37–11 illustrates a typical 
RTD used as a probe. A very small coil of platinum 
wire is encased inside a copper tip. Copper is used to 
provide good thermal contact. This permits the probe 
to be very fast-acting. The chart in Figure 37–12 
shows resistance versus temperature for a typical 
 Figure 37–11
Resistance temperature detector. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
DEGREES C
RESISTANCE
0
100
50
119.39
100
138.5
150
157.32
200
175.84
250
194.08
300
212.03
350
229.69
400
247.06
450
264.16
500
280.93
550
297.44
600
313.65
 Figure 37–12
Temperature and resistance for a typical RTD. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 37  Methods of Sensing  Temperature   343
the transistor and the sensor diode. The value of R1 
also determines the amount of current that will fl ow 
through the diode. Diode D1 is a 5.1-volt zener diode 
used to produce a constant voltage between the base 
and emitter of the PNP transistor. Resistor R2 limits 
the amount of current fl ow through the zener diode 
and the base of the transistor. Diode D2 is a common 
silicon diode. It is being used as the temperature sen-
sor for the circuit. If a digital voltmeter is connected 
across the diode, a voltage drop between .8 and 
0 volts can be seen. The amount of the voltage drop 
is determined by the temperature of the diode.
If the diode is subjected to a lower temperature, 
say by touching it with a piece of ice, it will be seen 
that the voltage drop of the diode will increase. If the 
temperature of the diode is increased by holding it 
between two fi ngers or bringing a hot soldering iron 
near it, its voltage drop will decrease. Notice that 
the diode has a negative temperature coeffi cient. 
As its temperature increases, its voltage drop 
becomes less. The circuit shown in Figure 37–14 
When a silicon diode is used as a temperature sen-
sor, a constant current is passed through the diode. 
Figure 37–13 shows this type of circuit. In this 
circuit, resistor R1 limits the current fl ow through 
 Figure 37–13
Constant current generator. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
+ 1000 µf
C2
+
–
+
1000 µf
C1
120  VAC
12.6  VCT
R6
R3
D3
1K
R4
1K
R5
Q2
2N2907
D5
(REF. VOLTAGE)
1K
4.7K
R7
5K
4
3
2
6
7
741
D4
1K
R1
1K
R2
D2
1N4004
TEMP.
SENSOR
Q1
2N2907
D1
 Figure 37–14
Set level detector for temperature. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

344   SECTION 5  Control Components
voltage applied to the noninverting input between 
1 volt and 0. This is done to make adjustment of 
the detector circuit easy. Because the voltage drop 
of diode D2 will never be greater than .8 volts, 
resistor R7 can adjust the entire range over which 
the detector can operate.
Diode D3 is used as an output indicator. When 
the output is low, D3 will be turned off. When the 
output of the op amp goes high, D3 will be turned 
on. Diode D3 is used only as an indicator in this 
circuit. The output of the op amp could be used 
to operate the input of a transistor or a solid-state 
relay. The transistor or relay could be used to oper-
ate almost anything desired. Resistor R3 limits the 
current fl ow through D3.
To understand the operation of this circuit, 
assume that resistor R7 has been adjusted to a 
point that the output of the op amp is off or low. 
This means that the voltage applied to the invert-
ing input, pin 2, is more positive than the volt-
age set at pin 3. If the temperature of diode D2 is 
increased, its voltage drop will decrease. When 
the temperature of the sensor diode becomes high 
enough, its voltage drop will be less than the volt-
age set at the noninverting input. When the volt-
age applied to pin 3 becomes more positive than the 
voltage applied to pin 2, the output of the op amp 
will go high or turn on. Adjustment of resistor R7 
permits the detector to be used over a wide range of 
temperatures.
EXPANSION DUE TO PRESSURE
Another common method of measuring tempera-
ture is by the increase of pressure of some chemi-
cals. Refrigerant, for example, increases pressure 
as temperature increases. If a simple bellows is 
connected to a line containing refrigerant, Fig-
ure 37–15, the bellows will expand as the pres-
sure inside the sealed system increases. When the 
surrounding temperature decreases, the pressure 
inside the system decreases, and the bellows con-
tracts. When the bellows is made to operate a set of 
contacts, it is generally referred to as a bellows-
type thermostat.
can be used as a set point detector. The operation of 
the circuit is as follows.
A bridge rectifi er and a center-tapped trans-
former are used to produce an above- and below-
ground power supply. If ground is considered as 
zero volts, the positive output of the bridge will be 
positive with respect to ground and the negative 
output of the bridge will be negative with respect 
to ground. Capacitors C1 and C2 are used to fi lter 
the DC output voltage of the rectifi er. Notice that 
capacitor C1 has its positive lead connected to 
ground and C2 has its negative lead connected 
to ground. The positive output of the rectifi er will 
produce a voltage that is about 9 volts compared 
to ground, and the negative output will produce 
a voltage that is about –9 volts compared to 
ground.
Diode D1 is a light-emitting diode connected 
in the forward direction. In this circuit, the LED 
is used as a low-voltage zener diode. Because 
the LED has a constant voltage drop of about 
1.7 volts, it can be used to provide a constant volt-
age. Resistor R1 limits the current flow through 
the diode and the sensor resistor. Resistor R2 
limits current flow through the LED and the base 
of the transistor. Notice this is the same constant 
current generator circuit shown in Figure 37–13 
with the exception of the LED’s being used as the 
zener diode.
Transistor Q2, resistors R5 and R4, and LED D4 
form another constant current generator circuit. 
Notice this generator is connected to an LED, D5. 
In this circuit, D5 is used to provide a low-voltage 
reference source for the operational amplifi er. 
When a light-emitting diode is connected to a 
constant current source, its voltage drop is very 
stable. This makes it an ideal choice when a steady 
reference voltage is needed. Resistors R6 and R7 
are used to form a voltage divider. Resistor R5 is 
a 5000-ohm variable resistor that has a voltage 
drop across its entire resistance of about 1 volt. 
The wiper tap of this resistor is connected to the 
noninverting input of the 741. Because resistor 
R5 has a voltage drop of only 1 volt across its resis-
tance, the full range of the wiper will adjust the 

UNIT 37  Methods of Sensing  Temperature   345
C
NO
NC
BELLOWS
REFRIGERANT
 Figure 37–15
Bellows contracts and expands with a change of refrigerant pressure. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
SUMMARY
 A common method of sensing temperature is by the expansion of metal.
 Two factors that determine the amount of expansion that will occur when metal is heated 
are:
A. The type of metal used.
B. The temperature of the metal.
 A common device that operates on the principle of expansion of metal is the mercury 
thermometer.
 A bimetal strip is constructed by bonding two types of metal together that expand at a dif-
ferent rate.
 The sensitivity of a bimetal strip is proportional to its length.
 Bimetal strips are often wound into a spiral to permit a longer strip to be used in a small 
space.
 Thermocouples produce a voltage when heated at one end.
 Thermocouples are made by joining two dissimilar metals together at one end.
 The amount of voltage produced by a thermocouple is determined by:
A. The types of metals used.
B. The difference in temperature of the two junctions.
 Resistance temperature detectors (RTDs) are made of platinum wire.
 The resistance of platinum changes at a very predictable rate as the temperature 
changes.
 Thermistors are devices that rapidly change their resistance with a change of tempera-
ture.
 The resistance of a thermistor with a positive temperature coeffi cient will increase with an 
increase of temperature.

346   SECTION 5  Control Components
 The resistance of a thermistor with a negative temperature coeffi cient will decrease with 
an increase of temperature.
 Because of thermistors’ ability to rapidly change resistance with a change of temperature, 
they are generally used as temperature-sensitive switches.
 A PN junction can be used to sense temperature by passing a constant current through it 
and detecting the voltage drop across the junction.
 When a constant current is passed through a PN junction, its voltage drop is proportional 
to the temperature.
 A metal bellows connected to a sealed refrigerant line can be used to sense temperature 
because the pressure in the sealed system will be proportional to the temperature.
KEY TERMS
bellows-type 
    thermostat
expansion
negative temperature 
    coeffi cient (NTC)
PN junction
positive temperature 
    coeffi cient (PTC)
resistance temperature 
    detector (RTD)
thermocouple
thermopile
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. Should a metal bar be heated or cooled to make it expand?
 
2. What type of metal remains in a liquid state at room temperature?
 
3. How is a bimetal metal strip made?
 
4. Why are bimetal strips often formed into a spiral shape?
 
5. Why should electrical contacts never be permitted to open or close slowly?
 
6. What two factors determine the amount of voltage produced by a thermocouple?
 
7. What is a thermopile?
 
8. What do the letters RTD stand for?
 
9. What type of wire are RTDs made of?
 10. What material is a thermistor made of?
 11. Why is it diffi cult to measure temperature with a thermistor?
 12. If the temperature of a NTC thermistor increases, will its resistance increase or 
decrease?
 13. How can a silicon diode be made to measure temperature?
 14. Assume that a silicon diode is being used as a temperature detector. If its temperature 
increases, will its voltage drop increase or decrease?
 15. What is an above- and below-ground power supply?

347
The primary function of a gas burner control is to 
ensure that gas is not permitted to enter the system 
if it cannot be ignited in a safe manner. An accu-
mulation of gas is extremely explosive and must 
be avoided. Several methods of igniting the main 
burner can be employed. The two most common in 
use today are the pilot light and high-voltage spark 
ignition.
PILOT LIGHT
Probably the oldest method of automatically 
igniting the main burner is with a pilot light. 
A pilot light is a small gas fl ame that burns continu-
ously near the main burner. When gas is permitted 
to fl ow to the main burner, the pilot light ignites 
the fuel. If the pilot light should not be in  operation 
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Discuss the functions of a gas 
burner control
 Discuss the pilot light method of 
igniting a gas burner
 Discuss high-voltage spark ignition
 Describe the operation of a 
thermocouple
 Describe the operation of a “ﬁ re eye” 
and “ﬂ ame rod” ﬂ ame sensor
 Discuss the operation of the main 
control valve
UNIT 38
Gas Burner 
Controls

348   SECTION 5  Control Components
when the gas is permitted to fl ow to the main 
burner, an accumulation of gas could result in an 
explosion. Therefore, the control system must have 
some means of sensing the presence of the pilot 
fl ame. If the pilot fl ame is not present, the main gas 
valve goes into safety shutdown and does not permit 
gas to be supplied to the main burner.
HIGH-VOLTAGE SPARK IGNITION
Many of the newer gas-operated appliances and 
heating systems use an electric arc to ignite the 
gas fl ame. This system uses less energy than a pilot 
light because it does not depend on a gas fl ame being 
present at all times. The electric arc is used only 
during the actual ignition sequence. When electric 
arc ignition is used, the gas-control system must be 
different also. Instead of sensing the presence of a 
pilot fl ame, the control system turns on the electric 
ignitor and permits gas to fl ow. If a fl ame is not 
detected in a short period of time, the control system 
turns off the fl ow of gas.
FLAME SENSORS
There are several methods used to sense the pres-
ence of a gas fl ame. One of the most common is with 
the use of a thermocouple. The thermocouple is a 
device that produces a voltage when heated. If the 
thermocouple is inserted in the gas fl ame as shown 
in Figure 38–1, a voltage will be produced. The volt-
age produced by the thermocouple is used to create 
a current fl ow through the coil of a solenoid. The 
current produces a magnetic fi eld that holds the 
valve open. As long as the solenoid receives enough 
current, a valve is held open and gas is permitted 
to fl ow to the main burner. If the pilot light should 
go out, no voltage will be produced and the pilot 
valve will stop the fl ow of gas. It should be noted 
that the thermocouple has the ability to produce 
enough current to hold the valve open, but it cannot 
produce enough current to reopen the valve if it is 
closed. The pilot valve must be opened manually by 
pushing the pilot button located on the main valve. 
It should also be noted that some controls of this 
type are actually thermopiles and not thermocou-
ples. Recall that a thermopile is a series connection 
of several thermocouples used to produce a higher 
voltage. When replacing a thermocouple, care must 
be taken to use the proper type. A thermocouple is 
shown in Figure 38–2.
Another type of fl ame sensor uses pressure. This 
control is similar to the pressure type of thermostat. 
A refrigerant-fi lled bulb is located in the pilot fl ame. 
When the refrigerant is heated, a pressure is pro-
duced that holds the pilot safety valve open.
Another type of gas fl ame sensor is the “fi re 
eye” or “fl ame eye”. The fi re eye is a gas-fi lled 
tube that has a very high resistance in its normal 
state and will not conduct electricity. A gas fl ame 
contains ultraviolet (UV) radiation. The ultraviolet 
radiation of the gas fl ame causes the gas in the fi re 
eye to ionize and conduct electricity. Notice that this 
type of sensor detects the light of a fl ame and not the 
heat. This type of control is generally used to sense 
 Figure 38–1
Thermocouple senses pilot ﬂ ame. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
PILOT
LIGHT
THERMOCOUPLE
TO  GAS  CONTROL
VALVE
 Figure 38–2
Thermocouple and pilot burner. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 38  Gas Burner Controls   349
the presence of the main burner fl ame instead of 
the pilot fl ame. Fire eye detectors are generally used 
with timers that turn the gas supply off if a fl ame 
is not detected within a certain time after a call 
for heat.
The “fl ame rod” is another sensor that is 
generally used to detect the presence of fl ame at the 
main burner. The fl ame rod operates by using the 
gas fl ame as a conductor of electricity. A gas fl ame 
contains many ionized particles that will conduct 
electricity in a similar manner to some types of 
vacuum tubes. When the fl ame rod is inserted in 
a fl ame, a current path exists between the rod and 
the metal of the burner head itself. As long as there 
is a fl ame, there can be a fl ow of electricity between 
the rod and the burner head. If the fl ame should 
be extinguished, the fl ow of electricity will stop. 
Figure 38–3 shows a photograph of a fl ame rod, a 
small burner head and an electric spark ignitor.
CONTROL VALVES
The gas control valve is the real heart of the gas 
heating system. Control valves control the fl ow of 
gas to the main burner and the pilot light, if used. 
Many of them contain an internal pressure reg-
ulator, which maintains a constant pressure to the 
main burner. A simple gas control valve is shown in 
Figure 38–4. This illustration is used to show the 
basic principle of operation. This type of valve uses a 
thermocouple to detect the presence of a pilot fl ame. 
 Figure 38–3
Flame rod, burner head, and high-voltage ignition 
electrode. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Notice that a spring is used to close the valve if the 
thermocouple should stop producing current for the 
solenoid coil. Also notice that a solenoid coil is used 
to open the main valve when the thermostat calls for 
heat. Different valves use different methods of open-
ing the main valve. Some valves use a small electric 
heater to heat a bimetal strip that opens the main 
valve. Others use a small heater to cause a metal 
rod to expand and open the main valve. Regardless 
of the method used, all control valves perform the 
same basic function.
The schematic in Figure 38–5 shows a basic 
control circuit for a gas heating system. Notice that 
the fan and high-limit switch are connected in the 
120-volt line ahead of the control transformer. 
When the thermostat closes, 24 volts AC is applied 
to the control valve. This permits the valve to open 
and supply gas to the main burner. Notice that this 
control valve uses a thermocouple to sense the pres-
ence of a pilot light. If the pilot light should go out, 
the pilot valve will close and gas fl ow to the burner 
will stop.
The schematic in Figure 38–6 shows a con-
trol circuit that uses a high-voltage spark ignitor. 
Notice that a fan-limit switch is connected ahead of 
the 24 volts control transformer. This is the same as 
the other type of control. In this circuit, however, 
when the thermostat calls for heat, 24 volts AC is 
applied to a direct spark ignition control module. 
When the control module receives a call for heat, 
it turns on the main control valve and provides 
about 15,000 volts to the ignition electrode. The 
module also starts an electronic timer at the same 
time. When the gas is ignited at the burner head, 
a current fl ows from the fl ame rod to the base of 
the burner. This completes a circuit through the 
ground wire back to the control module. This fl ow 
of current is used to turn off the timer and electric 
ignitor. As long as a fl ame is present, and the ther-
mostat calls for heat, the main valve is permitted to 
remain open. If the fl ame should go out, however, 
current fl ow between the fl ame rod and burner 
ground will be broken and the timer and electric 
ignitor will be started. If a fl ame is not established in 
a predetermined time, the main valve will be turned 
off and the fl ow of gas stopped. Some systems are 
equipped with an alarm relay that is turned on by 
a solid-state relay when the control module senses 
an unsafe condition.

350   SECTION 5  Control Components
To
Thermostat
Pilot
Adj.
Pressure
Adj.
To Pilot
Light
Outlet
Cock
Window
Pilot Valve
Inlet
To
Thermocouple
Regulator
Main
Valve
Off-Pilot-On
 Figure 38–4
Basic gas control valve. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
N
L
FAN-LIMIT
SWITCH
THERMOSTAT
GAS CONTROL
VALVE
BLOWER
MOTOR
24 VOLTS
GAS INLET
GAS OUTLET
TO THERMOCOUPLE
 Figure 38–5
Basic gas control system. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 38  Gas Burner Controls   351
N
L
FAN LIMIT
SWITCH
THERMOSTAT
BLOWER
MOTOR
24 VOLTS
AUX. HIGH
LIMIT IF
USED
DIRECT
SPARK 
IGNITION
CONTROL
ALARM RELAY
IF USED
GAS CONTROL
VALVE
FLAME
ROD
ELECTRIC
IGNITOR
MAIN BURNER
 Figure 38–6
Electric spark-ignition control. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 38–7
Direct spark-ignition control module. (Courtesy of  Honeywell Inc.).
If a fl ame is not established when the thermostat 
calls for heat, the timer will shut down the system in 
the same manner. A direct ignition control module 
is shown in Figure 38–7, and a gas control valve 
used with an electric spark-ignition system is shown 
in Figure 38–8.
 Figure 38–8
Main gas valve used with electric ignition. (Courtesy of 
Honeywell Inc.).

352   SECTION 5  Control Components
SUMMARY
 The primary function of a gas burner control is to ensure that gas is not permitted to enter 
the system if it cannot be ignited in a safe manner.
 The oldest method of automatically igniting a gas burner is with a pilot light.
 A thermocouple is used to sense the presence of a pilot light before gas is permitted to fl ow 
to the main burner.
 The pilot light heats the thermocouple, which supplies an electric current to hold a sole-
noid valve open in the main control valve.
 High-voltage spark ignition is used on some gas appliances to ignite the main burner.
 The “fi re-eye” type of fl ame sensor changes resistance in the presence of the light of the 
fl ame of the main burner.
 A “fl ame rod” senses the presence of a gas fl ame by using ionized particles in the fl ame as 
a conductor.
 The gas control valve controls the fl ow of gas to the main burner.
KEY TERMS
control valve
electric arc
“fi re eye” or “fl ame eye”
“fl ame rod”
pilot light
pressure regulator
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What is the purpose of a pilot light?
 
2. Why is it necessary to be certain that the gas is ignited at the main burner on a call 
for heat by the thermostat?
 
3. What is a thermocouple?
 
4. What is a thermopile?
 
5. Why must the pilot control valve be reset manually if it should open?
 
6. Explain how a “fi re eye” works.
 
7. Explain the operation of a “fl ame rod.”
 
8. What is of common amount of voltage applied to an electric spark ignitor?
 
9. Why must a ground wire be connected between the direct spark-ignition control 
module and the burner head?
 10. What is the advantage of electric-spark ignition over pilot-light ignition?

Some of the controls on an oil-fi red heating system 
are basically the same as the controls on a gas-fi red 
system. The fan and limit controls are very similar 
and in some cases the same. The major part of an 
oil-fi red control system is the primary control. 
The primary control’s function is to ensure that 
when the thermostat calls for heat, the fl ame will be 
established within a predetermined amount of time. 
This is to prevent an accumulation of oil vapor in 
the combustion chamber. If a large amount of oil is 
formed in the combustion chamber and ignited, an 
explosion could occur.
IGNITION
A gun-type oil furnace is ignited by an electric arc. 
Two electrodes are located near the nozzle. When 
the thermostat calls for heat, the primary control 
Oil Burner 
Controls
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Discuss the operation of an oil-ﬁ red 
heating system
 Describe electric ignition of a gun-type 
oil heating system
 Discuss the operation of the primary 
control
 Describe the operation of the CAD cell
353
UNIT 39

354   SECTION 5  Control Components
several solid-state components in its operation. 
These components are:
 1. The silicon bilateral switch (SBS).
 2. The triac.
 3. The cadmium sulfi de cell (CAD cell).
In this circuit, the gate lead of the SBS has been left 
disconnected. This permits the SBS to operate very 
similar to a diac. When the voltage applied to the SBS 
reaches a high enough level, assume 5 volts for this 
example, it will turn on and conduct current to the 
gate of the triac. This will permit the triac to turn on.
CAD CELL
The CAD cell is a device that changes its resistance 
in accordance with the amount of light it is exposed 
to. When the CAD cell is in darkness, it will have a 
very high resistance of several hundred thousand 
ohms. When it is in light, its resistance will decrease 
to about 50 ohms.
connects the ignition transformer to the 120-volt 
AC power line. The transformer steps the 120 volts 
up to 10,000 volts. The 10,000 volts is connected 
to two electrodes. This causes an arc to be produced 
between the two electrodes. The air produced by the 
combustion fan motor causes the arc to be blown 
in a horseshoe shape as shown in Figure 39–1. 
This arc is used to ignite the oil. The electrodes are 
adjusted in such a manner that they do not enter 
into the oil spray produced by the nozzle. Only the 
horseshoe-shaped arc is permitted to contact the oil 
spray. If the electrodes are adjusted too far in front 
of the nozzle, they may touch the spray, which will 
cause them to burn and soot. If they are adjusted too 
far behind the nozzle, the arc will not contact the oil 
spray. This will cause the furnace to start hard and 
have delayed ignition.
PRIMARY CONTROL
The schematic of a typical primary control is shown 
in Figure 39–2. Notice that this control employs 
1K2
IGNITION
TRANSFORMER
10,000  VAC
ELECTRODES
ARC
120  VAC
 Figure 39–1
Electric-arc ignites oil-ﬁ red furnace. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 39–2
Internal schematic and typical hookup for R8184G. (Courtesy of Honeywell Inc.).

UNIT 39  Oil Burner Controls   355
coil 1K is connected in series with the safety switch 
heater at this time.
Figure 39–4 illustrates the operation of the cir-
cuit when relay coil 1K energizes. Notice that both 
contacts 1K1 and 1K2 are shown closed. When 
contact 1K2 closes, 120 volts is connected to the 
burner motor and the ignition transformer. When 
contact 1K1 closes, a different current path for the 
relay coil and safety heater is provided to the center 
tap of the transformer. Relay coil 1K and the safety 
switch heater are no longer connected in series. 
Notice that one current path is through the thermo-
stat, and 1K relay coil. The current path through 
the SBS and triac gate is still provided because the oil 
fl ame has not been ignited as yet and the CAD cell is 
still in darkness.
A second current path is provided through the triac 
and safety switch heater. If, for some reason, ignition 
CIRCUIT OPERATION
To help in understanding how this circuit works, it 
will be shown in different stages of operation. In the 
circuit shown in Figure 39–3, the thermostat has 
just called for heat. The arrows are used to show the 
path of current fl ow through the circuit. The cur-
rent leaves one side of the step-down transformer 
and fl ows through the thermostat contacts. The 
current then fl ows through resistor R1. Because the 
CAD cell is in darkness, it has a very high resistance. 
This causes most of the voltage to be dropped at the 
junction point of R1 and R2. Because the voltage at 
this point is greater than 5 volts, the SBS will turn 
on and conduct current to the gate of the triac. 
When the triac turns on, current is permitted to 
fl ow through relay coil 1K, the safety switch heater, 
the triac, and back to the transformer. Notice that 
 Figure 39–3
Internal schematic and typical hookup for R8184G after thermostat has called for heat. (Courtesy of Honeywell Inc.).
 Figure 39–4
Internal schematic and typical hookup for R8184G when relay coil 1K energizes. (Courtesy of Honeywell Inc.).

356   SECTION 5  Control Components
the voltage drop at the junction of resistors R1 and 
R2 becomes very low. Because there is now less 
than 5 volts, the SBS is turned off and no current 
is conducted to the gate of the triac. This stops the 
current fl ow through the safety switch heater and 
the circuit continues to operate until the thermostat 
is satisfi ed.
A photograph of a CAD cell used as the fl ame 
detector in an oil furnace is shown in Figure 39–6. 
A primary control unit for an oil furnace is shown in 
Figure 39–7. A burner assembly with pump, burner 
motor, primary control, and ignition transformer is 
shown in Figure 39–8.
should not occur, current will continue to fl ow through 
the triac and safety switch heater. This will eventually 
cause the bimetal contact SS to open and disconnect 
the thermostat circuit. If this should happen, it is nec-
essary to manually reset the primary control with the 
reset button located on the control unit.
In Figure 39–5, the circuit is shown in its normal 
operating condition after ignition. Notice that cur-
rent is still permitted to fl ow through the 1K relay 
coil to keep it energized. The triac, however, has 
been turned off. When ignition occurs, the CAD cell 
“sees” the light of the fl ame. This causes its resis-
tance to drop to a low value. When this happens, 
 Figure 39–5
Internal schematic and typical hookup for R8184G in normal operating condition after ignition. (Courtesy of Honeywell Inc.).
 Figure 39–6
CAD cell ﬂ ame detector. (Courtesy of Honeywell Inc.).
 Figure 39–7
Primary control. (Courtesy of Honeywell Inc.).

UNIT 39  Oil Burner Controls   357
 Figure 39–8
Oil burner assembly 
with pump, burner 
motor, primary 
control, and ignition 
 transformer. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
SUMMARY
 The primary control controls the major operation of an oil-fi red heating system.
 The primary control must ensure that ignition is established in the combustion chamber 
to prevent an accumulation of oil vapor.
 Oil-fi red systems are generally ignited by a high-voltage transformer producing an arc 
across two electrodes located near the nozzle.
 Most primary controls contain solid-state components.
 A CAD cell located in a position close to the fl ame is used to sense burner igniting by 
detecting the light of the fl ame.
 A CAD cell is a solid-state device that lowers its resistance in the presence of light.
KEY TERMS
cadmium sulfi de cell (CAD cell)
gun-type
primary control
silicon bilateral switch (SBS)

358   SECTION 5  Control Components
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What is the function of the ignition transformer?
 
2. How much voltage is supplied to the electrodes?
 
3. Are the electrodes permitted to enter into the oil spray?
 
4. What does enter into the oil spray to cause ignition?
 
5. What device is controlled by the operation of the triac?
 
6. What solid-state device controls the fl ow of gate current to the triac?
 
7. Does the CAD cell have a high resistance or low resistance when in the presence of 
light?
 
8. How would the circuit operate if the CAD cell were in the presence of light when the 
thermostat called for heat?

SECTION 6
Troubleshooting 
Using Control 
Schematics

Troubleshooting is probably the most important 
part of a service technician’s job. Good trouble-
shooting ability will save hours of valuable time and 
money. Unfortunately, troubleshooting can be one 
of the most confusing aspects of the job if the techni-
cian does not know the basics. Different technicians 
use different methods. Most adopt a procedure they 
are comfortable with and understand. Some basic 
questions that should be considered when trouble-
shooting any type of system are:
• What is the system supposed to do?
• How does it do it?
• What is it doing that it should not be doing, or 
what is it not doing that it should be doing?
Knowing the answer to these basic questions will 
generally point you in the right direction for deter-
mining the problem.
360
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Use a voltmeter to measure voltage 
across circuit components
 Use an ohmmeter to measure 
continuity and component resistance
 Use an ammeter to measure circuit 
current
 Explain the hopscotch method of 
troubleshooting
 Discuss the use of current transformers
 Discuss safety considerations when 
using CTs
UNIT 40
Introduction to 
Troubleshooting

UNIT 40  Introduction to Troubleshooting   361
QUESTION 1: Assuming the lamp fi lament is good, 
would the voltmeter shown in Figure 40–2 indicate 
0 volts, 120 volts, or some voltage value between 0 
and 120?
ANSWER: The voltmeter would indicate 0 volts. 
In the circuit shown in Figure 40–2 the switch 
and lamp are connected in series. One of the basic 
rules for a series circuit is that the voltage drop 
across all components equals the applied volt-
age. The voltage drop across each component is 
proportional to the amount of resistance of the 
component and the amount of current flow. In 
the circuit shown in Figure 40-2, there is no cur-
rent flow because the switch is open. Because no 
current can flow through the lamp there can be 
no voltage drop.
QUESTION 2: If the voltmeter probes were to be moved 
across the switch as shown in Figure 40–3 would 
the meter indicate 0 volts, 120 volts, or some value 
between 0 and 120 volts?
Troubleshooting electric circuits generally 
involves the use of electric measuring instru-
ments. The most common are the voltmeter, 
ammeter, and ohmmeter. Understanding how 
each of these instruments functions and how to 
employ them is one of the keys to developing good 
troubleshooting skills. The general use of each will 
be discussed in this unit.
THE VOLTMETER
Recall that one defi nition of voltage is electrical 
pressure. The voltmeter indicates the amount of 
potential between two points, in much the same 
way a pressure gauge indicates the pressure differ-
ence between two points. In the circuit shown in 
Figure 40–1, assume that a voltage of 120 volts exists 
between L1 and N. If the leads of a voltmeter were 
to be connected between L1 and N, the meter would 
indicate 120 volts. Now assume that the leads of the 
voltmeter are connected across the lamp, Figure 40–2.
L1
N
 Figure 40–1
A voltage of 120 volts exists between 
L1 and N. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
L1
N
V
 Figure 40–2
The voltmeter is connected across the 
lamp. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
L1
N
V
 Figure 40–3
The voltmeter is connected across the 
switch. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

362   SECTION 6  Troubleshooting Using Control Schematics
voltage drop across the voltmeter resistance it is 
generally considered to be zero. Assume the lamp 
fi lament to have a resistance of 50 ohms. Now 
assume the voltmeter is a digital voltmeter with 
a resistance of 10 million ohms. The total circuit 
resistance is 10,000,050 . The total circuit cur-
rent is 0.000011999 amps (120/10,000,050) or 
about 12 microamperes. The voltage drop across 
the lamp fi lament is 0.0006 volts or 0.6 millivolts 
(50  12 μA).
QUESTION 4: Assume that the fi lament of the lamp 
is open or burned out. Would the voltmeter in 
 Figure 40–3 indicate 0 volts, 120 volts, or some 
value between 0 and 120 volts?
ANSWER: The voltmeter would indicate 0 volts. If the 
lamp fi lament is open or burned out, a current path 
for the voltmeter does not exist and the voltmeter 
would indicate zero, Figure 40–5. In order for the 
voltmeter to indicate voltage, it would have to be 
connected across L1 and N so that a complete circuit 
through the meter would exist, Figure 40–6.
ANSWER: The voltmeter would indicate 120 volts. 
Because the switch is an open circuit, the resistance 
is infi nite at this point, which is millions of times 
greater than the resistance of the lamp fi lament. 
Remember that voltage is electrical pressure. The 
only current fl ow necessary to measure voltage is 
the current fl ow through the meter itself. In this cir-
cuit, the only current path is through the resistance 
of the voltmeter and the lamp fi lament, Figure 40–4. 
If the probes of the voltmeter were to be connected 
to a wall outlet the meter would indicate 120 volts, 
but there would be no current fl ow except through 
the meter itself.
QUESTION 3: If the total or applied voltage in a series 
circuit equals the voltage drop across each compo-
nent, why is all the voltage drop across the voltme-
ter resistor and none across the lamp fi lament?
ANSWER: There is some voltage drop across the lamp 
fi lament because the current of the voltmeter is 
fl owing through it. The voltage drop across the lamp 
fi lament, however, is so small as compared with the 
V
L1
N
 Figure 40–4
Current ﬂ ows through the meter and lamp 
ﬁ lament. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 40–6
A complete circuit must exist through the 
meter to measure voltage. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
L1
N
V
 Figure 40–5
If the lamp ﬁ lament is open, no current can ﬂ ow.
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
L1
N
V

UNIT 40  Introduction to Troubleshooting   363
 2. This causes both FR load contacts to close 
and connect the fan motor to the 240-volt 
line.
 3. The moving air of the fan causes fl ow switch 
FL to close.
 4. When switch FL closes, power is provided to 
the compressor contactor (CC).
 5. Both CC load contacts close and supply power 
to the compressor motor.
TROUBLESHOOTING WITH 
THE VOLTMETER
Before it is possible to troubleshoot a circuit, the 
technician must have an understanding of how 
the circuit operates normally. The circuit shown 
in  Figure 40–7 is a basic control circuit for a 
 compressor. The circuit operates as follows:
 1. When the thermostat contacts close, power is 
provided to the FR (fan relay) coil.
L2
L1
FR
FR
THERMOSTAT
FUSE
HP
LP
FL
TRANSFORMER  240/24
CC
FR
FAN  MOTOR
COMPRESSOR
240  VAC
CC
CC
OL
C
R
S
 Figure 40–7
Basic compressor circuit. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

364   SECTION 6  Troubleshooting Using Control Schematics
conditioner will not work. The fi rst test to be made 
is to determine if control voltage is available from 
the secondary of the transformer. This can be done 
by checking for 24 volts from the thermostat to CC, 
Figure 40–8. For the purpose of this example, it will 
be assumed that the voltmeter indicated 24 volts.
The next step is to attempt to operate the unit. 
Many service technicians use a jumper to short the 
thermostat contacts. When a jumper is used to short 
components in a control circuit, a fused jumper 
 6. High-pressure and low-pressure switches 
connected in series with the compressor con-
tactor provide protection for the compressor.
 7. When the thermostat opens, the circuit to 
both the compressor contactor and fan relay 
is broken disconnecting the compressor and 
fan from the line.
Assume that a problem has developed with the 
unit. The service technician is told that the air 
L2
L1
FR
FR
THERMOSTAT
FUSE
HP
LP
FL
TRANSFORMER  240/24
CC
FR
FAN  MOTOR
COMPRESSOR
240  VAC
CC
CC
OL
C
R
S
V
 Figure 40–8
Testing the transformer voltage. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 40  Introduction to Troubleshooting   365
THE HOPSCOTCH METHOD
A very common troubleshooting method is called 
the hopscotch method. As the name implies, 
you jump from one component to another until the 
open part of the circuit is found. In the example in 
Figure 40–10, the voltmeter is connected across the 
coil of contactor CC. To use the hopscotch method 
of troubleshooting, leave one voltmeter probe con-
nected to one side of the transformer and connect 
the other probe on the other side of the next compo-
nent in line, Figure 40–11. If the voltmeter indicates 
24 volts, it means that the fl ow switch is open and 
preventing the compressor contractor from energiz-
ing. If the voltmeter indicates 0 volts, it means that 
there is still an open condition somewhere else in 
the circuit that is preventing the voltmeter from 
receiving a fl ow or current. The 0 volt reading does 
not mean that contact FL is closed. Contact FL could 
be open but there is something else open in the cir-
cuit ahead of it. In this example, it will be assumed 
that the voltmeter indicates 0 volt.
The next step is to hopscotch to the next 
 component, which is the low pressure switch, 
 Figure 40–12. If the voltmeter indicates a voltage 
of 24 volts, it is an indication that the low pressure 
switch is open. If the voltmeter indicates 0 volts, 
the voltmeter probe should be moved across the 
next component in line. For this example it will be 
assumed that the voltmeter indicates a voltage of 
24 volts. The next step is to determine if the switch is 
defective or if the system is low on refrigerant.
THE OHMMETER
The ohmmeter is generally used in two primary 
ways:
 1. To measure the amount of resistance in a 
circuit.
 2. To test a circuit for continuity.
Assume that a service technician is sent on a ser-
vice call. The only information given is that the 
air conditioner will not run. Using the same circuit 
in the previous example, assume that the techni-
cian places a jumper across the thermostat and 
discovers that the condenser fan operates but the 
 Figure 40–9
Fused jumper for shorting control components. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
is recommended, Figure 40–9. The jumper contains 
a small amp value fuse such as 3 or 4 amperes. If 
the jumper should be accidentally connected across 
power, the fuse will blow instantly. Assume then 
that the thermostat was jumped; the fan motor 
started but the compressor did not.
The next step is to determine what could be the 
problem. Looking at the schematic, make mental notes 
of what could cause the compressor not to start.
 1. CC contactor is defective.
 2. Flow switch FL did not close.
 3. The low-pressure switch, LP, is open.
 4. The high-pressure switch, HP is open.
 5. CC load contacts are burned out and not con-
necting power to the compressor.
 6. The compressor overload is open.
 7. The compressor start capacitor is bad.
 8. The compressor motor is bad.
The next logical step is probably to determine if 
voltage is being applied to the coil of the compressor 
contactor. This can be done by jumping the thermo-
stat and checking across CC coil with a voltmeter, 
Figure 40–10.
For this example, it will be assumed that the volt-
meter indicated that there was no voltage applied to 
contactor coil CC.

366   SECTION 6  Troubleshooting Using Control Schematics
 1. The compressor windings are open.
 2. The overload relay is tripped.
Assume that the overload is checked and found 
not to be tripped. The next step is to check the 
compressor run and start windings for continu-
ity and resistance. This is done by connecting one 
probe of an ohmmeter to the common terminal of 
 compressor does not. Now assume that he  discovers 
that the compressor contactor is energized. The fi rst 
step would be to test the voltage across the run/
start and common terminals of the compressor, 
Figure 40–13. It will be assumed that the voltmeter 
 indicates a value of 240 volts.
The next step is to make mental notes of what 
could cause this problem.
L2
L1
FR
FR
THERMOSTAT
FUSE
HP
LP
FL
TRANSFORMER  240/24
CC
FR
FAN  MOTOR
COMPRESSOR
240  VAC
CC
CC
OL
C
R
S
V
 Figure 40–10
Measuring voltage across the compressor contactor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 40  Introduction to Troubleshooting   367
The resistance reading will generally give some 
indication as to the state of the winding, although 
trying to determine if a winding is shorted with an 
ohmmeter is a guess at best. The actual resistance 
of the winding is determined by the size and type of 
compressor motor and will probably not be known 
the compressor and the other terminal to the run 
and start terminals one at a time, Figure 40–14. 
The ohmmeter should indicate continuity between 
the common terminal and the run  terminal and 
 continuity between the common terminal and the 
start terminal. If it does not, it is an indication that 
the winding is open.
L2
L1
FR
FR
THERMOSTAT
FUSE
HP
LP
FL
TRANSFORMER  240/24
CC
FR
FAN  MOTOR
COMPRESSOR
240  VAC
CC
CC
OL
C
R
S
V
 Figure 40–11
The voltmeter is connected to the next component in line. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

368   SECTION 6  Troubleshooting Using Control Schematics
The run and start windings should also be tested to 
ensure that they are not grounded. This can be done by 
connecting one side of the ohmmeter probe to the case 
of the compressor and testing for continuity to each 
winding, Figure 40–15. The ohmmeter should indicate 
infi nite resistance if the winding are not grounded.
Another type of ohmmeter, called a megohmmeter 
or “megger,” is often used to test the insulation of 
by the service technician, but some general guide-
lines can be followed.
 1. If the resistance of either winding is extremely 
low as compared with the other, there is a 
good possibility that the winding is shorted.
 2. The start winding should be a little more 
resistive than the run winding.
L2
L1
FR
FR
THERMOSTAT
FUSE
HP
LP
FL
TRANSFORMER  240/24
CC
FR
FAN  MOTOR
COMPRESSOR
240  VAC
CC
CC
OL
C
R
S
V
 Figure 40–12
The next component in line is tested. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 40  Introduction to Troubleshooting   369
use from 500 to 1,000 volts to supply current to the 
circuit being tested. This higher voltage will often 
reveal problems that a low voltage will not.
USING AN AMMETER
The ammeter is used to measure the actual amount of 
electricity fl owing in a circuit. This can be extremely 
valuable when trying to determine if something 
wire, Figure 40–16. The megohmmeter is designed to 
measure resistance in the range of millions of ohms. 
It is generally used to test the insulation of wire and 
also produces a much higher voltage than a standard 
ohmmeter. Often, the insulation around wire will 
appear to be good when tested with an ohmmeter, but 
breaks down when it is subjected to a high voltage. 
Ohmmeters generally use from 1.5 to 9 volts to supply 
current to the circuit being tested. Meggers generally 
L2
L1
FR
FR
THERMOSTAT
FUSE
HP
LP
FL
TRANSFORMER  240/24
CC
FR
FAN  MOTOR
COMPRESSOR
240  VAC
CC
CC
OL
C
R
S
V
 Figure 40–13
Testing voltage to the compressor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

370   SECTION 6  Troubleshooting Using Control Schematics
Because each element has a power rating of 
5,000 watts, the ampere draw of each element can 
be determined using Ohm’s law.
I    P 
__ 
E  
I    5000 
_____ 
240  
I  20.8 amperes
is actually operating or not. Assume that you are 
troubleshooting an electric furnace. Also assume 
that the furnace has three stages rated at 5 kW 
each. The stages are generally sequenced so they 
come on one at a time. A very fast method of check-
ing the furnace is to connect a clamp-on ammeter to 
the incoming line, turn on the heat, and watch the 
readings on the ammeter, Figure 40–17.
L2
L1
FR
FR
THERMOSTAT
FUSE
HP
LP
FL
TRANSFORMER  240/24
CC
FR
FAN  MOTOR
COMPRESSOR
240  VAC
CC
CC
OL
C
R
S
Ω
 Figure 40–14
An ohmmeter is used to test the windings for continuity. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 40  Introduction to Troubleshooting   371
determine if voltage is being applied to each ele-
ment, but unless the power was turned and off and 
the heating elements disconnected and tested with 
an ohmmeter, you could not be certain an ele-
ment was not burned open. The ammeter permits 
a quick check of the unit and you know that each 
element is operating.
When the furnace is energized, the ammeter 
should indicate a current fl ow of approximately 
21 amperes. After a few minutes the current should 
increase to approximately 42 amperes (20.8  
20.8  41.6), and after another delay the current 
should increase to approximately 62.5 amperes 
(20.8  3  62.4). A voltmeter could be used to 
L2
L1
FR
FR
THERMOSTAT
FUSE
HP
LP
FL
TRANSFORMER  240/24
CC
FR
FAN  MOTOR
COMPRESSOR
240  VAC
CC
CC
OL
C
R
S
Ω
 Figure 40–15
Each winding is tested for a grounded condition. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

372   SECTION 6  Troubleshooting Using Control Schematics
 1. Check the power supply. To do this, set 
the fan switch to ON or MAN to see if the 
blower fan turns on. If it does, you have 
determined that the 24-volt supply is 
 working. If the blower does not turn on, the 
problem could be the thermostat, fan relay, 
blower motor, run capacitor, 24-volt trans-
former, or main power supply to the trans-
former. At this point you have determined 
if the problem is with the inside unit or the 
outside unit.
THE SHOTGUN METHOD
As stated previously, most technicians will adopt 
their own troubleshooting methods that are devel-
oped with time and experience. The shotgun method 
involves testing the circuit at various locations to 
determine trouble areas rather than following a 
step-by-step procedure as outlined in the hopscotch 
method. In this example, the circuit to be tested is a 
central air conditioner and electric heating system. 
Probably the best place to start is at the thermostat 
because it is readily accessible.
 Figure 40–16
A megohmmeter for 
 testing insulation 
 resistance. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
SEQ.
5kW
SEQ.
5kW
ELECTRIC  FURNACE
HR
240  VOLTS
5kW
 Figure 40–17
Testing an electric 
 furnace with an ammeter. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 40  Introduction to Troubleshooting   373
 8. If all components between the contactor and 
compressor are good, check the power sup-
plied to the compressor terminals. If power is 
present at the compressor terminals, discon-
nect power to the outside unit by opening the 
disconnect switch or circuit breaker.
 9. Disconnect the power terminals connected to 
the compressor. Use an ohmmeter and check 
between each terminal to determine if there is 
an open circuit. Also check between each ter-
minal and the compressor case to determine if 
there is a grounded circuit. Note: It is possible 
for the motor windings to be shorted and not 
be open or grounded. Shorted windings will 
cause the motor to draw an excessive amount 
of current or may not permit the compressor 
to start when power is supplied. An ohmmeter 
generally will not reveal this condition.
 10. If the ohmmeter indicates an open circuit 
in the compressor, note if the compressor is 
hot to the touch. If so, the internal overload 
may be open. It cannot be determined if the 
compressor winding is open or if the internal 
overload is open until the compressor cools. 
This overload cannot be bypassed. If the com-
pressor is hot, it may take hours for the over-
load to reset, depending on the temperature 
of the compressor, the ambient temperature, 
and whether the compressor is located in 
direct sunlight. The only way to know if the 
compressor is defective or if another problem 
caused the overload to open is to wait until 
the overload resets. It is recommended to 
leave the power disconnected to the outside 
unit until the compressor cools and allows 
the overload to reset. This will allow the tech-
nician to observe whether the compressor 
restarts or not.
 11. Some of the circumstances that can cause the 
internal overload to open are:
 
•    Defective windings in the compressor, 
causing it to draw excessive current.
 
•   A stuck compressor.
 
•    A brief power interruption, such as a loss 
of power or someone opening the thermo-
stat contacts and reclosing them.
 2. Test the thermostat. Remove the thermostat 
from its base and check the wires connected 
to the thermostat base with a voltmeter to 
determine if 24 volts is available. If 24 volts 
is available, use a fused jumper to test the 
circuit components controlled by the thermo-
stat. Connect one lead to the power terminal 
(R) and make connection to each of the other 
terminals to determine if there is a response. 
If there is a response to each of the terminals, 
the thermostat is defective.
 3. If there was not a response to a particular cir-
cuit component, replace the thermostat on the 
base and check that component starting with 
the power supply. In this example, assume 
that the air conditioning unit did not respond.
 4. Check the 240-volt power supply to the unit. 
This can be checked at the breaker, discon-
nect switch, or main contactor depending on 
which is most accessible. In this example it 
will be assumed that power is present at the 
main contactor.
 
 a.  Check the output of the main contactor 
to determine if power is being supplied to 
the compressor. If not, check the 24-volt 
 supply to the coil of the main contactor. 
If 24 volts is supplied to the coil, the 
 contactor is defective.
 5. If 24 volts is not present at the coil of the 
contactor, check the thermostat wires where 
they enter the outside unit. If power is not 
present, check the wiring between the ther-
mostat and the outside unit.
 6. If 24 volts is present at the unit, check any 
components between the 24-volt supply and 
the coil of the contactor. Components such 
as high-pressure switches, low-pressure 
switches, and so on are connected in series 
with the low-voltage circuit.
 
 Now assume that instead of no response at the 
outside unit, the condenser fan started but the 
compressor did not.
 7. If 240 volts is available at the output of the 
main contactor, check all components, such 
as run and start capacitors, between the con-
tactor and the compressor.

374   SECTION 6  Troubleshooting Using Control Schematics
vapor returning from the evaporator to 
help cool the motor.
 
•    Very high ambient temperature and being 
exposed to direct sunlight.
 12. If the compressor eventually restarts, 
check the current draw of the unit and 
compare this reading to the nameplate cur-
rent rating. If the current draw is greater 
than the full-load-amp (FLA) draw listed on 
the nameplate, determine if the problem is 
a  defective compressor or one of the other 
causes listed.
 
•    Lack of air fl ow across the condenser and 
compressor. This can be caused by a dirty 
condenser or anything blocking air to the 
condenser. The condenser fan can also be 
defective and thus prevented from obtain-
ing full speed.
 
•   Low voltage supplying the compressor.
 
•    Over charge of refrigerant causing high 
head pressure. This would cause the com-
pressor to draw excessive current.
 
•    Low charge of refrigerant. The compressor 
could overheat because it depends on cool 
SUMMARY
 Before it is possible to troubleshoot a circuit, the technician must have an understanding 
of how the circuit operates.
 The three main instruments used for troubleshooting are the voltmeter, ohmmeter, and 
ammeter.
 Power must always be disconnected from the circuit before using an ohmmeter.
 A complete circuit must exist before a voltmeter will indicate voltage.
 An ammeter is used to determine if current is actually fl owing through the circuit.
 The hopscotch method of troubleshooting involves starting at one of the circuits and mov-
ing from component to component until the problem is discovered.
KEY TERMS
ammeter 
hopscotch method 
ohmmeter
electrical pressure 
measuring instruments 
voltmeter
fused jumper
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. A voltmeter is connected across the terminals of an electric heating element. The 
voltmeter indicates a voltage of 240 volts. Is this a true test to determine if the heating 
element is operating?
 
2. What electrical measuring instrument should be used to determine if the heating ele-
ment in question 1 is operating?

UNIT 40  Introduction to Troubleshooting   375
 
3. It is suspected that the high-pressure switch in a control circuit is open. Explain the 
steps in testing this component with an ohmmeter.
 
4. Refer to Figure 40–10. Assume that the voltmeter indicates a value of 24 volts, but 
the compressor contactor is not energized. What is the most likely problem?
 
 A. A jumper wire was not placed around the thermostat contacts.
 
 B. The fl ow switch is open.
 
 C. The coil of the CC contactor is open.
 
 D. The coil of the CC contactor is shorted.
 
5. Refer to the circuit in Figure 40–7. Assume that when a jumper is placed around the 
thermostat contacts, the fan motor starts, the compressor contactor energizes, but the 
compressor motor does not start. Which of the following could not cause this problem?
 
 A. The fl ow switch is not closing.
 
 B. The CC load contacts are defective.
 
 C. The compressor overload relay is open.
 
 D. The compressor start capacitor is defective.

In the previous units, basic symbols and rules for 
reading a schematic diagram have been covered. 
In actual practice, however, schematics do not 
always look like the classic textbook examples. 
Many schematic diagrams use a legend to aid 
in understanding. A legend is a list that shows a 
symbol or notation and gives the defi nition of that 
symbol or notation. The legend that will be used 
with the schematics presented in this unit is shown 
in Figure 41–1.
SCHEMATIC 1
The fi rst circuit to be discussed is shown in 
 Figure 41–2. First fi nd the major components
shown on the schematic: the switch, fan motor, com-
pressor, capacitor, overload, and thermostat. Notice 
that these components may not be shown exactly as 
376
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Identify circuit components on a 
schematic diagram
 Analyze a schematic diagram to 
determine how the circuit functions
UNIT 41
Room Air 
Conditioners

UNIT 41  Room Air Conditioners   377
represent the run winding. The middle terminal is 
labeled with an S, which represents the start wind-
ing terminal, and the third terminal is labeled with 
a C, which indicates the common terminal. Trace 
the common terminal through the overload and 
thermostat to terminal C on the switch. Notice 
that the thermostat and overload are connected 
in series with the compressor. Now trace the run 
lead of the compressor. Notice that it is connected 
to the B terminal of the capacitor. This shows that 
the run winding is connected to the common side 
of the service chord. Now trace the start lead to the 
A side of the capacitor. Notice that the capacitor is 
connected in series between the common side of the 
service chord and the start winding. The thermistor 
connected across the capacitor terminals is used to 
decrease the capacitance connected in series with 
the compressor after the compressor is in operation. 
Recall that a thermistor is a temperature-sensitive 
resistor. This thermistor has a negative temperature 
coeffi cient, which means that it will have a very 
high resistance when it is cool. When its tempera-
ture increases, its resistance will decrease. When 
the compressor is fi rst started, the thermistor is cool 
because no current has been fl owing through it. 
This causes its resistance to be much greater than 
the capacitive reactance of the capacitor. The full 
amount of the capacitor is now connected in series 
with the start winding.
As current fl ows through the thermistor, its tem-
perature begins to increase. This causes a decrease 
in its resistance, which permits more current to 
fl ow. As the resistance of the thermistor decreases, 
the effect of the capacitor on the motor decreases 
also. The effect is very similar to having a compres-
sor that has both a start and run capacitor in the 
circuit for starting, and then disconnecting the start 
capacitor and permitting the motor to operate with 
the run capacitor only.
The last component to be discussed is the switch. 
Notice that it is not shown with internal electrical 
connections. There is a legend at the bottom of the 
schematic, however, that shows which terminals 
are connected when the switch is set in different 
positions. In the LO position, for example, terminal 
L is connected to both the LO fan speed position and 
the C position, which permits the thermostat to con-
trol the compressor.
 Figure 41–1
Schematic legend. (Courtesy of Carrier Corp.).
you would expect. Notice the overload symbol, for 
example. The symbol used is the same as the symbol 
for an overload heater discussed earlier in the text. 
There are, however, no overload contacts shown. 
The schematic is indicating the use of a small, single-
phase bimetal overload unit that acts as both heater 
and overload contact.
Next, fi nd and examine the fan motor. Notice that 
this motor has several windings that indicate that it 
is used for multispeed operation. Notice also that 
there is no capacitor connected to this motor. The 
small winding shown separate is the start winding. 
Because there is no start or run capacitor shown, 
this motor is a resistance start induction run. Notice 
that the white wire is connected from the motor to 
B terminal of the capacitor and then to one lead of 
the service chord. This indicates that the white wire 
is common to the other windings. Now trace the 
connection of the red, blue, and black wires. The 
red wire is connected to the LO speed position on 
the switch; the blue wire is connected to the MED 
speed position and the black wire is connected to the 
HI speed position.
Next, examine the compressor. Notice that two 
windings are shown. Each winding is connected 
to a terminal. One terminal is labeled with an R to 

378   SECTION 6  Troubleshooting Using Control Schematics
two capacitors contained in the same case. The junc-
tion point between the two capacitors is connected 
to one side of the service chord. The fan motor in this 
unit is different also. Notice that this fan used a run 
capacitor connected in series with the start winding 
of the motor at all timers. This motor is a permanent 
split-capacitor motor. Notice that this motor has 
two speeds instead of three.
The start capacitor is connected in parallel with 
the run capacitor to increase the starting torque 
of the compressor. The resistor shown connected 
across the terminals of the start capacitor is a 
relatively high value of fi xed resistance used to dis-
charge the capacitor when it is disconnected from 
SCHEMATIC 2
The second schematic to be discussed is shown in 
 Figure 41–3. This schematic is for another room-
type air conditioner, but it has some added com-
ponents. This unit is used to provide heat as well 
as  cooling. An electric resistance heating 
element is used to provide heat in cool weather. 
Notice also the addition of the start capacitor 
and start relay. The thermostat in this circuit is 
 double-acting instead of a single-pole single-
throw. This permits the same thermostat to be used 
for both heating and cooling. Notice also that the 
run capacitor is different. This capacitor is actually 
 Figure 41–2
Schematic diagram. (Courtesy of Carrier Corp.).

UNIT 41  Room Air Conditioners   379
connected to L1, the fan motor will operate in its 
high speed. When terminal COMPR A is connected 
to L1, a current path is provided to terminal 1 of the 
thermostat. Terminal 2 is connected to terminal C 
of the switch. Since switch terminal A is connected 
to switch terminal C, power is connected to the 
compressor motor through the thermostat contact. 
When the thermostat is connected in this manner, 
an increase in temperature will cause the thermo-
stat contacts to close and a decrease in temperature 
will cause them to open.
Now assume that the switch has been set to the 
low heat position. The switch legend indicates that 
the circuit. Notice the start relay. The start capacitor 
is connected in series with the normally closed con-
tact. This is a potential starting relay, which senses 
the voltage induced in the start winding and opens 
the contact when the motor reaches about 75% of 
its full speed.
In this circuit, the switch is the main control-
ler. For example, trace the circuit when the switch 
is placed in the high cool position. The legend at 
the bottom of the schematic indicates that when 
the switch is in the HI cool position, terminals 
COMPR A and HI are connected to terminal L1, and 
 terminal A is connected to terminal C. When HI is 
 Figure 41–3
Room air conditioner circuit. (Courtesy of Carrier Corp.).

380   SECTION 6  Troubleshooting Using Control Schematics
the resistance heater through the high limit switch 
and fuse, the thermostat controls the operation of 
the heater. When the thermostat is connected in 
this manner, a decrease in temperature will cause 
the thermostat contacts to close and an increase in 
temperature will cause them to open.
terminals COMPR B, and LO are connected to L1, 
and terminal B is connected to terminal C. When 
LO is connected to L1, the fan motor operates in the 
low speed position. When terminal COMPR B is con-
nected to L1, power is provided to terminal 3 of the 
thermostat. Terminal 2 is connected to terminal C of 
the switch. Since switch terminal B is connected to 
SUMMARY
 Legends are sometimes used with schematic diagrams to aid in understanding.
 A legend is a list of symbols and/or notations and gives the defi nition of these symbols and/
or notations.
 When using a schematic to interpret the operation of a circuit, it is generally helpful to 
identify the major components in the circuit fi rst.
KEY TERMS
double-acting
electric resistance heating element
legend
major components
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What is a legend?
 
2. Refer to Figure 41–2. What would be the action of this circuit if the overload relay 
should burn open?
 
3. What purpose does the thermistor connected in parallel with the capacitor serve?
 
4. In Figure 41–2, what switch connections are made when the switch is in the HI position?
 
5. In Figure 41–3, why is the thermostat switch as a single-pole double-throw?
 
6. In Figure 41–3, what do the dashed lines showing connection between the start 
capacitor and start relay to other parts of the circuit mean?
 
7. In Figure 41–3, what color wire is connected between terminal 2 of the thermostat 
and terminal C of the switch?
 
8. What color wire is connected between terminal 2 of the thermostat and the start relay?
 
9. In Figure 41–3, if no continuity is shown when one lead of an ohmmeter is connected 
to switch terminal A and the other is connected to terminal C of the compressor, what 
does it mean?
 10. In Figure 41–3, to what two points should the terminals of an ohmmeter be con-
nected to check the continuity of the resistance heater circuit?

UNIT 41  Room Air Conditioners   381
TROUBLESHOOTING QUESTIONS
Refer to the schematic shown in Figure 41–3 to answer the following questions.
1. Assume that the switch has been set in the HI HEAT position. Now assume that the ther-
mostat controls the operation of the electric heating element, but does not control the 
operation of the fan motor. Which of the following could cause this condition?
A. The thermostat is defective.
B. The high limit switch is stuck in the closed position.
C. The switch is not making connection between contacts B and C.
D. There is nothing wrong with the unit. This is normal operation for this unit.
2. When the switch is set in the LO COOL position, the unit will operate normally. When the 
switch is set in the HI COOL position, the compressor will operate, but the fan motor will 
not. Which off the following could cause this condition?
A. The fan motor winding between the red and black wire is open.
B. The fan motor winding between the black and brown wire is open.
C. The switch is not making connection between terminals COMPR A and HI.
D. The capacitor section between terminals C and F is defective.
3. When the switch is set in HI COOL or LO COOL position, the unit will operate normally. 
When the switch is set in HI HEAT or LO HEAT position, the fan motor will operate nor-
mally, but the unit will not provide any heating. Which of the following could cause this 
condition?
A. The thermostat is not making connection between 2 and 3.
B. The limit switch is open.
C. The fuse link is open.
D. All of the above.
4. When the switch is set in the LO COOL position, the unit will operate normally. When the 
switch is set in the HI COOL position the fan motor will operate but the compressor will not 
operate. Which of the following could cause this condition?
A. The overload unit is open.
B. The switch is not making contact between terminals A and C.
C. The potential starting relay is defective.
D. The thermostat is defective.

382   SECTION 6  Troubleshooting Using Control Schematics
5. Assume that the switch has been set in the LO COOL position, and the fan motor operates 
normally. When the thermostat contact closes between terminals 1 and 2, the compressor 
hums but does not start. An ohmmeter test of the compressor is as follows:
R to C 2 ohms
S to C 6 ohms
R to S 8 ohms
R to case infi nity ohms
S to case infi nity ohms
  Which of the following would not cause this problem?
A. Overload is open.
B. The capacitor between terminals C and HERM is defective.
C. The start capacitor is defective.
D. The potential starting relay is defective.

383
In this unit, a commercial air conditioning system 
will be discussed. The legend for this schematic 
is shown in Figure 42–1. The schematic to be 
 discussed is shown in Figure 42–2. Notice that this 
control system contains several devices not  normally 
found in a residential system. The  compressor, for 
example, is operated by a three-phase squirrel-
cage induction motor. It can be seen that the 
motor is three phase by the wye connection of the 
stator winding. It can be determined that the motor 
is a squirrel cage because it has no external resistors 
that would be used for the rotor circuit of a wound 
rotor induction motor. There is also no DC circuit 
that would be required to excite the rotor of a three-
phase synchronous motor.
The condenser fan motor is a single-phase per-
manent split-capacitor motor. Notice that the con-
denser fan motor is connected in parallel with two 
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Recognize electrical components from 
the symbols on the schematic
 Discuss the operation of a commercial 
air conditioning unit
 Interpret a three-phase schematic 
diagram
A Commercial 
Air  Conditioning 
Unit
UNIT 42

384   SECTION 6  Troubleshooting Using Control Schematics
lines of the compressor. When contactor C ener-
gizes, both C contacts close and connect both the 
compressor and condenser fan motors to the line.
The crankcase heater is shown directly 
below the condenser fan motor, and is connected to 
terminals 21 and 23. Notice the crankcase heater 
is energized at all times. As long as power is con-
nected to the circuit, the crankcase heater will be 
energized.
The control transformer contains two pri-
mary windings and two secondary windings. This 
transformer can be connected to permit a 460- or 
230-volt connection to the primary, and the sec-
ondary can provide 230 or 115 volts. In the circuit 
shown, the primary winding is connected in series, 
which permits 460 volts to be connected to it. The 
secondary winding is also connected in series, which 
provides an output voltage of 230 volts.
The 230-volt circuit is used to operate a short-
cycle timer circuit. This is the same circuit that was 
discussed in Unit 35.
The 24-volt circuit is shown at the bottom of 
the schematic. Notice that only the secondary of 
the transformer is shown. This is indicating that its 
power can be derived from almost anywhere. The 
primary of this transformer could be connected to 
a 120-volt circuit inside the building. This circuit 
contains the high- and low-pressure switches. If one 
of them should open, it will have the same effect as 
opening the thermostat.
Notice that the indoor fan relay (IFR) is 
shown, but the fan motor is not. In a commercial 
location, there may actually be several fans oper-
ated by the IFR relay. In practice, the IFR relay may 
be used to control the coils of other relays, which 
connect the fan motors to the line.
 Figure 42–1
Schematic legend. (Courtesy of Carrier Corp.).

UNIT 42  A Commercial Air  Conditioning Unit   385
 Figure 42–2
Schematic diagram. (Courtesy of Carrier Corp.).

386   SECTION 6  Troubleshooting Using Control Schematics
The thermostat is a single-pole single-throw con-
tact. The resistor shown connected around the 
thermostat contact represents the heat anticipator. 
A switch is also provided that will permit the indoor 
fan to be operated automatically or manually.
The last item shows the component arrangement. 
This is used to aid the service technician in locating 
the different control components in the system.
SUMMARY
 The compressor in this example circuit is powered by a three-phase squirrel-cage motor.
 The windings in the compressor motor are connected in a wye confi guration.
 The condenser fan motor is a single-phase permanent-split capacitor motor.
 The control transformer contains two primary and two secondary windings.
 The thermostat, low-pressure switch, and high-pressure switch are connected to a 24-volt 
system.
 The control system for this unit contains a short-cycle timer.
KEY TERMS
crankcase heater
indoor fan relay (IFR)
three-phase squirrel-cage induction motor
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What does the term CC mean if seen on a control schematic?
 
2. What does the term CPCS mean if seen on a schematic?
  
Refer to Figure 42–2 for the following questions.
 
3. If it is desired to change the voltage controlling the short-cycle timer from 230 volts 
to 115 volts, what transformer leads should be connected together?
 
4. Assume the system has stopped operation. A voltmeter is connected across the LPS 
switch terminals and it indicates 24 volts. The voltmeter is then connected across 
the HPS switch and it indicates 0 volts. Which switch is stopping the operation of the 
circuit?
 
5. When the system is operating normally, how much voltage should be seen across the 
CR relay coil?

UNIT 42  A Commercial Air  Conditioning Unit   387
TROUBLESHOOTING QUESTIONS
Refer to the schematic shown in Figure 42–2 to answer the following questions.
1. Referring to the schematic in its present state, will the compressor start with the 
 thermostat in the closed position? Explain your answer.
A. Yes
B. No
2. What voltage is used to operate the short-cycle timer and compressor relay?
A. 460 VAC
B. 230 VAC
C. 120 VAC
D. 24 VAC
3. What relay controls the operation of the condenser fan motor?
A. IFR
B. HR
C. C
D. CR
4. Which of the following components is not shown on the schematic?
A. COMPRESSOR MOTOR
B. CONDENSER FAN MOTOR
C. THERMOSTAT
D. EVAPORATOR FAN MOTOR
5. Assume that the unit is in operation and suddenly stops. A voltmeter test reveals the 
following information:
Voltage across L1, L2, and L3  460 VAC
Voltage across X1 to X4 of the control transformer  230 VAC
Voltage across CR coil  24 VAC
Voltage across terminals 2 and 4 of the CR contact  230 VAC
Voltage across coil C  0
What is the most probable cause of trouble? Explain your answer.
A. CR coil is open.
B. CR contacts are stuck closed.
C. Coil HR of the short-cycle timer is open.
D. Coil C is open.

A heat pump is a device that provides both heating 
and air conditioning within the same unit. In the 
cooling cycle, the outside heat exchange unit is used 
as the condenser and the inside heat exchanger 
is used as the evaporator. When the heat pump is 
used for heating, the reversing valve reverses the 
fl ow of refrigerant in the system and the outside heat 
exchanger becomes the evaporator. The inside heat 
exchanger becomes the condenser. Heat pumps also 
contain some type of back-up heating system that 
is used when the outside temperature is too low to 
make heat transfer effi cient. The most common type 
of back-up heat is electric-resistance heat.
Heat pumps contain other control devices that 
are generally used only with heat-pump equipment, 
such as two-stage thermostats, sequence relays, and 
defrost timers.
388
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Describe the operation of a heat pump
 Discuss the function of a double-acting 
thermostat in a heat-pump system
 Discuss the operation of a sequence 
timer
 Describe the operation of the defrost 
thermostat and timer
UNIT 43
Heat-Pump 
Controls

UNIT 43  Heat-Pump Controls   389
DEFROST TIMER
When the heat pump is used in the heating mode of 
operation, it removes heat from the air and delivers 
it inside the living area. This means that the outside 
heat exchanger is being used as the evaporator and 
cold refrigerant is circulated through it. Any mois-
ture in the air can cause frost to form on the coil 
and reduce the airfl ow through it. This will reduce 
the effi ciency of the unit. For this reason, it is gener-
ally necessary to defrost the outside heat exchanger. 
Defrosting is done by disconnecting the condenser 
or outside fan motor and reversing the fl ow of 
refrigerant through the coil. This causes the unit to 
temporarily become an air conditioner and warm 
refrigerant is circulated through the coil.
Before the defrost cycle can be activated, 
two separate control conditions must exist. The 
defrost thermostat, located on the outside heat 
exchanger, must be closed; and the defrost timer 
must permit the defrost cycle to begin. A schematic 
diagram of a basic defrost control circuit is shown 
in Figure 43–2. Notice that the defrost timer is con-
nected in parallel with the compressor. This means 
that the timer can operate only when the compres-
sor is in operation. Notice also that the defrost cycle 
energizes the reversing valve solenoid. This 
means that this unit is in the heating mode when 
the solenoid is deenergized.
Notice the defrost timer contains two contacts, 
DT1 and DT2. DT1 is normally open and DT2 is 
normally closed. The defrost relay (DFR) contains 
three contacts. DFR1 is normally closed and is con-
nected in series with the outside fan motor. DFR2 
is normally open and is connected in parallel with 
contact DT1. Contact DFR3 is normally open and is 
connected to the reversing valve solenoid.
The schematic shown in Figure 43–3 illustrates 
the condition of the circuit when the defrost cycle 
fi rst begins. Notice that the defrost timer (DT) has 
caused contact DT1 to close, but contact DT2 has 
not opened. The contacts of the defrost timer are 
operated by two separate cams. The cams are so 
arranged that contact DT1 will close before DT2 
opens.
The schematic in Figure 43–4 illustrates the 
condition of the circuit immediately after the defrost 
relay has energized. Notice that all DFR contacts 
TWO-STAGE THERMOSTATS
The two-stage thermostat is a thermostat that con-
tains two separate mercury contacts. It is similar to 
the programmable thermostat except that the two 
mercury contacts cannot be set independently of 
each other. The mercury contacts of the two-stage 
thermostat are so arranged that one contact will 
make connection slightly ahead of the other. For 
example, assume the heat pump is being used in the 
heating mode. Now assume that the temperature 
drops. One of the contacts will make connection 
fi rst. This contact turns on the compressor and heat 
is provided to the living area. If the compressor can 
provide enough heat to raise the temperature to the 
desired level, the second mercury contact does not 
make connection. If the compressor cannot provide 
the heat needed, the second mercury contact will 
close and turn on the electric-resistance heating ele-
ments to provide extra heat to the living area.
THE SEQUENCE TIMER
The sequence timer is an on-delay timer used 
to connect the heating elements to the line in stages 
instead of all at once. Most sequence timers contain 
two or three contacts and are operated by a small 
heating element that heats a bimetal strip. When the 
bimetal strip becomes hot enough, it snaps from one 
position to another and closes the two contacts. A pho-
tograph of this type of timer is shown in Figure 43–1.
 Figure 43–1
Sequence relay. (Courtesy of Emerson Electric Co., White-Rodgers Division).

390   SECTION 6  Troubleshooting Using Control Schematics
unit will remain in the defrost cycle until the defrost 
thermostat is satisfi ed and opens the circuit, or the 
defrost timer causes the DT2 contact to open. When 
this occurs, the system will change back to its origi-
nal condition shown in Figure 43–2.
Electronic Defrost Timers
Many units now employ an electronic defrost 
timer similar to the one shown in Figure 43–6. 
This timer has a fixed 10-minute defrost time. The 
time interval between defrost cycles can be set by 
have changed position. DFR1 contact is now open 
and the outside fan motor has been disconnected 
from the circuit. DFR2 contact is closed and is used 
as a holding contact around contact DT1. DFR3 
contact is closed and provides current to the revers-
ing valve solenoid to reverse the fl ow of refrigerant 
in the system.
The schematic shown in Figure 43–5 illus-
trates the condition of the circuit after contact DT1 
reopens. Notice that contact DFR2 maintains a cur-
rent fl ow path around the now open DT1 contact 
and the defrost cycle is permitted to continue. The 
COMP.
FM
DT
DFR
C
C
COMPRESSOR
FAN MOTOR
DEFROST TIMER
DEFROST RELAY
DEFROST
THERMOSTAT
DT2
DT1
DFR2
DFR3
COOLING
THERMOSTAT
L1
L2
24 VOLTS
DFR1
REVERSING VALVE
SOLENOID
 Figure 43–2
Defrost cycle circuit. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 43  Heat-Pump Controls   391
THE FULL SYSTEM SCHEMATIC
A schematic for a residential, heat-pump unit is 
shown in Figure 43–8. The legend for the schematic 
is shown in Figure 43–9. Notice in Figure 43–8 that 
the schematic is divided into three main sections. 
One section shows the outdoor compressor 
controls. The second section shows the indoor 
resistance heat and blower-fan controls, and the 
third section shows the low-voltage controls.
moving a jumper lead to the proper pin. The time 
interval can be set for 30, 60, or 90 minutes. Two 
pins marked TEST can be shorted to reduce the 
defrost time by a factor of 2, 5, and 6 seconds. 
This permits the service technician to test the 
unit without waiting a long period of time. The 
HOLD terminal permits the timer to accumulate 
time only during the time that the compressor 
is in operation. The connection diagram for this 
module is shown in Figure 43–7.
COMP.
FM
DT
DFR
C
C
COMPRESSOR
FAN MOTOR
DEFROST TIMER
DEFROST RELAY
DEFROST
THERMOSTAT
DT2
DT1
DFR2
DFR3
COOLING
THERMOSTAT
REVERSING VALVE
SOLENOID
L1
L2
24 VOLTS
DFR1
 Figure 43–3
Initial circuit operation. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

392   SECTION 6  Troubleshooting Using Control Schematics
Notice the terminal board contains some of the same 
letter connection points as the other terminal board. 
Now locate the thermostat. Notice the thermostat 
contains terminal markings that are the same 
as the other two boards. These terminal markings 
are used to aid in tracing the circuit. For example, 
locate the terminal marked Y on the thermostat. 
Now, locate the terminal marked Y on the board 
closest to the control transformer. Finally, locate the 
terminal marked Y on the terminal board located 
under the outdoor unit. If the wires are traced, it will 
To begin the study of this control system, locate 
the low-voltage section of the schematic. It is divided 
into three sections. One section is located directly 
below the blower fan motor. Notice the 24-volt 
transformer used to provide needed power. Now 
locate the terminal board directly to the left of 
the control transformer. The terminal board shows 
terminal connections marked inside hexagon-shaped 
fi gures. Starting at the top and going down they are 
R, G, O, Y, and so on. Now locate the second control 
section directly under the outdoor unit schematic. 
COMP.
FM
DT
DFR
C
C
COMPRESSOR
FAN MOTOR
DEFROST TIMER
DEFROST RELAY
DEFROST
THERMOSTAT
DT2
DT1
DFR2
DFR3
COOLING
THERMOSTAT
REVERSING VALVE
SOLENOID
L1
L2
24 VOLTS
DFR1
 Figure 43–4
Defrost relay energizes. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 43  Heat-Pump Controls   393
be seen that all of the terminals marked Y are con-
nected together. This is true for all the other termi-
nals that are marked with the same letter. Terminal 
markings are often used to help simplify a schematic 
by removing some to the connecting wires. The 
circuit shown in Figure 43–10 is very similar to the 
schematic in Figure 43–8 except that the terminal 
markings are used instead of connecting wires.
Notice the use of the two-stage thermostat in the 
schematic shown in Figure 43–8. The thermostat is 
so constructed that contact H1 will close before H2. 
Also, contact CO will close before C1. Also notice 
that the thermostat has an emergency heat position 
that permits the switch to override the thermostat 
and the electric resistance heaters to be connected 
in the circuit on a call for heat. Notice also that 
COMP.
FM
DT
DFR
C
C
COMPRESSOR
FAN MOTOR
DEFROST TIMER
DEFROST RELAY
DEFROST
THERMOSTAT
DT2
DT1
DFR2
DFR3
COOLING
THERMOSTAT
REVERSING VALVE
SOLENOID
L1
L2
24 VOLTS
DFR1
 Figure 43–5
Defrost timer opens DT1 contact. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 43–6
Electronic defrost timer module. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

394   SECTION 6  Troubleshooting Using Control Schematics
third SEQ2 contact permits current to fl ow to SEQ3 
timer. At the end of its time cycle, the two SEQ3 con-
tacts located in the resistance heater section close 
and connect the third bank of heaters to the line.
Locate the blower fan motor. Notice that this is 
a multispeed fan motor. Only two of the speeds are 
used, however. High speed is used when the fan con-
trol relay is energized by the thermostat. Notice that 
when the normally open FR contacts close, high 
speed is connected to the line. Also notice that the 
normally closed FR contacts are connected to the 
fi rst SEQ1 contact. When SEQ1 contact closes, 
the second fan speed is connected to the line.
Now locate the defrost timer and defrost relay. 
Trace the action of the circuit as described earlier in 
this unit. Notice that the DFR contact located between 
this control uses an outdoor thermostat (ODT). The 
ODT senses the outside temperature and permits 
sequence relays 1 and 2 to operate only if the out-
side temperature is below a certain level.
Locate the three sequence relay coils, SEQ1, 
SEQ2, and SEQ3. Trace the operation of the circuit 
when sequence relay 1 is energized. The two SEQ1 
contacts located in the resistance heat section close 
and connect the heating elements to the line. A 
third SEQ1 contact is connected in series with SEQ2 
timer. When this contact closes, SEQ2 timer can 
begin operation provided the outdoor thermostat is 
closed. When this timer completes its time sequence, 
all SEQ2 contacts close. The two SEQ2 contacts 
located in the resistance heat section connect the 
second bank of resistance heaters to the line. The 
L2
L1
THERMOSTAT
HOLD
24  VAC
TEST
30
60
90
OUT
COM
24-VOLT
TRANSFORMER
DEFROST
THERMOSTAT
DFR
 Figure 43–7
Connection for a typical electronic defrost timer. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 43  Heat-Pump Controls   395
 Figure 43–8
Heat-pump circuit. 
(Courtesy of Carrier Corp.).

396   SECTION 6  Troubleshooting Using Control Schematics
 Figure 43–9
Schematic legend. (Courtesy of Carrier Corp.).
terminals 4 and 6 is used to override the outdoor ther-
mostat. This permits the resistance heaters to be used 
during the defrost cycle, preventing cold air from being 
blown in the living areas during the time the unit is 
operating as an air conditioner.
Now locate the two outside fan-speed control 
thermostats labeled FT1 and FT2. Notice that when 
FT1 is in the position shown it permits FT2 to 
operate the fan in either high speed or low speed. 
When FT1 changes position and makes connection 
between terminals 1 and 3, it connects the fan in 
the high-speed position and FT2 has no control over 
the speed.

UNIT 43  Heat-Pump Controls   397
 Figure 43–10
Terminal identiﬁ cation
is used to simplify 
schematic. (Courtesy of 
Carrier Corp.).

398   SECTION 6  Troubleshooting Using Control Schematics
SUMMARY
 A heat pump is a device that provides both heating and cooling within the same unit.
 Heat-pump systems contain a back-up heating system that is used when the outside ambi-
ent temperature is too low to provide enough heat transfer.
 The double-acting thermostat contains two separate sets of contacts.
 The fi rst contact of a double-acting thermostat turns the heat-pump compressor on. The 
second contact turns the strip heaters on.
 Sequence timers are used to turn the strip heaters on in stages instead of all at one time.
 The defrost timer is used to reverse the fl ow of refrigerant at periodic intervals to melt any 
accumulation of frost on the outside evaporator coil.
KEY TERMS
defrost thermostat 
low-voltage controls 
sequence timer
defrost timer  
outdoor compressor controls  
terminal board
indoor resistance heat  
reversing valve solenoid 
terminal markings
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What is the purpose of terminal markings?
 
2. What two control components must be in a closed position before a heat pump is 
permitted to go into the defrost cycle?
 
3. The thermostat shows a small pilot light connected between terminals L and C. What 
condition of the thermostat turns this light on?
 
4. What is the purpose of the outdoor thermostat?
 
5. What is the operating voltage of the reversing valve solenoid?
TROUBLESHOOTING QUESTIONS
Refer to the schematic shown in Figures 43–8 and 43–10 to answer the following questions.
1. Assume that the unit is set in the heating mode and that thermostat contact H1 closes. 
Also assume that when H1 closed, the indoor fan motor and outside fan motors started, 
but the compressor motor did not. Which of the following could cause this condition?
A. The liquid line pressure switch is open.
B. Coil C is open.
C. The compressor motor is defective.
D. All of the above.

UNIT 43  Heat-Pump Controls   399
2. If the unit is set in the heating mode and thermostat contact H1 closes, what is the normal 
action of the unit?
A. The heat strips, indoor fan motor, outdoor fan motor, and compressor turn on.
B. The indoor fan motor, outdoor fan motor, and compressor turn on.
C. The heat strips and indoor fan motor turns on.
D. The heat strips, outdoor fan motor, indoor fan motor, compressor, and reversing valve 
turn on.
3. Assume that cooling thermostat C0 is closed and C1 is open. What is the normal operating 
sequence of the unit?
A. The indoor fan motor, outdoor fan motor, and compressor turn on.
B. Only the indoor fan motor turns on.
C. The indoor fan motor, outdoor fan motor, reversing valve, and compressor turn on.
D. The reversing valve turns on.
4. Assume that fuses FL1 and FL2 connected to strip heaters HTR-1 and HTR-2 are blown. 
Now assume that thermostat HT1 closes and starts the heat pump compressor, but the 
outside temperature is too low to permit the heat pump to suffi ciently heat the dwelling 
and thermostat H2 closes also. What will be the action of the unit?
A. The compressor will continue to run, but the heat strips will not activate because they 
are staged and must operate in proper sequence.
B. The heat pump compressor stops operating because thermostat H2 prevents both the 
compressor and heat strips from being turned on at the same time.
C. The compressor continues to operate and after some period of time sequencer 1 will 
time out and turn on sequencer 2 energizing heating elements HTR-3 and HTR-4. If 
enough time elapses, sequencer 2 will time out and turn on sequencer 3 which ener-
gizes heating elements HTR-5 and HTR-6.
D. The compressor will eventually be disconnected from the line due to high pressure 
because the inside blower cannot operate in the heating mode if the fi rst bank of strip 
heaters fail to operate.
5. The schematic shows a small lamp connected between terminals C and L on the thermo-
stat. What is this lamp used to indicate?
A. The compressor is in operation.
B. The compressor motor has failed.
C. The unit is in the defrost mode.
D. The thermostat has been set for emergency heat.

400
The schematic shown in Figure 44–1 is for a unit 
that contains both electric air conditioning and 
gas heating in the same package. This drawing 
shows both a connection diagram and a schematic 
 diagram of this unit.
This diagram shows mainly the heating and 
blower controls. At the bottom of the schematic dia-
gram is a component labeled condensing unit. 
This is the only reference to the air conditioning 
compressor and condenser fan on this schematic. 
This is not uncommon for a packaged unit.
THE COOLING CYCLE
The thermostat shows four terminal connections. 
The terminal labeled R is connected to one side of the 
24-volt control transformer. When the thermostat 
is in the cooling position, an increase in  temperature 
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Discuss the operation of an air 
conditioning system that operates in 
conjunction with a gas heating system
 Interpret the schematic diagram for the 
air conditioning system
 Interpret the schematic diagram for the 
heating system
Packaged Units: 
Electric Air 
 Conditioning 
and Gas 
 Heating
UNIT 44

UNIT 44  Packaged Units: Electric Air Conditioning and Gas Heating   401
 Figure 44–1
Schematic for an air conditioning and heating package unit. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

402   SECTION 6  Troubleshooting Using Control Schematics
permits the fan to operate in low speed when the 
unit is in the heating cycle, and in high speed when 
the unit is in the cooling cycle.
THE DOOR INTERLOCK SWITCH
The door interlock is shown on the schematic 
as a normally open push button labeled (DIS). The 
function of this switch is to permit the unit to oper-
ate only when the furnace door is closed. When 
the door is opened, the 120-volt power supply is 
broken to the unit. Most door interlock switches are 
so designed that they are actually a two-position 
switch. When the door is open, the switch can be 
pulled out. This causes the switch to make connec-
tion so the unit can be serviced.
ELECTRONIC CONTROL 
OF BLOWER MOTOR AND 
COMPRESSOR LOCK-OUT
Many units employ electronic control for some 
of their functions. Troubleshooting for electronic 
circuit boards is generally accomplished by deter-
mining if the board has the proper input informa-
tion to obtain an output. If the inputs and outputs 
are correct, the board is good and the problem lies 
somewhere else in the circuit. The circuit board 
shown in Figure 44–2 is designed to control the 
blower for a cooling unit with gas or electric heat. 
will cause terminal R to make connection with ter-
minals G and Y. When power is applied to terminal 
Y, a circuit is completed to the condensing unit. The 
other side of the condensing unit is connected to 
terminal C, which completes the circuit back to the 
control transformer. This starts the air conditioning 
compressor and condenser fan.
Terminal G of the thermostat is connected to the 
blower relay coil (BLR). When BLR coil energizes, 
both BLR contacts change position. The normally 
closed contact opens and prevents the possibility 
that power can be applied to the low-speed terminal 
of the blower fan motor. The normally open contact 
closes and connects power to the high-speed termi-
nal of the motor. Notice that the indoor blower fan 
operates in the high-speed position when the air 
conditioning unit is started.
THE HEATING CYCLE
When the thermostat is in the heating position, a 
decrease of temperature will cause the thermostat to 
make connection between terminals R and W. This 
permits a circuit to be completed through the automatic 
gas valve (AGV). When the AGV is energized, gas is per-
mitted to fl ow to the main burner where it is ignited by 
the pilot light. Two high-limit contacts are connected 
in series with the automatic gas valve. One is labeled 
auxiliary limit, and the other is labeled main 
limit. The wiring diagram shows the main limit to 
be located in the fan-limit switch. The auxiliary limit 
switch is in a separate location. Both of these switches 
are normally closed and are shown to be temperature 
activated. The schematic also shows that an increase 
in temperature will cause them to open. Because both 
are connected in series with the AGV, the circuit will be 
broken to the valve if either one opens.
In the heating cycle, the indoor blower fan is con-
trolled by the fan switch. The fan switch is tempera-
ture activated. After the gas burner has been turned 
on, the temperature of the furnace increases. When 
the temperature has risen to a high enough level, 
the fan switch will close and connect the low-speed 
terminal of the blower motor to the power line. 
Notice that the fan switch is connected in series with 
the normally closed BLR contact. When BLR relay 
is deenergized, the fan switch is permitted to control 
the operation of the blower fan. The blower fan relay 
 Figure 44–2
Blower motor and compressor lock-out control board. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 44  Packaged Units: Electric Air Conditioning and Gas Heating   403
evaporator temperature switch are closed and pro-
vide a complete circuit to the compressor contactor 
coil. Because the lock-out relay coil is connected in 
parallel with these switches, almost no voltage is 
dropped across the LOR coil and it remains turned 
off. If one of the switches should open, however, 
the lock-out relay coil becomes connected in series 
with the compressor contactor coil, Figure 44–4. 
Because the impedance of the lock-out relay coil is 
much higher than the compressor contactor coil, 
almost all the 24 volts is dropped across the LOR 
coil and very little voltage is across the CC coil. The 
compressor contactor cannot energize because of 
the low voltage applied to the coil.
The circuit board also provides lock-out protection 
for the compressor.
LOCK-OUT PROTECTION
Lock-out protection involves the use of a high-
impedance relay that becomes connected in series 
with the compressor contactor coil in the event of a 
problem with the compressor circuit. In the circuit 
shown in Figure 44–3, the coil of the lock-out 
relay is connected in parallel with the normally 
closed safety switches used to help protect the 
 compressor. Under normal conditions the high-
pressure switch, low-pressure switch, and the low 
EVAP-        TEMP-
ORATOR   ERATURE
HP
LP
LOR
24  VAC
LOR
CC
LOCK-OUT  RELAY
 Figure 44–3
Basic lock-out circuit. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 44–4
A circuit exists through the LOR coil and CC coil. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
EVAP- 
      TEMP-
ORATOR   ERATURE
HP
LP
LOR
24  VAC
LOR
LOCK-OUT  RELAY
CC

404   SECTION 6  Troubleshooting Using Control Schematics
OPERATION OF THE COMPRESSOR 
LOCK-OUT RELAY
The compressor lock-out relay can operate only 
when the thermostat is set in the cooling mode. 
In Figure 44–9 it is assumed that the thermostat 
has been set for the cooling mode and the ther-
mostat contact is closed. The main current path 
is through the normally closed K1 contact, low-
pressure switch, high-pressure switch, and evapora-
tor temperature switch to the coil of 1M contactor. 
The current takes this path because of the high 
impedance of coil K1. When coil 1M energizes, the 
compressor and condenser fan start, Figure 44–5. 
There is also a current path through the thermostat 
fan switch, the normally closed K3 contact and 2M 
coil. When the 2M coil energizes, the evaporator fan 
motor starts. The circuit will continue to operate in 
this manner until the thermostat contact opens or 
some other problem occurs.
Now assume that the low-pressure switch opens, 
Figure 44–10. The open circuit caused by the open 
low-pressure switch now connects coil K1 in series 
with coil 1M. Because coil K1 has a much higher 
impedance than 1M, most of the voltage is across 
K1 and not 1M, causing the K1 relay to energize 
and the 1M contactor to deenergize. The normally 
closed K1 contacts open and the normally open 
K1 contacts close. When the normally open K1 
contacts close, a current path is provided to the 
compressor lock-out indicator. The now open K1 
contact prevents the compressor from restarting if 
the low-pressure switch should reclose. The circuit 
will remain in this condition until the control power 
is interrupted.
The normally closed LOR contact connected in 
series with the compressor contactor coil opens. 
If the high-pressure switch should close, the now 
open LOR contact prevents the compressor contac-
tor from energizing. The circuit will remain in this 
condition until the control power is turned off and 
the lock-out relay coil deenergizes. The line volt-
age connections for the blower control and lock-
out relay circuit board are shown in Figure 44–5. 
The circuit board and basic controls are shown in 
Figure 44–6.
CIRCUIT OPERATION
When the heating thermostat contact closes, a cir-
cuit exists to the time delay relay (TDR) and draft 
motor relay (DMR), Figure 44–7. Power is also 
supplied to the ignition control module. The draft 
motor controls the centrifugal switch connected to 
the thermostat input of the ignition control module. 
Its function is used to insure that gas will not be 
supplied to the burner unless the draft motor is in 
operation.
In Figure 44–8, it is assumed that the centrifugal 
switch has closed and permitted the gas burner to 
ignite. It is also assumed that the time delay relay 
has permitted TDR contacts to close. When the 
TDR contacts close, a current path is provided to 
the coil of the K3 relay causing all K3 contacts to 
change position. When the normally open K3 con-
tact closes, a current path is provided to the coil of 
the 2M contactor. When 2M energizes, the blower 
motor turns on, Figure 44–5. The circuit will con-
tinue to operate in this manner until the thermostat 
contacts reopen.

UNIT 44  Packaged Units: Electric Air Conditioning and Gas Heating   405
 Figure 44–5
Line voltage circuit. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
L2
L1
TDR
DMR
CONTROL  TRANSFORMER
DRAFT  MOTOR  (GAS  ONLY)
2M
EVAPORATOR  FAN
1M
1M 
COMPRESSOR  CONTACTOR
2M 
EVAPORATOR  FAN  CONTACTOR
DMR DRAFT  MOTOR  FAN  RELAY
TDR TIME  DELAY  RELAY
COMPRESSOR
CRANK  CASE  HEATER
CONDENSER  FAN
HARD  START  KIT
1M
B
A

406   SECTION 6  Troubleshooting Using Control Schematics
2M
1M
TDR
DMR
TE
HP
LP
S4
TDR
S4
S4
P4
S3
LS1
CS
LS2
TH
PV
GND
R1
MV
IC
4
TH/R
TH
TR
GNC
GV
SENSOR
SPARK
1M COMPRESSOR  CONTACTOR
2M EVAPORATOR  FAN  CONTACTOR
CB CIRCUIT  BREAKER
CLI COMPRESSOR  LOCK-OUT  INDICATOR
CS CENTRIFUGAL  SWITCH
DMR  DRAFT  MOTOR  RELAY
GV GAS  VALVE
HP HIGH-PRESSURE  CONTROL
IC 
IGNITION  CONTROL
K1 COMPRESSOR  LOCK-OUT  RELAY
K3 BLOWER  INTERLOCK  RELAY
LP LOW-PRESSURE  CONTROL
LS1  LIMIT  SWITCH
LS2  LIMIT  SWITCH
TE LOW  EVAP.  TEMP.  THERMOSTAT
TH THERMOSTAT,  HEATING
TDR  TIME  DELAY  RELAY
CB
S1
K3
B
7
X
11
5
S1
W1
2
13
S1
W2
5
10
S1
Y2
10
3
S1
Z
1
14
S1
N
4
12
S1
Y1
8
4
S1
K1
1
S1
2
S1
7
S1
6
S1
R
6
9
S6
S8
S8
S8
K1
CL1
K1
K3
K3
FAN  ON
FAN  AUTO
OFF
THERMOSTAT
COOL
HEAT
G
9
 Figure 44–6
Control circuit for a cooling unit and gas heat. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 44  Packaged Units: Electric Air Conditioning and Gas Heating   407
2M
1M
TDR
DMR
TE
HP
LP
S4
TDR
S4
S4
P4
S3
LS1
CS
LS2
TH
PV
GND
R1
MV
IC
4
TH/R
TH
TR
GNC
GV
SENSOR
SPARK
1M COMPRESSOR  CONTACTOR
2M EVAPORATOR  FAN  CONTACTOR
CB CIRCUIT  BREAKER
CLI COMPRESSOR  LOCK-OUT  INDICATOR
CS CENTRIFUGAL  SWITCH
DMR  DRAFT  MOTOR  RELAY
GV GAS  VALVE
HP HIGH-PRESSURE  CONTROL
IC 
IGNITION  CONTROL
K1 COMPRESSOR  LOCK-OUT  RELAY
K3 BLOWER  INTERLOCK  RELAY
LP LOW-PRESSURE  CONTROL
LS1  LIMIT  SWITCH
LS2  LIMIT  SWITCH
TE LOW  EVAP.  TEMP.  THERMOSTAT
TH THERMOSTAT,  HEATING
TDR  TIME  DELAY  RELAY
CB
S1
K3
B
7
X
11
5
S1
W1
2
13
S1
W2
5
10
S1
Y2
10
3
S1
Z
1
14
S1
N
4
12
S1
Y1
8
4
S1
K1
1
S1
2
S1
7
S1
6
S1
R
6
9
S6
S8
S8
S8
K1
CL1
K1
K3
K3
FAN  ON
FAN  AUTO
OFF
THERMOSTAT
COOL
HEAT
G
9
 Figure 44–7
The heating thermostat contact closes. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

408   SECTION 6  Troubleshooting Using Control Schematics
 Figure 44–8
The blower motor turns on after a time delay. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
2M
1M
TDR
DMR
TE
HP
LP
S4
TDR
S4
S4
P4
S3
LS1
CS
LS2
TH
PV
GND
R1
MV
IC
4
TH/R
TH
TR
GNC
GV
SENSOR
SPARK
1M COMPRESSOR  CONTACTOR
2M EVAPORATOR  FAN  CONTACTOR
CB CIRCUIT  BREAKER
CLI COMPRESSOR  LOCK-OUT  INDICATOR
CS CENTRIFUGAL  SWITCH
DMR  DRAFT  MOTOR  RELAY
GV GAS  VALVE
HP HIGH-PRESSURE  CONTROL
IC 
IGNITION  CONTROL
K1 COMPRESSOR  LOCK-OUT  RELAY
K3 BLOWER  INTERLOCK  RELAY
LP LOW-PRESSURE  CONTROL
LS1  LIMIT  SWITCH
LS2  LIMIT  SWITCH
TE LOW  EVAP.  TEMP.  THERMOSTAT
TH THERMOSTAT,  HEATING
TDR  TIME  DELAY  RELAY
CB
S1
K3
B
7
X
11
5
S1
W1
2
13
S1
W2
5
10
S1
Y2
10
3
S1
Z
1
14
S1
N
4
12
S1
Y1
8
4
S1
K1
1
S1
2
S1
7
S1
6
S1
R
6
9
S6
S8
S8
S8
K1
CL1
K1
K3
K3
FAN  ON
FAN  AUTO
OFF
THERMOSTAT
COOL
HEAT
G
9

UNIT 44  Packaged Units: Electric Air Conditioning and Gas Heating   409
 Figure 44–9
Circuit during normal cooling cycle. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
2M
1M
TDR
DMR
TE
HP
LP
S4
TDR
S4
S4
P4
S3
LS1
CS
LS2
TH
PV
GND
R1
MV
IC
4
TH/R
TH
TR
GNC
GV
SENSOR
SPARK
1M COMPRESSOR  CONTACTOR
2M EVAPORATOR  FAN  CONTACTOR
CB CIRCUIT  BREAKER
CLI COMPRESSOR  LOCK-OUT  INDICATOR
CS CENTRIFUGAL  SWITCH
DMR  DRAFT  MOTOR  RELAY
GV GAS  VALVE
HP HIGH-PRESSURE  CONTROL
IC 
IGNITION  CONTROL
K1 COMPRESSOR  LOCK-OUT  RELAY
K3 BLOWER  INTERLOCK  RELAY
LP LOW-PRESSURE  CONTROL
LS1  LIMIT  SWITCH
LS2  LIMIT  SWITCH
TE LOW  EVAP.  TEMP.  THERMOSTAT
TH THERMOSTAT,  HEATING
TDR  TIME  DELAY  RELAY
CB
S1
K3
B
7
X
11
5
S1
W1
2
13
S1
W2
5
10
S1
Y2
10
3
S1
Z
1
14
S1
N
4
12
S1
Y1
8
4
S1
K1
1
S1
2
S1
7
S1
6
S1
R
6
9
S6
S8
S8
S8
K1
CL1
K1
K3
K3
FAN  ON
FAN  AUTO
OFF
THERMOSTAT
COOL
HEAT
G
9

410   SECTION 6  Troubleshooting Using Control Schematics
 Figure 44–10
The lock-out relay has energized. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
2M
1M
TDR
DMR
TE
HP
LP
S4
TDR
S4
S4
P4
S3
LS1
CS
LS2
TH
PV
GND
R1
MV
IC
4
TH/R
TH
TR
GNC
GV
SENSOR
SPARK
1M COMPRESSOR  CONTACTOR
2M EVAPORATOR  FAN  CONTACTOR
CB CIRCUIT  BREAKER
CLI COMPRESSOR  LOCK-OUT  INDICATOR
CS CENTRIFUGAL  SWITCH
DMR  DRAFT  MOTOR  RELAY
GV GAS  VALVE
HP HIGH-PRESSURE  CONTROL
IC 
IGNITION  CONTROL
K1 COMPRESSOR  LOCK-OUT  RELAY
K3 BLOWER  INTERLOCK  RELAY
LP LOW-PRESSURE  CONTROL
LS1  LIMIT  SWITCH
LS2  LIMIT  SWITCH
TE LOW  EVAP.  TEMP.  THERMOSTAT
TH THERMOSTAT,  HEATING
TDR  TIME  DELAY  RELAY
CB
S1
K3
B
7
X
11
5
S1
W1
2
13
S1
W2
5
10
S1
Y2
10
3
S1
Z
1
14
S1
N
4
12
S1
Y1
8
4
S1
K1
1
S1
2
S1
7
S1
6
S1
R
6
9
S6
S8
S8
S8
K1
CL1
K1
K3
K3
FAN  ON
FAN  AUTO
OFF
THERMOSTAT
COOL
HEAT
G
9

UNIT 44  Packaged Units: Electric Air Conditioning and Gas Heating   411
SUMMARY
 The schematic diagram in this example shows mostly the operation of the heating  system.
 The thermostat in this diagram has four terminals labeled R, G, Y, and C.
 The thermostat is connected to the 24-volt side of the transformer.
 The heating system contains two high-limit switches.
 Both of the high-limit switches are connected normally closed and are connected in series 
with the automatic gas valve.
KEY TERMS
auxiliary limit 
door interlock 
main limit
condensing unit 
lock-out relay
REVIEW QUESTIONS
Refer to the schematic shown in Figure 44–1 for the following questions.
 
1. The unit will operate normally in the cooling cycle. When the unit is switched to the 
heating cycle, the gas burner will not ignite. List four possible problems.
 
2. The blower fan will operate normally in the cooling cycle. In the heating cycle, how-
ever, the fan will not operate. List three possible problems.
 
3. The unit will not operate in the heating or cooling cycle. A voltage check shows that 
there is no low voltage for operation of the control circuit. List three possible problems.
 
4. A lock-out protection circuit involves connecting the coil of the lock-out relay in 
series with the coil of the compressor contactor. When this circuit is energized, why is 
most of the voltage across the lock-out relay coil and very little across the compressor 
 contactor coil?
 
5. Once the lock-out relay has been energized, what must be done to reset the circuit?
TROUBLESHOOTING QUESTIONS
Refer to the schematic shown in Figure 44–1 to answer the following questions. Note that this draw-
ing is a combination of both a schematic and a wiring diagram. Also note that most of the control 
shown is of the heating system. The air conditioning part of this unit is referred to as “condensing 
unit” on the diagram. The thermostat contact arrangement is not shown in this diagram, but recall 
that in the cooling mode, terminals G and Y make connection with terminal R when the thermostat 
contact closes. In the heating mode, terminal R makes connection with terminal W when the thermo-
stat contact closes.

412   SECTION 6  Troubleshooting Using Control Schematics
1. When the unit is in the heating mode, what controls the operation of the blower motor?
A. Thermostat
B. Fan relay
C. Fan switch
D. Main limit switch
2. When the unit is used in the heating mode, which blower fan speed is used?
A. HIGH
B. MED
C. LOW
3. Assume that when in the heating mode, the gas burner will start when the thermostat 
calls for heat, but the blower motor will not run and eventually the burner is turned off by 
the main limit switch. Now assume that when the fan switch on the thermostat is moved 
to the manual position, the blower motor begins operating. List three conditions that 
could cause this problem.
A. _____________________________________________________________________
B. _____________________________________________________________________
C. _____________________________________________________________________
4. When the unit is in the cooling mode, which thermostat terminal controls the operation 
of the blower motor?
A. R
B. W
C. Y
D. G
5. Describe the operation of the door interlock switch.
A. The door interlock switch will prevent the unit from operating in either the heating or 
cooling mode. If the unit is in operation and the door is opened, the unit will stop opera-
tion. If the unit is not operating it cannot start in either the heating or cooling mode.
B. The door interlock switch will prevent operation in the heating mode only.
C. The door interlock switch will prevent operation in the cooling mode only.
D. The door interlock switch will prevent the unit from starting in either the heating or 
cooling mode, but if the unit is in operation when the door is opened, it will continue to 
operate until the thermostat is satisfi ed.
To answer the following questions, refer to the schematic diagram in fi gure 44–6.
6. Assume that the thermostat is set in the heating mode and that the heating thermostat 
contact closes. Now assume that the DMR relay coil is defective. Will the gas burner oper-
ate? Explain your answer.
7. Which relay controls the operation of the 2M contactor when the unit is in the heating mode?
8. Is the CLI indicator a __________?
A. Incandescent lamp.
B. Neon lamp.
C. Light-emitting diode.
D. The print does not indicate the type of light producing device.

SECTION 7
Ice Maker and 
Refrigeration 
Controls

414
Ice makers can be divided into two major categories, 
household and commercial. Unlike commercial units, 
household ice makers do not recirculate water. They 
fi ll a tray or mold and the water is allowed to freeze. 
Various methods are used to sense when the water 
has been frozen and to eject the ice from the tray.
Commercial ice makers generally recirculate the 
water during the freeze cycle. The one reason for 
this is that pure water freezes faster than water 
containing impurities and minerals. The ice formed 
is more pure and clearer in color. This does not 
apply to fl aker-type machines, however. Flaker or 
crushed-ice machines use an auger to scrape ice off 
an evaporator after the water has been frozen.
Some cube-type machines freeze water in the 
shape of the cube, and others freeze water as a slab. 
The slab-type machines use a grid of cutter wires to 
cut the frozen slab into cubes.
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Discuss the operation of a compact-
type ice maker
 Describe the operation of the water 
valve and ﬂ ow washer
 Discuss the sequence of events that 
takes place during each stage of the 
ice maker’s operation
 Discuss the operation of a ﬂ ex tray 
ice maker
Household Ice 
Makers
UNIT 45

UNIT 45  Household Ice Makers   415
HOUSEHOLD ICE MAKERS
One of the most widely used household ice makers 
is the compact, Figure 45–1. Although a newer 
model has been introduced, many of these original 
units are still in operation. The basic operation of 
this unit is as follows:
 1. An electric solenoid valve, Figure 45–2, turns 
on and fi lls the tray or mold with water. The 
valve contains a fl ow washer that meters 
the amount of water. The washer is designed 
to work with pressures that range between 
15 and 100 psi. The length of time the water 
is permitted to fl ow is controlled by a cam 
operated by a small electric motor. The time 
can be adjusted by moving the water sole-
noid switch closer to or farther away from 
the cam. The amount of water needed to fi ll 
the mold is approximately 135 cc or 4 oz. It 
should be noted that insuffi cient water causes 
the thermostat to cool too quickly, causing 
the ice maker to eject hollow cubes.
 2. A thermostat senses when the water is 
 frozen. It is mounted directly on the mold by 
a spring clip. The thermostat controls the 
start of the ejection and refi ll cycle.
 3. When the thermostat contact closes, it turns 
on the mold heater and motor. The motor 
operates the timing cam and ejector blades. 
The ice maker is so designed that the ejec-
tor blades can stall against the ice cubes 
without causing harm to the motor or me-
chanical parts. When the heater has warmed 
the mold suffi ciently, the ice cubes are pushed 
out by the ejector blades.
 4. During the ejection cycle, the shutoff arm 
rises and lowers. The shutoff arm senses the 
height of ice in the holding bin. If the bin is 
not full, the arm returns to its original posi-
tion and the ice maker is permitted to eject 
ice cubes again after they have been frozen. If 
the holding bin is full, however, the arm can-
not return to its normal position and the next 
ejection cycle cannot begin. The ice maker 
can be manually turned off by raising the 
shutoff arm above its normal range of travel.
The ice maker will normally permit the ejector 
blades to make two revolutions before the thermo-
stat reopens its contact and permits the process 
to stop at the end of the cycle. If the ejector blades 
make only one revolution, the ice cubes will be left 
on top of the blades instead of being dumped into 
the holding bin. This is not a problem, however, 
because the cubes will be dumped at the beginning 
of the next ejection cycle. Near the end of the cycle 
the mold is refi lled with water.
FLOW  WASHER
STRAINER
VALVE  BODY
SOLENOID  COIL
 Figure 45–1
Early model of a compact ice maker. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 Figure 45–2
Water valve. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

416   SECTION 7  Ice Maker and Refrigeration Controls
OPERATION OF THE CIRCUIT
The basic circuit for the compact ice maker is shown 
in Figure 45–3. The circuit is shown during the 
freeze cycle. It is assumed that the mold has been 
fi lled with water and the thermostat contact is open. 
The shutoff arm is in its normal position, indicating 
that the holding bin is not full. Note the position of 
the ejector blade and the shutoff arm.
Figure 45–4 shows the circuit at the beginning of 
the ejection cycle. At this time, the thermostat has 
cooled suffi ciently for its contact to close. A current 
path now exists through the mold heater and motor, 
and the ejector blades begin to turn.
NO
NC
C
NO
NC
NO
C
NO
NC
NO
C
WATER
SOLENOID
VALVE
WATER
SOLENOID
SWITCH
HOLDING  SWITCH
SHUTOFF  SWITCH
THERMOSTAT
117  VOLTS
60  Hz
MOLD  HEATER
MOTOR
EJECTOR
BLADE
ICE
STORAGE  BIN
 SHUT-
OFF
ARM
NO
NO
NC
NO
NO
NC
NO
C
WATER
SOLENOID
VALVE
WATER
SOLENOID
SWITCH
HOLDING  SWITCH
SHUTOFF  SWITCH
THERMOSTAT
117  VOLTS
60  Hz
MOLD  HEATER
MOTOR
ICE
STORAGE  BIN
 SHUT-
OFF
ARM
C
NC
C
 Figure 45–3
Basic circuit for the compact ice maker. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 45–4
Beginning of the ejection cycle. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 45  Household Ice Makers   417
As the motor turns the ejector blades and timing 
cam, the holding switch changes position and 
the shutoff arm begins to rise, Figure 45–5. The 
function of the holding switch is to maintain the 
circuit until the cam returns to the freeze, or off, 
position.
NO
NO
NC
NO
NO
NC
NO
C
WATER
SOLENOID
VALVE
WATER
SOLENOID
SWITCH
HOLDING  SWITCH
SHUTOFF  SWITCH
THERMOSTAT
117  VOLTS
60  Hz
MOLD  HEATER
MOTOR
ICE
STORAGE  BIN
 SHUT-
OFF
ARM
C
NC
C
NO
NO
NC
NO
NO
NC
NO
C
WATER
SOLENOID
VALVE
WATER
SOLENOID
SWITCH
HOLDING  SWITCH
SHUTOFF  SWITCH
THERMOSTAT
117  VOLTS
60  Hz
MOLD  HEATER
MOTOR
ICE
STORAGE  BIN
 SHUT-
OFF
ARM
C
NC
C
In Figure 45–6, the timing cam causes the shut-
off arm to rise and fall, making the shutoff switch 
change position. When the ejector blades reach 
the ice in the mold, the motor will stall until the ice 
cubes are thawed loose by the mold heater. Notice 
that the circuit to both the heater and motor has 
 Figure 45–6
The shutoff switch changes position. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 45–5
The shutoff arm begins to rise. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

418   SECTION 7  Ice Maker and Refrigeration Controls
been maintained by the holding switch. Note that it 
is possible for the thermostat to open its contact at 
any point in this process. If this should occur, power 
is turned off to the mold heater but maintained to 
the motor by the holding switch.
Near the completion of the fi rst revolution of 
the ejector blades, the timing cam closes the water 
solenoid switch, Figure 45–7. Although the water 
solenoid switch is now closed, current cannot fl ow 
through the coil. As long as the thermostat contact 
is closed, the same voltage potential is applied to 
both sides of the water solenoid coil. Because there 
is no potential difference across the coil, no current 
can fl ow and the water valve does not open to per-
mit water fl ow into the mold.
At the end of the fi rst revolution, Figure 45–8, 
the shutoff arm and ejector blades have returned to 
their normal position and the timing cam has reset 
NO
NO
NC
NO
NO
NC
NO
C
WATER
SOLENOID
VALVE
WATER
SOLENOID
SWITCH
HOLDING  SWITCH
SHUTOFF  SWITCH
THERMOSTAT
117  VOLTS
60  Hz
MOLD  HEATER
MOTOR
ICE
STORAGE  BIN
 SHUT-
OFF
ARM
C
NC
C
 Figure 45–7
The timing cam closes the water solenoid switch. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
NO
NO
NC
NO
NO
NC
NO
C
WATER
SOLENOID
VALVE
WATER
SOLENOID
SWITCH
HOLDING  SWITCH
SHUTOFF  SWITCH
THERMOSTAT
117  VOLTS
60  Hz
MOLD  HEATER
MOTOR
ICE
STORAGE  BIN
 SHUT-
OFF
ARM
C
NC
C
 Figure 45–8
End of the ﬁ rst revolution. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 45  Household Ice Makers   419
all cam-operated switches back to their normal posi-
tion. Notice, however, that the thermostat contact 
has remained in the closed position, permitting the 
second revolution to begin.
After the timing cam has rotated a few degrees, 
the holding switch again closes to maintain 
a current path to the motor and mold heater, 
 Figure 45–9. The shutoff arm raises and changes 
the position of the shutoff switch. The continued 
 rotation of the ejector blades dumps the ice into the 
holding bin.
During the second revolution, the increased tem-
perature from the mold heater causes the thermo-
stat contact to reopen, which deenergizes the heater, 
 Figure 45–10. The holding contact, however, provides 
a continued current path to the motor. If the storage 
bin is full, the shutoff arm will not return to its normal 
position and the shutoff switch will not be reset.
NO
NO
NC
NO
NO
NC
NO
C
WATER
SOLENOID
VALVE
WATER
SOLENOID
SWITCH
HOLDING  SWITCH
SHUTOFF  SWITCH
THERMOSTAT
117  VOLTS
60  Hz
MOLD  HEATER
MOTOR
ICE
STORAGE  BIN
 SHUT-
OFF
ARM
C
NC
C
NO
NO
NC
NO
NO
NC
NO
C
WATER
SOLENOID
VALVE
WATER
SOLENOID
SWITCH
HOLDING  SWITCH
SHUTOFF  SWITCH
THERMOSTAT
117  VOLTS
60  Hz
MOLD  HEATER
MOTOR
 SHUT-
OFF
ARM
C
NC
C
STORAGE  BIN
 Figure 45–10
Middle of the second revolution. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 45–9
Beginning of the second revolution. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

420   SECTION 7  Ice Maker and Refrigeration Controls
Near the completion of the second revolution, 
Figure 45–11, the timing cam again closes the 
water solenoid switch. A current path now exists 
through the solenoid coil and the mold heater. 
Although the solenoid coil and mold heater are now 
connected in series, the impedance of the solenoid 
coil is much higher than that of the heater. This per-
mits most of the voltage, about 105 to 110 volts, to 
be applied across the coil causing it to energize and 
open the water valve.
The cycle ends when the timing cam reopens the 
water solenoid and holding switch, Figure 45–12. If 
the storage bin is full as shown in this illustration, a 
new ejection and refi ll cycle cannot begin until suffi -
cient ice has been removed from the storage bin to per-
mit the shutoff arm to return to its normal position.
NO
NO
NC
NO
NO
NC
NO
C
WATER
SOLENOID
VALVE
WATER
SOLENOID
SWITCH
HOLDING  SWITCH
SHUTOFF  SWITCH
THERMOSTAT
117  VOLTS
60  Hz
MOLD  HEATER
MOTOR
 SHUT-
OFF
ARM
C
NC
C
STORAGE  BIN
NO
NO
NC
NO
NO
NC
NO
C
WATER
SOLENOID
VALVE
WATER
SOLENOID
SWITCH
HOLDING  SWITCH
SHUTOFF  SWITCH
THERMOSTAT
117  VOLTS
60  Hz
MOLD  HEATER
MOTOR
 SHUT-
OFF
ARM
C
NC
C
STORAGE  BIN
WATER
 Figure 45–11
End of the second revolution. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 45–12
End of the cycle. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 45  Household Ice Makers   421
THE NEW MODEL COMPACT ICE 
MAKER
Although the new model compact ice maker, 
 Figure 45–13, is very similar in design and operat-
ing principle to the original version just discussed, 
there are some signifi cant differences. Some of these 
differences are listed below:
 1. The ejector blades on the newer model stop at 
a different position, as shown in Figure 45–14. 
Also shown in Figure 45–14 is the position of 
the ejector blades when different actions occur 
during the ejection cycle.
 2. The ejector blades make only one revolution 
instead of two during the ejection cycle.
 3. Most of the new models have an external 
water level adjustment knob, Figure 45–13. 
Turning the knob moves a set of contacts in 
relation to its contact ring, permitting the fi ll 
time to be longer or shorter.
 4. On the original model compact ice maker, the 
gear located on the front of the unit could be 
turned manually to advance the ice maker 
through different parts of the cycle. This 
gear should never be turned on the newer 
model. To do so will cause damage to the ice 
maker. The front gears of both the original 
and newer compact ice makers are shown in 
Figure 45–15.
EJECTOR
BLADES
STALL
ON  ICE
THERMOSTAT
OPENS
STARTING
POSITION
WATER  VALVE
OPENS
 Figure 45–13
New compact ice maker. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 45–15
Front gears of the original (left) and newer model (right) 
compact ice makers. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 45–14
Ejector blade positions on new model compact 
ice maker. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 5. The new model compact provides test 
points on the plate located behind the front 
cover, Figure 45–16. It is possible to test 
different parts of the electrical circuit using a 
voltmeter and ohmmeter. The letters indicate 
the following test points:
 
 • N   Neutral side of the line
 
 • L    L1 (HOT) side of the line
 
 • M  Motor connection

422   SECTION 7  Ice Maker and Refrigeration Controls
located on the back side of the drive gear. 
When the motor turns, it turns these copper 
strips also. Contacts ride against these copper 
strips and make or break connection to oper-
ate the circuit. A diagram of the copper strips 
and contacts is shown in Figure 45–17.
The basic electrical circuit for this unit is shown 
in Figure 45–18. Please note that the contact points 
A, B, C, and D correspond to the contacts shown 
in Figure 45–17. At this point, connection is made 
between contacts B and C.
When the thermostat reaches approximately 
17°F, its contact will close and produce a current 
path to both the motor and heater as shown in 
 Figure 45–19. The motor begins to turn both the ejec-
tor blades and the copper strips located on the back 
of the main gear. At some point, contact between 
points B and C is broken and contact between points 
C and D is made, as shown in  Figure 45–20. The 
ejector blades then stall against the ice. A current 
path is maintained to the motor between points C 
and D and a current path is maintained to the heater 
by the closed thermostat contact.
After the surface of the ice has been thawed 
by the heater, the ejector blades will begin to 
turn again. After the ejector blades have rotated 
 approximately 180°, the thermostat contact opens, 
 Figure 45–16
Test points. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 45–17
Rotary switch located 
on back of drive gear. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
CONTACT  C  (HOLDING  SWITCH)
CONTACT  D  (NEUTRAL)
CONTACT  B  (THERMOSTAT)
CONTACT  A
(WATER  VALVE)
 
 • H  Heater connection
 
 • T   Thermostat connection
 
 • V   Water valve connection
 6. Probably the greatest difference lies in the 
electrical circuit itself. In this model, copper 
strips are laminated on an insulated plate 

UNIT 45  Household Ice Makers   423
 Figure 45–18
Basic schematic diagram for 
new model of Whirlpool compact 
ice maker. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 45–19
A current path is provided 
through the heater and 
timer motor. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
CONTACT
A
V
CONTACT
B
H
T
CONTACT
C
M
CONTACT
D
TIMER  MOTOR
4400Ω
72Ω  HEATER
WATER  VALVE
N
L1
SHUTOFF
SWITCH
(UP)
(DN)
THERMOSTAT
N
L
CONTACT
A
V
CONTACT
B
H
T
CONTACT
C
M
CONTACT
D
TIMER  MOTOR
4400Ω
72Ω  HEATER
WATER  VALVE
N
L1
SHUTOFF
SWITCH
(UP)
(DN)
THERMOSTAT
N
L
Figure 45–14. As the blades continue to turn, the 
shutoff arm rises and lowers and the copper strips 
advance until  connection is made between contacts 
A and B,  Figure 45–21. This provides a current 
path through the mold heater to the water solenoid 
valve. Because the coil of the solenoid has a much 
higher  impedance than the mold heater, most of the 
line voltage will be dropped across the valve, caus-
ing it to open and refi ll the mold. The ejector blades 
will continue to turn until they reach the end of the 
cycle and the circuit returns to its original condition 
as shown in Figure 45–18.

424   SECTION 7  Ice Maker and Refrigeration Controls
CONTACT
A
V
CONTACT
B
H
T
CONTACT
C
M
CONTACT
D
TIMER  MOTOR
4400Ω
72Ω  HEATER
WATER  VALVE
N
L1
SHUTOFF
SWITCH
(UP)
(DN)
THERMOSTAT
N
L
CONTACT
A
V
CONTACT
B
H
T
CONTACT
C
M
CONTACT
D
TIMER  MOTOR
4400Ω
72Ω  HEATER
WATER  VALVE
N
L1
SHUTOFF
SWITCH
(UP)
(DN)
THERMOSTAT
N
L
 Figure 45–20
The holding contact 
 maintains the timer motor 
circuit. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 Figure 45–21
Water valve energizes. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
FLEX TRAY ICE MAKERS
Another type of household ice maker is known 
as the fl ex tray, Figures 45–22A and 45–22B. 
Although fl ex tray type ice makers are no longer 
manufactured, many are still in service, making it 
necessary for technicians in the fi eld to understand 
their operation. Flex tray ice makers differ from the 
compact ice makers in several ways. Flex tray ice 
makers fi ll a tray with water and then, after some 

UNIT 45  Household Ice Makers   425
 Figure 45–22A
Side view of ﬂ ex tray ice maker. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 45–23
Flex tray ice maker. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 45–24
Water solenoid switch. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 45–22B
Top view of ﬂ ex tray ice maker. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
length of time, turn the tray to dump the cubes 
into a storage bin, Figure 45-23. At a point dur-
ing the ejection cycle, a tab located on one side of 
the rear of the tray contacts a stationary stop. The 
front of the tray continues to turn, causing the tray 
to fl ex or bend at about a 20° angle. This fl exing 
action causes the cubes to dump into the storage 
bin. Notice that the time necessary to complete one 
cycle is about 13.3 minutes. When the turning tray 
approaches the upright position again, a cam oper-
ated switch energizes a water solenoid valve for a 
period of about 13 seconds and refi lls the tray with 
approximately 8 ounces of water, Figure 45–24.
Note that replacement motors for this type of 
ice maker operate at a higher rate of speed than 
the original motors supplied with the unit. The 
new motors cause an ejection cycle to occur every 
90 minutes instead of 120 minutes. For this reason, 
the water fi ll switch should be changed with the 
motor to prevent short cycling of the fi ll cycle.
The principle of operation of the fl ex tray ice 
maker is different than that of the compact type. 
The fl ex tray ice maker is incorporated in the same 

426   SECTION 7  Ice Maker and Refrigeration Controls
WATER
SOLENOID
VALVE
120
VOLTS
DEFROST
HEATER
DEFROST
THERMOSTAT
EVAPORATOR
FAN
COMPRESSOR
CONDENSER  FAN
RUN
START
TIMER
MOTOR
WATER  FILL  SWITCH
STARTING  RELAY
OVERLOAD
CABINET
THERMOSTAT
START  CAP.
DEFROST
TIMER
SWITCH
ICEMAKER
 Figure 45–25
Schematic of ﬂ ex tray ice maker. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 circuit with the defrost timer, Figure 45–25. Because 
this type of ice maker does not need a mold heater or 
separate thermostat, it contains only three electrical 
components:
 1. A timer motor, which operates both the de-
frost timer and the ice maker, Figure 45–26. 
This motor contains a two-stage output 
gear. One gear operates the time cycle for 
the defrost heater, and the other gear oper-
ates the ice maker. The defrost cycle operates 
every 9.6 hours of timer motor running time, 
and the ice maker operates every 2 hours of 
timer motor running time. When the appli-
ance is in the freeze cycle, the timer motor 
can operate only when both the cabinet 
thermostat and the defrost heater 
thermostat are closed. During the defrost 
cycle, however, the timer motor will continue 
to operate regardless of the condition of either 
thermostat.
 2. Defrost timer switch, Figure 45–27.
 3. Water fi ll switch, Figure 45–24.
Another operating difference is that the fl ex tray 
ice maker is more dependent on mechanical control 

UNIT 45  Household Ice Makers   427
When the shutoff arm is held up, the pin will 
not be released and the tray will not enter into an 
ejection cycle. The operation of the ice maker can 
be manually stopped by lifting the arm above its 
normal turnoff position.
CIRCUIT OPERATION
In the fi rst stage of operation, the circuit is shown 
during the freeze cycle, Figure 45–29. The cabinet 
thermostat and defrost heater thermostat are both 
closed. At this point, several circuit paths exist. 
One circuit is completed through the timer motor, 
defrost heater, and defrost thermostat. A circuit is 
completed through the evaporator fan, condenser 
fan, and the run winding of the compressor. If 
the cabinet thermostat should open, as shown in 
 Figure 45–30, the timer motor also stops.
After 9.6 hours of timer motor operation, the 
defrost timer switch changes position and completes 
the circuits shown in Figure 45–31. The defrost 
heater is now connected directly to the power line, 
which permits it to warm the evaporator and melt 
accumulations of frost. A current path also exists 
through the timer motor to the evaporator fan, 
compressor run winding, and condenser fan. It is 
this circuit path that permits the timer motor to con-
tinue operation if the defrost thermostat should open 
its contacts. The timer motor must continue to run, 
or the defrost cycle cannot be completed. Note that 
 Figure 45–26
Timer motor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 45–27
Defrost timer switch. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 45–28
Locking pin. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
than electrical control. The shutoff arm located at 
the bottom of the ice maker senses the level of ice 
in the storage bin. When this arm is in the down 
position, it permits a spring-loaded pin to move for-
ward and lock a gear in place, Figure 45–28. This 
locked gear permits the timing motor to turn the 
tray through one revolution and eject the ice into 
the storage bin. The pin is mechanically reset at the 
end of each ejection cycle.

428   SECTION 7  Ice Maker and Refrigeration Controls
WATER
SOLENOID
VALVE
120
VOLTS
DEFROST
HEATER
DEFROST
THERMOSTAT
EVAPORATOR
FAN
COMPRESSOR
CONDENSER  FAN
RUN
START
TIMER
MOTOR
WATER  FILL  SWITCH
STARTING  RELAY
OVERLOAD
CABINET
THERMOSTAT
START  CAP.
DEFROST
TIMER
SWITCH
ICEMAKER
 Figure 45–29
First stage of operation. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
the winding of the timer motor has a much higher 
impedance than the run winding of the compressor. 
This permits almost all the voltage to be dropped 
across the timer motor and very little to be dropped 
across the evaporator fan, compressor run winding, 
and condenser fan. At this time, the timer motor will 
operate, but the other motors will not. The defrost 
cycle lasts for approximately 21.5 minutes.
At the end of the defrost cycle, the defrost timer 
switch changes back to its normal position. Because 

UNIT 45  Household Ice Makers   429
 Figure 45–30
Cabinet thermostat opens. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
WATER
SOLENOID
VALVE
120
VOLTS
DEFROST
HEATER
DEFROST
THERMOSTAT
EVAPORATOR
FAN
COMPRESSOR
CONDENSER  FAN
RUN
START
TIMER
MOTOR
WATER  FILL  SWITCH
STARTING  RELAY
OVERLOAD
CABINET
THERMOSTAT
START  CAP.
DEFROST
TIMER
SWITCH
ICEMAKER
the defrost thermostat opens its contacts at approxi-
mately 70°F and does not reclose them until the 
evaporator reaches about 2°F, it is normal for these 
contacts to be open at the end of the defrost cycle, 
Figure 45–32. During this time, the timer motor is 
turned off.
Under normal conditions, the ice maker acti-
vates after 2 hours of timer motor running time. 
Figure 45–33 shows the condition of the circuit 
near the end of the ejection cycle. The cam-operated 
water fi ll switch has closed and now completes a 
circuit through the water solenoid valve, defrost 

430   SECTION 7  Ice Maker and Refrigeration Controls
WATER
SOLENOID
VALVE
120
VOLTS
DEFROST
HEATER
DEFROST
THERMOSTAT
EVAPORATOR
FAN
COMPRESSOR
CONDENSER  FAN
RUN
START
TIMER
MOTOR
WATER  FILL  SWITCH
STARTING  RELAY
OVERLOAD
CABINET
THERMOSTAT
START  CAP.
DEFROST
TIMER
SWITCH
ICEMAKER
 Figure 45–31
Defrost thermostat closes. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
heater, and defrost thermostat. Note that if the 
cabinet thermostat should open during the water fi ll 
cycle, the cycle will be interrupted until the cabinet 
thermostat again closes.
Because the timer motor is used to operate both 
the ice maker and defrost cycle, it is possible for the 
ice ejection cycle to occur during the defrost cycle, 
Figure 45–34. Notice that a parallel current path 
exists through both the timer motor and water sole-
noid valve. If the defrost thermostat should open 
while the water valve switch is closed, the same 
current path is provided through the evaporator 
fan, compressor run winding, and condenser fan 
for both the timer motor and water solenoid valve. 
This permits the tray to dump the ice and refi ll with 
water.

UNIT 45  Household Ice Makers   431
WATER
SOLENOID
VALVE
120
VOLTS
DEFROST
HEATER
DEFROST
THERMOSTAT
EVAPORATOR
FAN
COMPRESSOR
CONDENSER  FAN
RUN
START
TIMER
MOTOR
WATER  FILL  SWITCH
STARTING  RELAY
OVERLOAD
CABINET
THERMOSTAT
START  CAP.
DEFROST
TIMER
SWITCH
ICEMAKER
 Figure 45–32
The defrost thermostat remains open until the temperature drops to 2°F. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
PROBLEMS AND PRECAUTIONS 
WITH THE FLEX TRAY ICE MAKER
When servicing the fl ex tray ice maker, there are 
several conditions the serviceperson should be 
aware of:
 1. Before disconnecting the ice maker, turn the 
cabinet thermostat to the OFF position or 
unplug the appliance. This is done to prevent 
arcing at the terminal connector block.
 2. If the ice maker should jam, it will prevent 
the defrost timer from operating.
 3. The fl ex tray type of ice maker permits no 
adjustment of the water fi ll switch.
 4. One of the most common problems is that the 
surface of the ice tray becomes rough because 
of mineral deposits in the water. This causes 
the ice cubes to stick in the tray and not be 
ejected. When ice cubes are not ejected, the 
tray becomes too full during the fi ll cycle and 

432   SECTION 7  Ice Maker and Refrigeration Controls
WATER
SOLENOID
VALVE
120
VOLTS
DEFROST
HEATER
DEFROST
THERMOSTAT
EVAPORATOR
FAN
COMPRESSOR
CONDENSER  FAN
RUN
START
TIMER
MOTOR
WATER  FILL  SWITCH
STARTING  RELAY
OVERLOAD
CABINET
THERMOSTAT
START  CAP.
DEFROST
TIMER
SWITCH
ICEMAKER
 Figure 45–33
The water ﬁ ll switch closes. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 45  Household Ice Makers   433
WATER
SOLENOID
VALVE
120
VOLTS
DEFROST
HEATER
DEFROST
THERMOSTAT
EVAPORATOR
FAN
COMPRESSOR
CONDENSER  FAN
RUN
START
TIMER
MOTOR
WATER  FILL  SWITCH
STARTING  RELAY
OVERLOAD
CABINET
THERMOSTAT
START  CAP.
DEFROST
TIMER
SWITCH
ICEMAKER
 Figure 45–34
The ice ejection cycle can occur during the defrost cycle. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 45–35
Drive gear and pins for the ﬂ ex tray ice maker. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
causes a slab of ice to form. This slab can 
cause damage to the pin, gears, and/or timer 
motor. The ice tray should be replaced at the 
fi rst sign of slabbing. A set of drive gears and 
pin are shown in Figure 45–35.

434   SECTION 7  Ice Maker and Refrigeration Controls
SUMMARY
 Ice makers can be divided into two major categories: household and commercial.
 An electric solenoid valve permits the tray to be fi lled with water at the proper time.
 A fl ow washer is used to meter the amount of water fl ow to the tray.
 The fl ow control washer is designed to operate with pressures that range between 15 and 
100 psi.
 The amount of water needed to fi ll the mold or tray is approximately 135 cc or 4 oz.
 A thermostat mounted to the mold senses when the water is frozen.
 A mold heater is used to slightly melt the cubes so the ejector blades can push them out of 
the mold.
 The shutoff arm senses when the storage bin is full of cubes.
 The shutoff arm can be used to manually prevent starting another cycle.
 Flex tray ice makers operate by fi lling a fl exible tray with water. When the water freezes, 
the entire tray rotates and dumps the ice in the storage bin.
 The motors of fl ex tray ice makers are generally used to operate the defrost timer circuit.
KEY TERMS
cabinet thermostat
compact
defrost heater thermostat
ejector blades
fl ex tray
fl ow washer
holding switch
mold heater
test points
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. Ice makers are divided into what two major categories?
 
2. What is the advantage of continually recirculating the water during the ice-making 
process?
 
3. What component controls the amount of water fl ow into the original compact ice 
maker?
 
4. Does the fl ex tray ice maker require a mold heater to thaw the ice cubes before they 
can be dumped into the storage bin?
 
5. In the original compact ice maker, what method is used to sense when the water has 
been frozen?
 
6. In the original compact ice maker, what controls the start of the ejection and refi ll 
cycle?
 
7. In the fl ex tray ice maker, what controls the start of the ejection and refi ll cycle?
 
8. How can the original compact ice maker be manually turned off?

UNIT 45  Household Ice Makers   435
 
9. How many revolutions will the ejector blades of the original compact ice maker nor-
mally make during the ejection cycle?
 10. What is the function of the holding switch in the original compact ice maker circuit?
 11. Concerning the fl ex tray ice maker, what two separate tasks are performed by the 
timer motor?
 12. What is the function of the spring loaded pin in the fl ex tray ice maker?
 13. Concerning the fl ex tray ice maker, is it possible for the timer motor to operate during 
the defrost cycle?
 14. Concerning the new type compact ice maker, what method is used to change the 
contacts labeled A, B, C, and D in the schematic diagram shown in Figure 45–18?
 15. Can the gear of the new type compact ice maker be rotated to manually advance the 
operation of the ice maker?
 16. How many revolutions do the ejector blades of the new type compact ice maker make 
during the ejection cycle?

436
Commercial ice makers are designed to produce 
large quantities of ice and are generally found in 
restaurants, cafeterias, motels, and hotels. Some ice 
makers produce cubes and others produce fl aked ice. 
The fi rst commercial type ice maker to be discussed 
is manufactured by Scotsman Company. The basic 
components of this unit are shown in Figure 46–1. 
Notice that this unit can be equipped with either an 
air-cooled or a water-cooled condenser. The water-
cooled unit operates much more quietly.
This unit produces ice by cascading water over 
a metal plate used as the evaporator, Figure 46–2. 
A water pump provides continuous circulation of 
water when the compressor is operating. A water 
distributor, located at the top of the plate, provides 
an even fl ow of water over the entire surface of the 
plate. Excess water is caught by a trough at the bot-
tom of the plate and is returned to a sump where 
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Discuss the basic design of different 
types of commercial ice makers
 Discuss the operation of a cube-type 
and ﬂ aker-type ice maker
 Discuss the control system of a cube-
type and ﬂ aker-type ice maker
Commercial 
Ice Makers
UNIT 46

UNIT 46  Commercial Ice Markers   437
 Figure 46–1
Scotsman cube-type ice maker. (Courtesy of Scotsman Ice Systems).

438   SECTION 7  Ice Maker and Refrigeration Controls
 Figure 46–2
Water cascades over a metal plate to produce ice. (Courtesy of Scotsman Ice Systems).

UNIT 46  Commercial Ice Markers   439
be diverted to the evaporator plate. This high pres-
sure gas warms the plate, and thaws the surface of 
the ice that is in contact with it. The combination of 
the warm plate and the cascading water loosens the 
ice cubes so that they drop away from the plate and 
fall into the storage bin below. During the harvest 
cycle, a water solenoid valve opens and permits 
fresh water to fl ow into the sump. This not only 
refi lls the sump, but also fl ushes impurities out the 
overfl ow drain.
The basic electrical schematic diagram for this 
machine is shown in Figure 46–3. There are two 
manual switches in this circuit. One is the master 
it is recirculated by the pump. Continuous circula-
tion of water produces a clearer ice because pure 
water freezes faster than impure water. This is not 
to say that water can be purifi ed by circulating it. 
The purifi cation is a result of the freezing process. 
Basically, the water freezes before the impurities 
and minerals have a chance to freeze. The water, 
minus the impurities and minerals, is frozen to the 
evaporator plate and the impurities and minerals 
are returned to the sump.
After the ice has formed, the harvest cycle begins. 
At the beginning of this cycle, a hot-gas solenoid 
valve opens and permits high pressure hot gas to 
PUMP  MOTOR
COMPRESSOR
START
RUN
HIGH
TEMP.
CUTOUT
HIGH
PRESS.
CUTOUT
MASTER
SWITCH
L1
N
FAN  MOTOR
HIGH  PRESS.
FAN  CONTROL
PSR
POTENTIAL
STARTING
RELAY
PSR
C
START  CAP.
FR2
HOT–GAS  SOL.
WATER  SOL.
TMR1
BIN
THERMOSTAT
FR3
TMR2
FR1
FR4
CUBE  SIZE
THERMOSTAT
COMP.
SWITCH
FR
FINISH
RELAY
TMR
TIMER
MOTOR
C
COMP. CONTACTOR
 Figure 46–3
Basic schematic diagram of a commercial ice cube maker. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

440   SECTION 7  Ice Maker and Refrigeration Controls
After the circuit has operated in this condition for 
some period of time, the evaporator plate becomes 
cold enough to permit the cube-size thermostat 
to close as shown in Figure 46–5. This completes 
a circuit to the timer motor. The timer is used to 
complete the cycle in the event the bin thermostat 
should open.
After the timer has operated for some length of 
time, the timer contacts will change position as 
shown in Figure 46–6, starting the harvest cycle. 
The TMR2 contact closes to maintain a current path 
around the bin thermostat contact, and the TMR1 
contact opens and deenergizes coil FR. When coil FR 
deenergizes, all of its contacts return to their normal 
position. The FR2 contact recloses and maintains 
a current path to the timer motor, permitting it 
to complete the cycle. When the FR4 contact re-
closes, the hot-gas solenoid and water solenoid 
valves open. As hot gas is circulated through the 
evaporator plate, it warms and permits the cube 
size thermostat contact to reopen. The circuit will 
continue to operate in this condition until the timer 
completes the cycle and resets both TMR contacts. 
At this point, the freeze cycle will begin again if the 
bin thermostat is still closed.
FLAKER-TYPE ICE MAKERS
Flaker-type ice makers produce ice continuously 
as opposed to harvesting ice cubes at certain inter-
vals. Flaked ice has a soft, fl aky texture and is often 
preferred by restaurants. A basic diagram of a 
fl aker-type ice maker is shown in Figure 46–7. The 
water supply from the building enters the water 
reservoir. A fl oat valve maintains a constant water 
level in the reservoir.
Water from the reservoir enters the bottom of 
the freezer assembly. The freezer assembly is 
the evaporator of the refrigeration unit. The freezer 
assembly is basically a hollow tube surrounded by 
a cylindrical container. Refrigerant is used to cool 
the hollow tube. A stainless steel auger is placed 
inside the hollow tube. The motor drive assembly 
turns the auger. As water enters the bottom of the 
freezer assembly, it is frozen into ice and carried 
upward by the auger. When the ice reaches the top, 
the fl ared end of the auger presses excess water out 
of the ice before it is extruded or fl aked out through 
switch, and can be used to disconnect power to the 
entire control circuit. The second is connected in 
series with the compressor contactor relay coil. This 
switch can be used to turn off the compressor sepa-
rately. Two safety switches, the high temperature 
cutout and the high pressure cutout, are connected 
in series with the master switch. If either of these 
switches opens, they will disconnect power to the 
control circuit.
This circuit also contains two thermostats, the bin 
thermostat and the cube-size thermostat. 
The sensor for the bin thermostat is located in the ice 
storage bin and senses the level of ice. When the ice 
reaches a high enough level, it touches the sensor and 
causes the contact to open. This stops the operation 
of the ice maker at the end of the harvest cycle. The 
sensor for the cube-size thermostat is mounted on the 
evaporator plate. When the evaporator plate reaches 
a low enough temperature, the thermostat contact 
closes and completes a circuit to the timer motor. The 
timer contains a set of cam-operated contacts and is 
used to complete the freeze and harvest cycle.
This circuit also contains a fan motor controlled 
by a pressure switch that senses the pressure on the 
high side of the compressor. This fan motor is used 
only on units with an air-cooled condenser. Because 
this fan motor is controlled by a pressure switch, it 
may cycle on and off during the unit’s operation.
For a better understanding of this circuit, it 
is shown at the beginning of the freeze cycle, 
 Figure 46–4. It is assumed that the master switch 
and the compressor switch have been closed, and 
that the bin thermostat contact is closed. A circuit 
is now completed to the fi nish relay, FR, causing all 
FR contacts to change position. The FR3 contact 
serves as a holding contact to permit completion 
of the cycle in the event the bin thermostat contact 
should open. The FR1 contact has closed to permit a 
current path to the timer motor when the cube size 
thermostat closes. The compressor contactor coil is 
energized, which closes its contact and connects the 
compressor to the line. The pump motor is energized 
causing water to fl ow over the evaporator plate. It 
is also assumed that the high-pressure fan control 
switch is closed, permitting the condenser fan motor 
to operate. Notice, however, that the FR4 contact 
has opened to prevent the hot-gas solenoid and the 
water solenoid from operating.

UNIT 46  Commercial Ice Markers   441
switches, one normally closed and the other nor-
mally open. The normally closed switch connects 
the motor start winding to the line when the motor 
is started. The normally open centrifugal switch con-
trols the coil of the compressor contactor. The com-
pressor contactor can be energized only when the 
auger drive motor operates within a certain speed 
range. If ice becomes compacted in the freezer unit, 
it will cause the auger drive motor to slow down. If 
the speed of the auger drive motor is reduced below 
a certain point, the centrifugal switch connected in 
the ice spout. A nylobraid tube carries the ice to 
the ice storage bin. When enough ice accumulates, 
it touches the sensor bulb of the bin thermostat. The 
bin thermostat contact then opens and the compres-
sor is disconnected from the line, but the auger drive 
motor continues to operate for approximately 1 to 
2 minutes. This permits the auger to clear the ice 
out of the freezer unit before it stops operating.
The basic schematic diagram for the fl aker-type 
ice maker is shown in Figure 46–8. Notice that the 
auger drive motor contains two separate centrifugal 
PUMP  MOTOR
COMPRESSOR
START
RUN
HIGH
TEMP.
CUTOUT
HIGH
PRESS.
CUTOUT
MASTER
SWITCH
L1
N
FAN  MOTOR
HIGH  PRESS.
FAN  CONTROL
PSR
POTENTIAL
STARTING
RELAY
PSR
C
START  CAP.
FR2
HOT  GAS  SOL.
WATER  SOL.
TMR1
BIN
THERMOSTAT
FR3
TMR2
FR1
FR4
CUBE  SIZE
THERMOSTAT
COMP.
SWITCH
FR
FINISH
RELAY
TMR
TIMER
MOTOR
C
COMP. CONTACTOR
 Figure 46–4
Beginning of freezing cycle. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

442   SECTION 7  Ice Maker and Refrigeration Controls
system is turned off, and the pressures have equal-
ized in the system, the low-side pressure is high 
enough to hold the switch in the position shown 
in Figure 46–8. When the compressor starts, the 
low-side pressure begins to decrease. When it has 
decreased to 20 psig (pounds per square inch 
gauge), the contacts change position. They will 
remain in the changed position until the low-side 
pressure increases to 32 psig.
The bin thermostat senses the level of ice in the 
storage bin and normally controls the operation of 
series with the compressor contactor coil will open. 
If this should happen, the compressor turns off, but 
the auger delay pressure control switch permits the 
auger to continue operating for approximately one 
and a half minutes. If the ice is cleared suffi ciently in 
that length of time, the auger drive motor speed will 
increase and permit the centrifugal switch to reclose 
and start the compressor.
The auger delay pressure control switch is a 
single-pole double-throw pressure switch connected 
in the low side of the refrigeration system. When the 
PUMP  MOTOR
COMPRESSOR
START
RUN
HIGH
TEMP.
CUTOUT
HIGH
PRESS.
CUTOUT
MASTER
SWITCH
L1
N
FAN  MOTOR
HIGH  PRESS.
FAN  CONTROL
PSR
POTENTIAL
STARTING
RELAY
PSR
C
START  CAP.
FR2
HOT  GAS  SOL.
WATER  SOL.
TMR1
BIN
THERMOSTAT
FR3
TMR2
FR1
FR4
CUBE  SIZE
THERMOSTAT
COMP.
SWITCH
FR
FINISH
RELAY
TMR
TIMER
MOTOR
C
COMP. CONTACTOR
 Figure 46–5
The cube-size thermostat closes to complete a circuit to the timer motor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 46  Commercial Ice Markers   443
 compacted in the nylobraid tube and spout. If the spout 
switch becomes tripped, it must be manually reset.
This unit utilizes two condenser fan motors. One 
motor is mounted at the bottom of the condenser 
and the other is mounted at the top. The bottom fan 
motor is connected in parallel with the compressor 
and will operate any time the compressor is in oper-
ation. The top fan motor is controlled by a pressure 
switch that senses the high side of the refrigeration 
system. If the pressure becomes high enough, the 
the ice maker. A low water-pressure switch is con-
nected to the water supply line. If the water pressure 
drops below 5 psig, the switch contacts will open. 
They will reclose when the water pressure reaches 
20 psig. The low head-pressure switch can interrupt 
operation of the compressor if the head pressure 
should become too low.
A master switch disconnects power to the entire 
control circuit. The spout switch can also disconnect 
power to the entire circuit in case the ice becomes 
PUMP  MOTOR
COMPRESSOR
START
RUN
HIGH
TEMP.
CUTOUT
HIGH
PRESS.
CUTOUT
MASTER
SWITCH
L1
N
FAN  MOTOR
HIGH  PRESS.
FAN  CONTROL
PSR
POTENTIAL
STARTING
RELAY
PSR
C
START  CAP.
FR2
HOT–GAS  SOL.
WATER  SOL.
TMR1
BIN
THERMOSTAT
FR3
TMR2
FR1
FR4
CUBE  SIZE
THERMOSTAT
COMP.
SWITCH
FR
FINISH
RELAY
TMR
TIMER
MOTOR
C
COMP. CONTACTOR
 Figure 46–6
Harvest cycle. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

444   SECTION 7  Ice Maker and Refrigeration Controls
 Figure 46–7
Water schematic. (Courtesy of Scotsman Ice Systems).

UNIT 46  Commercial Ice Markers   445
switch contact will close and start the top condenser 
fan motor.
OPERATION OF THE CIRCUIT
The circuit in Figure 46–9 shows the initial start 
up of the ice maker. It is assumed that the master 
switch and the bin thermostat switch are closed. A 
circuit is fi rst completed through coil B. This closes 
contact B and completes a circuit through the 
auger delay pressure control switch to the auger 
drive motor. The normally closed centrifugal switch 
contact completes a circuit to the start winding and 
permits the auger drive motor to start.
The normal running mode of the circuit is shown 
in Figure 46–10. In this phase of operation, it is 
assumed that the auger drive motor is operating 
at the proper speed and the centrifugal switch 
COMPRESSOR
RUN
START
L1
L2
TOP  FAN  MOTOR
BOTTOM  FAN  MOTOR
AUGER  DELAY  PRESS.
CONTROL
FAN  PRESS.
CONTROL
PSR
POTENTIAL  START  RELAY
PSR
START  CAP.
RUN  CAP.
B
C
T1
B
RELAY  COIL
CENTRIFUGAL  SWITCH
AUGER  DRIVE  MOTOR
OL
C
CONTACTOR
COIL
BIN
THERMO.
LOW
PRESS.
SPOUT
SWITCH
MASTER
SWITCH
LOW
WATER
PRESS.
RUN
START
 Figure 46–8
Basic schematic of ﬂ aker-type ice maker. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

446   SECTION 7  Ice Maker and Refrigeration Controls
 connected in series with the compressor contactor 
has closed and permitted the compressor to start. 
The suction pressure has dropped low enough to 
permit the auger delay pressure control switch con-
tacts to change position. The bottom condenser fan 
motor is in operation and the top fan motor may or 
may not be operating depending on the pressure on 
the high side of the refrigeration system.
In the schematic shown in Figure 46–11, it is 
assumed that the bin thermostat has been satisfi ed 
and has opened its contact. This opens the circuit to 
coils B and C and stops the operation of the compres-
sor. The auger drive motor will continue to operate 
until the pressure on the low side of the refrigeration 
system increases enough to reset the auger delay 
pressure switch. The circuit will then be back in its 
original, deenergized position.
The circuit in Figure 46–12 shows the operation 
of the circuit when the auger drive motor slows 
down enough to cause the centrifugal switch in 
COMPRESSOR
RUN
START
L1
L2
TOP  FAN  MOTOR
BOTTOM  FAN  MOTOR
AUGER  DELAY  PRESS.
CONTROL
FAN  PRESS.
CONTROL
PSR
POTENTIAL  START  RELAY
PSR
START  CAP.
RUN  CAP.
B
C
T1
B
RELAY  COIL
CENTRIFUGAL  SWITCH
AUGER  DRIVE  MOTOR
OL
C
CONTACTOR
COIL
BIN
THERMO.
LOW
PRESS.
SPOUT
SWITCH
MASTER
SWITCH
LOW
WATER
PRESS.
RUN
START
 Figure 46–9
Initial start sequence. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 46  Commercial Ice Markers   447
series with the compressor contactor to open. If this 
occurs, the compressor will be disconnected from 
the line and stop operating. A current path is main-
tained through the auger drive motor and auger 
delay pressure switch. Notice also that a current 
path is maintained through relay coil B. If the auger 
drive motor speed does not increase suffi ciently 
before the auger delay switch changes position, the 
closed B contact will provide a current path through 
the reset auger delay switch and permit the auger 
drive motor to continue operation.
COMPRESSOR
RUN
START
L1
L2
TOP  FAN  MOTOR
BOTTOM  FAN  MOTOR
AUGER  DELAY  PRESS.
CONTROL
FAN  PRESS.
CONTROL
PSR
POTENTIAL  START  RELAY
PSR
START  CAP.
RUN  CAP.
B
C
T1
B
RELAY  COIL
CENTRIFUGAL  SWITCH
AUGER  DRIVE  MOTOR
OL
C
CONTACTOR
COIL
BIN
THERMO.
LOW
PRESS.
SPOUT
SWITCH
MASTER
SWITCH
LOW
WATER
PRESS.
RUN
START
 Figure 46–10
Normal ice-making mode. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

448   SECTION 7  Ice Maker and Refrigeration Controls
COMPRESSOR
RUN
START
L1
L2
TOP  FAN  MOTOR
BOTTOM  FAN  MOTOR
AUGER  DELAY  PRESS.
CONTROL
FAN  PRESS.
CONTROL
PSR
POTENTIAL  START  RELAY
PSR
START  CAP.
RUN  CAP.
B
C
T1
B
RELAY  COIL
CENTRIFUGAL  SWITCH
AUGER  DRIVE  MOTOR
OL
C
CONTACTOR
COIL
BIN
THERMO.
LOW
PRESS.
SPOUT
SWITCH
MASTER
SWITCH
LOW
WATER
PRESS.
RUN
START
 Figure 46–11
The bin thermostat stops the ice-making process. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 46  Commercial Ice Markers   449
COMPRESSOR
RUN
START
L1
L2
TOP  FAN  MOTOR
BOTTOM  FAN  MOTOR
AUGER  DELAY  PRESS. CONTROL
FAN  PRESS.
CONTROL
PSR
POTENTIAL  START  RELAY
PSR
START  CAP.
RUN  CAP.
B
C
T1
B
RELAY  COIL
CENTRIFUGAL  SWITCH
AUGER  DRIVE  MOTOR
OL
C
CONTACTOR
COIL
BIN
THERMO.
LOW
PRESS.
SPOUT
SWITCH
MASTER
SWITCH
LOW
WATER
PRESS.
RUN
START
 Figure 46–12
Auger becomes overloaded and disconnects the compressor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
SUMMARY
 Commercial ice makers are designed to produce large quantities of ice.
 Continuous circulation of water produces a clearer ice because pure water freezes faster 
than impure water.
 At the beginning of the harvest cycle of the cube-type ice maker, a hot-gas solenoid valve 
permits high pressure gas to be diverted to the evaporator plate. This warms the plate and 
thaws the surface of the ice.

450   SECTION 7  Ice Maker and Refrigeration Controls
 During the harvest cycle, a water solenoid valve opens and permits fresh water to fl ow into 
the sump.
 The cube-type ice maker contains two thermostats: the bin thermostat and the cube-size 
thermostat.
 Flaker-type ice makers produce ice continuously.
 In the fl aker-type ice maker, a fl oat valve maintains a constant water level in the water 
reservoir.
 The fl aker-type ice maker uses a hollow tube as the evaporator.
 An auger is used to carry ice up the freezer assembly.
 A thermostat located inside the bin of a fl aker-type ice maker senses when the bin is full.
 The auger motor of the fl aker-type ice maker contains two centrifugal switches.
KEY TERMS
auger 
fl aker-type 
nylobraid tube
bin thermostat 
freezer assembly 
psig (pounds per square inch gauge)
cube-size thermostat 
hot-gas solenoid valve 
water solenoid valve
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. Concerning the Scotsman cube-type ice maker, what device is used to cause the water 
to fl ow evenly over the surface of the evaporator plate?
 
2. Concerning the Scotsman cube-type ice maker, what method is used to thaw the sur-
face of the ice in contact with the evaporator plate during the harvest cycle?
 
3. Concerning the Scotsman cube-type ice maker, what are the two safety switches used 
to disconnect power from the control circuit?
 
4. What device is used to sense the level of ice cubes in the storage bin of the Scotsman 
cube-type ice maker?
 
5. What electrical component starts the operation of the timer motor in the Scotsman 
cube-type ice maker?
 
6. Concerning the Scotsman fl aker-type ice maker, what device is used to carry the ice 
to the top of the evaporator tube?
 
7. How is excess water pressed out of the ice before it is ejected into the storage bin of the 
fl aker-type ice maker?
 
8. Explain the operation of the auger delay switch used in the fl aker-type ice maker.
 
9. Concerning the fl aker-type ice maker, why is it desirable to have the auger drive 
motor continue to operate for some period of time after the compressor has stopped 
operation?

UNIT 46  Commercial Ice Markers   451
 10. What controls the operation of the bottom condenser fan motor in the fl aker-type ice 
maker?
 11. What electrical component is used to stop the operation of the compressor if the auger 
should become overloaded?
 12. Concerning the Scotsman fl aker-type ice maker, which safety switch must be manu-
ally reset if it trips? 

452
Refrigeration and air conditioning systems are 
essentially the same in that they both involve 
removing heat from the surrounding air. The differ-
ences that occur are in the amount of heat removed 
and the operating environment. Air conditioning 
systems operate at a higher temperature and are 
used for comfort cooling and humidity control. 
They generally operate only in the warmer months 
and the condenser units are located outside the 
 structure being cooled.
Refrigeration systems are intended to produce 
colder temperatures and generally operate through-
out the year. Some are intended to produce tem-
peratures that range from 35°F to 45°F for food 
storage and others produce temperatures of 0°F or 
lower for hard freezing. Probably the greatest dif-
ference between air conditioning and refrigeration, 
as far as controls are concerned, lies in the fact that 
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Discuss differences between 
refrigeration and air conditioning 
control systems
 Discuss problems of low head 
pressures in a refrigeration system
 Discuss ways of improving the 
operation of refrigeration systems
 Explain condenser ﬂ ooding
 Discuss the use of shutters 
and dampers
 Discuss fan cycling
Refrigeration 
Controls
UNIT 47

UNIT 47  Refrigeration Controls   453
refrigeration systems operate at lower temperatures 
and must employ some method for defrosting the 
evaporator.
Many refrigeration systems, such as open freez-
ers in supermarkets, are intended to operate inside 
an air conditioned building. It is this operating 
environment that can create some special problems. 
The cold ambient air temperature in winter or the 
cool air inside an air conditioned building can cause 
the compressor head pressure to drop below a point 
such that the pressure differential between the high 
and low side of the system is insuffi cient for the unit 
to operate effi ciently. When this is the case, some 
method must be employed to raise the tempera-
ture of the condenser and permit the compressor 
head pressure to increase. Some common ways of 
accomplishing this are fan cycle control, shutters, 
and condenser fl ooding. Refrigeration and air condi-
tioning units that employ water-cooled condensers 
control the fl ow of cooling water to maintain head 
pressure.
CONDENSER FLOODING
Condenser fl ooding is accomplished by placing 
a pressure operated valve in the refrigerant line 
between the condenser and metering valve. More 
than one method can be employed to accomplish 
this. Flooding the condenser with liquid refrigerant 
COMPRESSOR
CONDENSER
HEAD  PRESSURE
CONTROL  VALVE
EVAPORATOR
METERING  VALVE
RECEIVER
has the effect of covering the condenser with a plas-
tic blanket. This causes an increase in condenser 
temperature and a corresponding increase in head 
pressure. To accomplish condenser fl ooding, the 
unit must contain enough liquid refrigerant to fl ood 
the condenser. This calls for a large charge of refrig-
erant and some means of storing it. Units intended 
to use condenser fl ooding contain a receiver to hold 
the excess refrigerant.
Nonadjustable Head 
Pressure Valve
Figure 47–1 illustrates the connection of a nonad-
justable head pressure control valve. A line drawing 
of the valve is shown in Figure 47–2. The valve’s 
main port is between the condenser and receiver. 
As long as receiver pressure remains above a certain 
level the bypass between discharge and receiver por-
tions of the valve are closed. If the receiver pressure 
should drop, such as would be the case with low 
ambient temperature, the spring loaded valve over-
comes the receiver pressure and hot gas begins to 
fl ow through the discharge portion of the valve. Low 
receiver pressure also causes the valve to decrease 
the fl ow from the condenser, causing refrigerant 
to backup in the condenser. This has the effect of 
decreasing the surface area of the condenser caus-
ing an increase in temperature and a corresponding 
 Figure 47–1
The head pressure control valve meters the ﬂ ow of refrigerant through the condenser. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

454   SECTION 7  Ice Maker and Refrigeration Controls
 Figure 47–2
Operation of a nonadjustable head pressure control valve. (Courtesy of Sporlan Valve Company).
increase in pressure. This valve maintains an almost 
constant pressure and function well in temperatures 
of up to about –40°F. A nonadjustable head pres-
sure control valve is shown in Figure 47–3.
Adjustable Head Pressure Valve
Adjustable head pressure systems generally require 
the use of two valves. One valve opens on rise of 
inlet pressure (ORI) and the other opens on rise 
of differential pressure (ORD). A basic piping 
connection for the adjustable head pressure system 
is shown in Figure 47–4. An illustration of the ORI 
valve is shown in Figure 47–5. The ORI valve is 
an inlet pressure regulating valve that responds to 
changes in the condenser pressure. Note that both 
the inlet and outlet pressures are against the seat 
disc. One tends to cancel the effects of the other. In 
warm weather the condenser pressure is greater 
than the receiver pressure, which causes the valve 
to open and permit refrigerant to fl ow through the 
condenser.
 Figure 47–3
A nonadjustable head pressure valve. (Courtesy of Sporlan 
Valve Company).
The ORD valve provides a bypass around the con-
denser. An illustration of the ORD valve is shown in 
Figure 47–6. The compressor head pressure acts to 
open the ORD valve and the receiver pressure and 

UNIT 47  Refrigeration Controls   455
 Figure 47–5
The open on rise of inlet pressure (ORI) valve can be 
adjusted. (Courtesy of Sporlan Valve Company).
 Figure 47–4
An adjustable head pressure system requires two valves. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
COMPRESSOR
CONDENSER
ORD  VALVE
ORI  VALVE
EVAPORATOR
METERING  VALVE
RECEIVER
spring tend to keep the valve closed. If the receiver 
pressure should drop due to low ambient tempera-
ture, two actions take place.
 1. The ORI valve begins to close and reduce the 
fl ow of refrigerant through the condenser.
 2. The ORD valve begins to open and permit the 
hot gas to bypass the condenser and fl ow to 
the receiver.
The reduced fl ow of refrigerant through the con-
denser causes an increase in temperature and pres-
sure. An ORI valve is shown in Figure 47–7 and an 
ORD valve is shown in Figure 47–8.
FAN CYCLE CONTROL
Another common method of increasing head pres-
sure is by controlling the amount of air across the 
condenser. Air-cooled condensers of large refrig-
eration units and air conditioners employ a fan to 
increase airfl ow across them. The increased airfl ow 
permits a greater amount of heat to be removed. 
During periods that the ambient temperature is so 
low that the head pressure drops below a certain 
amount, a fan cycle switch can be used to dis-
connect power to the condenser fan, Figure 47–9. 
The switch shown in Figure 47–9 is pressure 

456   SECTION 7  Ice Maker and Refrigeration Controls
 Figure 47–6
The open on rise of 
differential (ORD) valve 
operates on the difference 
in pressure between the 
compressor head pressure 
and receiver pressure. 
(Courtesy of Sporlan Valve Company).
 Figure 47–7
An open on rise of inlet pressure (ORI) valve. (Courtesy of 
Sporlan Valve Company).
 Figure 47–8
An open on rise of differential pressure (ORD) valve. 
(Courtesy of Sporlan Valve Company).
 operated. It is connected in the high side of the unit, 
Figure 47–10. The switch can be adjusted for the 
amount of pressure required to turn the fan on and 
off. A typical setting for refrigerant R12 is 125 psi 
turn off and 175 psi turn on. At pressures greater 
than 175 psi a set of electrical contacts inside the 
switch close and connect the condenser fan to the 
power line. If the high side pressure should drop 
below 125 psi, the contacts will open and turn off 
the condenser fan. The pressure differential prevents 
rapid cycling of the condenser fan motor. The fan 
cycle switch will not hinder operation during warm 
months and will provide good operation during 
cold months.
The fan cycle switch is relatively inexpensive 
and can be added to an existing system with very 
little trouble. Generally no alterations to the piping 
system are required. There is one potential problem 

UNIT 47  Refrigeration Controls   457
 Figure 47–10
A pressure-operated fan cycle switch controls the condenser fan to control head pressure. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 47–9
Pressure operated fan cycle switch. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
CONDENSER
FAN
FAN  CYCLE
SWITCH
POWER
LINE
L1
L2
FAN  SWITCH
CONNECTS  TO 
THE  HIGH  SIDE
with this type of head pressure control. The pressure 
differential between fan turn on and turn off can 
cause erratic operation of the expansion valve.
Units that employ more than one condenser 
fan will often have one fan controlled by pressure 
and the others controlled by temperature-sensitive 
switches. The fans will be set to turn on or off in 
stages. One temperature switch, for example, may 
turn a fan off at 75°F and another switch may turn a 
fan off at 65°F. This helps maintain a more constant 
head pressure. When temperature switches are 
used, the temperature sensing element is generally 
connected to the liquid line.
Variable Speed Control
Another type of fan cycle control employs a solid 
state device called a triac to control motor speed, 
Figure 47–11. The triac has the ability to control the 
output voltage applied to the motor. Refer to Unit 56 
for more information concerning the operation of a 
triac. Some controls vary the output voltage applied 
to the condenser fan in accord with the temperature 
of the liquid refrigerant line, and others sense ambient 

458   SECTION 7  Ice Maker and Refrigeration Controls
temperature. A thermistor is used to sense the tem-
perature. A decrease of temperature causes the unit 
to reduce the voltage applied to the condenser fan 
motor causing it to slow down. As the temperature 
increases the output voltage increases permitting the 
motor to increase speed. A chart illustrating typical 
voltage and temperature relationships for a con-
trol that senses liquid line temperature is shown in 
 Figure 47–12. The voltage/temperature relationship 
can be changed to some degree by changing the type 
thermistor used to sense the temperature. Notice on 
the chart that at temperatures below about 75°F the 
motor is turned off and at temperatures above about 
115°F full output voltage is applied to the motor. 
The variable speed control helps eliminate some of 
the pressure differential problems encountered with 
fan cycle controls that simply turn on or off. A typical 
connection diagram for this type control is shown in 
Figure 47–13.
SHUTTERS
Another method for controlling head pressure is 
with the use of shutters. Shutters can be opened or 
closed to control the airfl ow across the condenser. 
PERCENT  LINE  VOLTAGE  TO  MOTOR
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
70
80
90
100
100
TEMPERATURE  OF  LIQUID  LINE  IN  °F
110
120
130
140
 Figure 47–11
Variable-speed fan cycle control. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 47–12
Typical output voltage and temperature curve for a 
variable-speed fan cycle control. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
They can be installed on the inlet or outlet side of the 
condenser fan. A pressure-operated piston is used to 
open the shutters and permit more air to fl ow. The 
piston is connected to the high side of the system in 

UNIT 47  Refrigeration Controls   459
MOTOR
TO  TERMINAL  3  OR  4
120/240  VAC
277/600  VAC
L1
L2
THERMOSTAT
THERMISTOR
5
6
9
10
TRIAC
4
3
2
1
 Figure 47–13
Basic connection for a variable-speed fan control. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

460   SECTION 7  Ice Maker and Refrigeration Controls
much the same way as the pressure-operated fan 
cycle switch. If pressure decreases, the shutters close 
to restrict airfl ow. If the pressure rises, the piston 
pushes against a mechanical rod causing the shut-
ters to open and permit more airfl ow.
An advantage of shutters is that they open and 
close slowly maintaining an even head pressure. If 
a condenser contains multiple fans, one fan is gen-
erally equipped with a shutter and the other fans 
will be cycled on or off with pressure-activated or 
temperature-activated switches.
SUMMARY
 Refrigeration systems differ from air conditioning systems in the temperature ranges in 
which they operate, and refrigeration systems require some method of defrosting the 
evaporator.
 Refrigeration systems can experience diffi culties due to low head pressure in cold 
weather.
 Head pressure can be increased by limiting the airfl ow across the condenser.
 Condenser fl ooding has the effect of covering the condenser with a plastic blanket.
 To employ condenser fl ooding, the unit must have a large charge of refrigerant and a place 
to store it.
 Condenser fl ooding is generally accomplished by connecting a pressure-operated valve 
between the condenser and the expansion valve.
 Fan cycle control is accomplished by turning the condenser fan on or off in relation to 
pressure or temperature.
 Variable-speed fan cycle controls reduce the voltage applied to the motor if the liquid line 
temperature or ambient air temperature decreases below a certain point.
 Shutters can be used to decrease airfl ow across the condenser.
 Shutters generally employ a pressure-operated piston to control the opening and closing 
of the shutters.
KEY TERMS
opens on rise of differential (ORD)
opens on rise of inlet (ORI)
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. Explain why low ambient temperatures can cause problems with refrigeration 
 systems.
 
2. What can be done to make the unit act as if the condenser has been covered with a 
plastic blanket?

UNIT 47  Refrigeration Controls   461
 
3. Referring to the chart in Figure 47–12, what is the approximate percent of output 
voltage at a temperature of 100°F?
 
4. Referring to the chart in Figure 47–12, at about what temperature does the control 
turn the condenser fan off ?
 
5. Name two requirements that must be met to use condenser fl ooding to control head 
pressure.
 
6. What device is used to operate the shutters on most shutter systems?
 
7. Does an increase in pressure cause the shutters to open or close?
 
8. What problem can be caused by cycling the condenser fan on and off to control head 
pressure?
 
9. What device is used to sense liquid line temperature with the variable-speed fan cycle 
control described in this unit?
 10. What solid state device does the variable-speed control unit employ to control the 
voltage to the condenser fan motor?

This page intentionally left blank 

SECTION 8
Solid-State 
Devices

Resistors are among the most common components 
found in electrical circuits. It is sometimes necessary 
for a technician to be able to determine the value of 
a resistor in a circuit. Some resistors are intended to 
carry large amounts of current and produce heat, 
such as the resistors in electric heating systems, 
small space heaters, and the burners of an electric 
range, Figure 48–1. These resistors are generally 
made from a special type of wire called nichrome. 
Nichrome wire is about 65 times more resistive 
than copper and can be operated at very high 
temperatures.
Wire wound resistors are made from nichrome 
wire also. These resistors are often made by wind-
ing nichrome wire on a hollow porcelain tube, 
 Figure 48–2. Wire wound resistors of this type 
should be mounted vertically and not horizontally. 
The hollow portion of the resistor acts as a chimney 
464
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Discuss different types of resistors
 Determine the resistance of a resistor 
using the color code
 Test a resistor to determine if it is 
within its rated tolerance
UNIT 48
Resistors and 
Color Codes

UNIT 48  Resistors and Color Codes   465
to permit air to circulate through the resistor, 
Figure 47–3. People often employ light bulbs as 
small heaters to protect well pumps during periods 
of cold weather. The problem with light bulbs is 
that they have a bad habit of burning out during 
the coldest nights of the year. A better solution is 
to use a wire wound resistor instead of a light bulb. 
A resistor with a value of 120 ohms would produce 
120 watts of heat when connected to 120 volts. 
If the resistor were rated at 150 watts or more, it 
would probably never burn out.
 Figure 48–1
Electric heating element.
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 48–2
Wire wound resistor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 48–3
Mounting the resistor vertically permits air to ﬂ ow 
through the hollow opening. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

466   SECTION 8  Solid-State Devices
Wire wound resistors generally have the ohmic 
value and power rating written on the resistor. If the 
ohmic value is not written on the resistor, an ohm-
meter can be used to determine its value.
Color Code
Small fi xed resistors with ratings of 1/8 to 2 watts 
are generally marked with bands of color to 
indicate their ohmic value and tolerance. The 
size of the resistor indicates its wattage rating, 
 Figure 48–4. Resistors can have from three to fi ve 
bands of color. Most have four bands. The colors 
are used to indicate a numeric value. The chart in 
Figure 48–5 lists the colors and their corresponding 
number value. Resistors with a tolerance of 20% 
will contain three bands of color. Resistors with a 
tolerance of 10%, 5%, and 2% will contain 
four bands of color, and resistors with a tolerance 
of 1% and some special purpose resistors will 
contain fi ve bands of color. When determining the 
ohmic value and tolerance of a resistor with three 
or four bands of color, the fi rst two bands represent 
numbers, the third band is the multiplier, and the 
fourth band indicates the tolerance, Figure 48–6. 
If the resistor has a tolerance of 10%, the fourth 
band will be silver. The fourth band will be gold for a 
resistor with a tolerance of 5%, and red for a resis-
tor with a tolerance of 2%.
Assume a resistor has color bands of yellow, 
violet, orange, and gold, Figure 48–7. The fi rst two 
2 WATT
1 WATT
1/2 WATT
 Figure 48–4
The size of a ﬁ xed resistor indicates its wattage value. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
COLOR 
NUMBER VALUE
Black 
0
Brown 
1
Red 
2
Orange 
3
Yellow 
4
Green 
5
Blue 
6
Violet 
7
Gray 
8
White 
9
Tolerance
No fourth band 
20%
Silver fourth band 
10%
Gold fourth band 
 5%
Red fourth band 
 2%
Brown ﬁ fth band 
 1%
Special Multipliers
Gold third band 
0.10
Silver third band 
0.01
 Figure 48–5
Colors represent numeric values. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
TOLERANCE
MULTIPLIER
NUMBERS
 Figure 48–6
Four band resistor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 48  Resistors and Color Codes   467
bands represent numbers. Yellow is 4 and violet 
is 7. The third band is the multiplier. Add the num-
ber of zeros indicated by the color. Orange is three, 
so add 3 zeros. The number becomes 47000. The 
resistor has a value of 47,000 ohms with a toler-
ance of 5%.
Now assume that a resistor has color bands of 
green, brown, black, Figure 48–8. Green is 5, brown 
is 1, and black is 0. The fi rst two colors are numbers 
51 and the third band color is black which is zero. 
This means there is no multiplier. The resistor has 
an ohmic value of 51 ohms. Since there is no third 
band the resistor has a tolerance of 20%.
Resistors that have a value less than 10 ohms 
use gold and silver in the third band as multipliers. 
When a resistor has a third band of gold it means to 
multiply the fi rst two numbers by 0.1 or divide the 
fi rst two numbers by 10. If the third band is silver, 
multiply the fi rst two numbers by 0.01 or divide the 
fi rst two numbers by 100. Assume a resistor has 
colors of blue, gray, gold, and red, Figure 48–9. Blue 
is 6, gray is 8 and gold means to divide by 10. The 
resistor has an ohmic value of 6.8 ohms. The red 
fourth band indicates a tolerance of 2%.
Tolerance
The tolerance indicates the limits of ohmic value. 
Assume that a resistor is marked 1,000 ohms with 
a tolerance of 10%. To determine if this resistor 
is within its tolerance rating, fi nd 10% of the rated 
47,000  OHMS  5%
GOLD
ORANGE
VIOLET
YELLOW
 Figure 48–7
The resistor has a value of 47,000 ohms with a 
 tolerance of 5%. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
51  OHMS  20%
BLACK
BROWN
GREEN
 Figure 48–8
The resistor has a value of 51 ohms and a tolerance 
of 20%. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
6.8  OHMS  2%
RED
GOLD
GRAY
BLUE
 Figure 48–9
The resistor has a value of 6.8 ohms with a tolerance 
of 2%. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
value (1,000  0.10  100 . The resistor will be in 
tolerance if its value is between 1,100 and 900 ohms 
(1,000  100  1,100 and 1,000 – 100  900).
Standard Resistance Values
Fixed resistors are generally manufactured in stan-
dard values. The higher the tolerance value, the 
fewer resistance values available. Standard resis-
tor values for different tolerances are listed in the 
chart shown in Figure 48–10. In the column under 
10% only 12 values of resistance are listed. These 
standard values, however, can be multiplied by fac-
tors of 10. Notice that one of the standard values 
listed is 33 . There are also standard values in 

468   SECTION 8  Solid-State Devices
STANDARD RESISTANCE VALUES
.1%, .25%, .5% 
1% 
.1%, .25%, .5% 
1% 
.1%, .25%, .5% 
1% 
.1%, .25%, .5% 
1%
10.0 
10.0 
17.8 
17.8 
31.6 
31.6 
56.2 
56.2
10.1 
– 
18.0 
– 
32.0 
– 
56.9 
–
10.2 
10.2 
18.2 
18.2 
32.4 
32.4 
57.6 
57.6
10.4 
– 
18.4 
– 
32.8 
– 
58.3 
–
10.5 
10.5 
18.7 
18.7 
33.2 
33.2 
59.0 
59.0
10.6 
– 
18.9 
– 
33.6 
– 
59.7 
–
10.7 
10.7 
19.1 
19.1 
34.0 
34.0 
60.4 
60.4
10.9 
– 
19.3 
– 
34.4 
– 
61.2 
–
11.0 
11.0 
19.6 
19.6 
34.8 
34.8 
61.9 
61.9
11.1 
– 
19.8 
– 
35.2 
– 
62.6 
–
11.3 
11.3 
20.0 
20.0 
35.7 
35.7 
63.4 
63.4
11.4 
– 
20.3 
– 
36.1 
– 
64.2 
–
11.5 
11.5 
20.5 
20.5 
36.5 
36.5 
64.9 
64.9
11.7 
– 
20.8 
– 
37.0 
– 
65.7 
–
11.8 
11.8 
21.0 
21.0 
37.4 
37.4 
66.5 
66.5
12.0 
– 
21.3 
– 
37.9 
– 
67.3 
–
12.1 
12.1 
21.5 
21.5 
38.3 
38.3 
68.1 
68.1
12.3 
– 
21.8 
– 
38.8 
– 
69.0 
–
12.4 
12.4 
22.1 
22.1 
39.2 
39.2 
69.8 
69.8
12.6 
– 
22.3 
– 
39.7 
– 
70.6 
–
12.7 
12.7 
22.6 
22.6 
40.2 
40.2 
71.5 
71.5
12.9 
– 
22.9 
– 
40.7 
– 
72.3 
–
13.0 
13.0 
23.2 
23.2 
41.2 
41.2 
73.2 
73.2
13.2 
– 
23.4 
– 
41.7 
– 
74.1 
–
13.3 
13.3 
23.7 
23.7 
42.2 
42.2 
75.0 
75.0
13.5 
– 
24.0 
– 
42.7 
– 
75.9 
–
13.7 
13.7 
24.3 
24.3 
43.2 
43.2 
76.8 
76.8
13.8 
– 
24.6 
– 
43.7 
– 
77.7 
–
14.0 
14.0 
24.9 
24.9 
44.2 
44.2 
78.7 
78.7
14.2 
– 
25.2 
– 
44.8 
– 
79.6 
–
14.3 
14.3 
25.5 
25.5 
45.3 
45.3 
80.6 
80.6
14.5 
– 
25.8 
– 
45.9 
– 
81.6 
–
14.7 
14.7 
26.1 
26.1 
46.4 
46.4 
82.5 
82.5
14.9 
– 
26.4 
– 
47.0 
– 
83.5 
–
15.0 
15.0 
26.7 
26.7 
47.5 
47.5 
84.5 
84.5
15.2 
– 
27.1 
– 
48.1 
– 
85.6 
–
15.4 
15.4 
27.4 
27.4 
48.7 
48.7 
86.6 
86.6
15.6 
– 
27.7 
– 
49.3 
– 
87.6 
–
15.8 
15.8 
28.0 
28.0 
49.9 
49.9 
88.7 
88.7
16.0 
– 
28.4 
– 
50.5 
– 
89.8 
–
16.2 
16.2 
28.7 
28.7 
51.1 
51.1 
90.9 
90.9
16.4 
– 
29.1 
– 
51.7 
– 
92.0 
–
16.5 
16.5 
29.4 
29.4 
52.3 
52.3 
93.1 
93.1
16.7 
– 
29.8 
– 
53.0 
– 
94.2 
–
16.9 
16.9 
30.1 
30.1 
53.6 
53.6 
95.3 
95.3
17.2 
– 
30.5 
– 
54.2 
– 
96.5 
–
17.4 
17.4 
30.9 
30.9 
54.9 
54.9 
97.6 
97.6
17.6 
– 
31.2 
– 
55.6 
– 
98.8 
–

UNIT 48  Resistors and Color Codes   469
STANDARD RESISTANCE VALUES continued
2%, 5% 
10% 
2%, 5% 
10% 
2%, 5% 
10% 
2%, 5% 
10%
10 
10 
18 
18 
33 
33 
56 
56
11 
– 
20 
– 
36 
– 
62 
–
12 
12 
22 
22 
39 
39 
68 
68
13 
– 
24 
– 
43 
– 
75 
–
15 
15 
27 
27 
47 
47 
82 
82
16 
– 
30 
– 
51 
– 
91 
–
 Figure 48–10
Standard resistance values. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
10%  resistors of 0.33; 3.3; 330; 3300; 33,000; and 
330,000, 3,300,00 . Notice there is no listing for 
a value 32 or 34 ohms. They do not exist as a stan-
dard value. The 2% and 5% column lists 24 stan-
dard values and the 1% column lists 96 values. All 
of the values listed can be multiplied by factors of 10 
to obtain other resistance values. Resistors with tol-
erance ratings of 0.1%, 0.25%, and 0.5% generally 
have the resistance value printed on the resistor.
1% Value Resistors
Notice in the chart shown in Figure 48–10 that the 
resistor values listed in the 1% column have three 
numeric numbers instead of two as is the case with 
2%, 5%, and 10% values. Because resistors with a 
tolerance of 1% use three numbers instead of two, 
a fi ve band resistor must be used to indicate their 
value, Figure 48–11. Assume a fi ve band resistor 
has color bands of brown, blue, yellow, orange, and 
brown, Figure 48–12. The fi rst three bands repre-
sent numbers: brown  1, blue  6, and yellow  
4. The fourth band is orange, which means that you 
would multiply by 1,000 or move the decimal three 
places; 16.4 becomes 16,400 ohms. The fi fth band is 
brown, which indicates a tolerance value of 1%.
Other Fifth-Band Colors
Some resistors have fi ve bands of color that are not 
1% resistors. These are generally military markings. 
A resistor with a fi fth band of yellow or orange is 
a reliability rating. The military often needs resis-
tors that have been tested for reliability. It has long 
been known that if a resistor can operate within its 
tolerance for some number of hours without failure 
TOLERANCE
(BROWN)
MULTIPLIER
NUMBERS
 Figure 48–11
Five-band resistor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
16,400  OHMS  1%
BROWN
ORANGE
YELLOW
BLUE
BROWN
 Figure 48–12
A 1% resistor has ﬁ ve color bands. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

470   SECTION 8  Solid-State Devices
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What type of resistor is generally used when a high power rating is needed?
 
2. What type of wire is generally used in the construction of resistors intended to be oper-
ated at high temperatures?
 
3. A resistor is marked orange, orange, orange, and gold. An ohmmeter indicates that 
the resistor value is 34,700 ohms. Is this resistor within its tolerance rating?
 
4. What would be the color bands for a 1,000-ohm resistor with a tolerance of 2%?
 
5. What would be the color bands for a resistor valued at 365,000 ohms?
 
6. A resistor has color bands of yellow, orange, gold, gold. What is the value and 
 tolerance of this resistor?
that the chances of failure become much smaller. 
The military often employs companies to test resis-
tors for some period of time by operating them in 
a circuit and then checking the value to see if the 
resistor has remained within its tolerance rating. 
SUMMARY
 Wire wound resistors are generally used for applications requiring a high power rating.
 Nichrome wire is generally employed in the construction of wire wound resistors.
 Electric heating elements are generally made of nichrome wire.
 Resistors in sizes ranging from 1/8 to 2 watts generally have their values marked with 
bands of color.
 The size of a resistor is generally an indication of its power rating.
 A resistor color code is generally used to indicate a resistor’s ohmic value and tolerance.
 Resistors that have only three bands of color are rated at 20%.
 Resistors with a tolerance rating of 2%, 5%, and 10% have four color bands.
 Resistors with a tolerance rating 1% have a brown fi fth band.
 The fi fth band of some military resistors indicates reliability.
KEY TERMS
bands of color
fi xed resistors
nichrome
tolerance
wattage rating
wire wound
Resistors with a fi fth band of yellow are rated reli-
able enough for space fl ight equipment. An orange 
fi fth band indicates the resistor is reliable enough for 
use in missile systems. A white fi fth band indicates 
the leads are solderable.

UNIT 48  Resistors and Color Codes   471
 
7. What color bands would be found on a resistor with an ohmic value of 510  and a 
tolerance of 10%?
 
8. Should a wire wound resistor with a hollow core be mounted vertically or 
 horizontally?
 
9. A wire wound resistor has a value of 100  and a power rating of 150 watts. If this 
resistor is connected to 120 volts, will its power rating be exceeded?
 10. A circuit requires a resistor with a value of 5,000 ohms. What is the closest standard 
value of a 5% resistor that can be used in this circuit?

472
Many of the air conditioning controls are oper-
ated by solid-state devices as well as magnetic and 
mechanical devices. If a service technician is to 
install and troubleshoot control systems, he or she 
must have an understanding of electronic devices 
as well as relays.
Solid-state devices, such as diodes and transistors, 
are often referred to as semiconductors. The word 
semiconductor refers to the type of material solid-state 
devices are made of. To understand how solid-state 
devices operate, one must study the atomic structure 
of conductors, insulators, and semi conductors.
CONDUCTORS
Conductors are materials that provide an easy path 
for electron fl ow. Conductors are generally made from 
materials that have large, heavy atoms. This is why 
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Discuss the atomic structure 
of conductors, insulators, and 
semiconductors
 Discuss how a P-type material 
is produced
 Discuss how an N-type material 
is produced
Semiconductor 
Materials
UNIT 49

UNIT 49  Semiconductor Materials   473
most conductors are metals. The best electrical con-
ductors are silver, copper, and aluminum. Conduc-
tors are materials that have only one or two valence 
electrons in their atom, Figure 49–1. An atom that 
has only one valence electron makes the best electri-
cal conductor because the electron is loosely held in 
orbit and is easily given up for current fl ow.
INSULATORS
Insulators are generally made from light-weight 
materials that have small atoms. The atoms of an 
insulating material will have their outer orbits fi lled 
or almost fi lled with valence electrons. This means 
an insulator will have seven or eight valence elec-
trons, Figure 49–2.
Because an insulator has its outer orbit fi lled or 
almost fi lled with valence electrons, they are tightly 
held in orbit and not easily given up for current fl ow.
SEMICONDUCTORS
Semiconductors, as the name implies, are materials 
that are neither good conductors nor good insula-
tors. Semiconductors are made from materials that 
Valence Electron
 Figure 49–1
Atom of a conductor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 49–2
Atom of an insulator. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 49–3
Atom of a semiconductor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
have four valence electrons in their outer orbit, 
Figure 49–3.
The most common semiconductor materials 
used in the electronics fi eld are germanium and 
silicon. Of these two materials, silicon is used 

474   SECTION 8  Solid-State Devices
 Figure 49–4
Lattice structure of a pure 
semiconductor material. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
more often because of its ability to withstand heat. 
When semiconductor materials are refi ned into 
a pure form, the molecules arrange themselves 
into a crystal structure that has a defi nite pattern, 
 Figure 49–4. A pattern such as this is known as a 
lattice structure.
A pure semiconductor material such as silicon 
has no special properties and will do little more than 
make a poor conductive material. If a semiconduc-
tor material is to become useful for the production 
of solid-state components, it must be mixed with 
an impurity. When the semiconductor material is 
mixed with an impurity that has only 3 valence 
electrons, such as idium or gallium, the lattice struc-
ture also becomes different, Figure 49–5. When a 
material that has only 3 valence electrons is mixed 
with a pure semiconductor, a hole is left in the mate-
rial when the lattice structure is formed. This hole is 
caused by the lack of an electron where one should 
be. Because the material now has a lack of elec-
trons, it is no longer electrically neutral. Electrons 
are negative particles. Because a hole is in a place 
where an electron should be, the hole has a positive 
charge. This semiconductor material now has a net 
positive charge, and is therefore known as a P-type 
material.

UNIT 49  Semiconductor Materials   475
 Figure 49–5
Lattice structure of a P-type 
material. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Hole
Hole
Hole
When a semiconductor material is mixed with an 
impurity that has 5 valence electrons, such as arse-
nic or antimony, the lattice structure will have an 
excess of electrons, Figure 49–6. Because electrons 
are negative particles, and there are more electrons 
in the material than there should be, the material 
has a net negative charge. This material is referred 
to as an N-type material because of its negative 
charge.
All solid-state devices are made from a combina-
tion of P- and N-type materials. The type of device 
formed is determined by how the P- and N-type 
materials are connected or joined together. The 
number of layers of material and the thickness of 
various layers play an important part in determin-
ing what type of device will be formed. For instance, 
the diode is often called a PN junction because it is 
made by joining together a piece of P-type and a 
piece of N-type material, Figure 49–7.
The transistor, on the other hand, is made by 
joining three layers of semiconductor material, 
 Figure 49–8. Regardless of the type of solid-state 
device being used, it is made by the joining together 
of P- and N-type materials.

476   SECTION 8  Solid-State Devices
P
N
Free Electron
Free Electron
Free Electron
 Figure 49–6
Lattice structure of an N-type 
material. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
P
N
N
 Figure 49–7
PN junction. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 49–8
Transistor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
SUMMARY
 Conductors are materials that provide an easy path for electron fl ow.
 The best conductors are silver, copper, and aluminum.
 Valence electrons are electrons located in the outermost orbit or shell of an atom.
 Conductors are made from materials that generally contain 1 or 2 valence electrons.

UNIT 49  Semiconductor Materials   477
 Insulators are materials that do not conduct electricity easily.
 Insulators are made from materials that generally contain 7 or 8 valence electrons.
 Semiconductors are materials that contain 4 valence electrons.
 The two most common semiconductor materials are germanium and silicon.
 Silicon is used more often than germanium because it can withstand more heat.
 P-type material is made by combining a material that has 3 valence electrons with a pure 
semiconductor material.
 A P-type semiconductor material has an excess of holes in its structure.
 N-type material is made by combining a material that has 5 valence electrons with a pure 
semiconductor material.
 N-type semiconductor material has an excess of electrons in its structure.
KEY TERMS
germanium
lattice structure
N-type material
P-type material
semiconductors
silicon
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. How many valence electrons are contained in a material used as a conductor?
 
2. How many valence electrons are contained in a material used as an insulator?
 
3. What are the two most common materials used to produce semiconductor devices?
 
4. What is a lattice structure?
 
5. How is a P-type material made?
 
6. How is an N-type material made?
 
7. What type of semiconductor material can withstand the greatest amount of heat?
 
8. All solid-state components are formed from combinations of P- and N-type materials. 
What factors determine what kind of components will be formed?

478
As stated previously, solid-state devices are made 
by combining P- and N-type materials together. 
The device produced is determined by the number 
of layers of material used, the thickness of the lay-
ers of material, and the manner in which the layers 
are joined together. Hundreds of different electronic 
devices have been produced since the invention of 
solid-state components.
It is not within the scope of this text to cover even 
a small portion of these devices. The devices to be 
covered by this text have been chosen because of 
their frequent use in the air conditioning industry 
as opposed to communications or computers. These 
devices are presented from a straightforward, prac-
tical viewpoint, and mathematical explanation is 
used only when necessary.
The PN junction is often referred to as the diode. 
The diode is the simplest of all electronic devices. 
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Discuss how the PN junction 
is constructed
 Recognize the schematic symbol for 
a diode
 Discuss the differences between the 
conventional current ﬂ ow theory and 
the electron ﬂ ow theory
 Discuss how the diode operates in 
a circuit
 Identify the anode and cathode leads 
of a diode
 Properly connect the diode in an 
electric circuit
 Discuss the differences between a half-
wave rectiﬁ er and a full-wave rectiﬁ er
 Test the diode with an ohmmeter
The PN 
 Junction
UNIT 50

UNIT 50  The PN  Junction   479
 Figure 50–1
PN junction. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 50–2
Schematic symbol of a diode. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
It is made by joining together a piece of P-type 
material and a piece of N-type material. Refer to 
Figure 50–1. The schematic symbol for a diode is 
shown in Figure 50–2. The diode operates like an 
electric check valve in that it will permit current to 
fl ow through it in only one direction. If the diode is 
to conduct current, it must be forward biased. 
The diode is forward biased only when a positive 
voltage is connected to the anode and a negative 
voltage is connected to the cathode. If the diode is 
reverse biased, the negative voltage connected 
to the anode and the positive voltage connected to 
the cathode, it will act like an open switch and no 
current will fl ow through the device.
One thing the service technician should be aware 
of when working with solid-state circuits is that the 
explanation of the circuit is often given assuming 
conventional current fl ow as opposed to electron 
fl ow. The conventional current fl ow theory 
assumes that current fl ows from positive to negative 
as opposed to the electron fl ow theory, which 
states that current fl ows from negative to positive. 
Although it has been known for many years that 
current fl ows from negative to positive, many of the 
electronic circuit explanations assume a positive 
to negative current fl ow. There are several reasons 
for this. For one, ground is generally negative and 
considered to be 0 volts in an electronic circuit. Any 
voltage above or greater than ground is positive. 
Most people fi nd it is easier to think of something 
fl owing downhill or from some point above to some 
point below. Another reason is that all the arrows in 
an electronic schematic are pointed in the direction 
of conventional current fl ow. The diode shown in 
Figure 50–2 is forward biased only when a positive 
voltage is applied to the anode and a negative volt-
age is applied to the cathode. If the conventional 
current fl ow theory is used, current will fl ow in 
the direction the arrow is pointing. If the electron 
theory of current fl ow is used, current must fl ow 
against the arrow.
A common example of the use of the conven-
tional current fl ow theory is the electrical systems 
of automobiles. Most automobiles use a negative 
ground system, which means the negative terminal 
of the battery is grounded. The positive terminal of 
the battery is considered to be the “HOT” terminal, 
and it is generally assumed that current fl ows from 
P
N
ANODE
CATHODE
+
–
the “HOT” to ground. This explanation is offered in 
an effort to avoid confusion when troubleshooting 
electronic circuits.
TESTING THE DIODE
The diode can be tested with an ohmmeter. When 
the leads of an ohmmeter are connected to a 
diode, the diode should show continuity in only 
one direction. For example, assume that when the 
leads of an ohmmeter are connected to a diode, it 
shows continuity. If the leads are reversed, the ohm-
meter should indicate an open circuit. If the diode 
shows continuity in both directions, it is shorted. 
If the ohmmeter indicates no continuity in either 
direction, the diode is open. To test the diode, follow 
this two-step procedure:
 1. Connect the ohmmeter leads to the diode. 
Notice if the meter indicates continuity 
through the diode or not, Figure 50–3.
 2. Reverse the diode connection to the ohm-
meter, Figure 50–4. Notice if the meter 
indicates continuity through the diode or not. 
The ohmmeter should indicate continuity 
through the diode in only one direction.
NOTE: If continuity is not indicated in either 
direction, the diode is open. If continuity is indi-
cated in both directions, the diode is shorted.

480   SECTION 8  Solid-State Devices
RECTIFIERS
Diodes can be used to perform many jobs, but their 
most common use in industry is to construct a rec-
tifi er. A rectifi er is a device that changes or converts 
AC voltage into DC voltage. The simplest type of rec-
tifi er is known as the half-wave rectifi er. Refer 
to the circuit shown in Figure 50–5. The half-wave 
rectifi er can be constructed with only one diode, and 
gets its name from the fact that it will rectify only half 
of the AC waveform applied to it. When the voltage 
applied to the anode is positive, the diode is forward 
biased and current can fl ow through the diode, load 
resistor, and back to the power supply. When the 
voltage applied to the anode becomes negative, the 
diode is reverse biased and no current will fl ow. Since 
the diode permits current to fl ow through the load in 
only one direction, the current is DC.
Diodes can be connected to produce full-wave 
rectifi cation, which means both halves of the AC 
waveform will be made to fl ow in the same direc-
tion. One type of full-wave rectifi er is known as 
the bridge rectifi er and is shown in  Figure 50–6. 
Notice the bridge rectifi er requires 4 diodes for 
 construction.
To understand the operation of the bridge rectifi er, 
assume that point X of the AC source is positive and 
point Y is negative. Current will fl ow to point A of the 
OHMMETER
+
–
 Figure 50–3
Testing a diode. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 50–4
A diode connected in the reverse direction. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
OHMMETER
+
–
 Figure 50–5
Half-wave rectiﬁ er. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
LOAD
rectifi er. At point A, diode D4 is reverse biased and 
D1 is forward biased. The current will fl ow through 
diode D1 to point B of the rectifi er. At point B, 
diode D2 is reverse biased, so the current must fl ow 
through the load resistor to ground. The current 
returns through ground to point D of the rectifi er. At 
point D, both diodes D4 and D3 are forward biased, 
but current will not fl ow from positive to positive. 
Therefore, the current will fl ow through diode D3 to 
point C of the bridge, and then to point Y of the AC 
source, which is negative at this time. Since current 
fl owed through the load resistor during this half 
cycle, a voltage is developed across the resistor.
Now assume that point Y of the AC source is 
positive and X is negative. Current will fl ow from 
point Y to point C of the rectifi er. At point C, diode 

UNIT 50  The PN  Junction   481
 Figure 50–7
Three-phase bridge rectiﬁ er. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 50–8
Lead identiﬁ cation of a plastic case diode. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 Figure 50–9
Junction diode. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 50–6
Bridge rectiﬁ er. (Source: 
Delmar/Cengage Learning)
D
B
X
Y
D4
D3
C
D2
D1
A
D3 is reverse biased and diode D2 is forward biased. 
The current will fl ow through diode D2 to point B of 
the rectifi er. At point B, diode D1 is reverse biased, 
so the current must fl ow through the load resistor 
to ground. The current fl ows from ground to point D 
of the bridge. At point D, both diodes D3 and D4 
are forward biased. As before, current will not fl ow 
from positive to positive, so the current will fl ow 
through diode D4 to point A of the bridge and then 
to point X, which is now negative. Since current 
fl owed through the load resistor during this half 
cycle, a voltage is developed across the load resistor. 
Notice that the current fl ow was in the same direc-
tion through the resistor during both half cycles.
Most of industry operates on three-phase power 
instead of single-phase. Six diodes can be connected 
to form a three-phase bridge rectifi er, which will 
change three-phase AC voltage into DC voltage. 
Refer to the circuit shown in Figure 50–7.
IDENTIFYING DIODE LEADS
When the diode is to be connected in a circuit, there 
must be some means of identifying the anode and 
the cathode. Diodes are made in different case styles 
so there are different methods of identifying the 
leads. Large stud-mounted diodes often have the 
diode symbol printed on the case to show proper 
lead identifi cation. Small plastic case diodes often 
have a line or band around one end of the case, 
Figure 50–8. This line or band represents the line 
in front of the arrow on the schematic symbol of the 
diode. An ohmmeter can always be used to deter-
mine the proper lead identifi cation if the polarity of 
the ohmmeter leads is known. The positive lead of 
the ohmmeter must be connected to the anode to 
make the diode forward biased. A junction diode is 
shown in Figure 50–9.
ANODE
CATHODE
ANODE
CATHODE

482   SECTION 8  Solid-State Devices
SUMMARY
 The PN junction is formed by joining a piece of P-type and a piece of N-typesemiconductor 
material together.
 The diode operates like an electronic check valve in that it will permit current to fl ow 
through it in only one direction.
 The diode can be used to change alternating current into direct current.
 A half-wave rectifi er rectifi es only one-half of the AC waveform into DC.
 A full-wave rectifi er rectifi es both halves of the AC waveform into DC.
 The diode can be tested with an ohmmeter by connecting it fi rst one way and then the 
other. Current should fl ow through it in only one direction.
 The conventional current fl ow theory states that current fl ows from positive to negative.
 The electron fl ow theory states that current fl ows from negative to positive.
KEY TERMS
anode
bridge rectifi er
cathode
conventional
current fl ow theory
diode
electron fl ow theory
forward biased
full-wave rectifi er
half-wave rectifi er
rectifi er
reverse biased
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What is the PN junction more commonly known as?
 
2. On a plastic case diode, how are the leads identifi ed?
 
3. Explain how a diode operates.
 
4. Explain the difference between the conventional current fl ow theory and the electron 
fl ow theory.
 
5. Explain the difference between a half-wave rectifi er and a full-wave rectifi er.
 
6. Explain how to test a diode with an ohmmeter.

483
Light-emitting diodes (LEDs) are among the 
most common devices found in the electrical and 
electronics fi elds. They are used as indicator lights in 
many types of equipment. They have an extremely 
long life when operated within their ratings because 
there is no fi lament to burn out. LEDs are constructed 
by joining special semiconductor materials together 
that emit photons when power is applied. The color 
produced is determined by the types of materials 
used. LED colors are generally IR (infrared), red, 
green, yellow, orange, and blue. The basic light-
emitting diode is formed by joining gallium arsenide 
(GaAs) or gallium phosphide (GaP) with some other 
material. These two solutions can be combined to 
form a solid solution known as gallium arsenide 
phosphide (GaAsP). Different colors are produced 
by adding other compounds, called dopants, such 
as zinc selenide (ZnSe) or silicon carbide (SiC). The 
UNIT 51
Light-Emitting 
Diodes (LEDs) 
and 
Photodiodes
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Discuss the operation of a light-
emitting diode
 Compute the resistance needed for 
connecting an LED into a circuit
 Connect an LED in a circuit
 Discuss the differences between light-
emitting diodes and photodiodes
 Draw the schematic symbols for LED 
and photodiodes

484   SECTION 8  Solid-State Devices
chart in Figure 51–1 shows different- colored LEDs, 
the wavelength of light in nanometers, and the 
materials used to construct the diode.
LED CHARACTERISTICS
The electrical characteristics of light-emitting diodes 
vary considerably from those of the common junc-
tion or rectifi er diode. Junction diodes have a for-
ward voltage drop of about 0.7 volts for silicon and 
0.4 volts for germanium. LEDs have a forward volt-
age drop of about 1.7 volts or greater, depending on 
the material the diode is made of. Most light-emitting 
diodes are operated at about 20 mA or less current. 
A chart showing the typical forward voltage drop of 
different diodes is shown in Figure 51–2. Junction 
diodes typically have a PIV rating of 100 volts or 
greater, but LEDs have a typical PIV rating of about 
5 volts. For this reason, when light-emitting diodes 
are used in applications where they are intended to 
block any amount of reverse voltage they are con-
nected in series with a junction diode.
Testing LEDs
Light-emitting diodes can be tested in a manner 
similar to that of testing a junction diode. The LED is 
a rectifi er and should permit current to fl ow through 
it in one direction only. When testing an LED with an 
ohmmeter, it must be capable of supplying enough 
voltage to overcome the forward conduction voltage 
of about 1.7 volts or higher. The meter, however, 
must not supply a voltage that is higher than the 
reverse breakdown voltage. The schematic symbol 
for a light-emitting diode is shown in Figure 51–3. 
Some symbols use a straight arrow as shown in 
Figure 51–3, and others use a lightning arrow as 
shown in Figure 51–4. The lightning arrow symbol 
is employed to help prevent the arrow from being 
confused with a lead attached to the device. The 
important part of the symbol is that the arrow is 
pointing away from the diode. This indicates that 
light is being emitted or given off by the diode.
LED Lead Identifi cation
Light-emitting diodes are housed in many different 
case styles. Regardless of the case style, however, 
Color
Material
Dopant
Wavelength (nm)
IR
GaAs
Zn
900
IR
GaAs
Si
900–1020
Red
GaP
Zn,O
700
Red
GaAsP
—
650
Orange
GaAsP
N
632
Yellow
GaP
N,N
590
Yellow
GaAsP
N
589
Green
GaP
N
570
Blue
SiC
—
490
Blue
ZnSe
—
490
 Figure 51–1
The color of an LED is determined by the material it is 
made from. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
0
10 mA
20 mA
30 mA
40 mA
50 mA
1
2
3
4
FORWARD VOLTAGE DROP
Ge
Si
GaAs
GaAsP
GaP
SiC
 Figure 51–2
Forward voltage and current characteristics of diodes.
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 51  Light-Emitting Diodes (LEDs) and Photodiodes   485
there is generally some method of identifying which 
lead is the cathode and which is the anode. The 
case of most LEDs will have a fl at side that is located 
closer to the cathode lead, Figure 51–5. Also, the 
cathode lead is generally shorter.
Seven-Segment Displays
A very common device that employs the use of 
light-emitting diodes is the seven segment display, 
Figure 51–6. The display actually contains eight 
LEDs, each segment plus the decimal point. Common 
cathode displays have all the cathodes connected 
together to form a common point. The display is 
energized by connecting a more positive voltage to 
the anode lead of each segment. Common anode dis-
plays are energized by connecting the appropriate 
cathode lead to a more negative voltage (generally 
ground). The seven-segment display can be used to 
display any number from 0 to 9.
 Figure 51–3
Schematic symbol for a light-emitting diode. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 Figure 51–4
LED symbol using lightning arrow. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
LED CHIP
WIRE
ANODE POST
CATHODE POST
FLAT SIDE
CATHODE LEAD IS
SHORTER THAN 
ANODE LEAD
FLAT SIDE CLOSER
TO CATHODE LEAD
CATHODE
ANODE
BOTTOM VIEW
 Figure 51–5
Identifying the leads of an LED. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

486   SECTION 8  Solid-State Devices
Connecting the LED in a Circuit
When used in a circuit, the LED generally operates 
with a current of about 20 mA (0.020 A) or less. 
Assume that an LED is to be connected in a 12-VDC 
circuit and is to have a current draw of approxi-
mately 20 milliamperes. This LED must have a 
current-limiting resistor connected in series with it. 
Ohm’s law can be used to determine what size resis-
tor should be connected in the circuit.
R    E 
__ I  
R    12 
_____ 
.020  
R  600 Ω
The nearest standard size resistor without going 
below 600 Ω is 620 Ω. A 620 Ω resistor would 
be connected in series with the LED, Figure 51–7. 
The minimum power rating for the resistor can 
also be determined using Ohm’s law. The LED will 
have a voltage drop of approximately 1.7 volts. 
Because the resistor is connected in series with 
the LED, it will have a voltage drop of 10.3 volts. 
The power dissipation of the resistor can now be 
determined.
P  E2/R
P   10.32 
_____ 
620
  
P   106.09 
_______ 
620
  
P  0.171 watt
A ¼ watt resistor can be employed in this circuit. A 
light-emitting diode is shown in Figure 51–8.
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
DP
 Figure 51–6
Seven-segment display. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
12 VDC
620
 Figure 51–7
Current is limited by a resistor connected in series with 
the LED. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning) 
 Figure 51–8
Light-emitting diode. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 51  Light-Emitting Diodes (LEDs) and Photodiodes   487
PHOTODIODES
The photodiode is so named because of its 
response to a light source. Photodiodes are housed 
in a case that has a window that permits light to 
strike the semiconductor material, Figure 51–9. 
Photodiodes can be used in two basic ways.
Photovoltaic
Photodiodes can be used as photovoltaic devices. 
When in the presence of light, they will produce a 
voltage in a manner similar to that of solar cells. 
The output voltage is approximately 0.45 volts. The 
current capacity is small and use is generally limited 
to applications such as operating light-metering 
devices. The basic schematic for a photodiode used 
as a photovoltaic device is shown in Figure 51–10. 
LENS
TAB CLOSEST
TO CATHODE
LEAD
CATHODE
ANODE
 Figure 51–9
Photodiode. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
+0.45 V
PHOTODIODE
 Figure 51–10
Photodiode used as a photovoltaic device. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Note the symbol used to represent a photo diode. 
The arrow pointing toward the diode indicates that 
it must receive light to operate.
Photoconductive
Photodiodes can also be used as photoconduc-
tive devices. When used in this manner they 
are connected reverse biased, Figure 51–11. In 
the presence of darkness, the amount of reverse 
current fl ow is extremely small, similar to that of 
a junction diode connected reverse biased. This 
current is referred to as the dark current (ID) and is 
generally in the range of a few nanoamperes. For 
most practical purposes dark current is generally 
considered to be zero.
When exposed to light, photons enter the 
depletion region and create electron-hole pairs, 

488   SECTION 8  Solid-State Devices
increasing conductivity in the reverse direction. 
The increased conduction may permit several mil-
liamperes of current to fl ow. This is known as light 
current (IL). The great advantage of the photodiode 
over other photoconductive devices, such as the 
cad cell, is speed of operation. Photodiodes can 
operate at very high frequencies.
SUMMARY
 The light-emitting diode produces a light when current fl ows through it.
 The schematic symbol of an LED is a standard diode symbol with an arrow pointing away 
from the symbol. The arrow indicates that light is being emitted by the device.
 The schematic symbol for a photodiode is a standard diode symbol with an arrow pointing 
toward the symbol. The arrow indicates that light is received by the device.
 The forward voltage drop of an LED is approximately 1.7 volts.
 Photodiodes are commonly used as photovoltaic devices and as photoconductive devices.
 The greatest advantage of photodiodes over other photoconductive devices is speed of 
operation.
KEY TERMS
light-emitting diode (LED)
photoconductive
photodiode
photovoltaic
BATTERY
OUTPUT
+
 Figure 51–11
Photodiode used as a photoconductive device. (Source: 
Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 51  Light-Emitting Diodes (LEDs) and Photodiodes   489
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. Will the LED rectify an AC voltage into DC voltage?
 
2. What is the average voltage drop on an LED?
 
3. How can the anode and cathode leads of an LED be identifi ed?
 
4. What is the average amount of current permitted to fl ow through an LED?
 
5. Can LEDs be tested with most ohmmeters?
 
6. When used as a photovoltaic device, how much voltage is generally produced by 
a photodiode?
 
7. Explain the difference between the schematic symbol used to indicate an LED and the 
symbol used to indicate a photodiode.
 
8. What is the greatest advantage of a photodiode used as a photoconductive device as 
compared with other photoconductive devices such as a cad cell?

490
Transistors are made by joining three pieces of 
semiconductor material together. There are two 
basic types of transistors, the NPN and the PNP, 
Figure 52–1. The schematic symbols for these tran-
sistors are shown in Figure 52–2. The difference in 
these transistors is the manner in which they are 
connected in a circuit. The NPN transistor must 
have positive connected to the collector and 
negative connected to the emitter. The PNP must 
have positive connected to the emitter and negative 
connected to the collector. Notice that the base
must be connected to the same polarity as the col-
lector to forward bias the transistor. Also notice that 
the arrows on the emitters point in the direction of 
conventional current fl ow.
UNIT 52
The Transistor
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Discuss the differences between PNP 
and NPN transistors
 Test transistors with an ohmmeter
 Identify the leads of standard case-
style transistors
 Discuss the operation of a transistor
 Connect a transistor in a circuit

UNIT 52  The Transistor   491
TESTING THE TRANSISTOR
The transistor can be tested with an ohmmeter. 
If the polarity of the output of the ohmmeter leads 
is known, the transistor can be identifi ed as either 
NPN or PNP. A transistor will appear to an ohm-
meter to be two diodes joined together, Figure 52–3. 
An NPN transistor will appear to an ohmmeter to 
be two diodes with their anodes connected together. 
If the positive lead of the ohmmeter is connected to 
the base of the transistor, a diode junction should 
be seen between the base-collector and the base-
emitter. If the negative lead of the ohmmeter is 
connected to the base of an NPN transistor, there 
should be no continuity between the base-collector 
and the base-emitter junction.
A PNP transistor will appear to be two diodes 
with their cathodes connected together. If the nega-
tive lead of the ohmmeter is connected to the base 
of the transistor, a diode junction should be seen 
between the base-collector and the base-emitter. 
If the positive ohmmeter lead is connected to the 
base, there should be no continuity between the 
base-collector or the base-emitter.
The following step-by-step procedure can be used 
to test a transistor.
 1. Using a diode, determine which ohmmeter 
lead is positive and which is negative. The 
ohmmeter will indicate continuity through 
the diode only when the positive lead is 
 connected to the anode and the negative lead 
is connected to the cathode, Figure 52–4.
 2. If the transistor is an NPN, connect the 
positive ohmmeter lead to the base and the 
negative lead to the collector. The ohm-
meter should indicate continuity. The 
reading should be about the same as the 
reading obtained when the diode was tested, 
 Figure 52–5.
 3. With the positive ohmmeter lead still con-
nected to the base of the transistor, connect 
the negative lead to the emitter. The ohm-
meter should again indicate a forward diode 
junction, Figure 52–6.
NOTE: If the ohmmeter does not indicate continu-
ity between the base-collector or the base-emitter, 
the transistor is open.
P
N
N
N
P
P
 Figure 52–1
Two basic types of transistors. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
+ COLLECTOR
+ BASE
NPN
– EMITTER
– COLLECTOR
– BASE
PNP
+ EMITTER
 Figure 52–2
Schematic symbols of 
transistors. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
COLLECTOR
EMITTER
NPN
BASE
COLLECTOR
EMITTER
PNP
BASE
 Figure 52–3
Ohmmeter test for transistors. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

492   SECTION 8  Solid-State Devices
 4. Connect the negative ohmmeter lead to the 
base and the positive lead to the collector. 
The ohmmeter should indicate infi nity or no 
continuity, Figure 52–7.
 5. With the negative ohmmeter lead connected 
to the base, reconnect the positive lead to the 
emitter. There should, again, be no indication 
of continuity, Figure 52–8.
NOTE: If a very high resistance is indicated by the 
ohmmeter, the transistor is “leaky” but it may still 
operate in the circuit. If a very low resistance is 
seen, the transistor is shorted.
 6. To test a PNP transistor, reverse the polar-
ity of the ohmmeter leads and repeat the 
test. When the negative ohmmeter lead is 
ANODE
CATHODE
OHMMETER
+
–
 Figure 52–4
Determining ohmmeter polarity. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
OHMMETER
+
–
 Figure 52–5
Testing the base-emitter junction. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
OHMMETER
+
–
 Figure 52–6
Testing the base-emitter junction. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
OHMMETER
+
–
 Figure 52–7
Reversing the connection of the base-collector junction. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 52  The Transistor   493
should be indicated when the negative lead 
is connected to the collector or the emitter, 
Figure 52–10.
TRANSISTOR OPERATION
The simplest way to describe the operation of a 
transistor is to say it operates like an electric valve. 
Current will not fl ow through the collector-emitter 
until current fl ows through the base-emitter. The 
amount of base-emitter current, however, is small 
when compared to the collector-emitter current, 
Figure 52–11. For example, assume that when one 
milliamp (mA) of current fl ows through the base-
emitter junction, 100 mA of current fl ows through 
the collector-emitter junction. If this transistor is a 
linear device, an increase or decrease of base current 
will cause a similar increase or decrease of collector 
current. For instance, if the base current is increased 
to 2 mA, the collector current would increase to 
200 mA. If the base current is decreased to .5 mA, 
the collector current would decrease to 50 mA. 
Notice that a small change in the amount of base 
current can cause a large change in the amount of 
collector current. This permits a small amount of 
signal current to operate a larger device, such as the 
coil of a control relay.
 connected to the base, a forward diode junc-
tion should be indicated when the positive 
lead is connected to the collector or emitter, 
Figure 52–9.
 7. If the positive ohmmeter lead is connected to 
the base of a PNP transistor, no continuity 
OHMMETER
+
–
 Figure 52–8
Reversing the connection of the base-emitter junction. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
OHMMETER
+
–
 Figure 52–9
Testing the base-collector junction of a PNP transistor. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
OHMMETER
+
–
 Figure 52–10
Reversing the connection of a PNP transistor. (Source: 
Delmar/Cengage Learning)

494   SECTION 8  Solid-State Devices
One of the most common applications of the 
transistor is that of a switch. When used in this 
manner, the transistor operates like a digital device 
instead of an analog device. The term digital refers 
to a device that has only two states such as on or 
off. An analog device can be adjusted to different 
states. An example of this control can be seen in a 
simple switch connection. A common wall switch is 
a digital device. It can be used to either turn a light 
on or off. If the simple toggle switch is replaced with 
a dimmer control, the light can be turned on, off, or 
adjusted to any position between. The dimmer is an 
example of analog control.
If no current fl ows through the base of the tran-
sistor, the transistor acts like an open switch and 
no current will fl ow through the collector-emitter 
junction. If enough base current is applied to the 
transistor to turn it completely on, it acts like a 
closed switch and permits current to fl ow through 
the collector-emitter junction. This is the same 
action produced by the closing contacts of a relay 
or motor starter, but a relay or motor starter cannot 
turn on and off several thousand times a second and 
a transistor can.
IDENTIFYING TRANSISTOR LEADS
Some case styles of transistors permit the leads to 
be quickly identifi ed. The TO 5 and TO 18 cases, 
and the TO 3 case are in this category. The leads of 
the TO 5 or TO 18 case transistors can be identifi ed 
by holding the case of the transistor with the leads 
 facing you as shown in Figure 52–12A. The metal 
tab on the case of the transistor is closest to the emit-
ter lead. The base and collector leads are positioned 
as shown in Figure 52–12A.
The leads of a TO 3 case transistor can be identi-
fi ed as shown in Figure 52–12B. With the transis-
tor held with the leads facing you and down, the 
emitter is the left lead and the base is the right 
lead. The case of the transistor is the collector. 
Several case styles for the transistor are shown in 
Figure 52–13.
 Figure 52–11
A small base current controls a large collector current. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
TO  5  AND
TO  18  CASE
TO  3  CASE
C
E
B
(A)
B
C
E
(B)
 Figure 52–12
Lead identiﬁ cation of transistors. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 52–13
Transistors shown in different case styles. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

UNIT 52  The Transistor   495
SUMMARY
 Transistors are made by joining three layers of semiconductor material together.
 The two basic types of transistors are NPN and PNP.
 The three terminal leads of a transistor are the collector, base, and emitter.
 A PNP transistor must have a more positive voltage connected to the emitter than the 
collector.
 An NPN transistor must have a more negative voltage connected to the emitter than
 the collector.
 The current fl ow through the base-emitter of the transistor controls the amount of current 
fl ow through collector-emitter.
KEY TERMS
analog
base
case
collector
digital
emitter
NPN
PNP
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What are the two basic types of transistors?
 
2. Explain how to test an NPN transistor with an ohmmeter.
 
3. Explain how to test a PNP transistor with an ohmmeter.
 
4. What polarity must be connected to the collector, base, and emitter of an NPN to 
make it forward biased?
 
5. What polarity must be connected to the collector, base, and emitter of a PNP  transistor 
to make it forward biased?
 
6. Explain the difference between an analog device and a digital device.

496
The unijunction transistor is a special transis-
tor that has two bases and one emitter. The unijunc-
tion transistor (UJT) is a digital device because it has 
only two states, on or off, and is generally classifi ed 
with a group of devices known as thyristors. 
Thyristors are turned completely on or completely 
off. Thyristors include devices such as the silicon-
controlled rectifi er (SCR), triac, diac, and the uni-
junction transistor.
The unijunction transistor is made by combining 
three layers of semi-conductor material as shown 
in Figure 53–1. The schematic symbol with polar-
ity connections and the base diagram is shown in 
Figure 53–2.
UNIT 53
The 
Unijunction 
Transistor
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Discuss the differences between 
junction transistors and unijunction 
transistors
 Identify the leads of a UJT
 Draw the schematic symbol for a UJT
 Test a UJT with an ohmmeter
 Connect a UJT in a circuit

UNIT 53  The Unijunction Transistor   497
UJT CHARACTERISTICS
The UJT has two paths for current fl ow. One path is 
from B2 to B1. The other path is through the emitter 
and base #1. In its normal state, there is no current 
fl ow through either path until the voltage applied 
to the emitter reaches about 10 volts higher than 
the voltage applied to base #1. When the voltage 
applied to the emitter reaches about 10 volts more 
positive than the voltage applied to base #1, the UJT 
turns on and current fl ows through the B1–B2 path 
and from the emitter through base #1. Current will 
continue to fl ow through the UJT until the voltage 
applied to the emitter drops to a point that it is only 
about 3 volts higher than the voltage applied to B1. 
When the emitter voltage drops to this point, the 
UJT will turn off and remain turned off until the 
voltage applied to the emitter again becomes about 
10 volts higher than the voltage applied to B1.
CIRCUIT OPERATION
The unijunction transistor is generally connected 
into a circuit similar to the circuit shown in 
Figure 53–3. The variable resistor controls the rate 
of charge time of the capacitor. When the capaci-
tor has been charged to about 10 volts, the UJT 
turns on and discharges the capacitor through the 
 emitter and base #1. When the capacitor has been 
discharged to about 3 volts, the UJT turns off and 
permits the capacitor to begin charging again. By 
varying the resistance connected in series with the 
capacitor, the amount of time needed for charging 
the capacitor can be changed, thereby controlling 
the pulse rate of the UJT (T  RC).
The UJT can furnish a large output pulse, because 
the output pulse is produced by the discharging 
capacitor, Figure 53–4. This large output pulse is 
generally used for triggering the gate of an SCR.
The pulse rate is determined by the amount of 
resistance and capacitance connected to the emitter 
of the UJT. However, the amount of capacitance that 
can be connected to the UJT is limited. For instance, 
most UJTs should not have a capacitor larger than 
10 μf connected to them. If the capacitor is too large, 
the UJT will not be able to handle the current spike 
produced by the capacitor, and the UJT could be 
damaged.
BOTTOM  VIEW
2N2646
B1
B2
E
(B)
(A)
BASE #2 (+)
EMITTER (+) 
BASE #1 (–)
BASE 2
BASE 1
EMITTER
N
N
P
 Figure 53–1
Unijunction transistor. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 53–2
The schematic symbol for the unijunc-
tion transistor with polarity connec-
tions and base diagram. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
E
B1
B2
+
 Figure 53–3
Basic UJT connection. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

498   SECTION 8  Solid-State Devices
TESTING THE UJT
The unijunction transistor can be tested with an 
ohmmeter in a manner very similar to testing a 
common junction transistor. The UJT will appear 
to the ohmmeter to be a connection of two resis-
tors connected to a common junction diode. The 
common junction point of the two resistors will 
appear to be at the emitter of the UJT as shown in 
Figure 53–5. When the positive lead of the ohm-
meter is connected to the emitter, a diode junction 
should be seen from the emitter to base #2 and 
another diode connection from the emitter to base 
#1. If the negative lead of the ohmmeter is con-
nected to the emitter of the UJT, no connection 
should be seen between the emitter and either base.
The following step-by-step procedure can be used 
to test a unijunction transistor.
 1. Using a junction diode, determine which 
ohmmeter lead is positive and which is nega-
tive. The ohmmeter will indicate continuity 
when the positive lead is connected to the 
anode and the negative lead is connected to 
the cathode, Figure 53–6.
 2. Connect the positive ohmmeter lead to the 
emitter lead and the negative lead to base #1. 
The ohmmeter should indicate a forward 
diode junction, Figure 53–7.
 3. With the positive ohmmeter lead connected 
to the emitter, reconnect the negative lead to 
base #2. The ohmmeter should again indi-
cate a forward diode junction, Figure 53–8.
 4. If the negative ohmmeter lead is connected to 
the emitter, no continuity should be indi-
cated when the positive lead is connected to 
base #1 or base #2, Figure 53–9.
E
B1
OUTPUT
B2
+
 Figure 53–4
A large pulse is produced by the capacitor 
 discharge. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
E
B2
B1
 Figure 53–5
The UJT appears as two resistors connected to a diode 
when tested with an ohmmeter. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
ANODE
CATHODE
OHMMETER
+
–
 Figure 53–6
Determining ohmmeter polarity. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 53  The Unijunction Transistor   499
OHMMETER
+
–
B1
B2
E
 Figure 53–7
Testing a UJT. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
OHMMETER
+
B1
B2
E
–
 Figure 53–8 
Testing the emitter-base 2 junction. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
OHMMETER
–
+
B2
B1
E
 Figure 53–9
Reversing the polarity. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

500   SECTION 8  Solid-State Devices
SUMMARY
 The unijunction transistor has two bases and one emitter.
 The unijunction transistor is a member of the thyristor family of components.
 Injunction transistors have two states of operation: on or off.
 The unijunction transistor operates like a snap action, voltage sensitive switch.
 KEY TERMS
thyristors
unijunction transistor
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What do the letters UJT stand for?
 
2. How many layers of semiconductor material are used to construct a UJT?
 
3. Briefl y explain the operation of the UJT.
 
4. Draw the schematic symbol for the UJT.
 
5. Briefl y explain how to test a UJT with an ohmmeter.

501
The silicon-controlled rectifi er (SCR) is 
often referred to as the PNPN junction because it is 
made by joining four layers of semiconductor mate-
rial together, Figure 54–1. The schematic symbol 
for the SCR is shown in Figure 54–2. Notice that the 
symbol for the SCR is the same as the diode except 
that a gate lead has been added.
SCR CHARACTERISTICS
The SCR is a member of a family of devices known 
as thyristors. Thyristors are digital devices in that 
they have only two states, on or off. The SCR is 
used when it is necessary for an electronic device 
to control a large amount of power. Assume an 
SCR has been connected in a circuit as shown in 
Figure 54–3. When the SCR is turned off, it will 
drop the full voltage of the circuit and 200 volts will 
UNIT 54
The Silicon-
Controlled 
Rectiﬁ er
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Discuss the operation of a silicon-
controlled rectiﬁ er (SCR) in a DC 
circuit and an AC circuit
 Draw the schematic symbol for an SCR
 Discuss phase shifting
 Test an SCR with an ohmmeter
 Connect an SCR in a circuit

502   SECTION 8  Solid-State Devices
 connected to the same polarity as the anode if it is 
to turn the anode-cathode section of the SCR on. 
Once the gate has turned the SCR on, it will remain 
turned on until the current fl owing through the 
anode-cathode drops to a low enough level to per-
mit the device to turn off. The amount of current 
required to keep the SCR turned on is called the 
holding current, Figure 54–4. Assume resis-
tor R1 has been adjusted for its highest value and 
resistor R2 has been adjusted to its lowest or 0 
value. When switch S1 is closed, no current will 
fl ow through the anode-cathode section of the 
SCR because resistor R1 prevents enough current 
fl owing through the gate-cathode section of the 
SCR to trigger the device. If resistor R1 is slowly 
decreased in value, current fl ow through the gate-
cathode will slowly increase. When the gate cur-
rent reaches a certain level, assume 5 mA for this 
SCR, the SCR will fi re or turn on. When the SCR 
fi res, current will fl ow through the anode-cathode 
section and the voltage drop across the device 
becomes about 1 volt. Once the SCR has turned 
on, the gate has no more control over the device 
and could be disconnected from the anode without 
having any effect on the circuit. When the SCR 
fi res, the anode-cathode becomes a short circuit for 
all practical purposes and current fl ow is limited by 
resistor R3. Now assume that resistor R2 is slowly 
increased in value. When the resistance of R2 is 
slowly increased, the current fl ow through the 
anode-cathode will slowly decrease. Assume that 
when the current fl ow through the anode-cathode 
drops to 100 mA, the device suddenly turns off 
and the current fl ow drops to 0. This SCR requires 
5 mA of gate current to turn it on, and has a hold-
ing current value of 100 mA.
appear across the anode and cathode. Although 
the SCR has a voltage drop of 200 volts, there is no 
current fl ow in the circuit. The SCR does not have 
to dissipate any power in this condition (200 volts  
0 amps  0 watts). When the push button is pressed, 
the SCR will turn on. When the SCR turns on, it will 
have a voltage drop across its anode and cathode 
of about 1 volt. The load resistor limits the circuit 
current to 2 amps (200 volts/100 ohms  2 amps). 
Because the SCR now has a voltage drop of 1 volt 
and 2 amps of current is fl owing through it, it must 
now dissipate 2 watts of heat (1 volt  2 amps  
2 watts). Notice that the SCR is dissipating only 
2 watts of power, but is controlling 200 watts.
THE SCR IN A DC CIRCUIT
When an SCR is connected in a DC circuit as shown 
in Figure 54–3, the gate will turn the SCR on 
but will not turn the SCR off. The gate must be 
P
N
N
P
 Figure 54–1
PNPN junction. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
ANODE
+
–
CATHODE
GATE
 Figure 54–2
Schematic symbol of an SCR. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
200  VOLTS  DC
LOAD  100  OHMS
 Figure 54–3
Gate turns SCR on. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

UNIT 54  The Silicon-Controlled Rectiﬁ er   503
THE SCR IN AN AC CIRCUIT
The SCR is a rectifi er. When it is connected in an 
AC circuit the output will be DC. The SCR operates 
in the same manner in an AC circuit as it does in a 
DC circuit. The difference in operation is caused by 
the AC waveform falling back to 0 at the end of each 
half cycle. When the AC waveform drops to 0 at the 
end of each half cycle, it will permit the SCR to turn 
off. This means the gate must re-trigger the SCR for 
each cycle it is to conduct. Refer to the circuit shown 
in Figure 54–5.
Assume that the variable resistor connected to 
the gate has been adjusted to permit 5 mA of cur-
rent to fl ow when the voltage applied to the anode 
reaches its peak value. When the SCR turns on, 
current will begin fl owing through the load resis-
tor when the AC waveform is at its positive peak. 
Current will continue to fl ow through the load until 
the decreasing voltage of the sine wave causes the 
current to drop below the holding current level of 
100 mA. When the current through the anode-
cathode drops below 100 mA, the SCR turns off and 
all current fl ow stops. The SCR will remain turned 
off when the AC waveform goes into the negative 
half cycle because it is reverse biased and cannot 
be fi red.
If the resistance connected in series with the 
gate is reduced, a current of 5 mA will be reached 
before the AC waveform reaches it peak value, 
Figure 54–6. This causes the SCR to fi re sooner in 
the cycle. Since the SCR fi res sooner, current is per-
mitted to fl ow through the load resistor for a longer 
period of time, which causes a higher average volt-
age drop across the load. If the resistance of the gate 
circuit is reduced again, as shown in Figure 54–7, 
the 5 mA of gate current needed to fi re the SCR will 
be reached sooner than before. This permits cur-
rent to begin fl owing through the load sooner than 
before, which permits a higher average voltage to be 
dropped across the load.
Notice that this circuit will permit the SCR to con-
trol only half of the positive waveform. The latest the 
SCR can be fi red in the cycle is when the AC wave-
form is at 90° or peak. If a lamp were used as the 
load for this circuit, it would burn at half brightness 
when the SCR fi rst turned on. This control would 
permit the lamp to be operated from half brightness 
to full brightness, but it could not be operated at a 
level less than half brightness.
R1
S1
R2
R3
A2
A1
 Figure 54–4
Operation of an SCR 
in a DC circuit. (Source: 
Delmar/Cengage Learning)
5 mA
LOAD
 Figure 54–5
SCR ﬁ res when the AC waveform 
reaches peak value. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

504   SECTION 8  Solid-State Devices
PHASE SHIFTING THE SCR
If the SCR is to control all of the positive waveform, 
it must be phase shifted. As the term implies, 
phase shifting means to shift the phase of one thing 
in reference to another. In this instance, the volt-
age applied to the gate must be shifted out of phase 
with the voltage applied to the anode. There are 
several methods that can be used for phase shift-
ing an SCR, but it is beyond the scope of this text 
to cover all of them. The basic principles are the 
same for all of the methods, however, so only one 
method will be covered.
If the SCR is to be phase shifted, the gate circuit 
must be unlocked or separated from the anode cir-
cuit. The circuit shown in Figure 54–8 will accom-
plish this. A 24-volt center-tapped transformer has 
been used to isolate the gate circuit from the anode 
circuit. Diodes D1 and D2 are used to form a two-
diode type of full wave rectifi er to operate the uni-
junction transistor (UJT) circuit. Resistor R1 is used 
to determine the pulse rate of the UJT by controlling 
the charge time of capacitor C1. Resistor R2 is used 
to limit the current through the emitter of the UJT if 
resistor R1 is adjusted to 0 ohms. Resistor R3 limits 
current through the base 1–base 2 section when the 
UJT turns on. Resistor R4 permits a voltage spike or 
pulse to be produced across it when the UJT turns on 
and discharges capacitor C1. The pulse produced by 
the discharge of capacitor C1 is used to trigger the 
gate of the SCR.
Because the pulse of the UJT is used to provide a 
trigger for the gate of the SCR, the SCR can now be 
fi red at any time regardless of the voltage applied 
to the anode. This means the SCR can now be fi red 
as early or late during the positive half cycle as 
desired, because the gate pulse is now determined 
by the charge rate of capacitor C1. The voltage 
across the load can now be adjusted from 0 to the 
full applied voltage.
TESTING THE SCR
The SCR can be tested with an ohmmeter. To test 
the SCR, connect the positive output lead of the 
ohmmeter to the anode and the negative lead to 
the cathode. The ohmmeter should indicate no 
continuity. Touch the gate of the SCR to the anode. 
The ohmmeter should indicate continuity through 
the SCR. When the gate lead is removed from the 
anode, conduction may stop or continue, depend-
ing on whether the ohmmeter is supplying enough 
current to keep the device above its holding current 
level or not. If the ohmmeter indicates continuity 
through the SCR before the gate is touched to the 
anode, the SCR is shorted. If the ohmmeter will not 
5 mA
LOAD
5 mA
LOAD
 Figure 54–6
SCR ﬁ res before the AC wave-
form reaches peak value. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 54–7
SCR ﬁ res sooner than before. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 54  The Silicon-Controlled Rectiﬁ er   505
indicate continuity through the SCR after the gate 
has been touched to the anode, the SCR is open. The 
following step-by-step procedure can be used for 
testing an SCR.
 1. Using a junction diode, determine which 
ohmmeter lead is positive and which is nega-
tive. The ohmmeter will indicate continuity 
only when the positive lead is connected to 
the anode of the diode and the negative lead 
is connected to the cathode, Figure 54–9.
LOAD
R1
50  KILOHMS
R2
100  OHMS
C1
1 µF
24  VOLTS
CENTER  TAPPED
R3
330  OHMS
R4
3.3  KILOHMS
UJT
D1
D2
 Figure 54–8
UJT phase shift for an SCR. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
ANODE
CATHODE
OHMMETER
+
–
 Figure 54–9
Determining ohmmeter polarity. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 2. Connect the positive ohmmeter lead to the 
anode of the SCR and the negative lead to the 
cathode. The ohmmeter should indicate no 
continuity, Figure 54–10.
 3. Using a jumper lead, connect the gate of the 
SCR to the anode. The ohmmeter should 
indicate a forward diode junction when the 
connection is made, Figure 54–11.
ANODE
CATHODE
GATE
OHMMETER
+
–
 Figure 54–10
There should be no continuity between anode and 
cathode. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

506   SECTION 8  Solid-State Devices
NOTE: If the jumper is removed, the SCR may 
continue to conduct or it may turn off. This will be 
determined by whether or not the ohmmeter can 
supply enough current to keep the SCR above its 
holding current level.
 4. Reconnect the SCR so that the cathode is 
connected to the positive ohmmeter lead and 
the anode is connected to the negative lead. 
The ohmmeter should indicate no continuity, 
Figure 54–12.
 5. If a jumper lead is used to connect the gate to 
the anode, the ohmmeter should indicate no 
continuity, Figure 54–13. SCRs in different 
case styles are shown in Figure 54–14.
NOTE: SCRs designed to switch large current 
(50 amperes or more) may indicate some leakage 
current with this test. This is normal for some 
devices.
ANODE
CATHODE
GATE
OHMMETER
+
–
 Figure 54–11
Shorting the gate and anode causes the SCR to conduct. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
ANODE
CATHODE
GATE
OHMMETER
+
–
 Figure 54–12
Reversing the polarity. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
ANODE
CATHODE
GATE
OHMMETER
+
–
 Figure 54–13
The SCR will not conduct when the polarity is reversed. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 54  The Silicon-Controlled Rectiﬁ er   507
 Figure 54–14
SCRs shown in different case styles. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
SUMMARY
 The silicon-controlled rectifi er (SCR) is often referred to as a PNPN junction.
 The SCR is a member of the thyristor family of electronic devices.
 The SCR has two states of operation: on or off.
 When the SCR is connected in a DC circuit, the gate current controls the turn on, but once 
the SCR is turned on, the gate cannot turn it off.
 Before an SCR can be turned off, the current fl ow through the anode-cathode section must 
drop below the holding current level.
 When an SCR is connected in an AC circuit, the voltage returning to zero each half cycle 
turns the SCR off.
 The SCR is a rectifi er; it will change alternating current into direct current.
 In order to gain complete control of the output waveform, the SCR must be phase shifted.
 The unijunction transistor is often used to phase shift an SCR.
KEY TERMS
gate
holding current
phase shifted
PNPN
silicon-controlled
 rectifi er (SCR)

508   SECTION 8  Solid-State Devices
 
1. What do the letters SCR stand for?
 
2. How many layers of semiconductor material are joined to form an SCR?
 
3. SCRs are a member of what family of devices?
 
4. If an SCR is connected in an AC circuit, is the output AC or DC?
 
5. Is gate current used to turn the SCR on or off?
 
6. The amount of current fl ow through the anode-cathode section needed to keep an 
SCR turned on is called what?
 
7. When an SCR is connected in an AC circuit, what must be done to gain complete 
control of the output waveform?
 
8. What electronic component is generally used to phase shift an SCR?
REVIEW QUESTIONS

509
The diac is a special-purpose bidirectional
diode. The primary function of the diac is to phase 
shift a triac. The operation of the diac is very similar 
to that of a unijunction transistor, except the diac 
is a “bi” or two-directional device. The diac has the 
ability to operate in an AC circuit while the UJT is a 
DC device only.
There are two schematic symbols for the diac, 
Figure 55–1. Either of these symbols is used in an 
electronic schematic to illustrate the use of a diac; 
therefore, you should become familiar with both.
DIAC CHARACTERISTICS
The diac is a voltage-sensitive switch that can oper-
ate on either polarity, Figure 55–2. When voltage is 
applied to the diac, it will remain in the turned-off 
state until the applied voltage reaches a predetermined 
UNIT 55
The Diac
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Draw the schematic symbol for a diac
 Discuss the operation of a diac
 Connect a diac in a circuit

510   SECTION 8  Solid-State Devices
a lower voltage than the voltage that was applied to 
it, assume 5 volts. The diac will remain turned on 
until the applied voltage drops below its conduction 
level, which in this example is 5 volts. Refer to the 
waveform shown in Figure 55–3. Because the diac 
is a bidirectional device, it will conduct on either half 
cycle of the AC applied to it. Refer to the waveform 
shown in Figure 55–4. Notice that the diac has the 
same operating characteristic with either half cycle 
of AC. The simplest way to sum up the operation of 
the diac is to say it is a voltage-sensitive AC switch.
level. For this example, assume this to be 15 volts. 
When the voltage reaches 15 volts, the diac will 
turn on or fi re. When the diac fi res, it displays a 
negative resistance, which means it will conduct at 
 Figure 55–1
Schematic symbols for a diac.  (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 55–2 
The diac can operate on either polarity.  (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
+15  VOLTS
+5  VOLTS
 Figure 55–3
The diac operates until the applied voltage falls below 
its conduction level.  (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
+15  VOLTS
+5  VOLTS
–5  VOLTS
–15  VOLTS
 Figure 55–4
The diac will conduct on either half 
of the alternating current. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
SUMMARY
 The diac is a bidirectional diode.
 The primary function of a diac is to phase shift a triac.
 The diac operates on AC.
 The diac operates like a voltage-sensitive AC switch.
 The diac displays a negative resistance characteristic.

UNIT 55  The Diac   511
KEY TERMS
bidirectional
diac
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. Briefl y explain how a diac operates.
 
2. Draw the two schematic symbols for the diac.
 
3. What is the major use of the diac in industry?
 
4. When a diac fi rst turns on, does the voltage drop, remain at the same level, 
or increase to a higher level?

512
The triac is a PNPN junction connected in parallel 
with an NPNP junction. Figure 56–1 illustrates 
the semiconductor arrangement of a triac. The triac 
operates similar to two SCRs in parallel, facing in 
opposite directions with their gate leads connected 
together, Figure 56–2. The schematic symbol for 
the triac is shown in Figure 56–3.
When an SCR is connected in an AC circuit, the 
output voltage will be DC. When a triac is connected 
in an AC circuit, the output voltage will be AC. 
Since the triac operates like two SCRs connected 
together and facing in opposite directions, it will 
conduct both the positive and negative half cycles of 
AC current.
When a triac is connected in an AC circuit as 
shown in Figure 56–4, the gate must be connected 
to the same polarity as MT2. When the AC voltage 
applied to MT2 become positive, the SCR, which 
UNIT 56
The Triac
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Draw the schematic symbol for a triac
 Discuss the similarities and differences 
between SCRs and triacs
 Discuss the operation of a triac in an 
AC circuit
 Discuss phase shifting of a triac
 Connect a triac in a circuit
 Test a triac with an ohmmeter

UNIT 56  The Triac   513
is forward biased, will conduct. When the voltage 
applied to MT2 becomes negative, the other SCR 
is forward biased and will conduct that half of the 
waveform. Since one of the SCRs is forward biased 
for each half cycle, the triac will conduct AC current 
as long as the gate lead is connected to MT2.
The triac, like the SCR, requires a certain amount 
of gate current to turn it on. Once the triac has been 
triggered by the gate, it will continue to conduct 
until the current fl owing through MT2–MT1 drops 
below the holding current level.
THE TRIAC USED AS AN AC 
SWITCH
The triac is a member of the thyristor family and 
has only two states of operation, on or off. When 
the triac is turned off it will drop the full applied 
voltage of the circuit at 0 amps of current fl ow. 
When the triac is turned on, it has a voltage drop 
of about 1 volt and circuit current must be limited 
by the load connected to the circuit. The triac 
has become very popular in industrial circuits as 
an AC switch. Because it is a thyristor, it has the 
ability to control a large amount of voltage and 
current. There are no contacts to wear out, it is 
sealed against dirt and moisture, and it can operate 
thousands of times per second. The triac is used as 
the output of many solid-state relays that will be 
covered later.
THE TRIAC USED FOR AC 
VOLTAGE CONTROL
The triac can be used to control an AC voltage, 
Figure 56–5. If a variable resistor is connected in 
series with the gate, the point at which the gate 
current will reach a high enough level to fi re the 
triac can be adjusted. The resistance can be adjusted 
to permit the triac to fi re when the AC waveform 
reaches its peak value. This will cause half of the 
AC voltage to be dropped across the triac and half to 
be dropped across the load.
G
MT1
MT2
N
N
P
N
P
N
N
 Figure 56–1
Semiconductor arrangement of a triac. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 Figure 56–2
The triac operates similar to two SCRs with a common 
gate. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 56–3
Schematic symbol of a triac. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
G
MT1
MT2
 Figure 56–4
The triac will conduct both halves 
of the AC waveform. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

514   SECTION 8  Solid-State Devices
If the gate resistance is reduced, the amount of 
gate current needed to fi re the triac will be obtained 
before the AC waveform reaches its peak value. This 
means that less voltage will be dropped across the 
triac and more voltage will be dropped across the 
load. This circuit permits the triac to control only 
one half of the AC waveform applied to it. If a lamp 
is used as the load, it can be controlled from half 
brightness to full brightness. If an attempt is made 
to adjust the lamp to operate at less than half bright-
ness, it will turn off.
PHASE SHIFTING THE TRIAC
The triac, like the SCR, must be phase shifted if 
complete voltage control is to be obtained. There 
are several methods that can be used to phase shift 
a triac, but only one will be covered in this unit. 
In this example, a diac will be used to phase shift 
the triac, Figure 56–6. In this circuit, resistors R1 
and R2 are connected in series with capacitor C1. 
Resistor R1 is a variable resistor and is used to 
control the charge time of capacitor C1. Resistor 
R2 is used to limit current if resistor R1 should be 
adjusted to 0 ohms. Assume the diac connected in 
series with the gate of the triac will turn on when 
capacitor C1 has been charged to 15 volts. When 
the diac turns on, capacitor C1 will discharge 
through the gate of the triac. This permits the triac 
to fi re or turn on.
Once the triac has fi red, there will be a voltage 
drop of about 1 volt across MT2 and MT1. The triac 
will remain turned on until the AC voltage drops to 
a low enough value to permit the triac to turn off. 
Since the phase shift circuit is connected in parallel 
with the triac, once the triac turns on capacitor C1 
cannot begin charging again until the triac turns off 
at the end of the AC cycle. The diac, being a bidirec-
tional device, will permit a positive or negative pulse 
to trigger the gate of the triac.
Notice that the pulse applied to the gate is con-
trolled by the charging of capacitor C1 and not 
the amplitude of voltage. If the correct values are 
chosen, the triac can be fi red at any point in the AC 
cycle applied to it. The triac can now control the 
AC voltage from 0 to the full voltage of the circuit. 
MT1
MT2
LOAD
 Figure 56–5
The triac controls half of the AC 
applied voltage. (Source: Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
DIAC
C1
R1
50  KILOHMS
G
MT2
MT1
R2
100  OHMS
1 µf
LOAD
 Figure 56–6
Phase-shift circuit for a triac. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 56  The Triac   515
A common example of this type of triac circuit is the 
light dimmer control used in many homes.
TESTING THE TRIAC
The triac can be tested with an ohmmeter. To test 
the triac, connect the ohmmeter leads to MT2 and 
MT1. The ohmmeter should indicate no continuity. 
If the gate lead is touched to MT2, the triac should 
turn on and the ohmmeter will indicate continuity 
through the triac. When the gate lead is released 
from MT2, the triac may continue to conduct or 
turn off depending on whether the ohmmeter sup-
plies enough current to keep the device above its 
holding current level. This tests one half of the 
triac. To test the other half of the triac, reverse the 
connection of the ohmmeter leads. The ohmmeter 
should again indicate no continuity. If the gate is 
touched again to MT2, the ohmmeter should indi-
cate continuity through the device. The other half of 
the triac has been tested. The following step-by-step 
procedure can be used to test a triac.
 1. Using a junction diode, determine which 
ohmmeter lead is positive and which is nega-
tive. The ohmmeter will indicate continuity 
only when the positive lead is connected to 
the anode and the negative lead is connected 
to the cathode, Figure 56–7.
 2. Connect the positive ohmmeter lead to MT2 
and the negative lead to MT1. The ohmmeter 
should indicate no continuity through the 
triac, Figure 56–8.
 3. Using a jumper lead, connect the gate of the 
triac to MT2. The ohmmeter should indicate 
a forward diode junction, Figure 56–9.
ANODE
CATHODE
OHMMETER
+
–
 Figure 56–7
Determining ohmmeter polarity. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
MT2
MT1
GATE
OHMMETER
+
–
 Figure 56–8
No continuity. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
MT2
MT1
GATE
OHMMETER
+
–
 Figure 56–9
The triac will conduct when the gate is connected 
to MT2. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

516   SECTION 8  Solid-State Devices
SUMMARY
 The triac operates in a manner similar to two SCRs connected in opposite directions.
 The triac is a bidirectional device, which means that it will operate when connected 
to AC current.
 Triacs are often used as AC switches.
 A triac must be phase shifted to gain complete control of the AC waveform.
 A diac is often used to phase shift a triac.
KEY TERM
NPNP
MT2
MT1
GATE
OHMMETER
+
–
 Figure 56–10
Reversing the polarity. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
MT2
MT1
GATE
OHMMETER
+
–
 Figure 56–11
The triac will conduct with either polarity. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 4. Reconnect the triac so that MT1 is connected 
to the positive ohmmeter lead and MT2 is 
connected to the negative lead. The ohmme-
ter should indicate no continuity through the 
triac, Figure 56–10.
 5. Using a jumper lead, again connect the gate 
to MT2. The ohmmeter should indicate a 
forward diode junction, Figure 56–11.

UNIT 56  The Triac   517
 
1. Draw the schematic symbol of a triac.
 
2. When a triac is connected in an AC circuit, is the output AC or DC?
 
3. The triac is a member of what family of devices?
 
4. Briefl y explain why a triac must be phase shifted.
 
5. What electronic component is frequently used to phase shift the triac?
 
6. When the triac is being tested with an ohmmeter, which other terminal should the 
gate be connected to if the ohmmeter is to indicate continuity?
REVIEW QUESTIONS

518
The operational amplifi er has become another 
very common component found in industrial elec-
tronic circuits. The operational amplifi er, or op amp
as it is generally referred to, is used in hundreds of 
different applications. There are different types of 
op amps used, depending on the type of circuit it is 
intended to operate in. Some op amps use bipolar 
transistors for the input and others use fi eld 
effect transistors. The advantage of using fi eld 
effect transistors is their extremely high input imped-
ance, which can be several thousand megohms. The 
advantage of this extremely high input impedance 
is that it does not require a large amount of current 
to operate the amplifi er. In fact, op amps, which use 
FET inputs, are generally considered as requiring no 
input current.
UNIT 57
The 
Operational 
Ampliﬁ er
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Discuss the operation of the 
operational ampliﬁ er (op amp)
 List the major types of connection for 
the op amp
 Connect a level detector circuit for an 
op amp
 Connect an oscillator using an op amp

UNIT 57  The Operational Ampliﬁ er   519
THE IDEAL AMPLIFIER
Before continuing the discussion of op amps, it 
should fi rst be decided what an ideal amplifi er 
is. First, the ideal amplifi er should have an input 
impedance of infi nity. If the amplifi er had an input 
impedance of infi nity, it would require no power 
drain on the signal source being amplifi ed. There-
fore, regardless of how weak the input signal source 
is, it would not be affected when connected to the 
amplifi er. The ideal amplifi er would have 0 output 
impedance. If the amplifi er had 0 output imped-
ance it could be connected to any load resistance 
desired and not drop any voltage inside the ampli-
fi er. If it had no internal voltage drop, the amplifi er 
would utilize 100% of its gain. Third, the amplifi er 
would have unlimited gain. This would permit it to 
amplify any input signal as much as desired.
741 PARAMETERS
There is no such thing as the ideal or perfect ampli-
fi er of course, but the op amp can come close. One 
of the old reliable op amps, which is still used to a 
large extent, is the 741. The 741 will be used in this 
description as a typical operational amplifi er. Please 
keep in mind that there are other op amps that have 
different characteristics of input and output imped-
ance, but the basic theory of operation is the same 
for all of them.
The 741 op amp uses bipolar transistors for the 
input. The input impedance is about 2 megohms, 
and the output impedance is about 75 ohms. Its 
open loop or maximum gain is about 200,000. 
Actually, the 741 op amp has such a high gain that 
it is generally impractical to use and negative feed-
back, which will be discussed later, is used to reduce 
the gain. For instance, assume the amplifi er has an 
output voltage of 15 volts. If the input signal voltage 
is greater than 1/200,000 of the output voltage or 
75 microvolts (15/200,00  .000075), the ampli-
fi er would be driven into saturation at which point 
it would not operate.
741 PIN CONNECTION
The 741 operational amplifi er is generally housed 
in an 8-pin in-line IC package, Figure 57–1, Pins #1 
and #5 are connected to the offset null. The offset 
null is used to produce 0 volts at the output. What 
happens is this: The op amp has two inputs called 
the inverting input and the noninverting 
input. These inputs are connected to a differential 
amplifi er that amplifi es the difference between the 
two voltages. If both of these inputs are connected 
to the same voltage, say by grounding both inputs, 
the output should be 0 volts. In actual practice, 
however, there are generally unbalanced conditions 
in the op amp that cause a voltage to be produced 
at the output. Because the op amp has a very high 
gain, a very slight imbalance of a few microvolts at 
the input can cause several millivolts at the output. 
The offset nulls are adjusted after the 741 is con-
nected into a working circuit. Adjustment is made 
by connecting a 10K ohm potentiometer across pins 
#1 and #5, and connecting the wiper to the nega-
tive voltage, Figure 57–2.
Pin #2 is the inverting input. If a signal is 
applied to this input, the output will be inverted. For 
instance, if a positive-going AC voltage is applied 
OFFSET NULL
1
741
–
+
INVERTING
INPUT
2
NONINVERTING
INPUT
3
V–
NOT CONNECTED
V+
OUTPUT
OFFSET NULL
4
8
7
6
5
 Figure 57–1
741 operational ampliﬁ er. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

520   SECTION 8  Solid-State Devices
to the inverting input, the output will produce a 
negative-going voltage, Figure 57–3.
Pin #3 is the noninverting input. When a sig-
nal voltage is applied to the noninverting input, 
the output voltage will be the same polarity. If a 
positive-going AC signal is applied to the noninvert-
ing input, the output voltage will be positive also, 
Figure 57–4.
Pins #4 and #7 are the voltage input pins. 
Operational amplifi ers are generally connected to 
above- and below-ground power supplies. These 
power supplies produce both a positive and nega-
tive voltage as compared to ground. There are some 
circuit connections that do not require an above- 
and below-ground power supply, but these are the 
exception instead of the rule. Pin #4 is connected to 
the negative- or below-ground voltage and pin #7 is 
connected to the positive- or above-ground voltage. 
The 741 will operate on voltages that range from 
about 4 volts to 16 volts. Generally, the operating 
voltage for the 741 is 12 to 15 volts plus and minus. 
The 741 has a maximum power output rating of 
about 500 milliwatts. Pin #6 is the output and 
pin #8 is not connected.
NEGATIVE FEEDBACK
As stated previously, the open loop gain of the 
741 operational amplifi er is about 200,000. This 
amount of gain is not practical for most applica-
tions, so something must be done to reduce this 
gain to a reasonable level. One of the great advan-
tages of the op amp is the ease with which the 
gain can be controlled, Figure 57–5. The amount 
of gain is controlled by a negative-feedback loop. 
This is accomplished by feeding a portion of the 
output voltage back to the inverting input. Since 
the output voltage is always opposite in polarity to 
the inverting input voltage, the amount of output 
voltage fed back to the input tends to reduce the 
input voltage. Negative feedback has two effects 
on the operation of the amplifi er. One effect is that 
it reduces the gain. The other is that it makes the 
amplifi er more stable.
V–
10 KILOHMS
4
5
1
 Figure 57–2
Offset null connection. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
–
+
2
3
6
 Figure 57–3
Inverted output. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
–
+
2
3
6
 Figure 57–4
Noninverted output. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
–
+
2
R2
R1
3
6
 Figure 57–5
Negative feedback connection. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 57  The Operational Ampliﬁ er   521
The gain of the amplifi er is controlled by the 
ratio of resistors R2 and R1. If a noninverting 
amplifi er is used, the gain is found by the formula 
(R2  R1)/R1. If resistor R1 is 1K ohms and resistor 
R2 is 10K ohms, the gain of the amplifi er would be 
11 (11,000  1,000  11).
If the op amp is connected as an inverting ampli-
fi er, however, the input signal will be out of phase 
with the feedback voltage of the output. This will 
cause a reduction of the input voltage applied to 
the amplifi er and a reduction in gain. The formula 
(R2/R1) is used to compute the gain of an inverting 
amplifi er. If resistor R1 is 1K ohms and resistor 
R2 is 10K ohms, the gain of the inverting amplifi er 
would be 10 (10,000  1,000  10).
There are some practical limits, however. As a 
general rule, the 741 operational amplifi er is not 
operated above a gain of about 100. If more gain is 
desired, it is generally obtained by using more than 
one amplifi er, Figure 57–6.
As shown in Figure 57–6, the output of one 
amplifi er is fed into the input of another amplifi er. 
The reason for not operating the 741 at high gain 
is that at high gains it tends to become unstable. 
Another general rule for operating the 741 op amp 
is the total feedback resistance (R1  R2) is usu-
ally kept more than 1,000 ohms and less than 
100,000 ohms. These general rules apply to the 
741 operational amplifi er and may not apply to 
other operational amplifi ers.
BASIC CIRCUIT CONNECTIONS
Op amps are generally used in three basic ways. This 
is not to say that op amps are used in only three 
circuits, but that there are three basic circuits that 
are used to build other circuits. One of these basic 
circuits is the voltage follower. In this circuit, 
the output of the op amp is connected directly back 
to the inverting input, Figure 57–7. Because there is 
a direct connection between the output of the ampli-
fi er and the inverting input, the gain of this circuit 
is 1. For instance, if a signal voltage of .5 volts is con-
nected to the noninverting input, the output voltage 
will be .5 volts also. You may wonder why anyone 
would want an amplifi er that does not amplify. 
Actually, this circuit does amplify something. It 
amplifi es the input impedance by the amount of the 
open loop gain. If the 741 has an open loop gain of 
200,000 and an input impedance of 2 megohms, 
this circuit would give the amplifi er an input imped-
ance of 200K  2 megohms or 400,000 megohms. 
This circuit connection is generally used for imped-
ance matching purposes.
The second basic circuit is the noninverting 
amplifi er, Figure 57–8. In this circuit, the output 
voltage is the same polarity as the input voltage. 
If the input voltage is a positive-going voltage, the 
output will be a positive-going voltage at the same 
time. The amount of gain is set by the ratio of resis-
tors R1  R2/R1 in the negative feedback loop.
The third basic circuit is the inverting amplifi er, 
Figure 57–9. In this circuit the output voltage will 
be opposite in polarity to the input voltage. If the 
–
+
2
3
6
 Figure 57–7
Voltage follower connection. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
–
+
2
3
6
–
+
2
3
6
 Figure 57–6
Increasing the gain. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

522   SECTION 8  Solid-State Devices
input signal is a positive-going voltage, the output 
voltage will be negative-going at the same instant 
in time. The gain of the circuit is determined by the 
ratio of resistors R2 and R1.
CIRCUIT APPLICATIONS
The Level Detector
The operational amplifi er is often used as a level 
detector or comparator. In this type of cir-
cuit, the 741 op amp will be used as an inverted 
 amplifi er to detect when one voltage becomes 
greater than another. Refer to the circuit shown in 
Figure 57–10. Notice that this circuit does not use 
an above- and below-ground power supply. Instead 
it is connected to a power supply with a single posi-
tive and negative output. During normal operation, 
the noninverting input of the amplifi er is con-
nected to a zener diode. This zener diode produces 
a  constant positive voltage at the noninverting 
input of the amplifi er, which is used as a reference. 
As long as the  noninverting input is more positive 
than the inverting input, the output of the ampli-
fi er will be high. A light-emitting diode, D1, will be 
used to detect a change in the polarity of the output. 
As long as the output of the op amp remains high, 
the LED will be turned off. When the output of the 
amplifi er is high, the LED has equal voltage applied 
to both its anode and cathode. Since both the anode 
–
+
2
R2
R1
3
6
 Figure 57–8
Noninverting ampliﬁ er connection. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
–
+
2
R2
R1
3
6
 Figure 57–9
Inverting ampliﬁ er connection. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
2
7
4
V+
3
6
–
+
10 KILOHMS
47 KILOHMS
1 KILOHM
D1
LIGHT-
EMITTING
DIODE
 Figure 57–10
Inverting level detector. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

UNIT 57  The Operational Ampliﬁ er   523
voltage simply reaches the lowest voltage it can and 
then goes into saturation. The op amp is not a digital 
device, but it can be made to act like one.
If the zener diode is replaced with a voltage divider, 
as shown in Figure 57–11, the reference voltage can 
be set to any value desired. By adjusting the variable 
resistor shown in Figure 57–11, the positive volt-
age applied to the noninverting input can be set for 
any voltage value desired. For instance, if the volt-
age at the noninverting input is set for 3 volts, the 
output of the op amp will go low when the voltage 
applied to the inverting input becomes greater than 
3 volts. If the voltage at the noninverting input is 
set for 8 volts, the output voltage will go low when 
the voltage applied to the inverting input becomes 
greater than 8 volts. Notice that this circuit per-
mits the voltage level at which the output of the op 
amp will change to be adjusted.
In the two circuits just described, the op amp 
changed from a high level to a low level when acti-
vated. There may be occasions, however, when it is 
desired that the output be changed from a low level 
to a high level. This can be accomplished by con-
necting the inverting input to the reference voltage 
and connecting the noninverting input to the volt-
age being sensed, Figure 57–12. In this circuit, the 
zener diode is used to provide a positive reference 
voltage to the inverting input. As long as the voltage 
at the inverting input remains more positive than 
the voltage at the noninverting input, the output 
voltage of the op amp will remain low. If the voltage 
applied to the noninverting input should become 
more positive than the reference voltage, the output 
of the op amp will become high.
and cathode are connected to 12 volts, there is no 
potential difference and therefore no current fl ow 
through the LED.
If the voltage at the inverting input should become 
more positive than the reference voltage applied to 
pin #3, the output voltage will go low. The low 
voltage at the output will be about 2.5 volts. 
The output voltage of the op amp will not go to 0 or 
ground in this circuit because the op amp is not con-
nected to a voltage that is below ground. If the output 
voltage is to be able to go to 0 volts, pin #4 must be 
connected to a voltage that is below ground. When 
the output is low there is a potential of about 9.5 volts 
(12  2.5  9.5) produced across R1 and D1, which 
causes the LED to turn on and indicate that the state 
of the op amp’s output has changed from high to low.
In this type of circuit, the op amp appears to be a 
digital device in that the output seems to have only 
two states, high or low. Actually, the op amp is not a 
digital device. This circuit only makes it appear digi-
tal. Notice there is no negative feedback loop con-
nected between the output and the inverting input. 
Therefore, the amplifi er uses its open loop gain, 
which is about 200,000 for the 741, to amplify the 
voltage difference between the inverting input and 
the noninverting input. If the voltage applied to the 
inverting input should become 1 millivolt more 
positive than the reference voltage applied to the 
noninverting input, the amplifi er will try to pro-
duce an output that is 200 volts more negative than 
its high-state voltage (.001  200,000  200). The 
output voltage of the amplifi er cannot be driven 
200 volts more negative, of course, because there 
is only 12 volts applied to the circuit, so the output 
2
7
4
V+
3
6
–
+
1 KILOHM
10 KILOHMS
 Figure 57–11 
Adjustable inverting level detector. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

524   SECTION 8  Solid-State Devices
The second method of correcting the output 
voltage problem is shown in Figure 57–14. In this 
circuit, the op amp is connected to a power supply 
that has a single positive and negative output as 
before. A zener diode, D2, has been connected in 
series with the output of the op amp and the LED. 
The voltage value of diode D2 is greater than the 
output voltage of the op amp in the low state, but 
less than the output voltage of the op amp in its 
high state. For example, assume the value of the 
zener diode D2 is 5.1 volts. If the output voltage of 
the op amp in its low state is 2.5 volts, diode D2 is 
turned off and will not conduct. If the output volt-
age becomes 12 volts when the op amp switches 
to its high state, the zener diode will turn on and 
conduct current to the LED. Notice that the zener 
diode D2 keeps the LED turned completely off until 
the op amp switches to its high state and provides 
enough voltage to overcome the reverse voltage 
drop of the zener diode.
In the preceding circuits, an LED was used to 
indicate the output state of the amplifi er. Keep in 
mind that the LED is used only as a detector, and 
Depending on the application, this circuit could 
cause a small problem. As stated previously, since 
this circuit does not use an above- and below-ground 
power supply, the low output voltage of the op amp will 
be about 2.5 volts. This positive  output voltage could 
cause any other devices connected to the op amp’s 
output to be turned on even if it should be turned off. 
For instance, if the LED shown in Figure 57–12 was 
used, it would glow dimly even when the output is 
in the low state. This problem can be corrected in a 
couple of different ways. One way would be to connect 
the op amp to an above- and below-ground power 
supply as shown in Figure 57–13.
In this circuit, the output voltage of the op amp 
will be negative or below ground as long as the volt-
age applied to the inverting input is more positive than 
the voltage applied to the noninverting input. As long 
as the output voltage of the op amp is negative with 
respect to ground, the LED is reverse biased and can-
not operate. When the voltage applied to the nonin-
verting input becomes more positive than the voltage 
applied to the inverting input, the output of the op 
amp will become positive and the LED will turn on.
2
7
4
V+
3
6
–
+
10 KILOHMS
1 KILOHM
 Figure 57–12
Noninverting level detector. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
2
7
4
V+
V–
3
6
–
+
10 KILOHMS
1 KILOHM
 Figure 57–13
Below-ground power connec-
tion permits the output voltage to 
become negative. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

UNIT 57  The Operational Ampliﬁ er   525
the output of the op amp could be used to control 
almost anything. For example, the output of the 
op amp can be connected to the base of a transistor 
as shown in Figure 57–15. The transistor can then 
control the coil of a relay, which could be used to 
control almost anything.
The Oscillator
An operational amplifi er can be used as an oscil-
lator. The circuit shown in Figure 57–16 is a very 
simple circuit that will produce a square wave out-
put. This circuit is rather impractical, however. This 
circuit would depend on a slight imbalance in the 
op amp or random circuit noise to start the oscil-
lator. A slight voltage difference of a few millivolts 
between the two inputs is all that is needed to cause 
the output of the amplifi er to go high or low. For 
example, if the inverting input becomes slightly 
more positive than the noninverting input, the 
output will go low or negative. When the output 
becomes negative, capacitor Ct begins to charge 
through resistor Rt to the negative value of the 
output voltage. As soon as the voltage applied to 
the inverting input becomes slightly more negative 
than the voltage applied to the noninverting input, 
the output will change to a high or positive value of 
voltage. When the output becomes positive, capaci-
tor Ct begins charging through resistor Rt toward 
the positive output voltage. This circuit will work 
quite well if the op amp has no imbalance, and if the 
op amp is shielded from all electrical noise. In practi-
cal application, however, there is generally enough 
imbalance in the amplifi er or enough electrical noise 
to send the op amp into saturation, which stops the 
operation of the circuit.
The Hysteresis Loop
The problem with this circuit is that a millivolt dif-
ference between the two inputs is enough to drive 
the amplifi er’s output from one state to the other. 
This problem can be corrected by the addition of a 
hysteresis loop connected to the noninverting 
2
7
4
+12 VOLTS
D1
D2
3
–
+
10 KILOHMS
5.1 VOLTS
 Figure 57–14
A zener diode is used to keep the 
output turned off. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
2
7
741
6
K
Q1
4
+12 VOLTS
3
–
+
10 KILOHMS
1 KILOHM
47 KILOHMS
5.1 VOLTS
1N4001
 Figure 57–15
Controlling a relay with an 
op amp. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

526   SECTION 8  Solid-State Devices
output changes to a low value or 12 volts. The 
voltage applied to the noninverting input is driven 
from 6 volts to 6 volts, and capacitor Ct again 
begins to charge toward the negative output volt-
age of the op amp. Notice that the addition of the 
hysteresis loop has greatly changed the operation 
of the circuit. The voltage differential between the 
two inputs is now volts instead of millivolts. The 
output frequency of the oscillator is determined by 
the values of Ct and Rt. The period of one cycle can 
be computed by using the formula (T  2RC).
The Pulse Generator
The operational amplifi er can also be used as a 
pulse generator. The difference between an 
oscillator and a pulse generator is the period of time 
the output remains on as compared to the period of 
time it remains low or off. An oscillator is generally 
considered to produce a waveform that has posi-
tive and negative pulses of equal voltage and time, 
 Figure 57–18. Notice that the positive value of volt-
age is the same as the negative value. Also notice 
input as shown in Figure 57–17. Resistors R1 and 
R2 form a voltage divider for the noninverting 
input. These resistors are generally of equal value. 
To understand the circuit operation, assume that 
the inverting input is slightly more positive than the 
noninverting input. This causes the output voltage 
to go negative. Also assume that the output voltage 
is now negative 12 volts as compared with ground. 
If resistors R1 and R2 are of equal value, the non-
inverting input is driven to –6 volts by the voltage 
divider. Capacitor Ct begins to charge through 
resistor Rt to the value of the output voltage. When 
capacitor Ct has been charged to a value slightly 
more negative than the 6 volts applied to the non-
inverting input, the op amp’s output goes high or 
to 12 volts above ground. When the output of the 
op amp changes from 12 volts to 12 volts, the 
voltage applied to the noninverting input changes 
from 6 volts to 6 volts. Capacitor Ct now begins 
to charge through resistor Rt to the positive volt-
age of the output. When the voltage applied to 
the inverting input becomes more positive than 
the voltage applied to the noninverting input, the 
2
7
4
V–
V+
3
Ct
6
–
+
Rt
 Figure 57–16
Simple square wave oscillator. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
2
7
4
V–
V+
3
Ct
6
–
+
Rt
R2
R1
 Figure 57–17
Square wave oscillator using 
a hysteresis loop. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

UNIT 57  The Operational Ampliﬁ er   527
that both the positive and negative cycles remain 
turned on the same amount of time. This waveform 
is consistent with that which one would expect to 
see if an oscilloscope is connected to the output of a 
square wave oscillator.
If the oscilloscope is connected to a pulse genera-
tor, however, a waveform similar to the one shown 
in Figure 57–19 would be seen. Notice that the 
positive value of voltage is the same as the negative 
value just as it was in Figure 57–18. However, the 
positive pulse is of a much shorter duration than 
the negative pulse. The device producing this wave-
form is generally considered to be a pulse generator 
rather than an oscillator.
0%
100
90
10
 Figure 57–18
Output of an oscillator. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
0%
100
90
10
 Figure 57–19
Output of a pulse generator. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

528   SECTION 8  Solid-State Devices
The 741 operational amplifier can eas-
ily be changed from a square wave oscillator to 
a pulse generator. Refer to the circuit shown in 
Figure 57–20. This is the same basic circuit as the 
square wave oscillator with the addition of resistor R3 
and R4, and diodes D1 and D2. This circuit permits 
capacitor Ct to charge at a different rate when the 
output is high or positive than it does when the out-
put is low or negative. For instance, assume that the 
voltage of the op amp’s output is low or –12 volts. 
If the output voltage is negative, diode D1 is 
reverse biased and no current can fl ow through 
resistor R3. Therefore, capacitor Ct must charge 
through resistor R4 and diode D2, which is forward 
biased. When the voltage applied to the invert-
ing input becomes more negative than the volt-
age applied to the noninverting input, the output 
voltage of the op amp becomes 12 volts. When 
the output voltage becomes 12 volts, diode D2 
is reverse biased and diode D1 is forward biased. 
Capacitor Ct, therefore, begins charging toward 
the 12 volts through resistor R3 and diode D1. 
Notice that the amount of time the output of the op 
amp remains low is d etermined by the value of Ct 
and R4, and the amount of time the output remains 
high is determined by the value of Ct and R3. The 
ratio of time the output voltage is high compared to 
the amount of time it is low can be determined by 
the ratio of resistor R3 to resistor R4. A 741 opera-
tional amplifi er is shown in Figure 57–21.
2
7
4
V–
V+
D2
3
Ct
6
–
+
R3
R4
R2
R1
D1
 Figure 57–20
Pulse generator circuit. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 Figure 57–21
741 operational ampliﬁ er in an eight-pin in-line case. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 57  The Operational Ampliﬁ er   529
SUMMARY
 Some op amps use bipolar transistors for the inputs and other use fi eld effect transistors for 
the inputs.
 The 741 operational amplifi er has an input impedance of about 2 megohms.
 The 741 op amp has an output impedance of about 75 ohms.
 The 741 operational amplifi er has an open loop, or maximum gain, of about 200,000.
 Op amps have two input connections called the inverting and noninverting inputs.
 If the noninverting input is more positive than the inverting input, the output voltage will 
be positive with respect to ground.
 If the inverting input is more positive than the noninverting input, the output voltage will 
be negative with respect to ground.
 Operational amplifi ers are generally connected to above- and below-ground power supplies.
 Negative feedback is used to reduce the gain of operational amplifi ers.
 The voltage follower connection produces a gain of 1, but increases the input impedance.
 Inverting amplifi ers produce an output waveform that is inverted or opposite that of 
the input.
 Noninverting amplifi ers produce an output waveform that is the same as the input.
KEY TERMS
bipolar transistors
fi eld effect transistor
gain
hysteresis loop
inverting amplifi er
inverting input
level detector
loop
noninverting amplifi er
noninverting input
offset null
operational amplifi er 
 (op amp)
oscillator
pulse generator
voltage follower
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. When the voltage connected to the inverting input is more positive than the voltage 
connected to the noninverting input, will the output be positive or negative?
 
2. What is the input impedance of a 741 operational amplifi er?
 
3. What is the average open loop gain of the 741 operational amplifi er?
 
4. What is the average output impedance of the 741?
 
5. List the three common connections for operational amplifi ers.
 
6. When the operational amplifi er is connected as a voltage follower, it has a gain of one. 
If the input voltage does not get amplifi ed, what does?
 
7. Name two effects of negative feedback.

530   SECTION 8  Solid-State Devices
 
8. Refer to Figure 57–8. If resistor R1 is 200 ohms, the resistor R2 is 10K ohms, what is 
the gain of the amplifi er?
 
9. Refer to Figure 57–9. If resistor R1 is 470 ohms and resistor R2 is 47K ohms, what is 
the gain of the amplifi er?
 10. What is the purpose of the hysteresis loop when the op amp is used as an oscillator?

SECTION 9
Solid-State 
Controls

532
Programmable logic controllers (PLCs)
were fi rst used by the automotive industry in the 
late 1960s. Each time a change was made in the 
design of an automobile it was necessary to change 
the control system operating the machinery. This 
consisted of physically rewiring the control system 
to make it perform the new operation. Rewiring the 
system was, of course, very time consuming and 
expensive. What the industry needed was a control 
system that could be changed without the extensive 
rewiring required to change relay control systems.
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN 
PLCS AND PCS
One of the fi rst questions generally asked is, “Is a 
programmable logic controller a computer?” The 
UNIT 58
Programmable 
Logic 
Controllers
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 List the principal parts of a 
programmable controller
 Describe the differences between 
programmable controllers and other 
types of computers
 Discuss differences between the I/O 
rack, CPU, and program loader
 Draw a diagram of how the input and 
output modules work

UNIT 58  Programmable Logic Controllers   533
answer to that question is yes. The PLC is a special 
type of computer designed to perform a special func-
tion. Although the programmable logic controller 
(PLC) and the personal computer (PC) are both 
computers, there are some signifi cant differences. 
Both generally employ the same basic type of com-
puter and memory chips to perform the tasks for 
which they are intended, but the PLC must operate 
in an industrial environment. Any computer that is 
intended for industrial use must be able to withstand 
extremes of temperature; ignore voltage spikes and 
drops on the power line; survive in an atmosphere 
that often contains corrosive vapors, oil, and dirt; 
and withstand shock and vibration.
Programmable logic controllers are designed 
to be programmed with schematic or ladder dia-
grams instead of common computer languages. 
An electrician who is familiar with ladder logic 
diagrams can generally learn to program a PLC 
in a few hours as opposed to the time required to 
train a person how to write programs for a stan-
dard computer.
BASIC COMPONENTS
Programmable logic controllers can be divided into 
four primary parts:
 1. The power supply.
 2. The central processing unit (CPU).
 3. The programming terminal or program 
loader.
 4. The I/O (pronounced eye-oh) rack.
The Power Supply
The function of the power supply is to lower the 
incoming AC voltage to the desired level, rectify it 
to direct current, and then fi lter and regulate it. 
The internal logic of a PLC generally operates on 
5 to 24 volts DC depending on the type of control-
ler. This voltage must be free of voltage spikes and 
other electrical noise and be regulated to within 
5% of the required voltage value. Some manu-
facturers of PLCs build a separate power supply 
and others build the power supply into the central 
processing unit.
The CPU
The CPU, or central processing unit, is the 
“brains” of the programmable logic controller. It 
contains the microprocessor chip and related inte-
grated circuits to perform all the logic functions. The 
microprocessor chip used in most PLCs is the same 
as that found in most home and business personal 
computers.
The central processing unit often has a key located 
on the front panel, Figure 58–1. This switch must be 
turned on before the CPU can be programmed. This 
is done to prevent the circuit from being changed 
or deleted accidentally. Other manufacturers use 
a software switch to protect the circuit. A software 
switch is not a physical switch. It is a command that 
must be entered before the program can be changed 
or deleted. Whether a physical switch or a software 
switch is used, they both perform the same function. 
 Figure 58–1
A central processing unit. (Courtesy of Allen-Bradley, 
a Rockwell International Company).

534   SECTION 9  Solid-State Controls
They prevent a program from being accidentally 
changed or deleted.
Plug connections on the central processing unit 
provide connection for the programming terminal 
and I/O racks, Figure 58–2. CPUs are designed so 
that once a program has been developed and tested 
it can be stored on some type of medium such as 
tape, disk, CD, or other storage device. In this way, if 
a central processor unit fails and has to be replaced, 
the program can be downloaded from the storage 
medium. This eliminates the time-consuming pro-
cess of having to reprogram the unit by hand.
The Programming Terminal
The programming terminal or loading ter-
minal is used to program the CPU. The type of ter-
minal used depends on the manufacturer and often 
the preference of the consumer. Some are small 
handheld devices that use a liquid crystal display or 
light-emitting diodes to show the program, Figure 58–3. 
Some of these small units will display one line of the 
program at a time and others require the program to 
be entered in a language called Boolean.
Another type of programming terminal contains 
a display and keyboard, Figure 58–4. This type 
of terminal generally displays several lines of the 
program at a time and can be used to observe the 
operation of the circuit as it is operating.
Many industries prefer to use a notebook or lap-
top computer for programming, Figure 58–5. An 
interface that permits the computer to be connected 
to the input of the PLC and software program is 
generally available from the manufacturer of the 
programmable logic controller.
The terminal is used not only to program the 
PLC but also to troubleshoot the circuit. When the 
terminal is connected to the CPU, the circuit can 
be examined while it is in operation. Figure 58–6 
illustrates a circuit typical of those which are seen 
on the display. Notice that this schematic diagram 
is different from the typical ladder diagram. All of 
the line components are shown as normally open or 
normally closed contacts. There are no NEMA sym-
bols for pushbutton, fl oat switch, limit switches, and 
so on. The programmable logic controller recognizes 
only open or closed contacts. It does not know if a 
contact is connected to a pushbutton, a limit switch, 
or a fl oat switch. Each contact, however, does have 
a number. The number is used to distinguish one 
contact from another.
In this example, coil symbols look like a set of 
parentheses instead of a circle as shown on most 
ladder diagrams. Each line ends with a coil and 
each coil has a number. When a contact symbol 
has the same number as a coil, it means that the 
contact is controlled by that coil. The schematic in 
Figure 58–6 shows a coil numbered 257 and two 
contacts numbered 257. When coil 257 is ener-
gized, the programmable logic controller interprets 
both contacts 257 to be closed.
A characteristic of interpreting a diagram when 
viewing it on the screen of most loading terminals is 
that when a current path exists through a contact or 
if a coil is energized they will be highlighted on the 
display. In the example shown in Figure 58–6, coil 
257, both 257 contacts, contact 16, and  contact 
 Figure 58–2
Plug connections located on the CPU. (Courtesy of  Siemens Energy 
and Automation, Inc.).

UNIT 58  Programmable Logic Controllers   535
 Figure 58–3
Small programmable controller and handheld programming unit. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 58–4
Programming terminal. (Courtesy of Allen-Bradley, a Rockwell 
International Company). 
 Figure 58–5
A notebook computer is often used as the programming 
terminal for a PLC. (Courtesy of Dell Computers). 

536   SECTION 9  Solid-State Controls
18 are drawn with dark heavy lines, illustrating 
that they are highlighted or illuminated on the 
display. Highlighting a contact does not means that 
it has changed from its original state. It means that 
there is a complete circuit through that contact. 
Contact 16 is highlighted, indicating that coil 16 has 
energized and contact 16 is closed and providing a 
complete circuit. Contact 18, however, is shown as 
normally closed. Because it is highlighted, coil 18 
has not been energized because a current path still 
exists through contact 18. Coil 257 is shown high-
lighted, indicating that it is energized. Because coil 
257 is energized, both 257 contacts are now closed, 
providing a current path through them.
When the loading terminal is used to load a pro-
gram into the PLC, contact and coil symbols on the 
keyboard are used, Figure 58–7. Other keys permit 
specifi c types of relays, such as timers, counters, or 
retentive relays to be programmed into the logic of 
the circuit. Some keys permit parallel paths, gener-
ally referred to as down rungs, to be started and 
ended. The method employed to program a PLC is 
specifi c to the make and model of the controller. It is 
generally necessary to consult the manufacturer’s 
literature if you are not familiar with the specifi c 
programmable logic controller.
The I/O Rack
The I/O rack is used to connect the CPU to the 
outside world. It contains input modules that carry 
information from control sensor devices to the CPU 
and output modules that carry instructions from 
the CPU to output devices in the fi eld. I/O racks 
are shown in Figures 58–8A and 58–8B. Input 
and output modules contain more than one input 
or output. Any number from 4 to 32 is common, 
depending on the manufacturer and model of PLC. 
The modules shown in Figure 58–8A can each 
handle 16 connections. This means that each input 
module can handle 16 different input devices such 
as pushbutton, limit switches, proximity switches, 
fl oat switches, and so on. The output modules 
can each handle 16 external devices such as pilot 
lights, solenoid coils, or relay coils. The operating 
voltage can be either alternating or direct cur-
rent, depending on the manufacturer and model of 
controller, and is generally either 120 or 24 volts. 
16
18
257
257
19
258
257
301
258
 Figure 58–6 
Analyzing circuit operation with a terminal. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 58  Programmable Logic Controllers   537
The I/O rack shown in Figure 58–8A can handle 
10 modules. Because each module can handle 
16 input or output devices, the I/O rack is capable of 
handling 160 input and output devices. Many 
programmable logic controllers are capable of 
handling multiple I/O racks.
I/O CAPACITY
One factor that determines the size and cost of a 
programmable logic controller is its I/O capacity. 
Many small units may be intended to handle as few 
as 16 input and output devices. Large PLCs can gen-
erally handle several hundred. The number of input 
and output devices the controller must handle also 
affects the processor speed and amount of memory 
the CPU must have. A central processing unit with 
I/O racks is shown in Figure 58–9.
THE INPUT MODULE
The central processing unit of a programmable 
logic controller is extremely sensitive to voltage 
spikes and electrical noise. For this reason, the 
OPEN
CONTACT
CLOSED
CONTACT
COIL
DOWN
RUNG
CLOSE
RUNG
 Figure 58–7
Symbols are used to program the PLC. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 Figure 58–8A
I/O rack with input and output modules. (Courtesy of 
Schneider Automation).
 Figure 58–8B
I/O rack with input and output modules. (Courtesy of Allen-
Bradley Co., Systems Division). 
 Figure 58–9
Central processor with I/O racks. (Courtesy of General Electric).

538   SECTION 9  Solid-State Controls
input I/O uses opto-isolation to electrically separate 
the incoming signal from the CPU. Figure 58–10 
shows a typical circuit used for the input. A metal-
oxide-varistor (MOV) is connected across the AC 
input to help eliminate any voltage spikes that may 
occur on the line. The MOV is a voltage-sensitive 
resistor. As long as the voltage across its terminals 
remains below a certain level, it exhibits a very high 
resistance. If the voltage should become too high, 
the resistance almost instantly changes to a very 
low value. A bridge rectifi er changes the AC volt-
age into DC. A resistor is used to limit current to a 
light-emitting diode. When power is applied to the 
circuit, the LED turns on. The light is detected by a 
phototransistor that signals the CPU that there is a 
voltage present at the input terminal.
When the module has more than one input, the 
bridge rectifi ers are connected together on one side 
to form a common terminal. On the other side, the 
rectifi ers are labeled 1, 2, 3, and 4. Figure 58–11 
shows four bridge rectifi ers connected together to 
form a common terminal. Figure 58–12 shows a 
limit switch connected to input 1, a temperature 
switch connected to input 2, a fl oat switch con-
nected to input 3, and a normally open pushbutton 
connected to input 4. Notice that the pilot devices 
complete a circuit to the bridge rectifi ers. If any 
switch closes, 120 volts AC will be connected to a 
bridge rectifi er, causing the corresponding light-
emitting diode to turn on and signal the CPU that 
the input has voltage applied to it. When voltage is 
applied to an input, the CPU considers that input to 
be at a high level.
THE OUTPUT MODULE
The output module is used to connect the central 
processing unit to the load. Output modules provide 
line isolation between the CPU and the external 
circuit. Isolation is generally provided in one of two 
ways. The most popular is with optical isolation 
very similar to that used for the input modules. In 
this case, the CPU controls a light-emitting diode. 
The LED is used to signal a solid-state device to con-
nect the load to the line. If the load is operated by 
direct current, a power phototransistor is used to 
connect the load to the line, Figure 58–13. If the 
load is an alternating current device, a triac is used 
to connect the load to the line, Figure 58–14. Notice 
that the central processing unit is separated from the 
external circuit by a light beam. No voltage spikes or 
electrical noise can be transmitted to the CPU.
The second method of controlling the output is 
with small relays, Figure 58–15. The CPU controls 
the relay coil. The contacts connect the load to the 
line. The advantage of this type of output module is 
that it is not sensitive to whether the voltage is AC 
or DC and can control 120- or 24-volt circuits. The 
disadvantage is that it does contain moving parts 
that can wear. In this instance, the CPU is isolated 
AC INPUT
MOV
CURRENT-
LIMITING
RESISTOR
LED
TO CPU
PHOTOTRANSISTOR
 Figure 58–10
Input circuit. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 58  Programmable Logic Controllers   539
from the external circuit by a magnetic fi eld instead 
of a light beam.
If the module contains more than one output, one 
terminal of each output device is connected together 
to form a common terminal similar to a module with 
multiple inputs, Figure 58–16. Notice that one side 
of each triac has been connected together to form a 
common point. The other side of each triac is labeled 
1, 2, 3, or 4. If power transistors were used as output 
devices, the collectors or emitters of each transistor 
would be connected to form a common terminal. 
Figure 58–14 shows a relay coil connected to the 
output of a triac. Notice that the triac is used as a 
switch to connect the load to the line. The power 
to operate the load must be provided by an external 
source. Output modules do not provide power to operate 
external loads.
The amount of current an output can control 
is limited. The current rating of most outputs can 
range from .5 to about 3 amperes, depending on 
the manufacturer and type of output being used. 
Outputs are intended to control loads that draw a 
small amount of current such as solenoid coils, pilot 
lights, and relay coils. Some outputs can control 
motor starter coils directly and others require an 
interposing relay. Interposing relays are employed 
when the current draw of the load is above the cur-
rent rating of the output.
MOV
MOV
MOV
MOV
1
2
3
4
C
 Figure 58–11
Four-input module. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

540   SECTION 9  Solid-State Controls
HOT
NEUTRAL
1
2
3
4
COMMON
 Figure 58–12
Pilot devices connected to input modules. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 58  Programmable Logic Controllers   541
RELAY COIL
+
_
FROM CPU
POWER PHOTOTRANSISTOR
LED
 Figure 58–13
A power phototransistor connects a DC load to the line. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
HOT
NEUTRAL
FROM CPU
PHOTOTRIAC
LED
RELAY COIL
 Figure 58–14
A triac connects an AC load to the line. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

542   SECTION 9  Solid-State Controls
FROM CPU
LOAD
SOURCE VOLTAGE
 Figure 58–15
A relay connects the load to the line. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
HOT
FROM CPU
FROM CPU
FROM CPU
FROM CPU
1
2
3
4
 Figure 58–16
Multiple-output module. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

UNIT 58  Programmable Logic Controllers   543
INTERNAL RELAYS
The actual logic of the control circuit is performed 
by internal relays. An internal relay is an imagi-
nary device that exists only in the logic of the com-
puter. It can have any number of contacts from 
one to several hundred, and the contacts can be 
programmed normally open or normally closed. 
Internal relays are programmed into the logic of the 
PLC by assigning them a certain number. Manu-
facturers provide a chart that lists which numbers 
can be used to program inputs and outputs, internal 
relay coils, timers, counters, and so on. When a coil 
is entered at the end of a line of logic and is given 
a number that corresponds to an internal relay, it 
will act like a physical relay. Any contacts given 
the same number as that relay will be controlled by 
that relay.
TIMERS AND COUNTERS
Timers and counters are internal relays also. There 
is no physical timer or counter in the PLC. They 
are programmed into the logic in the same manner 
as any other internal relay, by assigning them a 
number that corresponds to a timer or counter. The 
difference is that the time delay or number of counts 
must be programmed when they are inserted into 
the program. The number of counts for a counter are 
entered using numbers on the keys on the load termi-
nal. Timers are generally programmed in 0.1-second 
intervals. Some manufacturers provide a decimal key 
and others do not. If a decimal key is not provided, 
the time delay is entered as 0.1-second intervals. 
If a delay of 10 seconds is desired, for example, the 
number 100 would be entered. One hundred tenths 
of a second equals 10 seconds.
OFF-DELAY CIRCUIT
Some programmable logic controllers permit a timer 
to be programmed as on or off delay, but others 
permit only on-delay timers to be programmed. 
When a PLC permits only on-delay timers to be 
programmed, a simple circuit can be used to per-
mit an on-delay timer to perform the function of 
an off-delay timer, Figure 58–17. To understand 
the action of the circuit, recall the operation of an 
off-delay timer. When the timer coil is energized 
the timed contacts change position immediately. 
When the coil is deenergized the contacts remain in 
their energized state for some period of time before 
returning to their normal state. In the circuit shown 
in Figure 58–17 it is assumed that contact 400 con-
trols the action of the timer. Coil 400 is an internal 
relay coil located somewhere in the circuit. Coil 12 
is an output and controls some external device. Coil 
TO-1 is an on-delay timer set for 100 tenths of a sec-
ond. When coil 400 is energized, both 400 contacts 
change position. The normally open 400 contact 
closes and provides a current path to coil 12. The 
normally closed 400 contact opens and prevents a 
circuit from being completed to coil TO-1 when coil 
12 energizes. Note that coil 12 turned on imme-
diately when contact 400 closed. When coil 400 
is deenergized, both 400 contacts return to their 
normal position. A current path is maintained to 
coil 12 by the now closed 12 contact in parallel 
400
12
TO-1
12
400
TO-1
12
00100
 Figure 58–17
Off-delay timer circuit. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

544   SECTION 9  Solid-State Controls
with the normally open 400 contact. When the 
normally closed 400 contact returns to its normal 
position a current path is established to coil TO-1 
through the now closed 12 contact. This starts the 
time sequence of timer TO-1. After a delay of 10 sec-
onds, the normally closed TO-1 contact opens and 
deenergizes coil 12, returning the two 12 contacts 
to their normal position. The circuit is now back in 
the state shown in Figure 58–16. Note the action 
of the circuit. When coil 400 was energized, output 
coil 12 turned on immediately. When coil 400 was 
deenergized, output 12 remained on for 10 seconds 
before turning off.
The number of internal relays and timers con-
tained in a programmable logic controller is deter-
mined by the memory capacity of the computer. As 
a general rule, PLCs that have a large I/O capacity 
will have a large amount of memory. The use of pro-
grammable logic controllers has steadily increased 
since their invention in the late 1960s. A PLC can 
replace hundreds of relays and occupy only a frac-
tion of the space. The circuit logic can be changed 
easily and quickly without requiring extensive hand 
rewiring. They have no moving parts or contacts to 
wear out, and their down time is less than that of 
an equivalent relay circuit. When replacement is 
necessary, they can be reprogrammed from a media 
storage device.
The programming methods presented in this text 
are general because it is impossible to include exam-
ples of each specifi c manufacturer. The concepts 
presented in this chapter, however, are common 
to all programmable controllers. A programmable 
logic controller used to control a DC drive is shown 
in Figure 58–18.
 Figure 58–18
DC drive unit controlled by a programmable logic 
controller. (Courtesy of Reliance Electric).
SUMMARY
 Programmable logic controllers were fi rst used by the automotive industry in the 
early 1960s.
 The major parts of a programmable logic controller are the power supply, central process-
ing unit, programming terminal, and I/O rack.
 The power supply changes AC into DC, and then fi lters and regulates it to the proper voltage.
 The central processing unit performs all the logic functions loaded into memory.
 The programming terminal is used to load or amend a program in a programmable 
logic controller.
 Laptop computers are often employed as programming terminals.
 The I/O rack provides inputs and outputs for the programmable logic controller.
 Most programmable logic controllers use opto-isolation in the input and output modules.
 Input modules provide information to the central processing unit from the outside circuit.

UNIT 58  Programmable Logic Controllers   545
 Output modules provide information from the central processing unit to the outside circuit.
 Internal relays are relays that exist only in the logic of the computer.
 Some internal relays can be employed as counters and timers.
KEY TERMS
central processing unit
 (CPU)
illuminated
internal relay
I/O capacity
I/O rack
loading terminal
power supply
programmable logic 
 controller (PLC)
programming terminal
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. What industry fi rst started using programmable logic controllers?
 
2. Name two differences between PLCs and common home or business computers.
 
3. Name the four basic sections of a programmable logic controller.
 
4. In what section of the PLC is the actual logic performed?
 
5. What device is used to program a PLC?
 
6. What device separates the central processing unit from the outside world?
 
7. What is opto-isolation?
 
8. If an output I/O controls a DC voltage, what solid-state device is used to connect the 
load to the line?
 
9. If an output I/O controls an AC voltage, what solid-state device is used to connect the 
load to the line?
 10. What is an internal relay?
 11. What is the purpose of the key switch located on the front of the CPU in many pro-
grammable logic controllers?
 12. What is a software switch?

546
In this unit a relay schematic will be converted 
into a diagram used to program a programmable 
logic controller. The process to be controlled is 
shown in Figure 59–1. A tank is used to mix two 
liquids. The control circuit operates as follows:
 1. When the start button is pressed, solenoids 
A and B energize. This permits the two liquids 
to begin fi lling the tank.
 2. When the tank is fi lled, the fl oat switch trips. 
This deenergizes solenoids A and B and starts 
the motor used to mix the liquids together.
 3. The motor is permitted to run for one 
minute. After one minute has elapsed, the 
motor turns off and solenoid C energizes to 
drain the tank.
UNIT 59
Programming 
a PLC
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Convert a relay schematic to a 
schematic used for programming 
a PLC
 Enter a program into a programmable 
logic controller

UNIT 59  Programming a PLC   547
 4. When the tank is empty, the fl oat switch 
deenergizes solenoid C.
 5. A stop button can be used to stop the process 
at any point.
 6. If the motor becomes overloaded, the action 
of the entire circuit will stop.
 7. Once the circuit has been energized it will 
continue to operate until it is manually 
stopped.
CIRCUIT OPERATION
A relay schematic that will perform the logic of this 
circuit is shown in Figure 59–2. The logic of this 
circuit is as follows:
 1. When the start button is pushed, relay coil 
CR is energized. This causes all CR contacts to 
close. Contact CR-1 is a holding contact used 
to maintain the circuit to coil CR when the 
start button is released.
 2. When contact CR-2 closes, a circuit is com-
pleted to solenoid coils A and B. This permits 
the two liquids that are to be mixed together 
to begin fi lling the tank.
 3. As the tank fi lls, the fl oat rises until the fl oat 
switch is tripped. This causes the normally 
closed fl oat switch contact to open and the 
normally open contact to close.
 4. When the normally closed fl oat switch opens, 
solenoid coils A and B deenergize and stop the 
fl ow of the two liquids into the tank.
 5. When the normally open contact closes, a 
circuit is completed to the coil of a motor 
starter and the coil of an on-delay timer. The 
motor is used to mix the two liquids together.
 6. At the end of the one minute time period, 
all of the TR contacts change position. The 
normally closed TR-2 contact connected 
in series with the motor starter coil opens 
and stops the operation of the motor. The 
normally open TR-3 contact closes and 
energizes solenoid coil C which permits liquid 
to begin draining from the tank. The normally 
closed TR-1 contact is used to assure that 
valves A and B cannot be reenergized until 
solenoid C deenergizes.
 7. As liquid drains from the tank, the fl oat 
drops. When the fl oat drops far enough, the 
fl oat switch trips and its contacts return to 
their normal positions. When the normally 
open fl oat switch contact reopens and 
de-energizes coil TR, all TR contacts return to 
their normal positions.
 8. When the normally open TR-3 contact 
reopens, solenoid C deenergizes and closes the 
drain valve. Contact TR-2 recloses, but the 
motor cannot restart because of the normally 
open fl oat switch contact. When contact 
TR-1 recloses, a circuit is completed to sole-
noids A and B. This permits the tank to begin 
refi lling, and the process starts over again.
 9. If the stop button or overload contact opens, 
coil CR deenergizes and all CR contacts open. 
This deenergizes the entire circuit.
MOTOR
FS
A
B
C
 Figure 59–1
Tank used to mix two liquids. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

548   SECTION 9  Solid-State Controls
DEVELOPING A PROGRAM
This circuit will now be developed into a program 
that can be loaded into the programmable control-
ler. Figure 59–3 shows a program being developed 
on a computer. Assume that the controller has an 
I/O capacity of 32, that I/O terminals 1 through 16 
are used as inputs, and that terminals 17 through 
32 are used as outputs.
Before a program can be developed for input into 
a programmable logic controller, it is necessary to 
assign which devices connect to the input and 
output terminals. This circuit contains four input 
devices and four output devices. It is also assumed 
that the motor starter for this circuit contains an 
overload relay that contains two contacts instead 
of one. One contact is normally closed and will be 
connected in series with the coil of the motor starter. 
The other contact is normally open and is used to 
supply an input to a programmable logic control-
ler. If the motor should become overloaded, the 
normally closed contacts will open and disconnect 
the motor from the line. The normally open contacts 
will close and provide a signal to the programmable 
logic controller that the motor has tripped on over-
load. The input devices are as follows:
 1. Normally closed stop pushbutton.
 2. Normally open start pushbutton.
 3. Normally open overload contact.
CR
TR
M
OL
A
N
H
CR-1
CR-2
FS
CR-3
CR-4
C
B
TR-1
TR-3
TR-2
 Figure 59–2
Relay schematic. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 59  Programming a PLC   549
 4. A fl oat switch that contains both a normally 
open and normally closed contact.
The four output devices are:
 1. Solenoid valve A.
 2. Solenoid valve B.
 3. Motor starter coil M.
 4. Solenoid valve C.
The connection of devices to the inputs and outputs 
is shown in Figure 59–4. The normally closed stop 
button is connected to input 1, the normally open 
start button is connected to input 2, the normally 
open overload contact is connected to input 3, and 
the fl oat switch is connected to input 4.
The outputs for this PLC are 17 through 32. Out-
put 17 is connected to solenoid A, output 18 is con-
nected to solenoid B, output 19 is connected to the 
coil of the motor starter, and output 20 is connected 
to solenoid C. Note that the outputs do not supply the 
power to operate the output devices. The outputs 
simply complete a circuit. One side of each output 
device is connected to the grounded or neutral side 
of a 120-VAC power line. The ungrounded or hot 
conductor is connected to the common terminal of 
 Figure 59–3
A program being developed on a programming 
 terminal. (Courtesy of GE Manuc)
1
2
3
4
C
5
6
7
8
C
9
10
11
12
C
13
14
15
16
C
17
18
19
20
C
21
22
23
24
C
25
26
27
28
C
29
30
31
32
C
INPUT
OUTPUT
INPUT
OUTPUT
INPUT
OUTPUT
INPUT
OUTPUT
M
OL
A
B
C
N
H
H
N
 Figure 59–4
Component connection 
to I/O rack. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

550   SECTION 9  Solid-State Controls
the four outputs. A good way to understand this is to 
imagine a set of contacts controlled by each output 
as shown in Figure 59–5. When programming the 
PLC, if a coil is given the same number as one of the 
outputs it will cause that contact to close and con-
nect the load to the line.
Unfortunately, programmable logic controllers 
are not all programmed the same way. Almost every 
manufacturer employs a different set of coil num-
bers to perform different functions. It is necessary to 
consult the manual before programming a PLC with 
which you are not familiar. In order to program 
the PLC in this example, refer to the information 
in Figure 59–6. This chart indicates that numbers 
1 through 16 are inputs. Any contact assigned a 
number between 1 and 16 will be examined each 
time the programmable logic controller scans the 
program. If an input has a low (0 volt) state, the con-
tact assigned that number will remain in the state it 
was programmed. If the input has a high (120-volt) 
state the program will interpret that contact as hav-
ing changed position. If it was programmed as open 
the PLC will now consider it as closed.
Outputs are 17 through 32. Outputs are treated 
as coils by the PLC. If a coil is given the same num-
ber as an output, that output will turn on (close 
17
18
19
20
C
21
22
23
24
C
25
26
27
28
C
29
30
31
32
C
M
A
B
C
H
N
 Figure 59–5
Output modules complete a circuit to connect 
the load to the line. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 59  Programming a PLC   551
the contact) when the coil is energized. Coils that 
control outputs can be assigned internal contacts as 
well. Internal contacts are contacts that exist in the 
logic of the program only. They do not physically 
exist. Because they do not physically exist, a coil 
can be assigned as many internal contacts as desired 
and they can be normally open or normally closed.
The chart in Figure 59–6 also indicates that 
internal relays number from 33 to 103. Internal 
relays are like internal contacts. They do not physi-
cally exist. They exist as part of the program only. 
They are programmed into the circuit logic by 
inserting a coil symbol in the program and assign-
ing it a number between 33 and 103.
Timers and counters are assigned coil numbers 
200 through 264, and retentive relays are num-
bered 104 through 134.
CONVERTING THE PROGRAM
Developing a program for a programmable logic 
controller is a little different from designing a circuit 
with relay logic. There are several rules that must 
be followed with almost all programmable logic 
controllers.
 1. Each line of logic must end with a coil. Some 
manufacturers permit coils to be connected 
in parallel and some do not.
 2. Generally, coils cannot be connected in series.
 3. The program will scan in the order that it 
is entered.
 4. Generally, coils cannot be assigned the 
same number. (Some programmable logic 
controllers require reset coils to reset coun-
ters and timers. These reset coils can be 
assigned the same number as the counter or 
timer they reset.)
The fi rst two lines of logic for the circuit shown 
in Figure 59–2 can be seen in Figure 59–7. Notice 
that contact symbols are used to represent inputs 
instead of logic symbols such as pushbuttons, fl oat 
switches, and so on. The programmable logic con-
troller recognizes all inputs as open or closed con-
tacts. It does not know what device is connected to 
which input. This is the reason that you must fi rst 
determine which device connects to which input 
before a program can be developed. Also notice 
that input 1 is shown as a normally open contact. 
Referring to Figure 59–4, it can be seen that input 1 
is connected to a normally closed pushbutton. The 
input is programmed as normally open because the 
normally closed pushbutton will supply a high volt-
age to input 1 in normal operation. Because input 
1 is in a high state, the PLC will change the state of 
the open contact and consider it closed. When the 
stop pushbutton is pressed, the input voltage will 
change to low and the PLC will change the contact 
back to its original open state and cause coil 33 
to deenergize.
Referring to the schematic in Figure 59–2, a con-
trol relay is used as part of the circuit logic. Because 
the control relay does not directly cause any output 
device to turn on or off, an internal relay will be used. 
The chart in Figure 59–6 indicates that internal 
Inputs
1 – 16
Outputs
17 – 32
Internal Relays
33 – 103
Timers and Counters
200 – 264
Retentative Relays
104 – 134
 Figure 59–6
Numbers that correspond to speciﬁ c PLC functions. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
1
2
3
33
33
 Figure 59–7
Lines 1 and 2 of the program. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

552   SECTION 9  Solid-State Controls
relays number between 33 and 103. Coil number 
33 is an internal relay and does not physically exist. 
Any number of contacts can be assigned to this 
relay, and they can be open or closed. The number 
33 contact connected in parallel with input 2 is the 
holding contact labeled CR-1 in Figure 59–2.
The next two lines of logic are shown in Figure 59–8. 
The third line of logic in the schematic in Figure 59–2 
contains a normally open CR-2 contact, a normally 
closed fl oat switch contact, a normally closed on-delay 
timed contact, and solenoid coil A. The fourth line of 
logic contains solenoid coil B connected in parallel 
with solenoid coil A. Line three in Figure 59–8 uses 
a normally open contact assigned the number 33 for 
contact CR-2. A normally closed contact symbol is 
assigned the number 4. Because the fl oat switch is 
connected to input number 4, it will control the action 
of this contact. As long as input 4 remains in a low 
state, the contact will remain closed. If the fl oat switch 
should close, input 4 will become high and the number 
4 contact will open.
The next contact is timed contact TR-1. The 
chart in Figure 59–6 indicates that timers and 
counters are assigned numbers 200 through 264. 
In this circuit, timer TR will be assigned number 
200. Line three ends with coil number 17. When 
coil 17 becomes energized, it will turn on output 17 
and connect solenoid coil A to the line.
The schematic in Figure 59–2 shows that sole-
noid coil B is connected in parallel with solenoid 
coil A. Most programmable logic controllers do not 
permit coils to be connected in parallel. Each line of 
logic must end with its own coil. Because solenoid 
coil B is connected in parallel with A, they both 
operate at the same time. This logic can be accom-
plished by assigning an internal contact the same 
number as the coil controlling output 17. Notice 
in Figure 59–8 that when coil 17 energizes it will 
cause contact 17 to close and energize output 18 at 
the same time.
In Figure 59–9, lines 5 and 6 of the schematic 
are added to the program. A normally open contact 
assigned number 33 is used as for contact CR-3. A 
normally open contact assigned the number 4 is 
controlled by the fl oat switch, and a second nor-
mally closed timed contact controlled by timer 200 
is programmed in line 5. The output coil is assigned 
the number 19. When this coil energizes it turns 
on output 19 and connects motor starter coil M to 
the line.
Line 6 contains timer coil TR. Notice in Figure 59–2 
that coil TR is connected in parallel with contact 
TR-2 and coil M. As was the case with solenoid coils 
A and B, coil TR cannot be connected in parallel with 
coil M. According to the schematic in Figure 59–2, 
coil TR is actually controlled by contacts CR-3 and 
the normally open fl oat switch. This logic can be 
accomplished as shown in Figure 59–9 by connect-
ing coil T200 in series with contacts assigned the 
numbers 33 and 4. Float switches do not normally 
contain this many contacts, but because the physical 
fl oat switch is supplying a high or low voltage to 
input 4, any number of contacts assigned the number 
4 can be used.
The last line of the program is shown in 
Figure 59–10. A normally open contact assigned 
1
2
3
33
33
33
4
T200
17
18
17
 Figure 59–8
Lines 3 and 4 of the circuit are 
added. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 59  Programming a PLC   553
1
2
3
33
33
33
4
T200
17
18
17
33
4
T200
19
33
4
T200
60 sec.
 Figure 59–9
Lines 5 and 6 are added to the 
program. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
1
2
3
33
33
33
4
T200
17
18
17
33
4
T200
19
33
4
T200
60 sec.
33
T200
20
 Figure 59–10
Line 7 of the program. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

554   SECTION 9  Solid-State Controls
the number 33 is used for contact CR-4 and a nor-
mally open contact controlled by timer T200 is used 
for the normally open timed contact labeled TR-3. 
Coil 20 controls the operation of solenoid coil C.
The circuit shown in Figure 59–2 has now been 
converted to a program that can be loaded into 
a programmable logic controller. The process is 
relatively simple if the rules concerning PLCs are 
followed.
ENTERING A PROGRAM
The manner in which a program is entered into the 
memory of the PLC is specifi c to the manufacturer 
and type of programming terminal used. Some pro-
gramming terminals employ keys that contain con-
tact, coil, and rung symbols to basically draw the 
program as it is entered. Small programming termi-
nals may require that the program be entered in a 
language called Boolean. Boolean uses statements 
such as and, or, not, and out to enter programs. 
Contacts connected in series, for example, would 
be joined by and statements, and contacts that are 
connected in parallel with each other would be pro-
grammed with or statements. In order to program a 
contact normally closed instead of normally open, 
the not statement is used. Different PLCs also require 
the use of different numbers to identify particular 
types of coils. One manufacturer may use any num-
ber between 600 and 699 to identify coils that are 
used as timer and counters. Another manufacturer 
may use any number between 900 and 999 to iden-
tify coils that can be used as timers and counters. 
When programming a PLC, it is always necessary 
to fi rst become familiar with the programming 
requirements of the model and manufacturer of the 
programmable logic controller being programmed.
PROGRAMMING 
CONSIDERATIONS
When developing a program for a programmable 
logic controller, there are certain characteristics of 
a PLC that should be considered. One of these is the 
manner in which a programmable logic controller 
performs its functions. Programmable logic control-
lers operate by scanning the program that has been 
entered into memory. This process is very similar 
to reading a book. It scans from top to bottom and 
from left to right. The computer scans the program 
one line at a time until it reaches the end of the pro-
gram. It then resets any output conditions that have 
changed since the previous scan. The next step is to 
check all inputs to determine if they are high (power 
applied to that input point) or low (no power applied 
to that input point). This information is available for 
the next scan. The next step is to update the display 
of the programming terminal if one is connected. 
The last step is to reset the “watchdog” timer. 
Most PLCs contain a timer that runs continually 
when the PLC is in the RUN mode. The function of 
this timer is to prevent the computer from becoming 
hung in some type of loop. If the timer is not reset at 
the end of each scan, the watchdog timer will reach 
zero and all outputs will be turned off. Although this 
process sounds long, it actually takes place in a few 
milliseconds. Depending on the program length, it 
may be scanned several hundred times each second. 
The watchdog timer duration is generally set for 
about twice the amount of time necessary to com-
plete one scan.
Scanning can eliminate some of the problems 
with contact races that occur with relay logic. 
The circuit shown in Figure 59–11 contains two 
control relay coils. A normally closed contact, con-
trolled by the opposite relay, is connected in series 
with each coil. When the switch is closed, which 
relay will turn on and which will be locked out of the 
circuit? This called a contact race. The relay that is 
turned on depends on which one managed to open 
its normally closed contact fi rst and break the circuit 
to the other coil. There is no way to really know 
which relay will turn on and which will remain off. 
There is not even a guarantee that the same relay 
will turn on each time the switch is closed.
Programmable logic controllers eliminate the 
problem of contact races. Because the PLC scans the 
program in a manner similar to reading a book, if 
it is imperative that a certain relay turn on before 
another one, simply program the one that must 
turn on fi rst ahead of the other one. A similar circuit 
is shown in Figure 59–12. When contact 1 closes, 
coil 100 will always be the internal relay that turns 
on because it is scanned before coil 101.

UNIT 59  Programming a PLC   555
SUMMARY
 As a general rule, the schematic diagrams used for relay logic must be changed before they 
can be loaded into a programmable logic controller.
 Each line of logic must end with a coil.
 All inputs are assumed to be normally open.
 When a normally closed component is connected to the input of a programmable logic 
controller, the logic of the program must be reversed for that input.
 Before a program can be developed, the sensor devices such as pushbuttons, limit switches, 
and fl oat switches must be assigned to an input. Outputs such as solenoid coils, pilot lights, 
and relay coils must be assigned to an output.
 Outputs do not supply power to operate devices.
CR2
CR1
CR1
CR2
120 VAC
 Figure 59–11
A contact race can exist in relay 
control circuits. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
1
101
1
100
100
101
 Figure 59–12
Scanning eliminates contact 
races in PLC logic. (Source: Delmar/
Cengage Learning)

556   SECTION 9  Solid-State Controls
KEY TERMS
Boolean
contact race
input
output
relay schematic
watchdog timer
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. Why are NEMA symbols such as pushbuttons, fl oat switches, and limit switches not 
used in programmable logic controller schematics?
 
2. How are such components as coils and contacts identifi ed and distinguished from 
 others in a PLC schematic?
 
3. Why are normally closed components such as stop pushbuttons programmed 
 normally open instead of normally closed when entering a program into the memory 
of a PLC?
 
4. What is an internal relay?
 
5. Why is the output of a PLC used to energize the coil of a motor starter instead of ener-
gizing the motor directly?
 
6. List four basic rules for developing a program for a PLC.
 
7. A programmable logic controller requires that times be programmed in 0.1-second 
intervals. What number should be entered to produce a time delay of 3 minutes?
 
8. When programming in Boolean, what statement should be used to connect compo-
nents in series?
 
9. When programming in Boolean, what statement should be used to connect compo-
nents in parallel?
 10. In a control circuit, it is imperative that a coil energize before another one. How can 
this be done when entering a program into the memory of the PLC?
 11. What is the function of a watchdog timer?

557
Many of the programmable controllers found in 
industry are designed to accept analog as well as 
digital inputs. Analog means continuously varying. 
These inputs are designed to sense voltage, current, 
speed, pressure, proximity, temperature, and so on. 
When an analog input is used, such as a thermo-
couple for measuring temperature, a special module 
that mounts on the I/O rack is used. These types of 
sensors are often used with set point detectors that 
can be used to trigger alarms and turn on or off cer-
tain processes. For example, the voltage produced 
by a thermocouple will increase with a change of 
temperature. Assume that you want to sound an 
alarm if the temperature of an object reaches a cer-
tain level. The detector is preset with a particular 
voltage. As the temperature of the thermocouple 
UNIT 60
Analog 
Sensing for 
Programmable 
Controllers
OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit the student should 
be able to:
 Describe the differences between 
analog and digital inputs
 Discuss precautions that should be 
taken when using analog inputs
 Describe the operation of a differential 
ampliﬁ er

558   SECTION 9  Solid-State Controls
increases, its output voltage increases also. When 
the voltage of the thermocouple becomes greater 
than the preset voltage, an alarm sounds.
INSTALLATION
Most analog sensors can produce only very weak 
signals. Zero to 10 volts or 4 to 20 milliamps is com-
mon. In an industrial environment where intense 
magnetic fi elds and large voltage spikes abound, it 
is easy to lose the input signal amid the electrical 
noise. For this reason, special precautions should 
be taken when installing the signal wiring between 
the sensor and input module. These precautions are 
particularly important when using analog inputs, 
but they should be followed when using digital 
inputs also.
KEEP WIRE RUNS SHORT
Try to keep wire runs as short as possible. The lon-
ger a wire run is, the more surface area of wire there 
is to pick up stray electrical noise.
PLAN THE ROUTE OF 
THE SIGNAL CABLE
Before starting, plan how the signal cable should be 
installed. Never run signal wire in the same conduit 
with power wiring. Try to run signal wiring as far 
away from power wiring as possible. When it is 
necessary to cross power wiring, install the signal 
cable so that it crosses at a right angle as shown in 
Figure 60–1.
USE SHIELDED CABLE
Shielded cable is generally used for the installa-
tion of signal wiring. One of the most common types, 
Figure 60–2, uses twisted wires with a Mylar foil 
shield. The ground wire must be grounded if the 
shielding is to operate properly. This type of shielded 
cable can provide a noise reduction ratio of 
about 30,000:1.
Another type of signal cable uses a twisted pair 
of signal wires surrounded by a braided shield. This 
type of cable provides a noise reduction of about 
300:1.
Common coaxial cable should be avoided. This 
cable consists of a single conductor surrounded by 
a braided shield. This type of cable offers very poor 
noise reduction.
GROUNDING
Ground is generally thought of as being electri-
cally neutral or zero at all points. This may not be 
the case in practical application, however. It is not 
uncommon to fi nd different pieces of equipment 
that have ground levels that are several volts apart, 
Figure 60–3.
One method that is sometimes used to overcome 
this problem is to use large cable to tie the two pieces 
of equipment together. This forces them to exist 
at the same potential. This method is sometimes 
referred to as the brute force method.
 Figure 60–1
Signal cable crosses power line at right angle. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
INSULATION
SHIELD
GROUND  WIRE
CONDUCTORS
 Figure 60–2
Shielded cable. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)

UNIT 60  Analog Sensing for Programmable Controllers   559
module, but induced noise is at a level of 5 volts. In 
this case the noise level is 100 times greater than the 
signal level. The induced noise level, however, is the 
same for both of the input conductors. The differen-
tial amplifi er, therefore, ignores the 5-volt noise and 
amplifi es only the voltage difference which is the 
50 millivolts.
Where the brute force method is not practical, 
the shield of the signal cable is grounded at only one 
end. The preferred method is generally to ground 
the shield at the sensor.
THE DIFFERENTIAL AMPLIFIER
An electronic device that is often used to help over-
come the problem of induced noise is the differen-
tial amplifi er shown in Figure 60–4. This device 
detects the voltage difference between the pair of 
signal wires and amplifi es this difference. Because 
the induced noise level should be the same in both 
conductors, the amplifi er will ignore the noise. For 
example, assume an analog sensor is producing a 
50 millivolt signal. This signal is applied to the input 
SENSOR
I/O  TRACK 
VOLTMETER
0
 Figure 60–3
All grounds are not equal. (Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
INPUT FROM  SENSOR
OUTPUT
+
–
 Figure 60–4
Differential ampliﬁ er detects difference of signal level. 
(Source: Delmar/Cengage Learning)
SUMMARY
 Analog inputs sense a range of values instead of operating in an on or off mode.
 Most analog inputs operate with a standard of 4 to 20 milliamps.
 Special precautions should be used when installing analog inputs.
 Wire runs should be kept as short as possible. This reduces the surface of the wire that is 
susceptible to electrical noise.
 Signal wiring should never be run close to power wiring.
 When a signal wire must cross power wiring, it should cross at a 90° angle.
 Signal inputs should be run with shielded cable.
 The shield of shielded cable should be grounded, generally at the sensor.
 Differential amplifi ers are sometimes used to help eliminate electrical noise induced in the 
signal cable.

560   SECTION 9  Solid-State Controls
KEY TERMS
analog input
brute force method
differential amplifi er
mylar foil shield
noise reduction ratio
shielded cable
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
1. Explain the difference between digital inputs and analog inputs.
 
2. Why should signal-wire runs be kept as short as possible?
 
3. When signal wiring must cross power wiring, how should the crossing be done?
 
4. Why is shielded wire used for signal runs?
 
5. What is the brute force method of grounding?
 
6. Explain the operation of the differential amplifi er.

GLOSSARY
561
A
AC (alternating current) Current that reverses its 
direction of fl ow at regular intervals.
AC electrolytic capacitor Can house a large amount 
of capacitance in a small case size, is designed 
for short-term use only, and used as the starting 
capacitor on single-phase motors.
across-the-line A method of motor starting that 
connects the motor directly to the supply line on 
starting or running. (Also known as full voltage 
starting.)
adjustable Describes construction of pressure 
switches used for commercial or industrial sys-
tems that allows service technicians to use the 
switch on different systems.
alternator A machine used to generate alternat-
ing current by rotating conductors through a 
 magnetic fi eld.
ambient air temperature The temperature in the 
surrounding area of a device.
ammeter A low impedance device used to measure 
current in a circuit.
amortisseur Winding named for the set of type “A” 
squirrel-cage bars in a synchronous motor rotor.
ampacity The maximum current rating of a wire 
or device.
ampere (amp) A measurement of the actual amount 
of electricity that fl ows through a circuit; defi ned 
as one coulomb per second.
ampliﬁ er A device used to increase a signal.
amplitude The highest value reached by a signal, 
voltage, or current.
analog Device that can be adjusted to different 
states since it represents continuously changing 
quantities.
analog input An input sensor designed to sense 
voltage, current, speed, pressure, proximity, tem-
perature, and other quantities in programmable 
computers that can trigger alarms or start/stop 
processes.
analog meter (voltmeter) A voltmeter that uses a 
meter movement to indicate the voltage value.
anode The positive terminal of an electrical device.
antifreeze protection Feature in some differential 
thermostats that turns the pump on and circu-
lates warm water through the collector when its 
temperature is near freezing. Avoids damage to 
the collector.
anti-short-cycling A control that prevents the com-
pressor from being restarted within a certain time 
after it has stopped.
apparent power (Volt-Amps) In an AC circuit, the 
applied voltage multiplied by the current fl ow in 
the circuit.
applied voltage The amount of voltage connected 
to a circuit or device.
arc-over Spark or illumination that occurs in a gap 
or breakage in a circuit.
armature The movable arm attracted by the mag-
netic fi eld of the iron core of a solenoid.
ASA American Standards Association.
atom The smallest part of an element that contains 
all the properties of that element.
attenuator A device that decreases the amount of 
signal voltage or current.
auger Device used for boring, forcing, or moving 
material. Presses ice and excess water out of 
fl aker-type ice maker.
automatic Self-acting; operation by its own mechan-
ical or electrical mechanism.

562   GLOSSARY
automatic reset overload Used to protect single-
phase motors. Constructed of bimetal strips that 
snap open contacts when overheated.
autotransformer Transformer that uses only one 
coil that is tapped to provide the correct voltage.
auxiliary contacts Small contacts located on relays 
and motor starters used to operate other control 
components.
auxiliary limit One of two high-limit contacts con-
nected in series with an automatic gas valve.
AWG (American Wire Gauge) Standard units of 
measure for wiring.
B
base The semiconductor region between the collec-
tor and emitter of a transistor. The base controls 
the current fl ow through the collector-emitter 
circuit.
bellows Device that draws in air through a valve 
and expels it through a tube. Used to operate 
pressure switches in most air conditioning units.
bellows-type thermostat A thermostat that uses 
a refrigerant fi lled bellows to operate a set of 
contacts.
bias A DC voltage applied to the base of a transistor 
to preset its operating point.
bidirectional Able to move in two directions.
bimetal strip A strip made by bonding two unlike 
metals together that, when heated, expand at 
different temperatures. This causes a bending or 
warping action.
bimetal type One of two basic kinds of over-
load relays. Uses bimetal strips in construction 
of unit.
bin thermostat Senses the level of ice in the ice 
storage bin.
bipolar transistors Dual-poled transistors used by 
operational amplifi ers for input.
Boolean A type of language using statements such 
as and, or, and not to program a programmable 
controller.
branch circuit That portion of a wiring system that 
extends beyond the circuit protective device such 
as a fuse or circuit breaker.
breakdown torque The maximum amount of 
torque that can be developed by a motor at rated 
voltage and frequency before an abrupt change 
in speed occurs.
bridge circuit A circuit that consists of four sections 
connected in series to form a closed loop.
bridge rectiﬁ er A device constructed with four 
diodes that converts both positive and negative 
cycles of AC voltage into DC voltage. The bridge 
rectifi er is one type of full-wave rectifi er.
brushless Generally refers to a motor that does not 
contain brushes.
brute force method When several pieces of 
equipment have unequal ground levels, the 
method of using a large cable to tie the equip-
ment together, forcing them to exist at the same 
potential.
busway An enclosed system used for power trans-
mission that is voltage and current rated.
C
cabinet thermostat One of two thermostats in a 
refrigerator using a fl ex tray ice maker that, if 
opened, interrupts the water fi ll cycle.
cadmium sulﬁ de cell (CAD cell) A solid-state 
device that changes its resistance in accordance 
with the amount of light it is exposed to.
cam A rotating or sliding piece that moves freely 
on its roller or by notches picked up by pins 
or gears.
capacitance The electrical size of a capacitor.
capacitive reactance Symbolized by XC, reactance 
caused by capacitance.
capacitor A device made with two conductive plates 
separated by an insulator or dielectric.
capacitor-start induction run motor A single-
phase induction motor that uses a capacitor con-
nected in series with the start winding to increase 
starting torque.
carbon brushes Material connected to slip rings on 
rotors to create resistance.
case Style of transistor that permits the leads to be 
quickly identifi ed; sometimes the collector of the 
transistor.

GLOSSARY   563
cathode The negative terminal of an electrical 
device.
center-tapped transformer A transformer that 
has a wire connected to the electrical midpoint 
of its winding. Generally, the secondary winding 
is tapped.
central processing unit (CPU) The brains of a pro-
grammable controller, contains the microproces-
sor chip and related integrated circuits to perform 
all the logic functions.
centrifugal force The law that states a spinning 
object will pull away from its centerpoint; the 
faster the spin, the greater the force.
centrifugal switch Used to disconnect start wind-
ings from the circuit, confi gured to move when 
the centrifugal force spins parts upward.
CFM (condenser fan motor) relay Its coil energizes 
and starts the condenser fan motor in a fl ow-
switch operated air conditioning system.
CFS (condenser ﬂ ow switch) Airfl ow switch oper-
ated by the force of air created by the condenser 
fan in an air conditioning circuit.
choke An inductor designed to present an imped-
ance to AC current, or to be used as the current 
fi lter of a DC power supply.
circuit breaker A device designed to open under an 
abnormal amount of current fl ow. The device is 
not damaged and may be used repeatedly. They 
are rated by voltage, current, and horsepower.
circular mils Measurement for the cross-sectional 
area of wire, equal to 1/1000 (0.001) of an inch.
clamp-on Type of ammeter where the jaw of the 
meter is clamped around one of the conductors 
supplying power to the load.
clock timer A time-delay device that uses an electric 
clock to measure the delay time.
code letter Provided on AC motors nameplates, 
indicates the type of bars used in the rotor.
collapse (of a magnetic fi eld) Occurs when a mag-
netic fi eld suddenly changes from its maximum 
value to a zero value.
collector A semiconductor region of a transistor 
that must be connected to the same polarity as 
the base.
combination A circuit that contains both series and 
parallel connections within the same circuit.
common denominator In fractions, the number all 
the denominators will divide into.
compact Type of household ice maker.
comparator A device or circuit that compares two 
like quantities, such as voltage levels.
compressor The component of an air conditioning 
or refrigeration system that maintains the differ-
ence in pressure between the high and low sides.
compressor relay coil Can be energized only after 
the condenser fan and evaporator fan relay coils 
have energized in an air conditioning unit.
condensing unit The component of an air condi-
tioning or refrigeration system in which heat is 
removed from the refrigerant and dissipated to 
the surrounding air or liquid.
conduction level The point at which an amount of 
voltage or current will cause a device to conduct.
conductor A device or material that permits current 
to fl ow through it easily.
consequent pole motor A multispeed AC motor 
that changes the motor speed by changing the 
number of its stator poles.
contact A conducting part of a relay that acts 
as a switch to connect or disconnect a circuit 
or component.
contact race A condition that can occur in relay 
control circuits when coils are energized at the 
same time.
contactor Similar to relays, though may contain 
large-load contacts designed to control large 
amounts of current, may also contain auxiliary 
contacts. Used to connect power to resistance 
heater banks.
contact section Section of a solder-melting type 
overload relay that is connected in series with the 
coil of the motor starter.
continuity A complete path for current fl ow.
continuous run timer A defrost timer connection 
(pigtail to terminal 1, terminal 3 to neutral) that 
permits the motor to operate on a continuous 
basis.

564   GLOSSARY
current rating The amount of current fl ow a device 
is designed to withstand.
current relay A relay that is operated by a prede-
termined amount of current fl ow. Current relays 
are often used as one type of starting relay for air 
conditioning and refrigeration equipment.
current transformer Used with an ammeter to 
 provide multiscale capability.
D
DC (direct current) Current that does not reverse its 
direction of fl ow.
DC excitation current Adjusted to change the 
power factor of the synchronous motor to nor-
mal, overexcited, or underexcited depending 
on adjustment.
deﬁ nite time control A method to short out the 
steps of resistance by using time relays to control 
when resistance is shorted out of the circuit.
defrost control A heat pump control that reverses 
the fl ow of refrigerant in a system to heat the out-
side heat exchange unit and remove frost.
defrost heater thermostat One of two thermostats 
in a fl ex tray ice maker that when closed permits 
the water fi ll cycle to operate.
defrost thermostat Heat sensor located on the out-
side heat exchanger of a heat pump.
defrost timer The “brain” of frost-free appliances, 
this disconnects the compressor circuit and con-
nects a resistive heating element located near the 
evaporator to melt frost at regular time intervals. 
Operated by a single-phase synchronous motor.
delta, delta connection A triangular-shaped cir-
cuit, resembling the Greek letter delta, for three-
phase current transformers and motor windings. 
A circuit formed by connecting three electrical 
devices in series to form a closed loop. It is used 
most often in three-phase connections.
diac A bidirectional diode used to phase shift a triac. 
It is a voltage-sensitive switch that operates on 
AC current.
dielectric An electrical insulator.
dielectric stress In a charged capacitor, the electron 
orbit of the atoms in the dielectric extend and are 
considered to be in tension, or dielectric stress.
control connector The connector that is connected 
to the control system.
control contacts In an oil-pressure failure switch, 
conducting parts of a relay that act as switches 
and provide power to the heater of the timer.
control transformers Used to change the value 
of line voltage to the value needed for the 
control circuit.
control valve The heart of a gas heating system, 
controls the fl ow of gas to the main burner and 
pilot light (if used).
conventional current ﬂ ow theory Assumes the 
current fl ows from positive to negative.
cooling anticipator A resistive heating element 
that operates in an opposite sense to the heat 
anticipator. While the air conditioning unit is not 
running, it slightly heats the thermostat to close 
the contacts before the ambient temperature 
closes them.
coulomb A quantity of measurement for electrons 
at rest on a surface area. One coulomb contains 
6.25  1018 electrons.
CR (control relay) Electrically operated switch 
whose coil energizes and closes its contacts, 
starting other operations in a circuit.
crankcase heater A component of a commercial 
air conditioning unit that, as long as power is 
connected, is energized at all times.
cube-size thermostat Mounted on the evaporator 
plate of a cube-type ice maker, its closed con-
tacts complete the circuit to the timer motor for 
ice harvest.
cumulative compressor run timer This defrost 
timer connection (pigtail to terminal 2, timer 
contact between terminals 1 and 4) allows 
the timer motor to operate only when the 
compressor is in operation and the thermostat 
is closed.
current The rate of fl ow of electrons.
current ﬂ ow The amount of current in a circuit.
current-limiting resistor A component of a time-
delay circuit that is center tapped to allow either 
240 volts to be connected in series with the 
heater, or for 120 volts to be connected to the 
center tap.

GLOSSARY   565
differential ampliﬁ er Helps overcome induced 
noise by detecting voltage difference between 
pairs of signal wires and amplifying the difference 
so noise is ignored.
differential pressure switch Used to measure the 
difference between the suction pressure and 
the discharge pressure of an oil pump, e.g., device 
used to measure actual oil pressure in an oil-
pressure failure switch.
differential thermostat Found mostly in solar-
 powered heating systems, uses two separate tem-
perature sensors and is activated by the difference 
of temperature between them.
digital, digital device A device that has only two 
states of operation: on or off.
digital logic Circuit elements connected in such a 
manner as to solve problems using components 
that have only two states of operation.
digital meter (voltmeter) A voltmeter that uses 
direct reading numerical display as opposed to a 
meter movement.
diode A two-element device that permits current to 
fl ow through it in only one direction.
disconnecting means (disconnect) Device(s) used 
to disconnect a circuit or device from its source 
of supply.
door interlock A switch that permits a heating 
unit to operate only when the furnace door 
is closed.
double-acting Describes the circuitry in a ther-
mostat permitting it to be used for both heating 
and cooling.
double-break contact A contact that breaks con-
nection at two points.
dual-pressure switch Switch that has both high- 
and low-pressure switches in the same housing.
dynamic braking (1) Using a DC motor as a gen-
erator to produce counter torque and thereby 
produce a braking action. (2) Applying direct 
current to the stator winding of an AC induction 
motor to cause a magnetic braking action.
E
eddy current Circular-induced current contrary 
to the main currents. Eddy currents are a 
source of heat and power loss in magnetically 
 operated devices.
EFM (evaporator fan motor) relay Its coil ener-
gizes and starts the evaporator fan motor.
EFS (evaporator ﬂ ow switch) Airfl ow switch 
operated by the force of air created by the evapo-
rator fan.
ejector blades Blades in ice makers that rotate and 
push ice cubes out of the mold tray and into a bin.
electrical interlock When the contacts of one device 
or circuit prevent the operation of some other 
device or circuit.
electrical pressure The electromotive force (volt-
age) that pushes electrons through a wire.
electric arc Used to ignite the gas fl ame in gas-
 operated appliances. Permits gas to fl ow but 
turns the gas off if no fl ame is soon detected.
electric controller Device(s) used to govern in some 
predetermined manner the operation of a circuit 
or piece of electrical apparatus.
electricity The fl ow of electrons through a com-
pleted path.
electric resistance heating element Component 
in an air conditioner sued to provide heat in cool 
weather.
electromagnetic ﬁ eld Created in windings when 
DC current is applied to the rotor. This fi eld of 
the rotor locks in step with the rotating magnetic 
fi eld of the stator.
electromotive force (EMF) The force that pushes 
electrons through a wire. Also known as voltage 
and electrical pressure.
electron One of the three major parts of an atom. 
The electron carries a negative charge.
electron ﬂ ow theory Assumes that current fl ows 
from negative to positive.
electrostatic charge The energy of a capacitor stored 
in the dielectric; permits production of extremely 
high currents under certain conditions.
emitter The semiconductor region of a transistor 
that must be connected to a polarity different 
from the base.
enclosure Mechanical, electrical, or environmental 
protection for components used in a system.

566   GLOSSARY
ﬂ ow switch (sail switch) Used in air conditioning 
systems to sense the fl ow of air instead of the fl ow 
of liquid. Operates on the principal of a sail.
ﬂ ow washer Part of an electric solenoid valve in an 
ice maker that meters the amount of water used.
forward biased A diode is forward biased when a 
positive voltage is connected to the anode and a 
negative voltage is connected to the cathode.
4-way valve (reversing valve) A common solenoid 
valve used to change the direction of refrigerant 
fl ow in a heat-pump system. Composed of a main 
valve and a pilot valve operating together.
FR (fan relay) Controls the fan motor. Designed so 
that a switch can be used to turn the circuit com-
pletely off, operate the fan manually, or permit 
the fan to be operated by a thermostat.
freezer assembly A hollow tube surrounded by a 
cylindrical container that is the evaporator in the 
refrigeration unit.
frequency The number of complete cycles of AC 
voltage that occur in one second.
FSCR (ﬂ ow switch control relay) The coil of relay 
connected to the line when the fl ow switch closes.
full-load torque The amount of torque necessary 
to produce the full horsepower of a motor at 
rated speed.
full-wave rectiﬁ er Rectifi er that uses two diodes to 
convert AC to DC. Both halves of the AC wave-
form are used.
fuse A device used to protect a circuit or electrical device 
from excessive current. Fuses operate by melting 
a metal link when current becomes excessive.
G
gain The increase in signal power produced by 
an amplifi er.
gate (1) A device that has multiple inputs and a 
single output. There are fi ve basic types of gates, 
the and, or, nand, nor, and inverter. (2) One ter-
minal of some electronic devices, such as SCRs, 
triacs, and fi eld effect transistors.
germanium Gray-white, hard, and brittle chemical 
element used in the manufacture of semiconduc-
tor materials such as transistors and diodes.
gun-type An oil furnace ignited by an electric arc.
eutectic alloy A metal with a low and sharp melting 
point used in thermal overload relays.
evaporator An air conditioning or refrigeration 
system component that removes heat from the 
surrounding air or liquid to cause a change of 
state in the refrigerant.
expansion Method for sensing temperature deter-
mined by the expansion of metal, considers the 
type of metal and the amount of heat used.
F
fan-limit switch Contains both a fan switch and a 
high-limit switch in one housing. Its operation 
will cause the burner to turn off and prevent 
damage to a heating system.
fan switch A single-pole, double-throw switch, con-
nected on one side to the thermostat control on 
the other to the control voltage.
fan switches (heating) Operated by a bimetal 
strip that closes a set of contacts when the tem-
perature of the heat exchanger reaches a high 
enough level so no cold air is blown into the liv-
ing area.
farad Rating or unit of measurement of a capacitor.
feeder The circuit conductor between the service 
equipment, or the generator switchboard of an 
isolated plant, and the branch circuit overcur-
rent protective device.
ﬁ eld discharge resistor Used across a winding to 
prevent excessive voltage; helps to reduce the 
voltage induced into the rotor by the collapsing 
magnetic fi eld when current is disconnected.
ﬁ eld effect transistors High input impedance tran-
sistors used by op amps that require little current 
to operate the amplifi er.
ﬁ lter A device used to remove the ripple produced 
by a rectifi er.
“ﬁ re eye” A gas fl ame sensing device that changes 
its resistance in the presence of light.
ﬂ aker-type Ice maker that produces ice chips or 
fl akes.
“ﬂ ame rod” A fl ame-sensing device that operates by 
using the gas fl ame as a conductor of electricity.
ﬂ ex tray Type of ice maker that fi lls with water and 
turns at an angle to dump ice cubes into a bin.

GLOSSARY   567
H
hair Human hair is used in some humidistats to 
sense humidity, since it contracts and expands 
with changes in the amount of humidity in 
the air.
half-wave rectiﬁ er The simplest type of rectifi er, it 
is one diode that changes or converts AC voltage 
into DC voltage over half an AC waveform.
heat anticipator The component of a thermostat 
that preheats the sensing element and causes the 
thermostat contacts to open before the room heat 
has reached the set point of the thermostat.
heater section Section of a solder-melting type 
overload relay that is connected in series with 
the motor.
heating element In a solder-melting type of over-
load relay, it is wound around the tube and is 
calibrated to produce a certain amount of heat 
when a predetermined amount of current fl ows 
through it.
heat pump A system that uses refrigerant to supply 
both heating and cooling to a dwelling.
heat sink A metallic device designed to increase the 
surface area of an electronic component for the 
purpose of removing heat at a faster rate.
henry Unit of measurement for inductors, or induc-
tance. One henry is present when the current 
through a coil, changing 1 ampere per second, 
produces 1 volt across the coil terminals.
hermetic compressor A compressor that is com-
pletely enclosed and airtight.
hertz (Hz) The international unit of frequency.
high leg A confi guration in a delta connection where 
one transformer is larger and center tapped.
high-pressure switch Used to sense amount of 
pressure in air conditioning and refrigeration 
units. The bellows in this switch is connected to 
the discharge side of the compressor via the tube; 
activates if pressure becomes too great.
holding current The amount of current needed to 
keep an SCR or triac turned on.
holding relay (HR) Used with short-cycling timers, 
this relay energizes and changes holding contacts 
during short-cycling recovery time.
holding, sealing, or maintaining contacts Con-
tacts used to maintain continuous current fl ow 
to the coil of a relay.
holding switch Functions in an ice maker by 
 changing positions to maintain the circuit until 
the cam returns to the freeze, or off, position.
horsepower A measure of power for electrical and 
mechanical devices.
hot-gas solenoid valve In harvest cycle of ice mak-
ing, opens and permits high pressure hot gas to 
be diverted to the evaporator plate.
hot-wire relay A type of starting relay used to 
disconnect the start windings of a single-phase 
motor; so named because it uses a length of resis-
tive wire connected in series with the motor to 
sense motor current.
humidistat A device that can sense the amount of 
humidity in the air and activate a set of contacts if 
the humidity should become too high or too low.
hysteresis loop A graphic curve that shows the 
value of magnetizing force for a particular type 
of material.
I
illuminate Act or state of being highlighted by light 
or color. In a PC, illuminated contacts prove they 
are closed and providing current paths.
impedance The total opposition to current fl ow in 
an electrical circuit.
indoor fan relay (IFR) A relay that may control 
the coils of other relays, which connect the fan 
motors to the line; may operate several fans 
at once.
indoor resistance heat Part of a schematic draw-
ing of a heat-pump control system depicting the 
indoor circuits.
induced current Current produced in a conductor 
by the cutting action of a magnetic fi eld.
induction motor A motor whose current fl ow in the 
rotor is produced by induced voltage from the 
rotating magnetic fi eld of the stator.
inductive reactance The opposition to current fl ow 
in an AC circuit, caused by an inductor. Mea-
sured in ohms; its symbol is XL.
inductor A coil.

568   GLOSSARY
J
jumper A short piece of conductor used to make 
connection between components or a break in a 
circuit.
junction diode A diode that is made by joining 
together two pieces of semiconductor material.
K
kick-back diode A diode used to eliminate the volt-
age spike induced in a coil by the collapse of a 
magnetic fi eld.
L
lattice structure The pattern that semiconductor 
material molecules arrange themselves in when 
refi ned into a pure form.
leakage current The small amount of current 
leaked when a very sudden increase of resistance 
opens a set of contacts. This leakage maintains 
the temperature of the thermistor and prevents it 
from returning to a low resistance.
LED (light-emitting diode) A diode that will pro-
duce light when current fl ows through it.
legend In a schematic diagram, a list that shows 
a symbol or notation and gives the defi nition of 
that symbol or notation.
level detector Detects when one voltage becomes 
greater than another; a comparator.
limit switch A mechanically, generally bimetal-
 operated switch that detects the position or move-
ment of an object.
line voltage thermostat Used to control loads such 
as blower fans and heating elements without an 
intervening relay.
load (1) Anything that may draw current from an 
electrical power source. (2) In a motor schematic, 
the large motor (M) contacts that are connected 
in series with the overload heater element and 
the motor.
load center Generally the service entrance. A point 
from which branch circuits originate.
loading terminal Either a handheld device or cath-
ode ray tube (CRT) used to program the program-
mable controller. Same as program terminal.
inlet Side of a solenoid valve that is connected to the 
side of the system with the highest pressure (for 
liquid or gas to fl ow).
inline Being directly connected into the circuit.
in phase In pure-resistive circuits, the voltage and 
current are in phase when they cross the zero line 
at the same point, and have their peak positive 
and negative values at the same time.
input The section of a programmable controller 
where information is supplied to the CPU.
input impedance Resistance or opposition to cur-
rent fl ow in an AC or DC circuit.
input voltage The amount of voltage connected to 
a device or circuit.
insulation Material that inhibits or slows current.
insulator A material used to electrically isolate two 
conductive surfaces.
interlock, interlocking A device/method used to 
prevent some action from taking place in a piece 
of equipment or circuit until some other action 
has occurred.
internal relay An imaginary device that exists 
only in the logic of a computer, programmed by 
assigning a coil a number greater than the I/O 
capacity.
inverting ampliﬁ er Connection in an op amp that 
renders the input signal out of phase with the 
feedback voltage of the output, reducing input 
voltage and gain.
inverting input Inverts the output of an op amp: 
if positive-going AC is applied, the output  
produces negative-going voltage.
I/O capacity Measure of input and output abil-
ity of a programmable controller. Number of 
tracks  I/O track (32)  I/O capacity (8 I/O 
tracks  256 I/O capacity).
I/O rack Contains input and output modules (typi-
cally from 2 to 8 each) used to connect the cen-
tral processing unit to the outside world.
isolation transformer A transformer whose sec-
ondary winding is electrically isolated from its 
primary winding.

GLOSSARY   569
locked rotor current The amount of current pro-
duced when voltage is applied to a motor and the 
rotor is not turning.
locked rotor torque The amount of torque pro-
duced by a motor at the time of starting.
lockout A mechanical device used to prevent the 
operation of some other component.
loop A closed electric circuit.
low-pressure switch Used to sense the amount of 
pressure in an air conditioning and refrigeration 
system. This switch is connected to the suction 
side of the compressor and activates if pressure 
becomes too low.
low voltage controls Section of a heat-pump sche-
matic detailing low voltage circuitry.
low voltage protection A magnetic relay circuit so 
connected that a drop in voltage causes the motor 
starter to disconnect the motor from the line.
M
magnetic contactor A contactor operated electro-
mechanically.
magnetic ﬁ eld 1. The space in which a magnetic 
force exists.
magnetic ﬁ eld 2. Lines of force used to represent 
magnetic induction.
main limit One of two high-limit contacts connected 
in series with automatic gas valve of a heating 
unit. May be located in a fan-limit switch.
maintaining contact Also known as a holding 
or sealing contact. It is used to maintain the 
coil circuit in a relay control circuit. The con-
tact is connected in parallel with the start 
push button.
major components The basic necessary ele-
ments, devices, and connections that make up 
a unit (switch, fan motor, compressor, etc.) and 
described in schematic diagrams.
manual controller A controller operated by hand 
at the location of the controller.
metering device Area in a heat pump where liquid 
or gas is changed to low-pressure liquid.
micro-farad A measurement of capacitance; one-
millionth of a farad, symbolized by μf.
microprocessor A small computer. The central 
processor unit is generally made from a single 
integrated circuit.
mil-foot Standard measurement of resistance of 
wire. A mil-foot of wire is one circular mil in 
diameter and one foot long.
mode A state or condition.
mold heater Part of an ice maker that warms the 
mold enough to release ice cubes.
motor A device used to convert electrical energy 
into rotating motion.
motor controller A device used to control the opera-
tion of a motor.
motor starters Contactors (designed to control large 
amounts of current) with the addition of overload 
relays. Usually contain auxiliary contacts as well 
as load contacts.
movable contact A contact that moves to make 
connection with another contact.
multiranged Ability to use one meter movement to 
measure several ranges of voltage.
multispeed AC motor A motor that can be oper-
ated at more than one speed.
mutual induction Induction that results when there 
is an interaction of adjacent inductors. When 
the magnetic fi eld of the primary induces a volt-
age into the secondary winding wound on the 
same core.
Mylar foil shield Material used in installations 
to shield cable for signal wiring to reduce 
noise ratio.
N
nameplates Plates on electric motors that provide 
important information describing the character-
istics of the motor (horsepower, volts, etc).
negative One polarity of a voltage, current, or 
charge that has an excess of electrons.
negative feedback Reduces the gain and makes 
the amplifi er more stable in an op amp.

570   GLOSSARY
nucleus Central part of an atom, containing neu-
trons and protons.
nylobraid tube Carries ice to the ice storage bin in 
an ice maker.
nylon Synthetic material used as a sense element in 
some humidistats.
O
off-delay timer A timer that delays changing its 
contacts back to their normal position when the 
coil is deenergized.
offset null Connection in an op amp used and 
adjusted to produce 0 volts at the output.
ohm The measure of resistance to the fl ow of current.
ohmmeter A device used to measure resistance.
Ohm’s law Current is equal to the voltage divided 
by the resistance (I  E/R). It takes 1 volt to push 
1 amp through 1 ohm.
oil-ﬁ lled capacitor Made with two metal foil plates 
separated by paper that has been soaked in a spe-
cial dielectric oil.
oil-pressure failure switch Switch containing sev-
eral control functions in the same unit, used in a 
forced-oil system to protect the compressor from 
insuffi cient oil pressure.
on-delay timer A timer that delays changing the 
position of its contacts when the coil is energized.
open-delta system Type of three-phase service that 
needs only two transformers to provide three-
phase voltage.
operational ampliﬁ er (op amp) An integrated 
circuit used as an amplifi er.
opposition Resistance or repelling movement.
optoisolated Situation when the load side of the 
relay is optically isolated from the control side of 
the relay and controlled by a light beam.
optoisolator A device used to connect different sec-
tions of a circuit by means of a light beam.
oriﬁ ce Passage on each side of a 4-way revers-
ing valve, each provides a path for a very small 
amount of refrigerant to fl ow.
oscillator A device used to change DC voltage 
into AC voltage; produces a waveform that has 
negative temperature coefﬁ cient (NTC) A therm-
istor that has this type of coeffi cient will decrease 
its resistance as the temperature increases.
NEMA 
National 
Electrical 
Manufacturers 
Association.
NEMA ratings Electrical control device ratings of 
voltage, current, horsepower, and interrupting 
capability given by NEMA.
neutron One of the principle parts of an atom. The 
neutron has no charge and is part of the nucleus.
node In schematic drawings, the dot in the center of 
the cross created by connecting wires.
noise reduction ratio Ratio of ability to diminish 
stray electrical noise or interference in circuits.
nonadjustable Type of pressure switch that must 
be matched to the refrigerant system, unlike 
adjustable switches which can be used to switch 
different systems.
noninductive load An electrical load that does not 
have induced voltages caused by a coil. Nonin-
ductive loads are generally considered to be resis-
tive, but can be capacitive.
noninverting ampliﬁ er One of two input connec-
tions in op amps that outputs in phase with the 
feedback: positive in produces positive out.
noninverting input Signal voltage applied to this 
input will output voltage the same polarity: posi-
tive in produces positive out.
nonreversing A device that can be operated in only 
one direction.
normally closed The contact of a relay that is 
closed when the coil is deenergized.
normally open The contact of a relay that is open 
when the coil is deenergized.
NPN Transistor with N and P materials in N-P-N 
order. Must have positive connected to the collec-
tor and negative connected to the emitter.
NPNP Rectifi er junction made by joining four 
layers of semiconductor material together in 
N-P-N-P order.
N-type material Semiconductor material that has 
been impurifi ed and rendered with excess elec-
trons, resulting in a net negative charge.

GLOSSARY   571
positive and negative pulses of equal voltage 
and time.
oscilloscope A voltmeter that displays a waveform 
of voltage in proportion to its amplitude with 
respect to time.
outdoor compressor controls Section of a sche-
matic detailing outdoor circuitry of a heat-pump 
system.
outlet Side of solenoid valve at which, if reversed 
and applied to the outlet side of the system, the 
pressure could cause valve leakage.
out-of-phase The condition in which two com-
ponents do not reach their positive or negative 
peaks at the same time.
output The section of the programmable controller 
where information is supplied to the outside cir-
cuits by the CPU.
overload Potentially damaging situation where 
too much current fl ows through a circuit not 
built to sustain the excess, thus overloading or 
overheating.
overload relay A relay used to protect a motor from 
damage due to overloads. The overload relay 
senses motor current and disconnects the motor 
from the line if the current is excessive for a cer-
tain length of time.
P
panelboard A metallic or nonmetallic panel used to 
mount electrical controls, equipment, or devices.
parallel circuit A circuit that contains more than 
one path for current fl ow.
peak-inverse/peak-reverse voltage The rating of 
a semiconductor device that indicates the maxi-
mum amount of voltage in the reverse direction 
that can be applied to the device.
peak-to-peak voltage The amplitude of AC 
voltage measured from its positive peak to its 
negative peak.
peak voltage The amplitude of voltage measured 
from zero to its highest value.
permanent magnet rotor The rotor of a motor or 
generator that is constructed using permanent 
magnets.
permanent split-capacitor motor (PSC) A single-
phase induction motor similar to the capacitor 
start motor except that the start windings and 
the starting capacitor remain connected in the 
circuit during normal operation.
phase shift, phase shifted A change in the phase 
relationship between two quantities of voltage or 
current (lead and lag), from one to another.
photoconductive A device that changes resistance 
in accord with the amount of light present.
photodetector Connected to a triac gate to control 
the output; permits current fl ow.
photodiode Semiconductor device for detecting 
and measuring radiant energy (light) by means 
of its conversion into an electric current.
photovoltaic A device that produces a voltage in the 
presence of light. Generally called a solar cell.
pico-farad Used in extremely small capacitors; one 
millionth of a micro-farad, symbolized by μμf or pf.
pilot device A control component designed to con-
trol small amounts of current. Pilot devices are 
used to control larger control components.
pilot light A small gas fl ame that burns continu-
ously near the main burner of a gas burner.
pilot valve Operates with the main valve in a 4-way 
reversing valve. Controls the operation of the 
main valve which controls the fl ow of refrigerant 
in a system.
plunger-type Type of solenoid that is generally 
used with relays that use double-break contacts. 
The coil is surrounded by the iron core that has 
an opening in it for the shaft of the armature 
to pass.
pneumatic timer A device that uses the displace-
ment of air in a bellows or diaphragm to produce 
a time delay.
PN junction An accurate and linear device, or 
diode, that measures temperature.
PNP Transistor with P and N materials in P-N-P 
order. Must have positive connected to the emit-
ter and negative connected to the collector.
PNPN Rectifi er junction made by joining four layers of 
semiconductor material together in P-N-P-N order.

572   GLOSSARY
polarity The characteristic of a device that exhibits 
opposite quantities within itself: positive and 
negative.
positive temperature coefﬁ cient (PTC) A thermis-
tor with this type of coeffi cient will increase its 
resistance as temperature increases.
potential relay Operates by sensing an increase in 
the voltage developed in the start winding when 
the motor is operating.
potentiometer A variable resistor with a sliding 
contact that is used as a voltage divider.
power connector The connector that is connected 
to the incoming power.
power factor A comparison of the true power 
(watts) to the apparent power (volt amps) in an 
AC circuit.
power rating The rating of a device that indicates 
the amount of current fl ow and voltage drop that 
can be permitted.
power supply Part of a programmable controller 
used to lower the incoming AC voltage to desired 
level, rectify it to DC, then fi lter and regulate it.
power transistor Used to connect the load to the 
line in a relay designed to control a DC load.
pressure regulator Internal component of many 
control valves, it maintains a constant pressure 
to the main burner.
pressure switch A device that senses the presence 
or absence of pressure and causes a set of con-
tacts to open or close.
primary control The major part of an oil-fi red con-
trol system, it ensures that when the thermostat 
calls for heat, the fl ame will be created within a 
predetermined amount of time.
printed circuit A board on which a predetermined 
pattern of printed connections has been made.
programmable logic controllers (PLCs) Com-
prised of a power supply, central processing 
unit, program loader or terminal, and I/O rack, 
these machines are generally designed to be pro-
grammed with relay schematic and ladder dia-
grams instead of computer languages for quick, 
versatile changes and use.
programmable thermostat Can be set to automati-
cally operate at different temperature settings at 
different times.
programming terminal Used to load or amend a 
program in a programmable controller. Same as 
loading terminal.
proton One of the three major parts of an atom. The 
proton has positive charge.
PSCR (pressure switch control relay) Used in a 
circuit designed to turn off a compressor if the 
pressure in the system reaches a predetermined 
(high) level. If power is disconnected, a warning 
light will appear and the circuit must be manu-
ally reset.
psig (pounds per square inch gauge) Standard 
measuring system to measure pressure.
P-type material Semiconductor material that has 
only 3 valence electrons, leaving a hole in its 
lattice structure, resulting in it having a net posi-
tive charge.
pulse generator Op amp that produces a wave-
form of positive and negative pulses of incon-
sistent voltage and time (pulse duration 
changes).
pure-capacitive circuit The current in this type of 
circuit is limited by the voltage of the charged 
capacitor.
pure-inductive circuit A circuit in which the cur-
rent lags behind the voltage by 90°. There is no 
true power or watts in this circuit.
pure-resistive circuit Similar to a DC circuit in 
having true power or watts equal to the voltage 
times the current. In this circuit the voltage and 
current are in phase with each other.
push button A pilot control device operated manu-
ally by being pushed or pressed.
R
rapid cool down Removing heat from an object in 
a short period of time.
reactance The opposition to current fl ow in an AC 
circuit offered by pure inductance or pure capaci-
tance.
reciprocal A pair of numbers whose product is 1, 
can be found by dividing that number into 1.
rectiﬁ er A device or circuit used to change AC volt-
age into DC voltage.
reed relay A small set of reed contacts connected 
to the gate of the triac; these contacts are closed 

GLOSSARY   573
by a magnetic fi eld and in turn cause the triac to 
turn on. Used to control solid-state relays.
regulator A device that maintains a quantity at a 
predetermined level.
relay A magnetically operated switch that may 
have one or more sets of contacts.
relay schematic Schematic diagram used for relay 
logic. These must be adapted to be loaded into a 
programmable computer.
remote control Controls the functions of some elec-
trical device from a distant location.
resistance The opposition to current fl ow in an AC 
or DC circuit.
resistance-start induction run motor One type of 
split-phase motor that uses the resistance of the 
start winding to produce a phase shift between 
the current in the start winding and the current 
in the run winding.
resistance temperature detector (RTD) Made of 
platinum wire, this measures temperature accu-
rately, since the resistance of platinum changes 
greatly with temperature.
resistive heating element Heating component 
located near the evaporator of a frost-free appli-
ance, connected at set intervals by a defrost timer 
to melt any frost on the evaporator.
resistor A device used to introduce some amount of 
resistance into an electrical circuit.
reversed biased When negative voltage is con-
nected to the anode and positive voltage is 
connected to the cathode resulting in an open 
connection with no current fl ow.
reversing valve (4-way valve) used to change the 
direction of fl ow of refrigerant in a heat-pump 
system.
reversing valve solenoid A device in a heat-pump 
system that, if deenergized, indicates the unit is in 
the heating mode.
rheostat A variable resistor.
RMS value The value of AC voltage that will pro-
duce as much power when connected across a 
resistor as a like amount of DC voltage.
rotating ﬁ eld speed Determined by the number of 
stator poles and the frequency.
rotating magnetic ﬁ eld The principle of operation 
for all three-phase motors. A magnetic fi eld that 
rotates due to either voltages being out of phase, 
voltages changing polarity, or the arrangement 
of stator winding in a motor.
rotor A large electromagnet that is the moving part 
of the alternator.
rotor bars Bars that are part of the rotor in a 
 squirrel-cage induction motor.
rotor slip Condition produced by a weakening mag-
netic fi eld due to series impedance, eventually 
causing the motor speed to decrease.
run winding In the stator of a split-phase motor, it 
is made of large wire and is placed in the bottom 
of the stator core.
S
sail switch (Flow switch) Used in air conditioning 
systems to sense the fl ow of air instead of the fl ow 
of liquid. Operates on the principle of a sail.
saturation The maximum amount of magnetic fl ux 
a material can hold.
schematic An electrical drawing showing compo-
nents in their electrical sequence without regard 
for physical location.
SCR (silicon-controlled rectiﬁ er) A semiconduc-
tor device that can be used to change AC volt-
age into DC voltage. The gate of the SCR must 
be triggered before the device will conduct 
current.
semiconductor A material that contains four 
valence electrons and is used in the production of 
solid-state devices.
sensing device A pilot device that detects a quan-
tity and converts it into an electrical signal.
sequence timer Used to turn the strip heaters (heat-
ing elements) on in stages instead of all at once.
series circuit A circuit that contains only one path 
for current fl ow.
service The conductors and equipment necessary to 
deliver energy from the electrical supply system 
to the premises served.
service factor An allowable overload for a motor 
indicated by a multiplier that, when applied to a 
normal horsepower rating, indicates the permis-
sible loading.
shaded-pole induction motor An AC induction 
motor that develops a rotating magnetic fi eld by 

574   GLOSSARY
shading part of the stator windings with a shad-
ing loop.
shading coil A large loop of copper wire or a copper 
band wound around one end of a shaded pole.
shading loop A large copper wire or band con-
nected around part of a magnetic pole piece to 
oppose a change of magnetic fl ux.
shielded cable Cable that has been wrapped in 
protective covering to provide noise reduction in 
signal wiring.
short circuit An electrical circuit that contains no 
resistance to limit the fl ow of current.
short cycling The starting and stopping of a com-
pressor in rapid succession.
short-cycling timer A cam-operated, motor 
driven, on-delay timer that allows time to oper-
ate and reset short-cycled contacts to their 
original positions.
silicon Most common element used to make semi-
conductor devices due to its ability to with-
stand heat.
silicon bilateral switch (SBS) A solid-state compo-
nent in a primary control of an oil burner that, 
if disconnected, behaves like a diac and will con-
duct current to the primary control’s triac.
silicon-controlled rectiﬁ er (SCR) A thyristor, also 
called the PNPN junction, used when an elec-
tronic device is needed to control large amounts 
of power.
sine-wave voltage A voltage waveform whose 
value at any point is proportional to the trigono-
metric sine of the angle of the generator produc-
ing it.
single-phase Formed by connecting a single trans-
former to a three-phase line.
single-pole breaker A circuit breaker used for con-
necting a 120-volt circuit.
slip The difference in speed between the rotating 
magnetic fi eld and the speed of the rotor in an 
induction motor.
slip ring When present on rotor shafts, permits the 
connection of external resistance to the rotor 
windings. Always used in pairs.
snap-action The quick opening and closing action 
of a spring-loaded contact.
solder-melting type An overload relay that uses a 
heating element to detect overloads.
solenoid A magnetic device used to convert electri-
cal energy into linear motion.
solenoid coil Component of a heat-pump system 
which, if energized, will change the position of 
the plunger of the pilot valve.
solenoid valve A valve operated by an electric 
solenoid used to control the fl ow of gasses 
or liquids.
solid-state hard starting kit Used to increase the 
starting torque of a permanent-split capacitor 
motor; contains a solid-state relay and an AC 
electrolytic capacitor.
solid-state relay A device or an electronic compo-
nent constructed from semiconductor material, 
used to control either AC or DC loads. Advan-
tages are that it has no moving parts, is resis-
tant to vibration, and is sealed against dirt and 
moisture.
solid-state starting relay Actually an electronic 
component known as a thermistor, intended to 
replace the current-type starting relay.
split-phase motor A type of single-phase motor that 
uses resistance or capacitance to cause a shift in 
the phase of the current in the run winding and 
the current in the start winding. The three pri-
mary types of split-phase motors are: resistance 
start induction run, capacitor start induction 
run, and permanent split-capacitor.
squirrel-cage induction motor An induction motor 
whose rotor contains a set of bars that resemble a 
squirrel cage.
staging thermostat A thermostat that contains 
more than one set of contacts that operate at dif-
ferent times in accord with the temperature.
star Also known as the wye connection, one of the 
three-phase wiring confi gurations.
starter A relay used to connect a motor to the 
power line.
starting relay Located away from the motor and 
used to disconnect the start windings when the 
motor has reached about 75% of its full speed. 
Used especially in single-phase motors that are 
hermetically sealed and unable to use a centrifu-
gal switch.

GLOSSARY   575
start winding In the stator of a split-phase motor, it 
is made of small wire and is placed near the top of 
the stator core.
stationary contact A contact that is fi xed and can-
not move.
stator The stationary winding of an AC motor.
step-down transformer A transformer that pro-
duces a lower voltage at its secondary than is 
applied to its primary.
stepstarting Similar to shifting gears in the trans-
mission of an automobile, method used in most 
large wound motors, as opposed to actual vari-
able resistors. Starts with maximum resistance 
and with increasing speed shorts out resistance.
step-up transformer A transformer that produces 
a higher voltage at its secondary than is applied 
to its primary.
surge A transient variation in the current or volt-
age at a point in the circuit. Surges are generally 
unwanted and temporary.
switch A mechanical device used to connect or dis-
connect a component or circuit.
synchronous condenser A synchronous motor 
operated at no load and used for power factor 
correction.
synchronous motor A three-phase motor that is 
not an induction motor; it will run at a constant 
speed from no load to full load and can correct its 
own power factor and the power factors of other 
motors connected to the same line.
synchronous speed The speed of the rotating mag-
netic fi eld of an AC induction motor.
T
tapped A circuit that has been cut in on by another 
circuit, or split in its confi guration by a circuit.
temperature Affects resistance of wire; resistance 
increases as temperature increases.
temperature relay A relay that functions at a 
predetermined temperature. Generally used to 
protect some other component from excessive 
temperature.
terminal, terminal board A fi tting attached to 
a device for the purpose of connecting wires 
to it.
terminal markings Identifi cation letters and sym-
bols assigned to circuitry in schematic drawings 
to aid in tracing the circuits.
termination temperature Temperature at which 
the terminals of devices connected to the conduc-
tor will be withstood.
test points Labeled on a plate behind the ice maker’s 
front cover, provide option of testing different parts 
of the electrical circuit with volt- or ohmmeter.
thermistor A resistor that changes its resistance 
with a change of temperature.
thermocouple Made by joining two dissimilar met-
als together at one end. The voltage produced is 
proportional to the types of metals used and the 
difference in temperature of the two junctions.
thermopile A series connection of thermocouples to 
permit the voltages to add and produce a higher 
output voltage.
thermostats Temperature-sensitive switches that 
employ a variety of methods to sense tempera-
ture and can be found with different contact 
arrangements.
three phase Having three separate voltage wave-
forms produced by the alternator.
three-phase motors Motors operated by a rotat-
ing magnetic fi eld: squirrel-cage induction 
motor, wound rotor induction motor, and syn-
chronous motor.
three-phase squirrel-cage induction motor A 
wye-connected motor with no external resistors 
for the rotor circuit and no DC circuit to excite 
the rotor.
three-pole breaker A circuit breaker used for con-
necting a three-phase circuit.
three-wire control circuits More fl exible than two-
wire control circuits, these are characterized by 
the fact that they are operated by a magnetic 
relay or motor starter.
thyristor An electronic component that has only 
two states of operation: on or off.
time-delay circuit Consists of a current-limiting 
resistor, a resistance heating element, and a 
bimetal strip; permits the compressor to oper-
ate long enough for oil pressure to build up in a 
system.

576   GLOSSARY
timer clock Device used in place of a defrost timer to 
activate defrost cycles. Its construction, includ-
ing a separate timer release solenoid, allows the 
defrost cycle to be activated during minimum use 
periods.
timer motor Part of a short-cycle timer that is geared 
to permit a delay of about 3 minutes before con-
tacts change position to restart a compressor.
torque The turning force developed by a motor.
transducer A device that converts one type of 
energy into another type of energy. Example: A 
solar cell converts light into electricity.
transformer An electrical device that changes one 
value of AC voltage into another value of AC 
voltage.
transistor A solid-state device made by combining 
three layers of semiconductor material together. 
A small amount of current fl ow through the 
base-emitter can control a larger amount of cur-
rent fl ow through the collector-emitter.
triac A bidirectional thyristor used to control AC 
voltage.
troubleshoot To locate and eliminate problems in 
a circuit.
true power The wattage, or measure of the amount 
of power that is being used in a circuit.
turns ratio Relationship between the number of 
turns in the primary of a transformer and the 
number of turns in the secondary.
two-conductor romex A cable used in circuit break-
ing containing three wires—black (hot), white 
(neutral), and bare copper (grounding).
two-phase power Produced by having an alterna-
tor with two sets of coils wound 90° out of phase 
with each other.
two-pole breaker Circuit breaker used for connect-
ing a 240-volt single-phase circuit.
two-speed compressors The systems that main-
tain the difference in pressure between the high 
and low sides, that have two speeds.
two-wire control circuit In this circuit, a simple 
switch is used to control the power applied to 
a small motor. Switch open means no com-
plete path for current to fl ow; switch closed 
supplies power.
U
unijunction transistor A digital transistor that has 
two bases and one emitter made by combining 
three layers of semiconductor material.
unity Pure-resistance, or having a power factor 
of 100%.
V
valence electrons Electrons located in the outer 
orbit of an atom.
valence shell The outer shell of an atom.
variable resistor A resistor whose resistance value 
can be varied between its minimum and maxi-
mum values.
variable speed A motor or device that permits a 
change of speed.
variable-speed motors Shaded-pole or permanent-
split capacitor motors able to change speeds 
without disconnecting by a switch or relay. Com-
monly used to operate light loads such as ceiling 
fans and blower motors.
varistor A resistor that changes its resistance value 
with a change of voltage.
VARs (volt-amps-reactive) In a pure-inductive 
circuit, the value of the voltage multiplied by the 
current. Also known as wattless power.
voltage An electrical measurement of potential 
difference, electrical pressure, or electromotive-
force (EMF).
voltage drop The amount of voltage required to 
cause an amount of current to fl ow through a 
certain resistance.
voltage follower A basic op amp circuit in which 
the output is connected directly back to the 
inverting input, producing a gain of 1; used for 
impedance matching purposes.
voltage rating A rating that indicates the amount 
of voltage that can be safely connected to a 
device.
voltage regulator A device or circuit that main-
tains a constant value of voltage.
volt-amps The apparent power of an AC circuit; the 
applied voltage multiplied by the current fl ow.
voltmeter An instrument used to measure a level 
of voltage.

GLOSSARY   577
volt-ohm-milliammeter (VOM) A test instrument 
so designed that it can be used to measure volt-
age, resistance, or milliamperes.
W
watchdog timer A time that runs continually to 
ensure that the program does not become locked 
in a loop.
water solenoid valve Valve in an ice maker that 
opens and permits fresh water to fl ow into the 
sump.
watt, wattage A measure of true power, or the 
amount of power being used in a circuit. It is 
proportional to the amount of voltage and the 
amount of current fl ow.
waveform The shape of a wave obtained by plotting 
a graph of voltage with respect to time.
wiring diagram An electrical diagram used to 
show components in their approximated physical 
location with connecting wires.
wound motor induction motor A three-phase 
induction motor used for large air conditioning 
units. Stator winding is the same as squirrel-
cage stator; however, the rotor contains wound 
coils of wire instead of squirrel-cage rotor bars, 
and will contain as many poles as there are sta-
tor poles.
wye, wye connection A three-phase wiring 
configuration that resembles the letter Y when 
the three coils are connected and schemati-
cally drawn. Also known as star, or the star 
connection.
Z
zener diode A diode that has a constant voltage 
drop when operated in the reverse direction. 
Zener diodes are commonly used as voltage regu-
lators in electronic circuits.
zero switching Occurs when a relay is told to turn 
off while the AC voltage is in the middle of a cycle. 
The relay will continue to conduct until the AC 
voltage drops to a zero level and then turn off.
zone Generally refers to heating or cooling a certain 
section of a dwelling.

This page intentionally left blank 

INDEX
579
INDEX
A
AC (alternating current), basic 
loads, 72
AC electrolytic capacitor, 86, 88
AC induction motor, 161
Across-the-line starting, 165, 166f
Adjustable head pressure valve, 
454–455, 455f, 456f
Adjustable pressure switches, 300, 
300f, 302
Alternators
 
electrical services key term, 61
 
electrical source, 11
 
voltage producer, 51, 51f
Aluminum
 
AWG table, 65f
 
conductor, 9, 473
 
resistance table, 64f
Ambient air temperature, 
240, 242
Ammeter
 
current transformers, 227, 
228f, 230, 230f
 
measurement instruments, 24, 
29–32, 29f, 30f, 31f
 
measuring instruments key 
term, 34
 
troubleshooting, 369–371, 372f
 
troubleshooting instrument, 
361
 
troubleshooting key term, 374
 
types of, 29–32, 29f, 30f, 
31f, 32f
Amortisseur, key term, 192
Amortisseur winding, 187, 
187f, 191f
Ampere (amp)
 
current impact chart, 4, 5f
 
quantities/laws key term, 22
 
term of, 16, 16f
579
 
voltage control, 271, 271f
 
voltage value determination, 
222–225, 223f, 224f
Auxiliary Limit, 402, 411
AWG (American Wire Gauge), 70
AWG (American Wire Gauge) 
table, 65t
B
Bands of color
 
resister ratings, 466f, 
466–467, 467f
 
resistors key term, 470
Base, transistor connections, 490, 
491f, 495
Batteries, 11
Bellows, 298, 302
Bellows-type thermostat, 344, 
345f, 346
Bidirectional diode, 509–510, 
510f, 511
Bimetal strip
 
bimetal unit, 236f, 236–237, 
237f
 
expansion of, 340, 340f
 
key term, 242
Bimetal thermostats, 282–283, 
283f, 285
Bimetal type
 
overloads, 234, 236f, 
236–237, 237f
 
overloads key term, 242
Bin thermostat, 440, 450
Bipolar transistors, 518, 529
Black tape, 56
Black wires, 56
Bohr, Niels, 8
Boiler control circuit, 100–102, 
101f
Boolean language, 554, 556
Amplifi er, 519
Analog, transistors, 494, 495
Analog input, 557, 560
Analog meter, 24, 25, 34
Analog sensors
 
differential amplifi er, 559, 559f
 
grounding, 558–559, 559f
 
installation, 558, 558f
 
programmable controllers, 558
 
shielded cable, 558, 558f
Anode, 479, 481f, 482
Antifreeze protection, 291, 296
Apparent power, 76, 76f, 77
Arc-over, 58, 61
Armature, 244, 244f, 247
Article 440, 66
Artifi cial respiration, 4
Atom
 
conductor, 473, 473f
 
insulator, 473, 473f
 
key terms, 14
 
parts of, 6
 
plum pudding model, 8
 
semiconductor, 473, 473f
 
structure of, 7–8, 473
Auger, 440, 445f, 450
Auto transformers, 200
“Automatic defrost,” 274
Automatic gas valve (AGV), 402
Automatic reset overload, 237, 
239f, 242
Autotransformer starting, 165, 
166–168, 168f
Autotransformers
 
current relationships, 225f, 
225–226
 
general features, 221–222, 
222f
 
variable speed motor control 
key term, 273
Note: “f” indicates a fi gure

580   INDEX
Branch circuit selection, 
67–68, 68f
Bridge rectifi er
 
full-wave, 480–481, 481f
 
key term, 482
 
synchronous motor, 190, 190f
Brushless, key term, 196
Brushless DC motors
 
advantages of, 194, 1
 
electronic control, 196
 
operation, 194f, 194–195, 195f
 
popularity of, 193
Brushless exciter
 
key term, 192
 
synchronous motor, 190f, 
190–191, 191f
Brute force method, 
558–559, 560
Bump theory, 10f, 10–11, 11f
C
Cabinet thermostat, 426, 434
Cadmium sulfi de cell (CAD cell), 
354, 357
Cam, 274–275, 281
Capacitance, 79, 80f, 88
Capacitive load, 72, 79
Capacitive reactance factors, 
81–82, 82f
Capacitive resistance, 88
Capacitor
 
charging, 79–80, 80f
 
ratings, 81–82
 
testing, 86–87
 
types, 85–86, 86f
Capacitor motor (PSC), 130
Capacitor-start induction run 
motor
 
operation, 120f, 122–123, 123f
 
single phase motor, 118, 
119–120,
Capacitor-start split-phase 
motors, 130
Capacitor terminals, 128f, 
128–129, 129f
Carbon brushes, 180, 181f, 184
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
(CPR), 4
Case, 495
Cathode, 479, 481f, 482
Central air conditioning 
units, 2, 3f
Central processing unit (CPU)
 
PLC “brains,” 533, 533f, 534, 
535f, 536, 536f, 537f
 
PLCs key term, 545
Centrifugal switch
 
resistance-start induction run 
motor, 120–121, 121f
 
split-phase motors key 
term, 130
Ceramic insulator, 12
CFM (condenser fan motor) relay, 
305, 307
CFS (condenser fl ow switch), 
305, 307
Circuit breaker, 61
Circuit breaker boxes, 56f, 56–57, 
57f, 58f
Circuits
 
alternating current loads, 72
 
key terms, 88
 
safety check, 2
Circular mils, 64, 70
Clamp-on, 34
Clamp-on ammeter
 
current transformers, 230, 230
 
key term, 231
 
use of, 29, 30–32, 31f
Code letter, 162–164, 163f, 178
Collector, 490, 491f, 495
Combination, 44
Combination circuit, 38–42, 39f, 
40f, 41f, 42f
Commercial air conditioning unit
 
general features, 383–384, 386
 
key term, 386
 
legend, 383, 384f
 
schematic, 383, 385f
Commercial ice makers
 
fl aker type, 440–443, 444f, 
445f, 445–447, 446f, 447f, 
448f, 449f
 
general features, 414, 436
 
Scotsman Company, 436, 
437f, 438f, 439f, 439–440, 
441f, 442f, 443f
Common denominator, 44
Common denominator 
method, 38
Compact
 
basic operation, 415, 415f
 
circuit operation, 416f, 416–
420, 417f, 418f, 419f, 420f
 
household ice makers key 
term, 434
 
new model, 421f, 421–423, 
422f, 423f, 424f
Compressor circuit
 
schematic, 110–113, 111f, 112f
 
wiring diagram, 113–114, 
113f, 114f
Compressor lock-out relay, 404, 
409f, 410f
Compressor nameplate, 66–67
Compressor relay coil, 305, 307
Compressors, 66–68
Condenser fl ooding, 453f, 
453–455, 454f, 455f, 456f
Condensing unit, 400, 401f, 411
Conductors
 
electrical fl ow, 9–10
 
key term, 14
 
material content, 472–473
 
NEC termination temperature 
regulation, 68
 
sizing, 66–68
 
valence electrons, 9, 473
Consequent pole motor, 135–136, 
136f, 145
Contact, 296
Contact arrangements, 282
Contact race, 554, 556
Contact section, 235–236, 342
Contactor, 246, 246f, 247
Continuous, 281
Continuous run timer, 275, 276f,
Control circuit
 
boiler schematic, 100–102, 
101f
 
compressor wiring diagram, 
113–114, 113f, 114f
 
fan motor, 107–108, 108f
 
start-stop push button, 98f, 
98–100, 99f, 100
 
thermostat, 102f, 102–104, 
103f, 104f
 
three wire, 90, 91, 91f
 
two-wire, 90–91, 91f
Control connector, 195, 195f, 196
Control contacts, 317, 319, 320
Control contacts, 320
Control relay (CR), 305, 305f, 307
Control transformer
 
industrial/commercial, 
255–257, 256f, 257f

INDEX   581
 
key term, 259
 
residential, 255, 255f
 
schematic, 257, 258f
Control valves
 
gas, 349, 350f, 351, 351f
 
key term, 352
Conventional, 482
Cooling anticipator, 286–287, 
287f, 296
Cooper
 
AWG table, 65f
 
conductor, 9, 10f, 473
 
resistance table, 64f
Core transformer, 204, 204f, 218
Coulomb
 
key term, 22
 
term, 15-16, 16f
CR. See Control relay (CR)
Crankcase heater, 384, 386
CTs, 231. See also Current trans-
formers (CTs)
Cube-size thermostat, 440, 450
Cumulative compressor, 281
Cumulative compressor run timer, 
275, 277f, 278, 278f, 279f
Current
 
autotransformers, 225f, 
225–226
 
human body impact, 4, 5f
 
inductive circuits, 74f, 
74–75, 75f
 
Ohm’s law chart, 20f
 
pure-capacitive circuit, 81, 
82–83, 83f
 
pure resistive circuit, 72, 
73f, 75
Current fl ow
 
capacitive circuit, 82, 82f, 83f, 
83–84
 
combination circuits, 
40-42, 41f
 
key term, 44
 
parallel circuits, 37–38, 
37f, 38f
 
series circuit, 35–36, 36f
Current fl ow theory, 479, 482
Current limiting resistor, 318, 320
Current relay
 
general features, 262f, 
262–263
 
key term, 268
 
starting relay type, 260
Current transformer
 
ammeter, 30, 30f
 
formulas, 201
 
key term, 34
Current transformers (CTs)
 
class of, 200
 
general features, 227–229, 
228f
 
key term, 231
D
Dalton, John, 7
Dark current, 487
Dashed lines, 96, 97f, 98f
DC excitation current, 
188–189, 192
Defi nite time control, 181, 
182f, 184
Defrost heater thermostat, 
426, 434
Defrost thermostat, 389, 
390f, 398
Defrost timer
 
commercial, 279, 280f
 
construction of, 274–275, 
275f
 
heat-pump, 389–390, 390f, 
391f, 392f, 393f
 
key term, 281, 398
 
refrigeration appliances, 274
Delay-on-break, 330, 331, 333, 
333f, 337
Delay-on-make, 330, 331, 332f, 
333f, 337
Delta connection
 
three phase, 51, 53, 53f, 54f
 
three-phase motors, 153, 
156, 156f
Delta, 61
Diac
 
characteristics, 509–510, 510f
 
general features, 509, 510f
 
key term, 511
Dielectric, 79, 80f, 88
Dielectric stress
 
electrostatic charge, 80f, 
80–81
 
key terms, 88
Dielectric test set, 87, 87f
Differential amplifi er, 559, 560
Differential pressure switch, 
317–318, 318f, 320
Differential thermostat, 290f, 
290–291, 296
Digital, 494, 495
Digital meter
 
ammeter, 32, 32f
 
ohmmeter, 33, 87
 
key term, 34
 
voltmeter, 25–27, 27f
Diode
 
bidirectional (diac), 509
 
electrical device, 478–479, 479f
 
identifying leads, 481, 481f
 
key term, 482
 
material content, 475, 476f
 
rectifi ers, 480f, 480–481, 481f
 
testing, 479, 480f
Disconnecting switch, 69, 69f, 70f
Disconnection, 68–69, 69f
Distribution transformers, 
214, 215f
Door interlock switch, 402, 411
Dopants, 483
Double-acting, 380
Double-acting thermostat, 378
Double-break contact, 247
Double-break contacts, 245–246, 
246f
Draft motor relay (DMR), 404
Dual Inline Package (DIP), 196
Dual voltage motor, 124–126, 
125f, 126f
Dual voltage stator, 153–155, 
153f, 154f, 155f
Dual-pressure switch, 300, 
301f, 302
Dust collection, 194
E
E-I core, 205, 205f, 218
Eddy currents, 245, 247
EFM (evaporator fan motor) relay, 
305, 307
EFS (evaporator fl ow switch), 
305, 307
Ejector blades, 415, 434
Electric arc, 348, 352
Electric circuits problems, 44–49
Electric heating element, 
464, 465f
Electrical circuits, 35–36, 36f
Electrical currents measurement 
instruments, 24

582   INDEX
Electrical pressure
 
key term, 22, 374
 
voltage, 16, 17f
Electrical resistance heating 
element, 380
Electrical symbols
 
NEMA, 93–95, 95f
 
wound rotor induction motor, 
180, 181f
Electricity
 
bump theory, 10f, 10–11, 11f
 
common sources, 11
 
composition, 9–10, 10f
 
key term, 14
 
measurements/values, 15
 
safety check, 2
 
terminal polarity, 11, 12f
 
valence shell, 9
Electromagnetic fi eld, 187, 192
Electromotive force (EMF), 16, 22
Electron
 
atomic structure, 7, 7f, 8f
 
coulomb, 15-16, 16f
 
discovery of, 7–8
 
electrical charge, 6
 
key term, 14
 
law of charges, 7, 7f
 
orbits of, 8-9, 9f
 
size of, 6, 7f
Electron fl ow theory, 482, 679
Electronic defrost timer, 390–391, 
393f, 394f
Electronic short cycle timers, 
330–331, 332f, 333, 333f
Electronic symbols, 96, 97f, 98f
Electrostatic charge, 80f, 80–81, 88
Emitter, 490, 491f, 495
Engineering notation, 20–21
Equipment nameplate, 66–67, 68f
Evaporator, 274, 281
Excitation current, 206, 218
Expansion
 
bimetal strip, 340, 340f
 
key term, 346
 
pressure, 344, 345
 
temperature sensor, 338, 339
F
Fan control circuit
 
schematic, 107–108, 108f
 
wiring diagram, 108–110, 
109f, 110f
Fan motors, 136–137
Fan relay. See FR (fan relay)
Fan switch, 285, 285f, 296
Fan switches
 
general features, 311–312, 
312f
 
key term, 316
 
types of, 312–313, 312f, 313f
Fan-limit switch, 314, 315f, 316
Farad, 81, 88
Field discharge resistor, 188, 
188f, 192
Field effect transistors (FETs), 
139–140, 518, 529
Fifteen lead motor, 156, 157f
“Fire eye,” 348–349, 352
First aid, safety rules, 4
5 amperes, 227–228, 228f, 231
Fixed resistors
 
color coding, 466f, 466–467, 
467f
 
key term, 470
 
standard values, 467, 
468f–469f, 469
 
values, 469, 469f
Flaker type, 450
Flaker type ice maker
 
basic features, 440–443, 444f, 
445, 445f
 
operation, 445–447, 446f, 
447f, 448f, 449f
“Flame eye,” 348–349, 352
Flame rod, 349, 349f, 352
Flame sensors, 348–349
Flex tray
 
basic features, 424–427, 425f, 
426f, 427f
 
key term, 434
 
operation, 427–430, 428f, 
429f, 430f, 431f, 
432f, 433f
 
problems/precautions, 431, 
433, 433f
Flow switch, 304–306, 305f, 
306f, 307
Flow washers, 415, 415f, 434
Forward biased, 479, 482
4-way valve, 322, 322f, 325
FR (fan relay), 107–108, 115
Freezer assembly, 440, 450
Frequency, 196
“Frost free,” 274
FSCR (fl ow switch control relay), 
243–244, 247
Full-wave rectifi er, 480–481, 
481f, 482
Fuse, 56, 61
Fused disconnects, 59–60, 60f
Fused jumper, 364–365, 365f, 374
Fuses, 58–58, 59f
G
Gain
 
negative feedback, 520, 520f
 
op am ideal, 519
 
op amp key term, 529
Gallium arsenide (GaAs), 
483–484, 484f
Gallium arsenide phosphide 
(GaAsP), 483–484, 484f
Gallium phosphide (GaP), 
483–484, 484f
Gas burners, 347
Gate, 502, 502f, 507
Gate turn off device (GTO), 
141–142
Germanium, 473, 477
Gold, 9
Green tape, 56
Gun-type oil furnace, 353–354, 
354f, 357
H
Hair, 308–309
Half-wave rectifi er, 480, 480f, 482
Hands, 4
Harmonics, 139, 145
Head pressure valve
 
adjustable, 454–455, 
455f, 456f
 
nonadjustable, 453f, 453–454, 
454f
Heat anticipator, 285–286, 
286f, 296
Heat-pump
 
defrost timer, 389–390, 390f, 
391f, 392f, 393f
 
electronic defrost timers, 
390–391, 393f, 394f
 
general features, 388
 
sequence timer, 389, 389f
 
system schematic, 391–394, 
395f, 396, 396f, 397f
 
thermostats, 389

INDEX   583
Heater section, 235–236, 242
Heating element, 235, 235f, 242
Helium, 7, 8f
Henry, 73, 77
Henry, Joseph, 73
Hermetically sealed compressors, 
66–68
Hertz, 50, 51f, 61
High voltage spark ignition, 347, 
348, 349, 351f
High-leg, 61
High-leg connection, 54, 54f
High-pressure switch
 
general features, 298–299, 
299f, 301f
 
key term, 302
Holding, 181, 184
Holding current, 502, 507
Holding relay (HR)
 
key term, 337
 
short-cycle timer, 328f, 328–
330, 329f, 330f, 331f, 332f
Holding switch, 417, 417f, 434
Hopscotch method, 365, 366f, 
367f, 368f, 374
Horseplay, 4
Hot-gas solenoid valve, 439, 
439f, 450
Hot-wire relay
 
general features, 261f, 
261–262
 
key term, 268
 
starting relay type, 260
Household ice makers
 
compact, 415f, 415–420, 
416f, 417f, 418f, 419f, 420f
 
fl ex tray features, 424–427, 
425f, 426f, 427f
 
fl ex tray operation, 427–430, 
428f, 429f, 430f, 431f, 
432f, 433f
 
fl ex tray problems, 431, 
433, 433f
 
general features, 414
 
new compact model, 421f, 
421–423, 422f, 423f, 424f
Human body, 4, 5f
Humidifi er, 309, 309f
Humidistat, 308, 309, 309f
Humidity, 308
Humidity control, 194
Hydrogen, 7, 7f
Hysteresis, 217
Hysteresis loop, 525–526, 
526f, 529
I
I/O capacity, 537, 537f, 545
I/O rack, 536–537, 537f, 545
Ice makers. See Commercial ice 
makers, Household ice 
 makers
Illuminated, 535–536, 545
Impedance
 
key term, 77
 
measurement value, 75f, 75–76
 
pure-capacitive circuit, 
82–83, 83f
 
quantities/laws key term, 22
 
speed control, 270
 
symbol, 75
 
term, 17
In phase, 72, 73f, 77
In-line ammeters, 227, 228f, 231
Indoor fan relay (IFR), 384, 386
Indoor resistance heat, 391, 
395f, 398
Induction-run motor, 130
Inductive circuits, 73f, 73–75, 
74f, 75f
Inductive load, 72
Inductive reactance
 
inductive circuits, 74f, 74–76, 
75f, 76f
 
key term, 77
Inlet, solenoid valve, 321, 
322f, 325
Inline, 34
Inline ammeter, 29, 29f
Input, 556
Input impedance, 25–26, 34
Input terminal, 548
Insulated gate bipolar transitors 
(IGBTs), 139–141, 140f, 145
Insulated gloves, 2
Insulation, 66, 67f, 70
Insulator, 12, 14, 473, 473f
Integrated circuits (ICS), 288
Interlocking
 
key term, 247
 
relays, 243–244
 
squirrel cage induction motor 
key term, 178
 
term, 166–167
Internal relay, 543, 545
“Inverter rated,” 140–141
Inverting amplifi er, 521, 521f, 
522f, 529
Inverting input, 519, 519f, 529
Isolation transformers
 
calculations, 201f, 207–210, 
208f, 209f, 210f
 
common use, 252
 
construction, 203, 204f
 
core types, 203–206, 
204f, 205f
 
distribution transformers, 
214, 215f
 
excitation transformers, 206
 
general features, 201f, 
201–203, 202f, 203f, 204f
 
key term, 218, 259
 
maximum current 
 determination, 216–217
 
multiple secondaries 
 calculations, 212–214, 
213f, 214f
 
multiple tapped windings, 210, 
211f, 212f
 
mutual induction, 206–207, 
207f
 
operating principles, 
206f, 206
 
power loss, 217, 217f
 
practical problems, 219–220
 
ratings, 216
 
testing, 215–216, 216f
L
Lattice structure, 474, 474f, 475f, 
476f, 477
Law of charges, 7, 7f, 14
Leads
 
identifying diode, 481, 481f
 
identifying transistor, 
494, 494f
Leakage current, 266, 268
Legend
 
commercial air conditioning 
unit, 383, 384f
 
heat-pump system, 396f
 
room air conditioners, 376, 
377f, 380
Level detector, 522f, 522–525, 
523f, 524f, 525f, 529
Light current, 488

584   INDEX
Light-emitting diode (LED)
 
characteristics, 484, 484f
 
circuit connection, 486, 486f
 
construction, 483–484, 484f
 
key term, 251, 488
 
lead identifi cation, 484–485, 
485f
 
seven-segment displays, 
485, 486f
 
solid state relay, 248–249, 249f
 
testing, 484, 485f
Limit switches, 313, 314f, 316
Line current
 
delta connection, 53, 54f
 
wye connection, 52
“Line isolation,” 202, 226
Line monitor, 333–334, 334f, 
335f, 336, 336f
Line voltage
 
delta connection, 53, 54f
 
general features, 287, 
287f, 288f
 
thermostat key term, 296
 
wye connection, 51–52, 52f
Load
 
control circuit, 99
 
schematics/wiring design 
key term, 105
Loading terminal, 534, 536, 545
Lock-out relay (LOR), 404f, 
403–404, 405f, 406f, 411
Locked rotor current, 163, 178
Loop, 529
Low voltage controls, 391, 392, 
395f, 398
Low-pressure switch, 299, 299f, 
300f, 301f, 302
M
Magnetic fi eld
 
inductive circuits, 73
 
key term, 77
 
rotation factors, 148–152, 
149f, 150f, 151f, 152f
 
speed factors, 152–153
Magnetic fl ux, 132, 132f, 134
Magnetic lines of fl ux, 11
Main Limit, 402, 411
Maintaining, 181
Maintaining contact, 184
Major components, 376–377, 
378f, 380
Measuring instruments, 374
“Megger,” 368–369, 372f
Megohmmeter, 368–369, 372f
Mercury contact thermostat, 
283–284, 284f
Meter, 2, 37
Metering device, 322, 322f, 
323f, 325
Metric prefi xes
 
engineering notation, 
20–21, 21f
 
standard measurement, 20, 20f
Mica, 12
Micro-farad, 81, 88
Microamperes, 16
Mil-foot, 64, 64f, 65t, 66, 77
Milliamperes, 16
Mold heater, 415, 415f, 434
Motor starters, 246, 246f, 247
Motors
 
consequent pole, 135–136, 
136f
 
inductive circuits, 73
 
“inverter rated,” 140–141
 
multispeed fan, 136f, 
136–137, 137f
 
power consumption, 126
 
power factor correction, 
84–85, 85f, 86f
 
protecting large, 240, 240f, 
241f
Movable contacts
 
electrical symbols, 92, 92f
 
schematics/wiring design key 
term, 105
Multimeter, 27f, 27–28
Multiple taps, 226
Multiranged, 25, 26f, 34
Multispeed AC motors, 135, 136, 
136f, 145
Mutual induction
 
key term, 218, 259
 
isolation transformers, 
206–207, 207f
Mylar foil shield, 558, 560
N
N-type material, 475, 475f, 477
 
Nameplates
 
code letters, 162–164
 
compressors, 66–67
 
electrical motors, 164, 164f
 
squirrel cage induction motor 
key term, 178
 
transformers, 216
National Electrical Code® (NEC®)
 
circuit conductor wire, 56
 
compressor regulation, 66–68
 
disconnecting visibility, 
68–69, 69f
 
fuse ratings, 50, 58–59, 59f
 
locked rotor code letters, 
163–164, 164f
 
temperature determination, 67f
 
termination temperature, 68
 
wire size, 63
National Electrical Manufacturers 
Association (NEMA), 93–95, 
95f, 105
Negative temperature coeffi cient 
(NTC), 342, 346
Neutral, 61
Neutral conductor, 55–56
Neutron, 6, 7, 8f, 14
Nichrome, 464, 470
NM cable, 12, 13f
Node, 105
Noise reduction ratio, 558, 560
Nonadjustable head pressure 
valve, 453–454, 454f
Nonadjustable pressure switches, 
300, 301f, 302
Noninverting amplifi er, 521, 521f, 
522f, 529
Noninverting input, 519, 
519f, 529
Normally closed, 105
Normally closed pushbuttons, 
92, 93f
Normally closed switches, 92, 92f
Normally open, 105
Normally open pushbuttons, 
92, 93f
Normally open switches, 92, 92f
NPN, 490, 491f, 494
NPNP junction, 512, 516
Nucleus, 7, 14
Numbering
 
compressor circuit, 112f, 
113–114, 114f
 
fan control circuit, 108–110, 
109f, 110f
Nylobraid tube, 441, 450
Nylon, 308–309

INDEX   585
O
Offset null, 519, 519f, 520f, 529
Ohm, 17, 17f, 22
Ohm’s law, 18–19, 22
Ohm’s law chart, 19, 19f, 20f
Ohm’s law formula chart, 19, 19f
Ohm’s law formulas, 19, 19f, 75
Ohmmeter
 
capacitor test, 86–87, 87
 
defrost timer, 278–279
 
diode testing, 479, 480f
 
key term, 34, 374
 
measurement instrument, 
32–33, 33f
 
SCR testing, 504–506, 505f, 
506f, 507f
 
squirrel-cage induction motor, 
164–165, 165f
 
stator winding test, 123–124, 
124f
 
synchronous motor, 189
 
transformers, 257
 
transistors, 491f, 491–493, 
492f, 493f
 
triac, 515f, 515–516, 516f
 
troubleshooting, 365–369, 
369f, 370f, 371f, 372f
 
troubleshooting instrument, 
361
 
UJT, 498, 498f, 499f
 
wound rotor induction motor, 
183, 183f
Oil fi red heating systems
 
control components, 354
 
controls, 353, 354f
 
operation, 355f, 355–356, 
356f, 357f
Oil furnace, 353–354, 354f
Oil-fi lled capacitor, 85–86, 
86f, 88
Oil-fi red boiler circuit, 100–102, 
101f
Oil-pressure failure switch
 
general features, 317, 320
 
key term, 320
 
specifi cations, 319, 319f
Open on rise of differential (ORD), 
454, 456f, 460
Open on rise of inlet (ORI), 454, 
455f, 456f, 460
Open-delta system, 54–55, 
55f, 61
Operational amplifi er (op amp),
 
basic circuit connections, 521f, 
521–522, 522f
 
general features, 518
 
hysteresis loop, 525–526, 526f
 
key term, 529
 
level detector application, 522f, 
522–525, 523f, 524f, 525f
 
negative feedback, 520f, 
520–521
 
oscillator application, 525, 
526f, 527f
 
pulse generator application, 
526–528, 527f, 528f
 
741 case, 528f
 
741 parameters, 519
 
741 pin connection, 519f, 
519–520, 520f
Opposition, 132, 132f, 134
Opto-isolated, 249, 251
Orbits, 8
Orifi ce, 323, 324f, 235
Oscillator, 525, 526f, 527f, 529
Outdoor compressor controls, 
391, 395f, 398
Outlet, 321. 322f, 325
Output, 556
Output terminal, 548
Overload relays, 234
Overloads, 234, 242
P
P-type material, 474, 475f, 477
Packaged units
 
circuit operation, 404, 
407f, 408f
 
compressor lock-out relay, 
404, 409f, 410f
 
cooling cycle, 400, 402
 
door interlock switch, 402
 
electronic controls, 402f, 
402–403
 
heating cycle, 402
 
lock-out protection, 403f, 
403–404, 405f, 406f
 
schematic, 400, 401f
Panel box, 56f, 56–57
Parallel, 44
Parallel circuit
 
circuit type, 35, 36–38, 38f, 
42, 42f
 
power factor, 84, 84f
Part winding starting, 165, 170, 
173, 173f, 174f, 175f, 176f
Permanent magnet rotor, 
194, 196
Permanent-split, 130
Permanent-split capacitor 
motor (PSC)
 
multispeed motors, 135
 
single phase motor, 119, 126f, 
126–127, 127f, 128f
Phase current
 
delta connection, 53, 54f
 
wye connection, 52
Phase shifted, 507
Phase voltage
 
delta connection, 53, 54f
 
wye connection, 51–52, 52
Photoconductive devices, 
487–488, 488f
Photodiode, general features, 
487f, 487, 488, 488f
Photovoltaic device, 487, 
487f, 488
PI, 81
Pico-farad, 81, 88
Pilot light, 347–348, 352
Pilot valve, 323, 324f, 325
Plates
 
capacitor, 79–80, 80f
 
dielectric stress, 81
Plum pudding model, 8
Plunger-type solenoid, 245, 
245f, 247
PN junction
 
construction of, 479, 479f
 
diode leads, 481, 481f
 
general features, 342–344, 
343f
 
key terms, 346
 
material content, 475, 476f
 
rectifi ers, 480f, 480–481, 481f
 
testing, 479, 480f
PNP, 490, 491f, 495
PNPN, 501, 507
Polarity, 136, 145
Positive temperature coeffi cient 
(PTC), 342, 346
Potential relay
 
general features, 263f, 
263–264, 265f
 
key term, 268
 
starting relay type, 260

586   INDEX
Power, 20f
Power connector, 195, 
195f, 196
Power consumption, 126
Power factor, 76, 76f, 77
Power factor correction
 
motor, 84–85, 85f, 86f
 
parallel circuit, 84, 84
 
pure-capacitive circuit, 83f, 
83–84
Power supply, 533, 545
Power transistor, 248, 249f, 351
Pressure, 348
Pressure regulator, 349, 
350f, 352
Pressure switch control relay. 
See PSCR (Pressure switch 
 control relay)
Pressure switches
 
construction, 300
 
operations, 298
 
settings, 300, 300f
Primary control
 
key term, 357
 
oil burner components, 
354, 354f
 
oil burner operation, 355f, 
355–356, 356f, 357f
 
oil-fi red control system, 353
Primary winding
 
autotransformers, 221, 226
 
current transformers, 
227–228, 228f
Programmable controllers, 
557–558
Programmable logic 
controller (PLC)
 
basic components, 533
 
CPU, 533f, 533–534, 534f
 
general features, 532–533
 
I/O capacity, 537, 537f
 
I/O rack, 536–537, 537f
 
input module, 537–538, 538, 
539f, 540f
 
internal relays, 543
 
key term, 545
 
off-delay circuit, 543f, 
543–544, 544f
 
original use, 532
 
output module, 538–539, 
541f, 542f
 
power supply, 433
 
programming terminal, 533, 
533f, 534 535f, 536, 
536f, 537f
 
symbols, 536, 537f
 
timers/counters, 543
Programmable logic controller 
(PLC) programming
 
circuit operation, 547, 548f
 
entering a program, 554
 
key terms, 556
 
program conversion, 551f, 
551–552, 552f, 553f
 
program development, 
548–551, 549f, 550f, 551f
 
programming considerations, 
554, 555f
 
programming task, 
546–547, 547f
Programmable thermostat, 288f, 
288–289, 289f, 296
Programming terminal, 545
Proton
 
atomic structure, 7, 7f, 8f
 
electrical charge, 6
 
key term, 14
 
law of charges, 7, 7f
 
size, 6, 7f
PSCR (Pressure switch control 
relay), 111–113, 112f, 115
Psig (pounds per square inch 
gauge), 442, 450
Pulse generator, 526–528, 527f, 
528f, 529
Pulse width modulation (PWM), 
140, 140f, 141f, 145
Pure-capacitive circuit, 81, 81f, 88
Pure-inductive circuit, 77
Pure resistive circuit, 72, 75, 77
Pushbuttons, 92, 93f
Q
“Quantum jumps,” 8
R
“Ramping,” 143–144
Rapid cool down, 196
Ratchet wheel, 235, 235f, 236f
Reactance, 74, 77
Reciprocal, 44
Reciprocal method, 35
Rectifi er, 480, 482
Red tape, 56
Reed relay, solid state relay, 249f, 
249–250, 251
Refrigeration controls
 
condenser fl ooding, 453f, 
453–455, 454f, 455f, 456f
 
fan cycle control, 455–457, 
457f
 
general features, 452–453
 
shutters, 458, 460
 
variable speed control, 
457–458, 458f, 459f
Relay
 
basic starting types, 260
 
solenoid principle, 244f, 
244–246, 245f, 246f
 
term, 243, 244f, 246, 247
Relay schematic, 546, 547f, 
548f, 556
Reliability, 469–470
Replaceable-line type fuse, 58, 58f
Resistance
 
combination circuits, 38–41, 
39f, 40f
 
key terms, 22
 
measurement, 17, 17f
 
parallel circuits, 37–38, 
38f, 42
 
series circuit, 35
Resistance-start, 130
Resistance-start induction run 
motor, 118, 119–122, 120f, 
121f, 122f
Resistance temperature detector 
(RTD), 342, 342, 346
Resistive heating element, 
274, 281
Resistive load, 72
Resistor/reactor starting, 
165–166, 167f
Resistors
 
color coding, 466f, 
466–467, 467f
 
fi fth band colors, 469–470
 
general features, 464–466, 
465f
 
standard values, 467, 
468f–469f, 469
 
value resistors, 469, 469f
Reverse biased, 479, 482
Reversing valve
 
general features, 322f, 
322–323, 323f

INDEX   587
 
key term, 325
 
operation, 323, 324f, 325, 325f
Reversing valve solenoid, 
heat-pump, 389, 398
Romex, 61
Romex cable
 
insulator, 12, 13f
 
two-conductor, 56–57
Room air conditioners
 
electric resistance heating 
 element, 378–380, 379f
 
legends, 376, 377f
 
major components, 
376–377, 378f
 
troubleshooting, 381–382
Rotating fi eld speed, 130
Rotating magnetic fi eld
 
brushless DC motors 
key term, 196
 
key term, 158
 
three-phase motor, 148–152, 
149f, 150f, 151f, 152f
Rotation, 124
Rotor
 
alternator, 51
 
brushless DC motors, 194, 194f
 
electrical services key term, 61
 
synchronous motor, 186–187, 
187f, 188f, 189f, 190f, 191f
 
testing, 183, 183f
 
wound rotor induction motor, 
179–180, 180f
Rotor bars, 160–161, 178
Rotor slip, 272f, 272, 273
Rubber, 12
Run capacitors, 128f, 128–129, 
129f
Run timer, 281
Run winding
 
consequent pole motor, 
135–136, 136f
 
dual voltage motors, 
124–125, 125f
 
key term, 130
 
motors, 119–120, 120f, 121f
 
PSC, 127, 127f
 
split-phase motors 
key term, 130
S
Safety, 2, 4, 80
Safety check, 2
Sail switch, 304–306, 305f, 307
Scale divider, 32, 32f
Schematic diagram
 
boiler schematic, 
100–102, 101f
 
commercial air conditioning 
unit, 383, 385f
 
commercial defrost timer, 280f
 
compressor circuit, 110–113, 
111f, 112f
 
control transformer, 257, 258f
 
defrost timer, 275, 275f, 
276f, 277f
 
diac symbol, 510f
 
diode symbol, 479
 
fan control circuit, 
107–108, 108f
 
gas control circuit, 349, 350f
 
heat-pump, 390f, 391f, 
392f, 393f
 
heat-pump system, 391–394, 
395f, 396f, 397f
 
high-voltage spark ignition 
control circuit, 349, 351f
 
key term, 105
 
legends, 376, 377f
 
oil-fi red control system, 354, 
354f, 355f, 356f
 
oil-pressure failure 
switch, 318f
 
packaged units, 400, 401f
 
potential relay, 264, 265f
 
programming task, 546, 547f, 
548f, 551
 
PSC, 126f
 
reading rules, 96, 96f
 
room air conditioner, 
376–380, 378f, 379f
 
Scotsman Company ice making 
unit, 439, 439f
 
solid-state starting relay, 
266, 266f
 
squirrel-cage induction 
motor, 164
 
start-stop push button, 98f, 
98–100, 99f
 
term, 90, 95
 
thermostat, 102f, 102–104, 
103f, 104f
 
transformer, 253f
 
transistor symbols, 490, 491f
 
triac symbol, 512, 513f
 
wound rotor induction motor, 
179–180, 180f
Scotsman Company ice making 
unit, 436, 437f, 438f, 439f, 
439–440, 441f, 442f, 443f
Sealing, 181, 184
Secondary winding
 
autotransformers, 221, 226
 
current transformers, 228
Self-induction, 206, 206f, 218
Self-transformer, 22, 226
Semiconductor
 
atom, 473, 473f
 
key term, 477
 
materials, 472, 473–475
 
structure, 473–474, 474f, 
475f, 476f
 
triac, 513, 513
Sequence timer, 389, 389f, 398
Series, 44
Series circuit
 
current fl ow/voltage drop, 
35–36, 36f
 
resistance/inductance, 75f, 
75–76
Shaded-pole induction motor
 
key term, 134
 
mechanism, 132f
 
operating features, 133, 134f
 
rotation, 133, 133f
 
speed, 133, 133f
Shading coil, 131–133, 132, 
133f, 134
Shell transfer, 204–205, 
205f, 218
Shells, 8, 9, 9f
Shielded cable, 558, 558f, 560
Short cycling
 
causes of, 327–328
 
description, 327
 
key term, 337
Short-cycle timer
 
electronic, 330–331, 332f, 
333, 333f
 
line monitor, 333–334, 334f, 
335f, 336, 336f
Short-cycling timer
 
general features, 328f, 
328–329
 
key term, 337
 
operation, 329f, 329–330, 
330f, 331f, 332f

588   INDEX
Shotgun method, 372–374
Shutters, 458, 460
Silicon, 473–474, 477
Silicon bilateral switch (SBS), 
354, 357
Silicon carbide (SiC), 483–484, 484f
Silicon controlled rectifi ers (SCRs)
 
multispeed motors 
key term, 145
 
variable frequency, 138–139, 
139f
 
variable frequency drives, 
141–142, 142f, 144f
Silicon steel, 217, 218
Silicon-controlled rectifi er (SCR)
 
AC circuit, 503, 503f, 504f
 
characteristics, 501–502, 502f
 
construction, 501, 502f
 
DC circuit, 502, 502f, 503f
 
key term, 507
 
phase shifted, 504, 505f
 
testing, 504–506, 505f, 
506f, 507f
 
thyristors, 500
Silver, 9, 64, 473
Single-phase, 61
Single phase service, 55f, 55–56
Single-phase motors
 
capacitor-start induction run, 
118, 119–120, 120f, 
122–123, 123f
 
dual voltage, 124–126, 
125f, 126f
 
overload protection, 237–240, 
239f
 
PSC, 119, 126f, 126–127, 
127f, 128f
 
resistance-start induction run, 
118, 119–122, 120f, 121f, 
122f
 
shaded-pole induction motor 
key term, 131
 
testing, 123–124, 124f
 
types of, 118–119
Single-pole breaker, 56, 56f, 61
Single-pole single throw (SPST) 
switch, 92, 92f
Slip ring
 
key term, 184
 
synchronous motor, 188f
 
wound rotor induction motor, 
179–180, 180f
Solar cells, 11
Solder-melting type, 234–236, 
235f, 236f, 242
Solenoid, 247
Solenoid coil, 323, 324f, 325
Solenoid principle, 244f, 
244–246, 245f
Solenoid valve, general features, 
321–322, 322f, 325
Solid state devices, 472, 478
Solid-state hard starting kit, 
266–267, 267f, 268
Solid-state relay, 248–250, 249f, 
250f, 251, 260
Solid-state starting relay, 264, 
266, 266f, 268
Split-phase motors
 
classifi cations, 118–119
 
key term, 130
 
production, 119
 
testing, 123–124, 124f
Squirrel-cage induction motor
 
code letters, 162–164, 
163f, 164f
 
electrical symbol, 164f
 
key term, 178
 
name, 159, 160f
 
operation principle, 159–162, 
161f, 162f
 
starting methods, 165
 
testing, 164–165, 165f
 
three-phase motors, 148
Squirrel cage rotor
 
general features, 159, 160f
 
shaded-pole induction motor, 
133, 134f
 
split-phase motors, 121, 
121–122, 122f
Staging thermostat, 289-290, 296
Star, 61
Star connection, 51f, 51–53
Start winding
 
dual voltage motors, 
124–126, 125f
 
key term, 130
 
motors, 119–120, 120f
 
permanent split-capacitor 
motor, 127, 127f
Start-stop push button circuit, 98f, 
98–100, 99f
Starting relay, 260, 268
Stationary contact
 
electrical symbols, 92, 92f
 
schematics/wiring design 
key term, 105
Stator
 
alternator, 51, 51f
 
electrical services key term, 61
 
motor winding, 119–120, 120f
 
squirrel-cage induction motor, 
159, 160f
 
wound rotor induction motor, 
179, 180f
Stator poles, 135–136
Stator winding
 
testing, 123–124, 124f
 
three-phase motors, 153–155, 
153f, 154f, 155f
Step-down, 226
Step-down transformer
 
autotransformer, 221–222, 222f
 
isolation transformers key 
term, 218
Step starting, 181–183, 182f, 184
Step-up, 226
Step-up transformer, 218
Switch(es)
 
differential pressure, 317–318
 
DIP, 196
 
electrical symbols, 92, 92f
 
fan control circuit, 107
 
fan-limit, 314, 315f
 
fans, 311–313, 312f, 313f
 
oil-pressure failure, 317
Synchronous condenser, 189, 192
Synchronous motor
 
brushless exciter, 190f, 
190–191, 191f
 
fi eld discharge resistor, 
188, 188f
 
general features, 186–187, 
187f
 
key term, 192
 
operation, 188
 
power factor correction, 
188–189
 
power supply, 189
 
starting, 187, 187f
 
testing, 189, 189f
 
three-phase motors, 148
Synchronous speed
 
determining factors, 152–153
 
key term, 158
 
magnetic rotation, 152

INDEX   589
T
Tape, 56
Tape wound, 205f, 205–206, 218
Tapped, 135–136, 136f, 145
Temperature
 
measurement, 338
 
metal expansion, 338–340, 
339f, 340f
 
wire/voltage key terms, 70
Temperature measure
 
bellows-type thermostat, 
344, 345f
 
PN junction, 342–344, 343f
 
thermistor, 342
Temperature variation, 194
Terminal board, 392, 395f, 398
Terminal markings, 392–393, 
397f, 398
Termination temperature, 68, 70
Test points, 434
Testing
 
capacitor, 86-87
 
current relay, 263
 
defrost timer, 278–279
 
dielectric test set, 87, 87f
 
diodes, 479, 480f
 
hot-wire relay, 262
 
LED, 484, 485f
 
overload protection, 238
 
potential relay, 264
 
resistor reliability, 469–470
 
single-phase motors, 
123–124, 124f
 
slit-phase motors, 
123–124, 124f
 
solid-state relay, 266
 
squirrel-cage induction motor, 
164–165, 165f
 
stator winding, 123–124, 124f
 
synchronous motors, 
189, 189f
 
thermostats, 291–292, 
294f, 295f
 
transformers, 215–216, 
216f, 257
 
transistor, 491f, 491–493, 
492f, 493f
 
triac, 515f, 515–516, 516f
 
UJT, 498, 498f, 499f
 
voltage, 69
 
wound rotor induction motor, 
183, 183f
Thermistor
 
key term, 268
 
solid-state starting relay, 
264, 266
 
types of, 342
Thermocouple
 
common types, 341f
 
fl ame sensor, 348, 348f
 
key terms, 346
 
voltage production, 340–341, 
341f
Thermopile, 341, 341f, 346
Thermoplastic, 12
Thermostat(s)
 
bimetal, 282–283, 283f, 285
 
bin, 440
 
blower fans, 285, 285f
 
cabinet, 426
 
circuit operation, 102f, 
102–104, 103f, 104f
 
defrost heater, 426
 
differential, 290f, 290–291
 
electronic programmable, 
289, 289f
 
general features, 282
 
heat-pump, 389
 
heating and cooling, 
284–285, 285f
 
key term, 296
 
line voltage, 287, 287f, 288f
 
mercury contact, 283–284, 
284f
 
programmable, 288f, 
288–289, 289f
 
room air conditioner, 378
 
staging, 289-290
 
terminal identifi cation, 291, 
292f, 293f, 294f
 
testing, 291–292, 294f, 295f
Thompson, J. J., electron, 7–8
Three phase, 51, 61
Three phase connection
 
delta connection, 51, 53, 54f
 
open-delta system, 54–55, 55f
 
wye connection, 51f, 51–53, 
52f, 53f
Three-phase motors
 
key term, 158
 
overload protection, 237, 237f, 
238f, 239f
 
synchronous, 148, 186–187. 
See also Synchronous motor
 
types, 148
 
wound rotor induction motor, 
148, 179–180, 180f, 184
Three-phase squirrel-cage 
 induction motor, 383, 386
Three-pole breaker, circuit breaker 
type, 56, 56f, 61f
Three wire control circuits, 90, 
91, 91f, 105
Thyristors, 500
Time delay circuit, general 
 features, 318–319, 320
Time delay contact
 
boiler circuit, 102
 
thermostat, 102, 104
Time delay relay (TDR), 404
Timer clock, commercial defrost 
timer, 279, 280f, 281
Timer motor, 329f, 329–330, 
330f, 331f, 332f, 337
Tolerance, 467, 470
Torque, 130, 161
Toroid core, 205f, 205–206, 
218
Toroid transformer, 229, 229f
Transformers
 
basic law, 201, 201f
 
classifi cations, 200
 
delta connection, 54, 54f
 
formulas, 201, 201f, 
223–225, 224f
 
general description, 200
 
inductive circuits, 73
 
operation, 252–253, 253f
 
operation principle, 253, 253f
 
power loss, 217, 217f
 
ratings, 216
 
single phase service, 55–56
 
term, 252, 259
 
testing, 215-216, 216f, 257
 
voltage/current relationship, 
253f, 253–255, 254f, 255f
Transistor
 
general features, 490, 491f
 
identifying leads, 494, 494f
 
IGBTs, 139–140
 
material content, 475, 476f
 
operation, 493–494, 494f
 
testing, 491f, 491–493, 
492f, 493f
 
variable frequency drives, 
138–139, 139f

590   INDEX
Triac
 
AC switch, 513
 
AC voltage control, 513–514, 
514f
 
general features, 512–513, 
513f
 
key term, 251
 
phase shifting, 514f, 514–515
 
primary control component, 
354
 
refrigeration control, 
457–458, 458f
 
solid state relay, 249, 249f,
 
speed control, 271f, 
271–272, 272f
 
testing, 515f, 515–516, 516f
 
thyristors, 500
Troubleshooting
 
ammeter, 369–371, 372f
 
basic questions, 360
 
commercial air conditioning 
unit, 386–387
 
heat-pump controls, 398–399
 
hopscotch method, 365, 366f, 
367f, 368f
 
measuring instruments, 361
 
ohmmeter, 365–369, 369f, 
370f, 371f, 372f
 
packaged units, 411–412
 
room air conditioners, 
381–382
 
shotgun method, 372–374
 
voltmeter, 363f, 363–365, 
364f, 365f, 366f
True power, 18, 18f, 22
Turns ratio
 
clamp-on ammeter, 
30–31, 31f
 
isolation transformers, 
201, 201f
 
key term, 34
 
transformer calculations, 208f, 
208–210, 209f, 210f
Two-conductor, 61
Two-conductor romex cable, 
56–57
Two-phase power, 119, 
119f, 130
Two-pole breaker, 56, 56f, 61
Two-speed compressors, 
136, 145
Two-wire control circuits, 90–91, 
91f, 105
U
Ultraviolet radiation (UV), 348
Unijunction transistor (UJT)
 
characteristics, 497
 
circuit operation, 497, 498f
 
construction, 496, 497f
 
general features, 496
 
key term, 500
 
testing, 498, 498f, 499f
Unity, 76, 77
V
Valence electrons
 
electron shell, 9, 10f
 
insulators, 12
 
key term, 14
Valence shell, 9, 14
Variable frequency, 145
Variable frequency drives
 
adjustment role, 143–144
 
induction motors, 138f, 
138–141, 139f, 140f, 141f
 
SCRs/GTOs, 141–143, 142f, 
143f, 144f
Variable resistor, 271, 271f, 273
Variable speed, 196
Variable speed air handlers, 194
Variable-speed motors
 
impedance, 272
 
key term, 273
 
use of, 270
 
voltage control, 271f, 
271–272, 272f
VARs (Volt-Amps Reactive), 76, 77
Vector addition, 52, 52f
Volt-amps, 76, 76f, 77
Volt-Amps Reactive circuit. See 
VARs (Volt-Amps Reactive)
Volt-omh-milliammeter (VOM), 
32–33, 34
Voltage
 
human body impact, 4
 
key term, 22
 
inductive circuits, 73f, 
73–74, 74f
 
pure-capacitive circuit, 81, 81f, 
82–83, 83f
 
pure resistive circuit, 72, 73f
Voltage drop
 
combination circuits, 40
 
electrical circuits key term, 44
 
parallel circuits, 37
 
rating, 66, 70
 
series circuit, 35–36, 36f
 
speed control, 270
 
spikes, 202, 203f
 
term, 16, 361
 
tests, 69
 
transformer formulas, 201
Voltage follower, 521, 529
Voltmeter
 
key term, 34, 374
 
measurement instruments, 
24–28, 25f, 26f, 27f
 
reading steps, 28f, 28–29
 
trouble shooting, 363f, 
363–365, 364f, 365f, 366f
 
trouble shooting instrument, 
361f, 361–362, 362f
Volts-per-turn method, 
223, 226
W
Warning tag, 2, 2f
Watchdog timer, 554, 556
Water solenoid valve, 439, 
439f, 450
Wattage,17–18, 18f, 22
Wattage rating, 466f, 466–467, 
467f, 470
White tape, 56
White wires, 56
Wire(s)
 
area, 64, 64f
 
circuit conductors, 56
 
insulation, 66
 
material, 64
 
resistance factors, 63
 
size, 63
 
temperature, 64f, 65f, 66, 67f
 
termination temperature, 68
 
voltage rating, 66
Wire resistance formula, 64
Wire wound, 470
Wire wound resistors, 464, 465f
Wiring diagrams
 
compressor circuit, 113
 
fan control circuit, 108–110, 
109f, 110f

INDEX   591
 
schematics/wiring design key 
term, 105
 
start-stop push button, 100, 
100f
 
term, 90, 96
Wood, 12
Wound rotor induction motor
 
key term, 184
 
motor operation, 180–181
 
schematic symbol, 180, 181f
 
step starting, 181–183, 182f
 
testing, 183
 
three-phase motors, 148, 
179–180, 180f
Wye, 61
Wye connection
 
three phase, 51f, 51–53, 52f, 53f
 
three-phase motors, 153
 
wound rotor induction motor, 
179–180, 180f
Wye-delta starting, 165, 
168–170, 169f, 170f, 
171f, 172f
Z
Zero switching, 250, 251
Zinc selenide (ZnSe), 
483–484, 484f

