Contents 
i

ii Contents
D P Kothari is presently Vice Chancellor of VIT University, Vellore. He obtained 
a BE (Electrical) in 1967, ME (Power Systems) in 1969 and PhD in 1975 from the 
Birla Institute of Technology and Science (BITS) Pilani, Rajasthan. From 1969 
to 1977, he was involved in teaching and development of several courses at BITS 
Pilani. Prior to his assuming charge as Vice Chancellor of VIT University, Dr Kothari 
served as Director In-charge and Deputy Director (Administration) as well as Head 
Centre for Energy Studies at Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi; and as Principal, 
Visvesvaraya Regional Engineering College, Nagpur. He was Visiting Professor at the 
Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology, Melbourne, Australia, during 1982–83 and 
1989 for two years. He was NSF Fellow at Purdue University, US in 1992.
Dr Kothari, who is a recipient of the Most Active Researcher Award, has published and presented 625 
research papers in various national as well as international journals, conferences, guided 30 PhD scholars and 
63 MTech students, and authored 21 books in Power Systems and other allied areas. He has delivered several 
keynote addresses and invited lectures at both national and international conferences on Electric Energy 
Systems. He has also delivered 42 video lectures on science and technology on YouTube with a maximum 
of 35,000 hits!
Dr Kothari is a Fellow of the Indian National Academy of Engineering (FNAE), Fellow of Indian National 
Academy of Sciences [FNASc], Fellow of Institution of Engineers (FIE) and Senior Member, IEEE. 
His many awards include the National Khosla award for Lifetime Achievements in Engineering for 2005 
from IIT Roorkee. The University Grants Commission (UGC), Govt. of India, has bestowed the UGC National 
Swami Pranavananda Saraswati award for 2005 on Education for his outstanding scholarly contributions.
He is also a recipient of the Lifetime Achievement Award (2009) by the World Management Congress, New 
Delhi, for his contribution to the areas of educational planning and administration. His ﬁelds of specialization 
are Optimal Hydro-thermal Scheduling, Unit Commitment, Maintenance Scheduling, Energy Conservation 
(loss minimization and voltage control), Power Quality and Energy Systems Planning and Modelling.
I J Nagrath is Adjunct Professor, BITS Pilani, from where he retired in July 1999 as 
Professor of Electrical Engineering and Deputy Director. He is now actively engaged 
in writing books related to his long teaching and research experience.
He obtained his BE with Honours in Electrical Engineering from Birla Engineering 
College in 1951 and MS from the University of Wisconsin, USA in 1956.
He has co-authored several successful books which include Electric Machines, 3/e, 
Modern Power System Analysis, Power System Engineering, Signals and Systems, 
Electrical Machines, Sigma Series and has authored Basic Electrical Engineering (all 
published by TMH). He has also co-authored Control System Engineering and authored Electronics: Analog 
and Digital. Besides he has these, published several research papers in prestigious national and international 
journals and continues to be active in studies and writing.

Contents 
iii
D P Kothari 
Vice Chancellor 
Vellore Institute of Technology (VIT) 
Vellore, Tamil Nadu 
I J Nagrath 
Adjunct Professor 
Birla Institute of Technology and Science (BITS) 
Pilani, Rajasthan 
Tata McGraw Hill Education Private Limited
NEW DELHI
New Delhi  New York  St Louis  San Francisco  Auckland  Bogotá Caracas
Kuala Lumpur  Lisbon  London  Madrid  Mexico City  Milan  Montreal
 San Juan  Santiago  Singapore  Sydney  Tokyo  Toronto

iv Contents
Tata McGraw-Hill
Published by the Tata McGraw Hill Education Private Limited,
7 West Patel Nagar, New Delhi 110 008.
Electric Machines, 4/e
Copyright © 2010, 2004, 1997, 1985, by Tata McGraw Hill Education Private Limited.
MATLAB® is a registered trademark of The MathWorks, Inc., 3 Apple Hill Drive, Natick, MA 01760-2098
No part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording, or otherwise or stored in a database or retrieval system without the prior written permission of 
the publishers. The program listings (if any) may be entered, stored and executed in a computer system, but they may not 
be reproduced for publication.
This edition can be exported from India only by the publishers,
Tata McGraw Hill Education Private Limited.
ISBN (13): 978-0-07-069967-0
ISBN (10): 0-07-069967-4
Managing Director: Ajay Shukla
Head—Higher Education Publishing and Marketing: Vibha  Mahajan 
Manager—Sponsoring: SEM & Tech. Ed.: Shalini Jha 
Assoc. Sponsoring Editor: Suman Sen
Development Editor: Manish Choudhary 
Executive—Editorial Services: Sohini Mukherjee
Sr. Production Manager: P L Pandita 
Dy. Marketing Manager—SEM & Tech. Ed.: Biju Ganesan
General Manager—Production: Rajender P Ghansela 
Asst. General Manager—Production: B L Dogra 
Information contained in this work has been obtained by Tata McGraw-Hill, from sources believed to be reliable. 
However, neither Tata McGraw-Hill nor its authors guarantee the accuracy or completeness of any information 
published herein, and neither Tata McGraw-Hill nor its authors shall be responsible for any errors, omissions, or 
damages arising out of use of this information. This work is published with the understanding that Tata McGraw-Hill 
and its authors are supplying information but are not attempting to render engineering or other professional services. 
If such services are required, the assistance of an appropriate professional should be sought.
Typeset at Tej Composers, WZ-391, Madipur, New Delhi 110063, and printed at S P Printers, 30A, Patpar Ganj Village, 
Delhi - 110091.
Cover Printer: S P Printers
DZXBCRAZDRXAQ
The McGraw-Hill Companies

Contents 
v
 
Dedicated
 
to
 
Shobha
 
 
—D P Kothari
 
and
 
Pushpa
 
 
—I J Nagrath

vi Contents

Contents 
vii
Preface 
xiii
 1. Introduction 
1
 
1.1 Introduction 1
 
1.2 Basic Principle, Types and Constructional Features of Electric Machines  3
 
1.3 Recent Trends in Research and Developments in Electric Machines 7
 2. Magnetic Circuits and Induction 
12
 
2.1 Introduction 12
 
2.2 Magnetic Circuits 12
 
2.3 Magnetic Materials and Their Properties 25
 
2.4 Magnetically Induced EMF and Force  27
 
2.5 AC Operation of Magnetic Circuits 31
 
2.6 Hysteresis and Eddy-Current Losses  33
 
2.7 Permanent Magnets 35
 
2.8 Application of Permanent Magnet Materials  40 
 
 Summary 42
 
 Practice Problems 43
 
 Review Questions 47
 3. Transformers 
48
 
3.1 Introduction 48
 
3.2 Transformer Construction and Practical Considerations 49
 
3.3 Transformer on No-Load  54
 
3.4 Ideal Transformer  58
 
3.5 Real Transformer and Equivalent Circuit  62
 
3.6 Transformer Losses  71
 
3.7 Transformer Testing  72
 
3.8 The Per Unit System 80
 
3.9 Efﬁciency and Voltage Regulation 82
 
3.10 Excitation Phenomenon in Transformers 91
 
3.11 Autotransformers  94
 
3.12 Variable Frequency Transformer  97

viii Contents
 
3.13 Three-Phase Transformers  101
 
3.14 Parallel Operation of Transformers 116
 
3.15 Three-Winding Transformers  120
 
3.16 Phase Conversion 124
 
3.17 Tap Changing Transformers  127
 
3.18 Voltage and Current Transformers  131
 
3.19 Audio-Frequency Transformer  135
 
3.20 Grounding Transformer  136
 
3.21 Welding Transformer 136 
 
3.22 Transformer as a Magnetically Coupled Circuit 137
 
 Summary 146
 
 Practice Problems 148
 
 Review Questions 156
 
 Multiple-Choice Questions 157 
 4. Principles of Electromechanical Energy Conversion 
158
 
4.1 Introduction 158
 
4.2 Energy in Magnetic System  158
 
4.3 Field Energy and Mechanical Force  162
 
4.4 Multiply-Excited Magnetic Field Systems  176
 
4.5 Forces/Torques in Systems with Permanent Magnets  184
 
4.6 Energy Conversion via Electric Field  187
 
4.7 Dynamical Equations of Electromechanical Systems  190
 
 Summary 193
 
 Practice Problems 194
 
 Review Questions 196
 5. Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
197
 
5.1 Introduction 197
 
5.2 Elementary Machines  198
 
5.3 Generated EMF 205
 
5.4 MMF of Distributed ac Windings  216
 
5.5 Rotating Magnetic Field  223
 
5.6 Torque in Round Rotor Machine  230
 
5.7 Operation of Basic Machine Types  234
 
5.8 Linear Machines  245
 
5.9 Magnetic Leakage in Rotating Machines 247
 
5.10 Losses and Efﬁciency  250
 
5.11 Rating and Loss Dissipation  255
 
5.12 Matching Characteristics of Electric Machine and Load 261

Contents 
ix
 
5.13 Resume  263
 
 Summary 263
 
 Practice Problems 266
 
 Review Questions 270
 
 Multiple-Choice Questions 272
 6. AC Armature Windings 
273
 
6.1 Introduction 273
 
6.2 AC Windings  275
 
 Summary 283
 
 Practice Problems 283
 
 Review Questions 284
 7. DC Machines 
285
 
7.1 Introduction 285
 
7.2 Armature Winding and Commutator  287
 
7.3 Certain Observations 301
 
7.4 EMF and Torque  301
 
7.5 Circuit Model 305
 
7.6 Armature Reaction  310
 
7.7 Compensating Winding 316
 
7.8 Commutation  318
 
7.9 Methods of Excitation  322
 
7.10 Operating Characteristics of dc Generator 326
 
7.11 Self-Excitation 332
 
7.12 Characteristics of dc Generators 335
 
7.13 Shunt Generator–Predetermination of External Characteristic 339
 
7.14 Parallel Operation of dc Generators 357
 
7.15 Characteristics of dc Motors  361
 
7.16 Starting of dc Motors  382
 
7.17 Speed Control of dc Motors  390
 
7.18 Braking of dc Motors 408
 
7.19 Efﬁciency and Testing 410
 
7.20 Testing of dc Machines 412
 
7.21 DC Machine Dynamics 423
 
7.22 Permanent Magnet dc (PMDC) Motors  426
 
7.23 DC Machine Applications  430
 
 Summary 431
 
 Practice Problems 433
 
 Review Questions 441
 
 Multiple-Choice Questions 442

x Contents
 8. Synchronous Machines 
444
 
8.1 Introduction 444
 
8.2 Basic Synchronous Machine Model 445
 
8.3 Circuit Model of Synchronous Machine  451
 
8.4 Determination of the Synchronous Reactance  454
 
8.5 MMF Method 462
 
8.6 Determination of Armature Reaction Ampere-Turns and
 
 Leakage Reactance of a Synchronous Machine—Potier Method 465
 
8.7 ASA (American Standards Association) Method (Latest) 473
 
8.8 Nature of Armature Reaction 475
 
8.9 Synchronizing to Inﬁnite Bus-Bars 476
 
8.10 Operating Characteristics  478
 
8.11 Efﬁciency of Synchronous Machines  494
 
8.12 Power Flow (Transfer) Equations  497
 
8.13 Capability Curve of Synchronous Generator  518
 
8.14 Salient-Pole Synchronous Machine  Two-Reaction Model 521
 
8.15 Staying in Synchronizm – The Synchronizing Power (Torque)  536
 
8.16 Determination of XD And XQ —Slip Test  543
 
8.17 Parallel Operation of Synchronous Generators  545
 
8.18 Hunting in Synchronous Machines  549
 
8.19 Starting of Synchronous Motors  554
 
8.20 Short-Circuit Transient in Synchronous Machine 555
 
8.21 Single-Phase Synchronous Generators  563
 
8.22 Brushless DC Motors  575
 
 Summary 582
 
 Practice Problems 585
 
 Review Questions 590
 
 Multiple-Choice Questions 591
 9. Induction Machine 
593
 
9.1 Introduction 593
 
9.2 Construction 593
 
9.3 Flux and MMF Waves in Induction Motor—Principle of Operation 596
 
9.4 Development of Circuit Model (Equivalent Circuit) 601
 
9.5 Power Across Air-Gap, Torque and Power Output 605
 
9.6 Tests to Determine Circuit-Model Parameters 614
 
9.7 The Circle Diagram (Approximate) 630
 
9.8 Starting 638
 
9.9 Cogging and Crawling 645
 
9.10 Speed Control  647
 
9.11 Deep-Bar/Double-Cage Rotor  663

Contents 
xi
 
9.12 Classes of Squirrel-Cage Motors 666
 
9.13 Induction Generator 667
 
9.14 Induction Machine Dynamics: Acceleration Time  670
 
9.15 Inverted Induction Machine  685
 
9.16 High Efﬁciency Induction Motors  687
 
9.17 Linear Induction Motor (LIM) 688
 
 Summary 691
 
 Practice Problems 694
 
 Review Questions 699
 
 Multiple-Choice Questions 701
 10. Fractional Kilowatt Motors 
702
 
10.1 Introduction 702
 
10.2 Single-Phase Induction Motors  702
 
10.3 Single-Phase Synchronous Motors  722
 
10.4 Circuit Model of Single-Phase Induction Motor  725
 
10.5 Balanced 2-Phase Motor Fed from Unbalanced Supply  734
 
10.6 Stepper Motors  740
 
10.7 Series Motor—Universal Motor  746
 
 Summary 751
 
 Practice Problems 752
 
 Review Questions 752
 11. Generalised Theory of Electrical Machines  
753
 
11.1 Introduction 753
 
11.2 Convention  753
 
11.3 Basic Two-Pole Machine 753
 
11.4 Transformer with a Movable Secondary Winding 755
 
11.5 Kron’s Primitive Machine 757
 
11.6 Linear Transformations in Machine 758
 
11.7 Three-Phase to Two-Phase (a, b, c To a, b. 0) Transformation  761
 
11.8 Rotating Axis (a, b. 0) to Stationary Axis (d, q, 0) Transformation  762
 
11.9 Physical Concepts of Park’s Transformation 765
 
 Review Questions 766 
 12. Motor Control by Static Power Converters 
767
 
12.1 Introduction 767
 
12.2 Solid State Devices  769
 
12.3 Electrical Drives  782
 
12.4 Power Converters 783
 
12.5 Thyristor Motor Control  785

xii Contents
 
12.6 DC Motor Control Through Converters  786
 
12.7 DC Motor Control Through Choppers 800
 
12.8 Converter Topologies for dc Motor Drives  811
 
12.9 AC Motor Control 813
 
12.10 Inverters  819
 
12.11 Forced Commutation  828
 
12.12 Vector Control of an Induction Motor 831
 
 Summary 837
 
 Practice Problems 837
 
 Review Questions 839
 
 Multiple-Choice Questions 839
Appendix I: AC Steady-State Circuit Analysis 841
Appendix II: Three-Phase Systems 851
Appendix III: Special Topics in Transformers 863
Appendix IV: Cross-Field Machines 866
Appendix V: AC Commutator Machines 869
Appendix VI: Resistance 875
Appendix VII: Sample Examples Solved Using Matlab 877
Appendix VIII: Table of Constants and Unit Conversion 891
References  
892
Answers to Problems 
897
Index  
907

Contents 
xiii
The aim of this book is to give deep exposition of the theory of electromechanical devices, with speciﬁc 
emphasis on the theory of rotating electric machines. The basic concepts have remained more or less the same 
over the years since the ﬁrst edition of this text appeared in 1985.
Since the appearance of the third edition in 2004, most of the advances in the application and control 
of electric machines have taken place owing to the further breakthroughs in power electronics and 
microprocessor/computer-based control systems. As a result, a much broader spectrum of electric machine 
types are now available. Particularly, permanent-magnet and variable-reluctance machines are now used in 
many applications and this is bound to increase further in future. AC drives are becoming more and more 
attractive in many applications, such as those requiring variable speed and ﬂexible control, while earlier dc 
machines were the only choice. Realising this fact, these machine types ﬁnd increased coverage in the fourth 
edition.
This book presents simple, explicit, and yet rigorous and comprehensive treatment of transformers and 
electric machines in a single volume. Considerable emphasis is laid on the fundamentals, physical concepts, 
principles and on rigorous development of circuit model equivalents of both transformers and machines. 
Each circuit model is closely related to the physical reality, the underlying assumptions are sharply focussed 
and consequent limitations on the range of operation over which the model is valid are fully explained. 
The clarity of the physical basis of models developed would be most satisfying to the reader and it would 
enable him to make intelligent use of the models in the solution of machine problems and in the design of 
systems using these devices. The prediction of device performance follows as an immediate sequel to its 
model. Furthermore, as a next step (not covered in this book), the circuit parameters could be conveniently 
related to the physical dimensions and properties of the materials used in the device. While the circuit theory 
approach to electro-mechanical devices is introduced early in Chapter 2, the machine analysis in the bulk of 
the book follows the ﬁeld-theory approach which, as is well-known, is better understood and appreciated by 
undergraduates and provides a deep insight into and a clear understanding of the electric machine. 
This is the only book which clearly brings home to the reader the distinction in the sign convention 
between the synchronous machine model and the transformer-type model, also employed for the induction 
machine. Another distinguishing feature of the book is the clarity with which it brings out the difference 
between a sinusoidally spaced distributed quantity (ﬁeld) represented as a vector and sinusoidally time-
varying quantities represented as phasors and how a rotating vector creates a time phasor. In order that the 
teacher and student can both make convenient use of symbols on the blackboard or on paper, the phasors are 
symbolically represented by capital letters with superbars and the vectors are represented by capital letters 
with superarrows.
The book covers all the essential ingredients of machine knowledge expected of a modern-day 
undergraduate in electrical engineering. With new and vital topics crowding the curriculum in electrical 
engineering, machine courses have rightly been squeezed into two time slots of one-semester duration each. 

xiv Contents
The book is designed to meet this need. The book is primarily designed to cater to a one-semester core course 
common for all engineering disciplines and a one-semester topping off course for those majoring in electrical 
engineering. The core course may comprise Chapters 1, 2, Secs 3.1 to 3.9 (except Sumpner’s test), 3.11, 3.12 
(partly), Chapters 4,5 and Secs 7.1 to 7.4 for dc machine coverage along with a quick resume of armature 
reaction, commutation, methods of excitation and characteristics of generators and motors. These topics are 
covered in initial portions of the relevant sections of Chapter 7. The dc machine winding can be explained to 
the class by merely projecting the two developed winding diagrams of Chapter 6. The remaining portions of 
the book would then comprise the second course. The book is written in a ﬂexible style and a high degree of 
selectivity is inbuilt so that the teacher may leave out advanced articles of various topics in coping with the 
time factor without any loss of continuity. It is even possible to select a single one-semester course out of the 
book where time exigencies so demand. 
The theory and applications of various machines as control-system actuators is treated at appropriate 
places in the book. The methods of control-system analysis have not been included as these form a full 
course in a modem curriculum. Linear approximations are employed for tackling non-linearities associated 
with most machines. Wherever warranted, the effect of magnetic nonlinearity is accounted for in steady-state 
analysis. 
Although the models advanced are strictly applicable for steady-state analysis of device performance, 
these are extended to the dynamic case at a few places by making strong assumptions. The transient analysis 
of the synchronous machine is treated qualitatively and a graphical picture of the phenomenon is presented. 
The reader is expected to have a prior grounding in electricity and magnetism, introductory circuit theory, 
basic mechanics and elementary differential equations. However, appendices on ac steady-state circuit 
analysis and three-phase systems have been included for ready reference. 
New to this Edition
The chapters on dc machines and synchronous machines are re-written completely. The highlights of this 
edition are large number of solved problems and practice problems that have been added in all the chapters. 
The key features of this edition are
 
∑ New chapter on ‘Generalized Theory of Electric Machines’
 
∑ Detailed description of Transformers, dc Machines, dc Machines Excitation, Predetermination of 
external characteristics of dc Generator, Parallel operation of dc Generators, Efﬁciency and Testing of 
dc Machines, Speed control of Induction Motor, Linear Induction Motor 
 
∑ Enhanced coverage of Permanent Magnet dc Motors, Permanent Magnet Materials and their 
applications 
 
∑ Discussion on Silicon Controlled Rectiﬁer (SCR), Insulated Gate Bipolar Transistor (IGBT), MOS 
Turn off Thyristor (MTO) and Emitter Turn off Thyristor (ETO) to cover new trends 
 
∑ Synchronous generator (alternator), MMF Method, ASA Method, V curves and inverted V curves, 
Rating of alternator, phasor diagrams, Reactive power ﬂow from generator
 
∑ MATLAB examples to facilitate problem-solving skills 
 
∑ Excellent pedagogy including 
xiv Preface

Contents 
xv
Though no sophisticated knowledge of mathematics is required for the reader of this book, the mathematics 
involved in this subject at times can get messy and tedious.  This is particularly true in the analysis of ac 
machines in which there is a signiﬁcant amount of algebra involving complex numbers.  One of the signiﬁcant 
positive developments in the recent years is the widespread availability of software such as MATLAB which 
greatly facilitates the solution of such problems. MATLAB is freely used in many institutions and colleges 
and is also available in a student version (http://www.mathworks.com). This edition, therefore, incorporates 
MATLAB in some sample solved examples.  It should be emphasized here that the use of MATLAB is not 
a prerequisite for using this book.  It is just an enhancement, an important one though!  Further, it may be 
noted that even in the cases where it is not speciﬁcally suggested, some of the problems in the book can be 
attempted using MATLAB or an equivalent program.  Some additional programs for solving problems using 
MATLAB are included in this book.  
The introductory chapter discusses electrical–electrical and electromechanical energy conversion 
processes and devices from a general point of view with the explicit purpose of motivating the reader for 
studying transformers and electric machines. This chapter, however, is not a prerequisite for the rest of the 
book. Chapter 2 brushes up magnetic circuits and the principle of induction. 
In Chapter 3, the transformer is treated exhaustively. The circuit-model approach is emphasized and for 
obvious reasons the role of the phasor diagram is underplayed. This chapter lays the ground work for the 
understanding of electromechanical energy conversion processes in machines and the circuit model of the 
induction machine in particular. 
Then follows Chapter 4 on the underlying principles of electromechanical energy conversion in the end 
of which is answered the question, “Why is electric ﬁeld not used as a coupling medium instead of the 
magnetic ﬁeld?” Cases of both linear and nonlinear magnetization (saturation) are treated. 
Exposition of the basic concepts of rotating machines from a generalized point of view as well as engineering 
aspects, such as cooling, rating and load mechanics is advanced in Chapter 5. General expressions for 
emf and torque are derived. The torque production is explained here via interaction of two magnetic ﬁelds 
assumed to be sinusoidally distributed. An alternative current-sheet approach is also given for the interested 
reader. Elementary treatment of speciﬁc machine types—synchronous and induction—then follows and their 
important characteristics are visualized on a ﬁeld-interaction basis. Since interacting ﬁelds are assumed to be 
sinusoidal, which is justiﬁed in these two classes of machines only, a most rudimentary treatment of the de 
machine is given here because the ﬁelds in this class of machines are essentially nonsinusoidally distributed.
While Chapter 5 gives the essential treatment of ac windings, the details including important practical 
features are dealt with in Chapter 6 devoted entirely to ac windings. Also given is a reasonably detailed 
account of dc armature windings in Chapter 7. Where time is a limiting factor, ac winding details can be 
skipped and dc winding directly introduced via the two developed diagrams with a brief explanation of 
parallel paths, commutation and brush location. 
Chapters 7–9 cover in depth the three basic machine types—the dc machine, synchronous machine and 
induction machine. The approach adopted in all the three is one of rigorous modelling with due stress on 
explanation of the underlying assumptions. The dc machine is the ﬁrst to be dealt with as its steady-state 
model is the simplest. The modelling in each machine results in a circuit model of the linear kind by virtue of 
the assumptions made, which for all practical purposes are quite valid for steady-state performance analysis 
as well as under certain transient situations. In Chapter 8, on the synchronous machine, a heuristic methods 
are advanced to account for the effect of strong magnetic nonlinearity on the machine performance. 
Preface 
xv

xvi Contents
Tests to determine circuit-model parameters are advanced at appropriate places. Assumptions involved 
in machine modelling are once again stressed at this stage. Once the circuit model of the machine has been 
arrived at, the discussion is then focussed on power ﬂow and operating characteristics. The constructional 
features and important practical details are included at suitable places and the circumstances under which a 
particular machine would be employed as a motor are discussed. 
With the availability of electronic calculators, circle-diagram methods have lost their signiﬁcance. However, 
the circle diagram for the induction machine is included as it gives the complete machine performance at a 
glance and is quite useful in qualitative reasoning. 
A simple approach to machine dynamics is given in all the three machine types. In the case of the 
synchronous machine, dynamics is restricted to the phenomenon of “hunting”, while transient stability 
receives elementary treatment. 
Chapter 10 deals with the important topic of fractional-kW motors. A qualitative-cum-heuristic analysis 
of a single-phase induction motor and its circuit model are followed by a rigorously developed circuit model 
for a two-winding motor. This rigorous coverage may be skipped when time does not permit it. A variety of 
single-phase induction, synchronous and series commutator types of motors are treated. Comprehensiveness 
is imparted to this chapter by the inclusion of stepper motors, ac servomotor and ac tachometer; the latter two 
follow simply as a corollary from the two-winding motor analysis. 
Chapter 11 is an entirely new chapter and deals with the generalised theory of electrical machines.
Probably the most signiﬁcant development in recent years in the allied area of motor control is the use of 
power semiconductors—diodes, power transistors and thyristors. The growth in this area has already qualiﬁed 
for a separate undergraduate level course. However, for the sake of completeness, a comprehensive chapter is 
included in this book. This in our view is a better approach than to burden the previous chapters by spreading 
out the relevant details. Chapter 12 on this topic has a wide coverage and includes all the three varieties 
of SCR (silicon controlled rectiﬁer) circuitry, namely converters, choppers and inverters. The contents and 
effects of non-smooth dc and nonsinusoidal ac outputs of these control equipment on the circuit behaviour 
and on machine performance are beyond the scope of this book. 
With the phenomenal developments in SCR circuitry for power control, cross-ﬁeld machines and ac 
commutator machines have become almost obsolete. However, to fulﬁl the need of such universities which 
still include these topics in their curriculum, fairly detailed appendices (IV and V) on these topics are added. 
A number of cross-sectional views of built-up machines and their parts are included and the student is 
exhorted to carefully study these to help him visualize the physical picture of the machine being modelled. 
Laboratory exercises always associated with a machines course will further aid this process. 
A large number and variety of illustrative examples are spread throughout the book. These would greatly 
help in imprinting a clear physical picture of the devices and associated physical reasoning on the student’s 
mind. An equally large number of unsolved problems are given as exercises at the end of each chapter. 
Answers to all the unsolved problems are given. Some of these problems are devised to illustrate some points 
beyond what is directly covered in the text. 
International Standard (SI) units are used throughout the book. The list of symbols is necessarily large. 
Apart from being illustrated at the point of occurrence, the symbols used are listed in the beginning of the 
book. 
Web Supplements
The web supplements can be accessed at http://www.mhne.com/electmach4e and contain the following 
material:
xvi Preface

Contents 
xvii
For Instructors: Solution Manual and Power Point Lecture Slides 
For Students: Interactive Quiz and Web links for Study Material. 
Acknowledgements
While revising the text, we have had the beneﬁt of valuable advice and suggestions from many teachers, 
students and other readers who used the earlier editions of this book.  All these individuals have inﬂuenced 
this edition.  We express our thanks and appreciation to them.  We hope this support / response would continue 
in future also. 
We are grateful to the authorities of VIT University, Vellore, for providing all the facilities necessary for 
writing the book.
One of us (D P Kothari) wishes to place on record the thanks he owes to his colleagues—Mr K Palanisamy, 
Mr Dilip Debnath, Mr Umashankar, Mr N Murali and Mr N Sreedhar—for their help in preparing and typing 
rough drafts of certain portions of the manuscript, writing MATLAB programs and solving problems using 
Simulink (MATLAB) and for helping in preparing the solutions of examples and unsolved problems of 
certain chapters. We also express our appreciation for all those reviewers who took out time to review the 
book. Their names are given below.
 
R K Jarial 
National Institute of Technology, Hamirpur, Himachal Pradesh 
 
K N Vaishnav 
National Institute of Technology, Jaipur, Rajasthan 
 
P P Tarang 
JSS College of Technical Education, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 
 
Imtiaz Ashraf 
Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, Uttar Pradesh 
 
Sanjay Parida 
Indian Institute of Technology, Patna, Bihar 
 
S N Mahto 
National Institute of Technology, Durgapur, West Bengal 
 
Urmila Kar 
Netaji Subhash Engineering College, Kolkata 
 
K K Ghosh 
Dream Institute of Technology, Kolkata 
 
N Kumaresan 
National Institute of Technology, Trichy, Tamil Nadu 
 
Ashok S 
National Institute of Technology, Calicut, Kerala 
 
A Nirmal Kumar 
Bannari Amman Institute of Technology, Tamil Nadu 
 
B K Murthy 
National Institute of Technology, Warangal, Andhra Pradesh 
 
T B Reddy 
GPR Engineering College, Kurnool, Andhra Pradesh
 
K S Pawar 
BSD College of Engineering, Dhule, Maharashtra 
We also thank TMH personnel and our families who supported us during this period and given all possible 
help so that this book could see the light of the day.
Feedback
We welcome any constructive criticism of the book and will be grateful for any appraisal by the readers. The 
suggestions can be sent on my email: dpk0710@yahoo.com
D P KOTHARI 
I J NAGRATH
Preface 
xvii

xviii Contents
Publisher’s Note
Tata McGraw-Hill invites suggestions and comments from you, all of which can be sent to
tmh.elefeedback@gmail.com (kindly mention the title and author name in the subject line). Piracy-related 
issues may also be reported.
xviii Preface

Introduction 1
1.1 
INTRODUCTION
Electricity does not occur naturally in usable form and it also cannot be stored* 
in usefully large quantities. Therefore, it must be generated continuously to 
meet the demand (of power) at all times. An efﬁcient and convenient way to 
generate electric power is by conversion of mechanical power into electrical form 
in a rotating device** called a generator. In the process a small part of power is lost in the generator 
(efﬁciencies in large generators are above 90%). The mechanical power is itself obtained from heat power 
by thermodynamical means in a steam turbine (efﬁciency in the range of 40–50% as the present upper limit) 
or by conversion of potential energy of water in a hydraulic turbine with very little loss. The basic source 
of mechanical power—steam/hydraulic turbine is called the prime mover. Electricity can also be generated 
directly from hot gases in plasma form, obviating the need of converging heat power to intermediate 
mechanical power. This process† is still in an experimental stage. The electromechanical process of electric 
power generation is shown schematically in Fig. 1.1. Under steady conversion conditions, 
Heat power
Shaft
Losses
Pelectrical
Pmechanical
TPM
TG
w
Electric
generator
Prime
mover
Fig. 1.1 
Electric generator 
TPM (prime mover) = TG (generator) and the turbine and generator run at steady speed. 
 Other than lighting and heating††, the major use of electric energy is made by converting it back to the 
mechanical form to run the wheels of industry as well as tiny household appliances. The intermediary, the 
1
 
* Attempts are on to store a sizeable amount of electric energy in large superconducting coils. While these attempts 
are not likely to succeed in the near future, this stored energy would only be sufﬁcient to meet sharp load peaks. 
 
** The device always has an outer stationary member (refer to Sec. 1.2). 
 
† The process is known as magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) which uses the Hall effect to generate electric power. 
The process is inefﬁcient because the outlet gases are at high temperature. By utilizing the hot gases in a conve-
nient gas turbine, the composite process could be made more efﬁcient than the conventional steam turbine. 
 
† † It is expensive to use electricity for heating except in special processes (e.g. electric arc furnaces) and where 
highly accurate controlled heating is required (e.g. induction heating).

2 Electric Machines
electric power, permits the use of large efﬁcient central generating stations, while it is easily transported 
to the myriads of use points. The electromechanical energy conversion process is a reversible one and 
simple adjustment of mechanical shaft and 
electrical conditions reverses the ﬂow of power as 
illustrated in Fig. 1.2. In this mode of operation, 
the electromechanical device, in general called 
the electric machine, is known as the motor and 
the machine is said to be in the motoring mode. 
Under steady speed operation, again TM (motor) 
= TL(load). Both in generating and motoring 
modes, losses occur in the electric machine but 
the overall conversion efﬁciencies are very high 
(close to or above 90%). 
 Electric machines are employed in almost every industrial and manufacturing process. Pages can be 
ﬁlled in listing the applications of electric machines right from giant-size generators (500 MW and above), 
industrial motors ranging up to a few megawatts to fractional-kW domestic appliances and to sophisticated 
aerospace applications requiring stringent reliability in operation. 
 This book deals with the important topic of electric machines, the indepth understanding of which is 
necessary to tackle the problems of energy, pollution and poverty that presently confront the whole of 
mankind. 
 Since Thomas Alva Edison developed an electric generator, more than hundred years ago, engineers 
have continually strived and successfully reduced the size and revised upwards the efﬁciencies of electric 
machines by the use of improved materials and optimal design strategies. We appear to have reached close 
to the upper limit imposed by nature. 
 A transformer is a static device that transforms electric energy from one ac voltage level to another. It 
is this device that has made the electric system almost universally ac. The electric power is generated at 
relatively low voltages (up to a maximum of 33 kV) which then is raised to very high voltages (e.g. 756 kV) 
by means of a transformer and then transmitted. High voltages are associated with low currents and reduced 
transmission losses. Geographically close to the use points, the electric power is transformed back to safe 
low utility voltages (400/231 V). A transformer consists basically of two coils (three sets of coil pairs for 
a 3-phase system) tightly coupled by means of magnetic (steel) core. Figure 1.3(a) gives the symbolic 
Losses
Shaft
Pmechanical
Pelectrical
TL
TM
w
Load
(mechanical)
Electric
motor
Fig. 1.2 
Motoring mode of operation of an electric machine
Electric power
Electric power
(a) Transformer
Transmission line
Generator
(ac)
Transformer
(step-up)
Transformer
(step-down)
Load
(b) Simple electric power system
Fig. 1.3

Introduction 3
1.2 
BASIC PRINCIPLE, TYPES AND CONSTRUCTIONAL FEATURES 
OF ELECTRIC MACHINES 
There are three basic rotating electric machine types, namely 
 
1. the dc machine, 
 
2. the polyphase synchronous machine (ac), and
 
3. the polyphase induction machine (ac). 
Three materials are mainly used in machine manufacture; steel to conduct magnetic ﬂux, copper (or 
aluminium) to conduct electric current and insulation to insulate the voltage induced in conductors conﬁning 
currents to them. 
All electric machines comprise of two parts: the cylindrical rotating member called the rotor and the 
annular stationary member called the stator with the intervening air-gap as illustrated in Fig. 1.4. The rotor 
has an axial shaft which is carried on bearings at each end located in end covers bolted to the stator. The shaft 
extends out of the end cover usually at one end and is coupled to either the prime mover or the load.
The stator and rotor are both made of magnetic material (steel) which conducts the magnetic ﬂux upon 
which depends the process of energy conversion. In both dc and synchronous machines, the main ﬁeld is 
created by ﬁeld poles excited with direct current. 
The winding on the ﬁeld poles is called the ﬁeld 
winding. The relative motion of the ﬁeld past 
a second winding located in the other member 
induces emf in it. The winding interchanges 
current with the external electric system 
depending upon the circuit conditions. It is this 
winding, called the armature winding, which 
handles the load power of the machine, while 
the ﬁeld winding consumes a small percentage 
(0.5% to 2%) of the rated load power. The load 
dependent armature current is known as load 
current.
In a dc machine the ﬁeld poles are on the stator while the rotor is the armature as shown in the cross-
sectional view of Fig. 1.5. The ﬁeld poles are symmetrical and are even in number, alternately north and 
south. As the armature rotates, alternating emf and current induced in the armature winding are rectiﬁed to dc 
form by a rotating mechanical switch called the commutator, which is tapped by means of stationary carbon 
brushes. The commutator is cylindrical in shape and comprises severel wedge-shaped copper segments 
representation of a transformer and Fig. 1.3(b) shows a simple electric power generation transmission and 
reception system. A practical electric power system is an integrated one, far more complex than the simple 
diagrammatic representation of Fig. 1.3(b), and is in the form of an interconnected network for reasons of 
economy, operational efﬁciency and reliability. 
 Because the principle of rotating ac machines is akin to that of a transformer, these two are always 
studied together in a book. Further, since the transformer analogy can be extended to both the ac machine 
types, the transformer study usually precedes the machine study.
Stator
Air-gap
Rotor
Shaft
Fig. 1.4 An electric machine

4 Electric Machines
bound together while they are insulated from each other. The armature is made of laminated steel with slots 
cut out on the periphery to accommodate the insulated armature winding. The ends of each armature coil 
are connected to the commutator segments to form a closed winding. The armature when carrying current 
produces stationary poles (same as number of ﬁeld poles) which interact with the ﬁeld poles to produce the 
electromagnetic torque. 
Yoke
Main pole
Field winding
Pole shoe
Armature
winding
Armature
Brushes
N
N
S
S
Commutator
la
V (dc)
a
V (dc)
f
lf
+
–
Fig. 1.5 Cross-sectional view of dc machine 
In a synchronous machine the ﬁeld poles could be either on the stator or rotor, but in all practical machines 
the rotor carries the ﬁeld poles as shown in the cross-sectional view of Fig. 1.6. The ﬁeld poles are excited 
Armature winding
Field winding
Stator
Rotor
Pole Shoe
Main pole
3-phase
ac
N
N
S
S
lf
la
lb
lc
V (dc)
f
Fig. 1.6 Cross-sectional view of synchronous machine

Introduction 5
by direct current. The stator forms the armature carrying a 3-phase winding wound for the same number of 
poles as the rotor. All the three phases have identical windings with the same angular displacement between 
any pair of phases. When the rotor rotates, it produces alternating emf in each phase forming a balanced set 
with frequency given by 
 
f = nP
120  
(1.1)
where 
f = frequency in Hz
 
n = rotor speed in rpm 
 
P = number of ﬁeld poles 
For a given number of poles, there is a ﬁxed correspondence between the rotor speed and the stator 
frequency; the rotor speed is therefore called the synchronous speed. When balanced 3-phase currents are 
allowed to ﬂow in the armature winding, these produce a synchronously rotating ﬁeld, stationary with respect 
to the rotor ﬁeld as a result of which the machine produces torque of electromagnetic origin. The synchronous 
motor is, however, nonselfstarting.
In both dc and synchronous machines the power handling capacity is determined by the voltage and 
current of the armature winding, while the ﬁeld is excited from low power dc. Thus these machine types are 
doubly excited. Quite different from these, an induction machine is singly excited from 3-phase mains on the 
stator side. The stator winding must therefore carry both load current and ﬁeld-producing excitation current. 
The stator winding is 3-phase, similar to the armature winding of a synchronous machine. When excited it 
produces a synchronously rotating ﬁeld. Two types of rotor constructions are employed which distinguish the 
type of induction motor. 
1. Squirrel-cage rotor Here the rotor has copper (or aluminium) bars embedded in slots which are short-
circuited at each end as shown in Fig. 1.7(a). It is a rugged economical construction but develops low starting 
torque.
2. Slip-ring (or wound-rotor) rotor The rotor has a proper 3-phase winding with three leads brought out 
through slip-rings and brushes as shown in Fig. 1.7(b). These leads are normally short-circuited when the 
motor is running. Resistances are introduced in the rotor circuit via the slip-rings at the time of starting to 
improve the starting torque. 
The rotating ﬁeld created by the stator winding moves past the shorted rotor conductors inducing currents 
in the latter. These induced currents produce their own ﬁeld which rotates at the same speed (synchronous) 
with respect to the stator as the stator-produced ﬁeld. Torque is developed by the interaction of these two 
relatively stationary ﬁelds. The rotor runs at a speed close to synchronous but always slightly lower than it. 
At the synchronous speed no torque can be developed as zero relative speed between the stator ﬁeld and the 
rotor implies no induced rotor currents and therefore no torque. 
Single-phase ac motors are employed for low-voltage, low-power applications—fractional-kW motors. 
They operate on the same basic principles as the 3-phase motor, but the pulsating single-phase ﬁeld produces 
additional losses, reducing motor torque and the pulsating torque component increases the noise level of the 
motor. 
An induction machine connected to the mains when driven at supersynchronous speed behaves as a 
generator feeding power into the electric system. It is used in small hydroelectric stations and wind and 
aerospace applications. 
The insulation of a machine (or transformer) is its most vulnerable part because it cannot be stressed beyond 
a certain temperature. For a given frame size, the steady temperature rise is determined by the machine loading, 

6 Electric Machines
the associated power loss (this appears in the form of heat) and the cooling provided. Thus the maximum 
machine loading called its rating for a given frame size is limited by the permissible temperature rise which 
is dependent upon the class of insulation used. In the case of high-speed dc machines poor commutation 
(reversal of current in armature coils) may become a limiting factor even before the temperature limit is 
reached. The speed itself may be a limiting factor in very high-speed machines on account of the centrifugal 
forces developed. This limit is more stringent in dc machines with complicated armature construction than 
in the rugged rotor induction motor. Because of their high thermal capacity, machines are quite capable of 
withstanding a fair amount of overloads for short durations. 
Motor Control
There is great diversity and variety in the components and systems used to control rotating machines. The 
purpose of a motor control may be as simple as start/stop or the control of one or more of the motor output 
parameters, i.e. shaft speed, angular position, acceleration, shaft torque and mechanical power output. With 
the rapid development of solid-state power devices, integrated circuits and cheap computer modules, the 
range, quality and accuracy of electronic motor control has become almost inﬁnite. Machines and other 
electromechanical systems having the highest possible precision and reliability have been developed for 
nuclear power and space applications. Using solid-state power converters, schemes have been devised to start, 
stop or reverse dc motors in the megawatt range in a matter of seconds. Finally, as the nonconventional and 
Conducting bars embedded in
slots and  shorted at both ends
by end rings
(a) A squirrel-cage rotor (schematic diagram)
Windings (details not shown)
embedded in slots, leads brought
out to slip-rings
Slip-rings
Brushes
(b) A wound rotor (schematic diagram)
End
rings
Fig. 1.7

Introduction 7
renewable sources of energy, such as solar, windmill, etc., would become economical, viable electromechanical 
energy converters will be required with matching characteristics. 
Economic and Other Considerations 
As in other devices, economics is an important consideration in the choice of electric machines and the 
associated control gear. The trade-off between the initial capital investment and the operating and maintenance 
cost must be taken into account in this choice; the decision may be in favour of a high-efﬁciency high-cost 
motor, particularly in an environment of rising energy costs. While the transformer produces magnetic noise, 
the rotating machines, in addition, produce mechanical noise arising from bearings, windage, etc. In present-
day noise-pollution levels, the noise ﬁgure in decibels can be an important factor in motor choice. These 
considerations are not the subject matter of this book which emphasises electromechanical principles and the 
theory and application of electric machines including transformers. 
1.3 
RECENT TRENDS IN RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENTS IN ELECTRIC MACHINES
Design and operation of electrical machines become easier and cheaper with suitable electric drives. This 
electric drive converts and feeds the input energy to the machine according to the desired operation. A 
power electronic converter constitutes the heart of the drive system which uses the power semiconductor 
devices. These converters help to convert the power from one form to another. Various advancements in 
converter topologies, and control methods have been proposed to convert and control the energy efﬁciently. 
Other intelligent techniques such as Neural Network, Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Expert system, Fuzzy logic and 
Evolutionary Computing are used to make the control most accurate and fast. 
Research in converter topologies has also improved the power quality at the supply end. Various multipulse 
and multilevel power electronic converters have been developed for power-quality improvement along with 
cost-effective ac-dc converters for power factor improvement in electric drive system.
Electrical energy offers the most ﬂexible, economic and efﬁcient mode of power generation, transmission, 
distribution and utilization compared to other forms of energy systems. Most of the power required for 
human activities round the globe continues to come from electrical machines from the very large generators 
installed in power stations to the very small motors in automotive control systems. The rapid depletion and the 
increased cost of conventional fuels have given a thrust in the research on isolated asynchronous generators 
as alternative power sources, converting from wind energy, biogas, hydro units and biomass. Asynchronous 
generators operated in isolated systems for supplying electricity to the remote areas, where grid supply is 
not accessible, are best options because of having certain advantages such as low cost, less maintenance and 
brushless constructions.
In a wind-energy conversion system, the voltage and frequency variation at the generator terminals is 
due to varying consumer loads as well as change in wind speeds. Therefore, the controller should have the 
capability to control the voltage and frequency of isolated generators under dynamic conditions. Various 
types of voltage and frequency controllers are proposed for constant-speed, constant-power applications.
Friction, vibration and noise can be eliminated in industrial drive by using permanent magnet direct-drive 
technology. Both ac and dc PM motors are more suitable for high performance and wide speed variation 
applications. Motors with higher torque and low speed are highly appreciated. PM brushless motors are of 
this category. 
The electric machines market is rapidly growing because of various developments and emerging areas 
such as wind energy, marine, traction and offshore.

8 Electric Machines
The materials used for making the electrical machines play a major role in their performance. Particularly, 
maximum temperature rise of the material (permanent magnet and insulation materials) used will affect 
the rated torque of an electrical machine. The operating temperature strongly affects the performances of 
electrical machines. Finite Element Analysis (FEA) can be used to compute the temperature of the material 
and machines. A thermal network of the electrical machines is considered and input to this network is 
calculated from magnetic and electrical loading of the machines. An Object Oriented Program (OOP) is used 
to develop thermal network and it allows a convenient organization of thermal analysis process.
Modern commercial electrical steels can be grouped under non-oriented, grain-oriented and rapidly 
quenched alloy types, of which the ﬁrst two dominate the applications. Because of the limitations on the 
shape of the magnetic path, grain-oriented types are used predominantly in large power and distribution 
transformers, while non-oriented ones are used in rotating machines and small apparatus. The silicon content 
is critical to the performance of electrical steels because it increases resistivity but it, also reduces the 
anisotropy and so reduces losses and magnetostriction and permeability and makes the material brittle. In 
non-oriented type, this content varies between 2.9% to 3.2%.
The continuing development of high permeability silicon-steel, metallic glass, ferrites, aluminum 
ceramics and high temperature insulating materials, permanent magnetic materials like Neomax (Nd-Fe-B) 
and rare-earth cobalts has been inﬂuencing the construction and design of many large and small machines and 
apparatus from large generators to small step motors. Not only the cost of material per kVA has come down 
in many cases, more reliable and highly efﬁcient machines have been successfully designed.
Areas which have revolutionized the growth of research in electrical machines could be grouped as 
 (a) Design of power electronic converters for motor drive and with better efﬁciency and control
 (b) Increase in rating of power semiconductor solid-state devices
 (c) Development of cheap digital signal processing controllers for operation and control
 (d) The development of evolutionary computing techniques, artiﬁcial intelligent techniques for machine 
design, operation and control
 (e) Power quality and power factor improvement using improved power quality converters for various 
motor-drive applications
 (f ) Design of motor drives of electric and hybrid electric vehicles
 (g) Condition monitoring of electrical machines using Artiﬁcial Intelligence techniques
 (h) Design of electric machines using CAD/CAM techniques and validation through FE analysis 
Thyristor is still unbeaten in high voltage and current rating among power semiconductor devices with 
voltage and current rating of 12 kV and 6 kV, respectively. New devices such as IGCT, GCT, power MOSFET, 
power IGBT have opened up new vistas for the electronic switching and control of energy-converting devices; 
ac/dc, dc/ac, ac/ac and dc/dc converters are at their peak in various applications and totally changed the 
way of operating the machines from the conventional mode of operation. Development of self-commutated 
devices overcome the drawbacks of line commutated converters and it is used in both Voltage Source 
Converters (VSC) and Current Source Converters (CSC). High voltage dc transmission (HVDC), Flexible ac 
Transmission System (FACTS), variable frequency operation of machines, voltage control of dc machines, 
Switched Mode Power Supply (SMPS), offer a wide variety of applications for converters and for power 
engineers to develop new and realiable system conﬁgurations. The most common application is the variable 
speed drives using dc and ac machines. Power electronics appear to have shifted the emphasis of electrical 
engineers from the design of special types of variable speed machines to the use of special electronic circuits 
to make an existing machine to give the desired variable speed characteristics and performances.

Introduction 9
Electric vehicles and hybrid electric vehicles are one of the most recent and potential applications of 
electrical machines. These vehicles use the motor drives in association with power electronic converters. 
Application of electrical drives in system automobile began with 6 V in the ﬁrst quarter of the 20th century. 
Initially, it was used only for basic and necessary functions such as ignition, cranking and lighting loads. 
Since then, there has been a constant increase in power demand and now the whole vehicle is driven by the 
electrical system. Electrical system has replaced all mechanical, pneumatic and hydraulic systems, thereby 
increasing the efﬁciency and performance of the automobile system. 
 Present voltage level being used is 12 V, and in the future it is expected to switch over to higher levels 
such as 42 V and 300 V. There is a immense challenge in design of power electronic converters and suitable 
high-efﬁciency machines for hybrid electric vehicles.
To make the squirrel-cage induction motor run like a separately excited dc motor has remained a dream of 
generations of electrical engineers. Direct Torque Control (DTC) has fulﬁlled this dream and simpliﬁed the 
control circuit of induction motor to a great extent. The availability of cheap microprocessor-based system 
has further improved the control of electrical devices of all forms for obtaining the desired steady state, 
transient as well as dynamic characteristics from the existing drive machine with the help of suitable designed 
solid-state control circuits. 
Electrical machines and drive systems are subjected to many different faults. They may include stator 
faults, rotor electrical faults and rotor mechanical faults, failure of power electronics system and damage of 
mechanical parts. Most of industrial processes demand continuous operation. This is mainly inﬂuenced by 
the condition monitoring leading to fault diagnosis and prediction of performance of electrical machines and 
drives. Fast and accurate diagnosis of machine faults results in prevention of failure and avoiding processes 
interrupt and reduce the idle time of machines. It also helps in reducing ﬁnancial loss, avoids harmful effects 
and devastation of the system. 
For many years, the manufactures and users had relied on protective relays such as over-current and over-
voltage relays to trip fault machines. This scheme may lead to machine damage and other harmful effects. 
Various intelligence techniques such as Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANN), Expert System (ES), Fuzzy 
System (FS) are being used for machines analysis for monitoring and control to make the process continuous, 
fast and  accurate.
One of the latest developments in ac motor research has been in the direction of ﬁeld-oriented control 
or making ac motors perform like dc motors with highly accurate torque and power control. Another recent 
development in ac motor drives is a system called Direct Torque Control and Direct Self-Control. There is 
no modulator and no need for an encoder to feedback information about motor shaft speed and position. 
The DTC sensorless-type control incorporates fast digital signal processing hardware, resulting in a torque 
response which is ten times faster than any ac or dc drive.
One of the reasons why ac technology will continue to make inroads into dc dominance is reduced power 
consumption. Brushless dc will survive eventually but it is not dc at all but a completely different technology. 
It is called dc because of the concept of external commutation.
Now there are increased levels of customer support. With the emphasis on just-in-time production, 
downtime is unacceptable. With today’s systems, if the machine goes down one can, via modem, have a 
technician at a remote site use system diagnosis software to troubleshoot the entire system from anywhere 
in the world.
Large Rating Machines
The innovative design features as direct water-cooled armature windings, gap-pickup rotor winding cooling, 
Micapal II stator insulation, Class F rotor and stator insulation, advanced Tetraloc stator endwinding 

10 Electric Machines
support systems, and the side ripple-spring armature bar slot support structure were developed for heavy 
rating machines. The Finite Element Model (FEM) is exercised to interrogate the generator assembly for all 
loads encountered during assembly and operation. Electromagnetic force is the most likely force to cause 
structural issues. This force is cyclic and acts in the radial direction at the inside diameter of the stator core 
with a magnitude of one million pounds. The resulting stator core vibration and the transmission to the 
generator structure and foundation is a signiﬁcant design consideration. Forced harmonic response analyses 
are performed to ensure that the electromagnetic forces cannot excite the machine’s natural frequencies. 
The structural design of the stationary components also must be considered when calculating the dynamic 
behavior of the rotor, since the rotor is supported on bearings located in the end shields of the machine. In 
this load conﬁguration, the structural vibratory loads caused by the rotor, and the loading caused by stator 
vibration that drives rotor behavior, are interrogated. Once again, a forced harmonic analysis is performed 
to understand and optimize the interactions. Lastly, the structural design has a major impact on the overall 
producibility and serviceability of the generator. The complexity of the fabrication determines the unit’s 
machining cycles as well as its accessibility for thoroughly cleaning the inner cavities of the machine before 
shipping.
Generator 2 pole machine running at 3000/3600 rpm and 4 pole machine running at 1500/1800 rpm have 
become common for large outputs or 1000 MW of more. The main dimension of 1000 MVA machine is the 
output coefﬁcient C which will be 2 MVA s/m3 and D2L will be 10 m3. The higher value of output coefﬁcient 
is made possible by enhanced cooling techniques. The excitation current is 7 kA at 650 V for 1500 MVA 
machine and 5.7 kA, 640  V for 1000 MVA machine respectively.
The stator core, made from grain-oriented silicon steel for low loss and high permeability, is mounted 
rigidly on the inner frame. Isolation of the core vibration from the remainder of the structure is accomplished 
through the use of ﬂexible pads between the feet on the inner frame and the base structure. The end windings 
are secured to a strong structure of insulating materials to be used. A solid cone of ﬁlament-wound resin 
bonded ﬁbre glass is used to generate strength and long-term rigidity. The coils are bedded to the structure 
with comfortable packing material. The complete structure is bolted to the end of the core. Axial movement 
may be allowed to accommodate expansion of coils relative to the core. Low-loss stator core, of grain-
oriented silicon steel, minimizes electrical losses within the core to increase machine efﬁciency.
The insulation between turns is usually provided by interleaves of resin-bonded glass fabric material. The 
stator winding arrangements for 1000 MVA should be four parallel paths in 2-pole machines and in 4-pole 
machines, it can be in parallel or series parallel combination. The efﬁciency of 1000–1500 MVA is normally 
very high. Due to this megawatt loss, good cooling medium is required. Direct hydrogen cooling of rotors is 
developed for 1000 MVA. The cooling of the rotor can be done by 1). Each coil is wound with continuous 
length of copper strap bent on edge at the four corners, 2). Larger section conductors of silver bearing copper-
containing grooves and holes to provide the passage of gas. Cool, deionized water, supplied by a closed-loop 
auxiliary system, ﬂows through copper strands in the stator winding, and the warm water is discharged at the 
turbine end of the generator. The hydrogen-cooled machines can be designed with a higher electrical loading 
than the air-cooled machines due to the better cooling, and tend to have a larger subtransient reactance than 
an air-cooled machine.
The generator’s performance is heightened by optimization of its bar strand conﬁguration, including 
hollow-to-solid-strand ratio. Spring bar stator core support system isolates vibration of the stator core, to 
minimize vibration transmitted to the foundation. Stator winding support features top wedges and ripple 
springs to secure stator bars in the slot and eliminate bar vibration. This maximizes insulation life and reduces 
maintenance requirements. Core-end cooling is enhanced through proven design concepts to control core 

Introduction 11
temperatures and minimize eddy current losses. Approaches include split tooth, stepped core, ﬂux shields 
and non-magnetic materials. Retaining rings of 18-Mangaanese/18-Chromium, non-magnetic stainless steel 
resists stress-corrosion cracking. 
Internal view of a 1000 MW generator is shown in Fig. 1.8.
Generator Parameters (600 MW)
Parameters
Unit
Rated capacity
Rated power factor
Synchronous reactance
Transient reactance
Sub-transient reactance
Nagative-seq reactance
Zero-seq reactance
Direct axis time constant
Open circuit time constant
Short circuit time constant
Open circuit sub-transinet
Short circuit sub-transient
Qudrature axis time constant
Open circuit time constant
Short circuit time constant
Open circuit sub-transinet
Short circuit sub-transient
MW
Xd%
Xd¢%
Xd≤%
X2%
X0%
Tdo¢ Sec
Td¢ Sec
Tdo≤ Sec
Td≤ Sec
Tdo¢ Sec
Td¢ Sec
Tdo≤ Sec
Td≤ Sec
600
0.85
240.313
28.281
21.582
21.295
10.131
8.724
1.027
0.046
0.035
0.969
0.169
0.068
0.035
P
K Di
=
2
¢
¢ ¢
L n
Core end with
flux shunt
High TS 18 Mn-18Cr RR
High TS 4Ni-Cr
shaft forging
Unequal section
mix strand water
cooled stator
coil
Hydrogen
cooled HVB
Maximized field
conductor area
Optimized L/D
rotor
Improved coil end
support
Low Fn compact
frame
Center grooved
elliptical
journal bearing
2 piece babbitt
sealing ring
Fig. 1.8 Internal view of 1000 MW generator (Courtesy, Toshiba Corporatin)

12 Electric Machines
2.2 
MAGNETIC CIRCUITS
The exact description of the magnetic ﬁeld is given by the Maxwell’s equations* and the constitutive 
relationship of the medium in which the ﬁeld is established. 
 
  


— ◊B  = 0 
and 


— ◊D  = r
 
  


— ¥ H  = 

J
D
t
+ ∂
∂
 
and 

D  = e0

E ; e0 = 8.85 ¥ 10–12
 
 wherein 
J  = conduction current density and 
D  = displacement current density, negligible for slowly-varying 
ﬁelds 
D  = e0

E ; e0 = 8.85 ¥ 10–12 F/m). 
2.1 
INTRODUCTION
The electromagnetic system is an essential element of all rotating electric 
machinery and electromechanical devices as well as static devices like the 
transformer. The role of the electromagnetic system is to establish and control 
electromagnetic ﬁelds for carrying out conversion of energy, its processing and 
transfer. Practically all electric motors and generators, ranging in size from fractional horsepower units 
found in domestic appliances to the gigantic several thousand kW motors employed in heavy industry and 
several hundred megawatt generators installed in modern generating stations, depend upon the magnetic 
ﬁeld as the coupling medium allowing interchange of energy in either direction between electrical and 
mechanical systems. A transformer though not an electromechanical conversion device, provides a means 
of transferring electrical energy between two electrical ports via the medium of a magnetic ﬁeld. Further, 
transformer analysis runs parallel to rotating machine analysis and greatly aids in understanding the latter. 
It is, therefore, seen that all electric machines including transformers use the medium of magnetic ﬁeld for 
energy conversion and transfer. The study of these devices essentially involves electric and magnetic circuit 
analysis and their interaction. Also, several other essential devices like relays, circuit breakers, etc. need the 
presence of a conﬁned magnetic ﬁeld for their operation. 
 The purpose of this chapter is to review the physical laws governing magnetic ﬁelds, induction of emf 
and production of mechanical force, and to develop methods of magnetic-circuit analysis. Simple magnetic 
circuits and magnetic materials will be brieﬂy discussed. In the chapters to follow, how the concepts of this 
chapter are applied in the analysis of transformers and machines will be shown. 
2

Magnetic Circuits and Induction 
13
Such description apart from being highly complex is otherwise not necessary for use in electric machines 
wherein the ﬁelds (magnetic and electric) are slowly varying (fundamental frequency being 50 Hz) so that 
the displacement current can be neglected. The magnetic ﬁeld can then be described by Ampere’s law and is 
solely governed by the conduction current. This law is in integral form and is easily derivable from the third 
Maxwell’s equation (by ignoring displacement current) by means of well-known results in vector algebra. 
The Ampere’s law is reproduced as follows: 
 


J ds
s
◊
Ú
 = 


 H dl
◊
Ú
 
(2.1) 
wherein 

J = conduction current density
 

H = magnetic ﬁeld intensity 
 
s = the surface enclosed by the closed path of length l
 
d s = differential surface 
 
d

l = differential length 
Consider the example of a simple electromagnetic system comprising an exciting coil and ferromagnetic 
core as shown in Fig. 2.1. The coil has N turns and carries a constant (dc) current of i A. The magnetic ﬁeld is 
established in the space wherein most of the total magnetic ﬂux set up is conﬁned to the ferromagnetic core 
for reasons which will soon become obvious. Consider the ﬂux path through the core (shown dotted) which in 
fact is the mean path of the core ﬂux. The total current piercing the surface enclosed by this path is as follows:
 


J ds
s
◊
Ú
 = Ni 
Core mean
length
(Ferromagnetic)
lc
Leakage fiux
Hc
Exciting coil
N
b
c a
d
e
+
–
i
Fig. 2.1 A simple magnetic system 
Hence Eq. (2.1) acquires the form 
 
Ni = 


 H dl
l
◊
Ú
 
(2.2) 
Since N is the number of coil turns and i the exciting current in amperes, the product F = Ni has the units of 
ampere-turns (AT) and is the cause of establishment of the magnetic ﬁeld. It is known as the magnetomotive 
force (mmf ) in analogy to the electromotive force (emf ) which establishes current in an electric circuit. 

14 Electric Machines
The magnetic ﬁeld intensity H causes a ﬂux density B to be set up at every point along the ﬂux path which 
is given by 
 
B = mH = m0mrH 
(for ﬂux path in core)  
(2.3a) 
and 
B = m0H 
(for ﬂux path in air)  
(2.3b) 
The units of ﬂux density are weber (Wb )/m2 called tesla (T). The term m0 is the absolute permeability of 
free space and has a value of 
 
m0 = 4p ¥ 10–7  
henry (H)/m 
The permeability m = m0mr of a material medium is different from m0 because of a certain phenomenon 
occurring in the material. The term mr is referred to as relative permeability of a material and is in the range of 
2000-6000 for ferromagnetic materials (see Sec. 2.3). It is, therefore, seen that for a given H, the ﬂux density 
B and, therefore, the ﬂux over a given area 
 
f = 


 B ds
s
◊
Ú
will be far larger in the magnetic core in Fig. 2.1 than in the air paths. Hence, it is safe to assume that the 
magnetic ﬂux set up by mmf Ni is mainly conﬁned to the ferromagnetic core and the ﬂux set up in air paths 
is of negligible value. The ﬂux set up in air paths is known as the leakage ﬂux as if it leaks through the core; 
some of the leakage ﬂux paths are shown chain-dotted in Fig. 2.1. There is no way to avoid magnetic leakage 
as there are no magnetic insulators in contrast to electric insulators which conﬁne the electric current to the 
conductor for all practical purposes. The effect of the leakage ﬂux is incorporated in machine models through 
the concept of the leakage inductance. 
The direction of ﬁeld intensity is H and so the direction of ﬂux f is determined from the Right Hand Rule 
(RHR). It is stated as: 
Imagine that you are holding a current carrying conductor in your right hand with the thumb pointing in 
the direction of current. Then the direction in which the ﬁngers curl gives the direction of ﬂux. In case of a 
coil you imagine that you are grasping the coil in right hand with the thumb in the direction of current; then 
the ﬁngers curl in the direction of ﬂux. 
The reader may apply RHR to the exciting coil in Fig. 2.1 to verify the direction of ﬂux as shown in the 
ﬁgure. 
The magnetic ﬁeld intensity 

H  is tangential to a ﬂux line all along its path, so that the closed vector 
integration in Eq. (2.2) along a ﬂux-line reduces to closed scalar integration, i.e.
 
Ni = 
H
lÚ
· dl 
(2.4) 
With the assumption of negligible leakage ﬂux, the ﬂux piercing the core cross-section at any point 
remains constant. Further, from the consideration of symmetry it immediately follows that the ﬂux density 
over straight parts of the core is uniform at each cross-section and remains constant along the length; such 
that H is constant along the straight parts of the core. Around the corners, ﬂux lines have different path lengths 
between magnetic equipotential planes (typical ones being ab and cd shown in Fig. 2.1) so that H varies from 
a high value along inner paths to a low value along outer paths. It is reasonable to assume that H shown dotted 
along the mean path will have the same value as in straight parts of the core (this mean path technique renders 
simple the analysis of magnetic circuits of machines and transformers). 

Magnetic Circuits and Induction 
15
It has been seen previously that the magnetic ﬁeld intensity along the mean ﬂux path in the core can be 
regarded constant at Hc. It then follows from Eq. (2.4) that 
 
F = Ni = Hclc 
(2.5)
where 
F = mmf in AT and lc = mean core length (m)
From Eq. (2.5) 
 
Hc = Ni
lc
  AT/m 
(2.6) 
If one now imagines that the exciting current i varies with time, Eq. (2.6) would indicate that Hc will vary 
in unison with it. Such ﬁelds are known as quasi-static ﬁelds in which the ﬁeld pattern in space is ﬁxed but 
the ﬁeld intensity at every point varies as a replica of the time variation of current. This simpliﬁed ﬁeld picture 
is a consequence of negligible displacement current in slowly-varying ﬁelds as mentioned earlier. In a quasi-
static ﬁeld, the ﬁeld pattern and ﬁeld strength at a particular value of time-varying exciting current will be the 
same as with a direct current of that value. In other words, a ﬁeld problem can be solved with dc excitation 
and then any time variation can be imparted to it. 
Now, the core ﬂux density is given by, 
 
Bc = mcHc  tesla (T) 
and core ﬂux (assumed to be total ﬂux) is given by, 
 
f = 


 B ds
s
◊
Ú
 = BcAc  Wb
where Ac = cross-sectional area of core and ﬂux in the limbs is oriented normal to cross-sectional area. Then 
from Eq. (2.6)
 
f = mcHcAc = 
Ni
l
A
c
c
c
m
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 or f = F
R  = F P 
(2.7) 
where 
R = F
f  = 
l
A
c
c
c
m
 = reluctance* of the magnetic circuit (AT/Wb) 
(2.8)
and P = 1/R = permeance of the magnetic circuit. It is, therefore, seen that by certain simplifying assumptions 
and ﬁeld symmetries, it has been possible to lump the distributed magnetic system into a lumped magnetic 
circuit described by Eq. (2.7) which is analogous to Ohm’s law in dc circuits. The electrical circuit analog 
of the magnetic system (now reduced to a magnetic circuit) is shown in 
Fig. 2.2 wherein F (mmf ) is analogous to E (emf ), R (reluctance) is 
analogous to R (resistance) and f (ﬂux) is analogous to i (current). 
The analogy though useful is, however, not complete; there being two 
points of difference: (i) magnetic reluctance is nondissipative of energy 
unlike electric resistance, (ii) when F is time-varying, the magnetic 
circuit still remains resistive as in Fig. 2.2, while inductive effects are 
bound to appear in an electric circuit. This is because there is no time-
lag between the exciting current and the establishment of magnetic ﬂux 
(quasi-static ﬁeld). 
 
* Unit of reluctance is AT/Wb and will not be speciﬁed every time in examples.
f (
)i
∼
F (
)
∼E
R (
)
R
∼
Fig. 2.2 Electrical analog of the 
simple magnetic circuit of 
Fig. 2.1

16 Electric Machines
The lumped magnetic circuit and its electrical analog are useful concepts provided the permeability (m) of 
the core material and, therefore, the core reluctance is constant as is tacitly assumed above. This, however, 
is not the case with ferromagnetic materials, but when air-gaps are involved, the assumption of constant 
reluctance is generally valid and leads to considerable simplicity in magnetic circuit analysis. 
In more complicated magnetic circuits—with multiple excitations and series-parallel core arrangement—
the general theorems of electric circuits apply, i.e. Kirchhoff’s voltage (mmf ) law and Kirchhoff’s current 
(ﬂux) law. This is illustrated in Example 2.3. 
B-H Relationship (Magnetization Characteristic)
In free space (also nonmagnetic materials), the permeability m0 is constant so that B-H relationship is linear. 
This, however, is not the case with ferromagnetic materials used in electric machines, wherein the B-H 
relationship is strictly nonlinear in two respects—
saturation and hysteresis. Hysteresis non-linearity 
is the double valued B-H relationship exhibited in 
cyclic variation of H (i.e. exciting current). This 
nonlinearity is usually ignored in magnetic circuit 
calculations and is important only when current 
wave shape and power loss are to be accounted 
for. This is discussed in Sections 2.3 and 2.6. A 
typical normal B-H relationship (magnetization 
characteristic) for ferromagnetic materials is shown 
in Fig. 2.3. It has an initial nonlinear zone, a middle 
almost linear zone and a ﬁnal saturation zone in 
which B progressively increases less rapidly with H 
compared to the linear zone. In the deep saturation 
zone, the material behaves like free space.
Due to considerations dictated by economy, electric machines and transformers are designed such that 
the magnetic material is slightly saturated (i.e. somewhat above the linear zone). In exact magnetic circuit 
calculations the nonlinear magnetization curve has to be used necessitating graphical/numerical solutions. 
Core with Air-gap 
Transformers are wound on closed cores as in Fig. 2.1. Rotating machines have a moving element and must 
therefore have air-gaps in the cores out of necessity. A typical magnetic circuit with an air-gap is shown in 
Fig. 2.4. It is assumed that the air-gap is narrow and the ﬂux coming out of the core passes straight down the 
air-gap such that the ﬂux density in the air-gap is the same as in the core. Actually as will soon be seen, that 
the ﬂux in the gap fringes out so that the gap ﬂux density is somewhat less than that of the core. Further, let 
the core permeability mc be regarded as constant (linear magnetization characteristic).  
The mmf Ni is now consumed in the core plus the air-gap. From the circuit model of Fig. 2.4(b) or directly 
from Fig. 2.4(a) 
 
Ni = Hclc + Hglg 
(2.9a)
or 
Ni = B l
B l
c
c
c
g
g
m
m
+
0
 
(2.9b)
Linear zone
(constant
)
m
Saturation zone
lnitial nonlinear zone
H AT m
(
/
)
B T
( )
0
Fig. 2.3 
Typical normal magnetization curve of 
ferromagnetic material

Magnetic Circuits and Induction 
17
Ni
(b)
N
(a)
e
i
Cross-sectional
area A
Air-gap; H , l
g
g
Hc
+
_
f
Rc
Mean core length, lc
Rg
Fig. 2.4 A typical magnetic circuit with air-gap and its equivalent electric circuit
Assuming that all the core ﬂux passes straight down the air-gap (it means no fringing (see Fig. 2.5)) 
 
Bg = Bc
\ 
f = BcA = BgA 
(2.10)
Substituting Eq. (2.10) in Eq. (2.9b) 
 
Ni = f
l
A
l
A
c
c
g
m
f
m
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ +
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
0
 
(2.11)
Recognizing various quantities in Eq. (2.11) 
 
F = f(Rc + Rg) = fReq 
(2.12)
where 
Rc = l
A
c
c
m
 = core reluctance 
 
Rg = 
l
A
g
m0
 = air-gap reluctance
From Eq. (2.12) 
 
f = 
F
R
R
c
g
+
 = 
F R
R
R
/
/
g
c
g
1 +
 
(2.13) 
But 
R
R
c
g
 = 
0l
l
c
c g
 ≪ 1
because mc is 2000 to 6000 times m0 in ferromagnetic materials. The permeability effect predominates the 
usual core and air-gap dimensions even though lc ≫ lg. It then follows from Eq. (2.13), that 
 
f ª F/Rg 
(2.14) 
which means that in a magnetic circuit with air-gap(s), core reluctance may be neglected with no signiﬁcant 
loss of accuracy. This assumption will be generally made in modelling rotating machines. The effect of core 
saturation (reduction of core permeability) will be introduced as a correction wherever greater accuracy is 
desired. 

18 Electric Machines
Magnetic Circuit Calculations 
Normally magnetic circuit calculations involve two types of problems. In the ﬁrst type of problem it is 
required to determine the excitation (mmf ) needed to establish a desired ﬂux or ﬂux density at a given point 
in a magnetic circuit. This is the normal case in designing electromechanical devices and is a straight forward 
problem. In the second category, the ﬂux (or ﬂux density) is unknown and is required to be determined for a 
given geometry of the magnetic circuit and speciﬁed mmf. This kind of problem arises in magnetic ampliﬁers 
wherein this resultant ﬂux is required to be determined owing to the given excitation on one or more control 
windings. A little thought will reveal that there is no direct analytical solution to this problem because of the 
non-linear B-H characteristic of the magnetic material. Graphical/numerical techniques have to be used in 
obtaining the solution of this problem. 
Leakage Flux
In all practical magnetic circuits, most of the ﬂux is conﬁned to the intended path by use of magnetic cores but 
a small amount of ﬂux always leaks through the surrounding air. This stray ﬂux as already stated is called the 
leakage ﬂux, Leakage is characteristic of all magnetic circuits and can never be fully eliminated. Calculations 
concerning the main magnetic circuit are usually carried out with the effect of leakage ﬂux either ignored or 
empirically accounted for. Special studies of leakage must be made for ac machines and transformers since 
their performance is affected by it. 
Fringing
At an air-gap in a magnetic core, the ﬂux fringes out into neighbouring air paths as shown in Fig. 2.5; 
these being of reluctance comparable to that of the gap. The result is nonuniform ﬂux density in the air-
gap (decreasing outward), enlargement of the effective air-
gap area and a decrease in the average gap ﬂux density. The 
fringing effect also disturbs the core ﬂux pattern to some 
depth near the gap. The effect of fringing increases with the 
air-gap length. Corrections for fringing in short gaps (as used 
in machines) are empirically made by adding one gap length 
to each of the two dimensions making up its area. For the 
example of the core with the air-gap previously presented, the 
gap reluctance would now be given by 
 
Rg = 
l
A
g
g
m0
which will be less than the previous value as Ag > A.  
It can be shown theoretically that the magnetic ﬂux leaves and enters the surface of an inﬁnitely permeable 
material normally. This will be nearly so in ferromagnetic materials which have high permeability. In electric 
machines a small amount of the tangential ﬂux component present at iron surfaces will be neglected. 
Stacking Factor 
Magnetic cores are made up of thin, lightly insulated (coating of varnish) laminations to reduce power loss 
in cores due to the eddy-current phenomenon (explained in Sec. 2.6). As a result, the net cross-sectional area 
Core
Fringing flux
Core
Air
gap
Fig. 2.5 
Flux fringing at air-gap

Magnetic Circuits and Induction 
19
of the core occupied by the magnetic material is less than its gross cross-section; their ratio (less than unity) 
being known as the stacking factor. Depending upon the thickness of laminations, stacking factor may vary 
from 0.5–0.95, approaching unity as the lamination thickness increases. 
EXAMPLE 2.1 The magnetic circuit of Fig. 2.4(a) has dimensions: Ac = 4 ¥ 4 cm2, lg = 0.06 cm, lc = 
40 cm; N = 600 turns. Assume the value of mr = 6000 for iron. Find the exciting current for Bc = 1.2 T and 
the corresponding ﬂux and ﬂux linkages. 
SOLUTION 
From Eq. (2.9), the ampere-turns for the circuit are given by
 
Ni = 
B
l
B l
c
r
c
g
g
m m
m
0
0
+
 
(i) 
Neglecting fringing 
 
Ac = Ag  therefore  Bc = Bg
Then 
i = B
N
l
l
c
c
r
g
m
m
0
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
 = 
1 2
4
10
600
40
6000
0 06
7
.
.
p ¥
¥
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
-
 ¥ 10–2 
(ii)
 
 = 1.06 A
The reader should note that the reluctance of the iron path of 40 cm is only 
2 3
6
/
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = 0.11 of the reluctance of the 
0.06 cm air-gap. 
 
f = Bc Ac = 1.2 ¥ 16 ¥ 10–4 = 19.2 ¥ 10–4 Wb
Flux linkages, 
l = Nf = 600 ¥ 19.2 ¥ 10–4 = 1.152 Wb-turns 
If fringing is to be taken into account, one gap length is added to each dimension of the air-gap constituting the area. 
Then 
 
Ag = (4 + 0.06) (4 + 0.06) = 16.484 cm2
Effective Ag > Ac reduces the air-gap reluctance. Now 
 
Bg = 19 2
10
16 484
10
4
4
.
.
¥
¥
-
-
 = 1.165 T 
From Eq. (i) 
 
i = 
1
0
m
m
N
B l
B l
c c
r
g g
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  
(iii) 
 
 = 
1
4
10
600
1 2
40
10
6000
1 165
0 06
10
7
2
2
p ¥
¥
¥
¥
+
¥
¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
-
-
-
.
.
.
 
 = 1.0332 A
EXAMPLE 2.2 A wrought iron bar 30 cm long and 2 cm in diameter is bent into a circular shape as 
shown in Fig. 2.6. It is then wound with 600 turns of wire. Calculate the current required to produce a ﬂux 
of 0.5 mWb in the magnetic circuit in the following cases: 
 
(i) no air-gap;
 (ii) with an air-gap of 1 mm; mr (iron) = 4000 (assumed constant); and

20 
Electric Machines
 (iii) with an air-gap of 1 mm; assume the following data for the magnetization of iron:
 
 H in AT/m 
2500 
3000 
3500 
4000
 
 B in T 
1.55 
1.59 
1.6 
1.615 
SOLUTION 
 
(i) No air-gap
 
  
Rc = 
30
10
4000
4
10
10
2
7
4
¥
¥
¥
¥
¥
-
-
-
p
p
 = 1.9 ¥ 105
 
  
Ni = fRc
 
 or 
i = fRc/N = 0 5
10
1 9
10
600
3
5
.
.
¥
¥
¥
-
 = 0.158 A
 
(ii) Air-gap = 1 mm, mr (iron) = 4000
 
  
Rc = 1.9 ¥ 105 (as in part (i)
 
  
Rg = 
1
10
4
10
10
3
7
4
¥
¥
¥
¥
-
-
-
p
p
 = 25.33 ¥ 105 
 
  
R(total) = Rc + Rg = 27.1 ¥ 105
 
 \ 
i = 0 5
10
27 1
10
600
3
5
.
.
¥
¥
¥
-
 = 2.258 A
 (iii) Air-gap = 1 mm; B-H data as given 
 
  
Bc = Bg = 0 5
10
10
3
4
. ¥
¥
-
-
p
 = 1.59 T (fringing neglected)
 
  
Hg = Bg
m0
 = 
1 59
4
10 7
.
p ¥
-
 
  
ATg = Hglg = 1 59
1
10
4
10
3
7
.
¥
¥
¥
-
-
p
 = 1265
 
 From the given magnetization data (at Bc = 1.59 T),
 
  
Hc = 3000 AT/m
 
  
ATc = Hclc = 3000 ¥ 30 ¥ 10–2 = 900
 
  
AT (total) = ATc + ATg
 
  
 = 900 + 1265 = 2165
 
  
i = 2165
600  = 3.61 A
EXAMPLE 2.3 The magnetic circuit of Fig. 2.7 has cast steel core with dimensions as shown:
 
Mean length from A to B through either outer limb = 0.5 m
 
Mean length from A to B through the central limb = 0.2 m 
In the magnetic circuit shown it is required to establish a ﬂux of 0.75 mWb in the air-gap of the central 
limb. Determine the mmf of the exciting coil if for the core material (a) mr = 
 (b) mr = 5000. Neglect 
fringing.
30 cm, core length
1 mm
A =
10
p ¥
–4m
2
c
N = 600
i
Fig. 2.6

Magnetic Circuits and Induction 
21
Mean flux path
1
1 cm
¥
f2
N
i
0.02 cm
2 cm
0.02 cm
B
0.025 cm
1
1 cm
¥
f1
f
A
3
2
1
Fig. 2.7
SOLUTION
 
(a) mr = , i.e. there are no mmf drops in the magnetic core. It is easy to see from Fig. 2.7 that the two outer limbs 
present a parallel magnetic circuit. The electrical analog of the magnetic circuit is drawn in Fig. 2.8(a). Various 
gap reluctances are:
 
  
Rg1 = 
0 025
10
4
10
1
10
2
7
4
.
¥
¥
¥
¥
-
-
-
p
 = 1.99 ¥ 106
 
  
Rg2 = 
0 02
10
4
10
1
10
2
7
4
.
¥
¥
¥
¥
-
-
-
p
 1.592 ¥ 106
 
  
Rg3 = 
0 02
10
4
10
2
10
2
7
4
.
¥
¥
¥
¥
-
-
-
p
 = 0.796 ¥ 106
 
 From Fig. 2.8(b),
 
  
Ni = 0.75 ¥ 10–3 (Rg3 + Rg1 || Rg2)
 
  
 = 0.75 ¥ 10–3 (0.796 + 0.844) ¥ 106
 
  
 = 1230 AT
0.75 mWb
N
Ni
f = 0.75 mWb
(a)
(b)
R g2
R g3
R g1
R g3
R
R
g
g
1
2
||
Fig. 2.8 
Electrical analog of Fig. 2.7
 
(b) mr = 5000. This means that the reluctance of magnetic core must be taken into consideration. The analogous 
electric circuit now becomes that of Fig. 2.9.

22 
Electric Machines
 
 Since gap lengths are negligible compared to core lengths, various core reluctances can be calculated as follows: 
 
  
Rc1 = 
0 5
4
10
5000
1
10
7
4
.
p ¥
¥
¥
¥
-
-
 = 0.796 ¥ 106
 
  
Rc2 = Rc1 = 0.796 ¥ 106
 
  
Rc3 = 
0 2
4
10
5000
2
10
7
4
.
p ¥
¥
¥
¥
-
-
 = 0.159 ¥ 106
 
 The equivalent reluctance is
 
  
Req = (Rc1 + Rg1) || (Rc2 + Rg2) + Rc3 + Rg3)
 
  
 = 27 86
23 86
51 72
.
.
.
¥
 ¥ 106 + 0.955 ¥ 106 = 1.955 ¥ 106
 
 Now Ni = fReq
 
  
 = 0.75 ¥ 10–3 ¥ 1.955 ¥ 106
 
  
 = 1466 AT
EXAMPLE 2.4 The magnetic circuit of Fig. 2.10 has cast steel core. The cross-sectional area of the 
central limb is 800 mm2 and that of each outer limb is 600 mm2. Calculate the exciting current needed 
to set up a ﬂux of 0.8 mWb in the air gap. Neglect magnetic leakage and fringing. The magnetization 
characteristic of cast steel is given in Fig. 2.16.  
500 turns
160 mm
1 mm
400
mm
400
mm
Fig. 2.10
SOLUTION
Air gap 
Bg = 0 8
800
10
10
3
6
.
¥
-
-
 = 1 T and Hg = 
1
4
10 7
p ¥
-
AT/m
 
Fg = 
1
4
10 7
p ¥
-
 ¥ 1 ¥ 10–3 = 796 AT
Central limb 
Bc = Bg = 1 T
From Fig. 2.16 
Hc = 1000 AT/m
 
Fc = 1000 ¥ 160 ¥ 10–3 = 160 AT 
Ni
0.75 mWb
R c2
R g2
R c3
R g3
R g1
R c1
Fig. 2.9

Magnetic Circuits and Induction 
23
Because of symmetry, ﬂux divides equally between the two outer limbs. So
 
f (outer limb) = 0.8/2 = 0.4 mWb
 
B (outer limb) = 0 4
10
600
10
3
6
. ¥
¥
-
-
 = 0.667 AT 
 
F (outer limb) = 375 ¥ 400 ¥ 10–3 = 150 AT
 
F (total) = 796 + 160 + 150 = 1106 AT
 
Exciting current = 1106/500 = 2.21 A
EXAMPLE 2.5 The magnetic circuit of Fig. 2.11 has a cast steel core whose dimensions are given below: 
 
Length (ab + cd) = 50 cm 
Cross-sectional area = 25 cm2 
 
Length ad = 20 cm 
Cross-sectional area = 12.5 cm2 
 
Length dea = 50 cm 
Cross-sectional area = 25 cm2
Determine the exciting coil mmf required to establish an air-gap ﬂux of 0.75 m Wb. Use the B-H curve 
of Fig. 2.16. 
a
b
c
F
0.25 cm
d
e
Fig. 2.11
SOLUTION 
Assuming no fringing the ﬂux density in the path abcd will be same, i.e. 
 
B = 0 75
10
25
10
3
4
.
¥
¥
-
-
 = 0.3 T 
 
Fbc = B
m0
lbc = 0 3
0 25
10
4
10
3
7
.
.
¥
¥
¥
-
-
p
 = 60 AT 
 Hab = Hcd (from Fig. 2.16 for cast steel for B = 0.3 T) = 200 AT/m
 
Fab+cd = 200 ¥ 50 ¥ 10–2 = 100 AT
\ 
Fad = 60 + 100 = 160 AT
 
Had = 
160
20
10 2
¥
-
 = 800 AT/m

24 Electric Machines
 
Bad (from Fig. 2.16) = 1.04 T
 
fad = 1.04 ¥ 12.5 ¥ 10–4 = 1.3 mWb
 
fdea = 0.75 + 1.3 = 2.05 mWb 
 
Bdea = 2 05
10
25
10
3
4
.
¥
¥
-
-
 = 0.82 T 
 
Hdea (from Fig. 2.16) = 500 A T/m 
 
Fdea = 500 ¥ 50 ¥ 10–2 = 250 AT 
 
F = Fdea + Fad = 250 + 160 = 410 AT 
EXAMPLE 2.6 A cast steel ring has a circular cross-section of 3 cm in diameter and a mean circumference 
of 80 cm. A 1 mm air-gap is cut out in the ring which is wound with a coil of 600 turns.
 (a) Estimate the current required to establish a ﬂux of 0.75 mWb in the air-gap. Neglect fringing and 
leakage.
 (b) What is the ﬂux produced in the air-gap if the exciting current is 2 A? Neglect fringing and leakage. 
Magnetization data: 
 H (AT/m) 
200 
400 
600 
800 
1000 
1200 
1400 
1600 
1800 
2020
 B (T) 
0.10 
0.32 
0.60  
0.90  
1.08  
1.18 
1.27  
1.32 
1.36 
1.40 
SOLUTION
 
f = 0.75 ¥ 10–3 Wb 
 
Bg = f/A = 0 75
10
0 03
2
3
2
.
.
¥
¥ Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
-
p
 =1.06  T 
 
Bc = Bg (no fringing)
Reading from the B-H curve drawn in Fig. 2.12,
 
Hc = 900 AT/m 
 
lc = 0.8 m (air-gap length can be neglected)
 
ATc = Hclc = 900 ¥ 0.8 = 720
 
ATg = 
1 06
4
10 7
.
p ¥
-
 ¥ 10–3 = 843
 
Ni = ATc + ATg = 720 + 843 = 1563
Therefore 
i = 1563
600  = 2.6 A
 
(b) The excitation is now given and the ﬂux is to be determined from the B-H curve given. The problem must, 
therefore, be solved numerically/graphically. It is solved here graphically. Now
 
  
Ni = B2
0
m
 lg + Hclc; (Bg = Bc) 
(i)
 
  This is a linear equation in Bc and Hc; the second equation is the nonlinear B-H curve. The intersection of the 
two for a given Ni will yield the solution. For this problem 
 
  
Ni = 600 ¥ 2 = 1200 AT 
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0
400
800
1200
1600
2000
Hc
B(T)
Bc
Ni =
+
H I
c c
H in AT/m
Bc
m0
Ig
Fig. 2.12

Magnetic Circuits and Induction 
25
 
 Substituting various values in Eq. (i) 
 
  
1200 = 
Bc
4
10 7
p ¥
-
 ¥ 10–3 + 0.8 Hc 
(ii)
 
 This equation is plotted in Fig. 2.12, by locating the points 
 
  
Hc = 0,  Bc = 1.5
 
  
Bc = 0,  Hc = 1500
 
 The intersection gives the result
 
  
Bc = 0.78  T
 
  
f = BcA = 0.78 ¥ p
4  (0.03)2 = 0.55 mWb
2.3 
MAGNETIC MATERIALS AND THEIR PROPERTIES
From the magnetic point of view* a material is classiﬁed according to the nature of its relative permeability 
(mr). All nonmagnetic materials are classiﬁed as paramagnetic, mr slightly greater than 1, and diamagnetic, 
mr slightly less than 1. For all practical purposes, mr of these materials can be regarded as unity, i.e. their 
magnetic properties are very much similar to that of free space. Such materials are not of interest to us in this 
treatise. 
Materials which are of interest to us are those whose relative permeability is much higher than that of free 
space. These can be classiﬁed as ferromagnetic and ferrimagnetic. Ferromagnetic materials can be further 
subdivided as hard and soft. Hard ferromagnetic materials include permanent magnet materials, such as 
alnicos, chromium steels, certain copper-nickel alloys and several other metal alloys. Soft ferromagnetic 
materials are iron and its alloys with nickel, cobalt, tungsten and aluminium. Silicon steels and cast steels 
are the most important ferromagnetic materials for use in transformers and electric machines. Ferrimagnetic 
materials are the ferrites and are composed of iron oxides—MeO. Fe2O3, where Me represents a metallic 
ion. Ferrites are also subgrouped as hard (permanent magnetic) and soft (nickel-zinc and manganese-zinc) 
ferrites. Soft ferrites are quite useful in high frequency transformers, microwave devices, and other similar 
high-frequency operations. There is a third category of magnetic materials, known as superparamagnetic, 
made from powdered iron or other magnetic particles. These materials are used in transformers for electronics 
and cores for inductors. Permalloy (molybdenum-nickel-iron powder) is the best known example of this 
important category of magnetic materials. 
Properties of Magnetic Materials 
Magnetic materials are characterized by high permeability and the nonlinear B-H relationship which 
exhibits both saturation and hysteresis. The physics of these properties is explained by the domain theory of 
magnetization usually taught in junior level courses. 
The B-H relationship for cyclic H is the hysteresis loop shown in Fig. 2.13 for two values of maximum 
ﬂux density. It is easily observed from this ﬁgure that B is a symmetrical two-valued function of H; at any 
given H, B is higher if H is reducing compared to when H is increasing. This is the basic hysteresis property 
in which B lags behind H. It can also be recognized as a memory-type non-linearity in which the material 
 
* For the theory of magnetization based on atomic structure of materials a suitable book on material science may be 
consulted. 

26 Electric Machines
remembers its previous history. Further, it is observed that the hysteresis loop becomes wider for increasing 
maximum ﬂux densities. The dotted curve drawn through the positive and negative tips of the hysteresis 
loops with increasing maximum ﬂux densities is the normal magnetization curve and is obtainable in virgin 
(unmagnetized) material by increasing the dc magnetization in either direction. The normal magnetization 
curve exhibits the saturation phenomenon as discussed in Sec. 2.2. 
Normal magnetization
curve
Hysteresis loops
H (AT/m)
H1, max H2, max
B1, max
B2, max
Residual flux
density
b
a
– H2, max
– H1, max
B (T)
B1, max
B2, max
Fig. 2.13 Typical B-H curve and hysteresis loops
It is easily seen that because of hysteresis and saturation, the magnetic characteristic of a given material 
cannot be described by a few overall parameters but must be expressed in the form of a set of curves. It 
will be shown in Sec. 2.6 that the area of the hysteresis loop is the energy loss (it appears in the form of 
heat energy) per unit volume in one cycle of magnetization. This loss depends upon the quality of material 
and the maximum ﬂux density at which the material is operated. Hysteresis loop as such is of little use in 
engineering applications except in illustrating the waveform of the exciting current. It is the normal (dc) 
magnetization curve which is of direct application in magnetic circuit calculations and design. In short form 
it will be referred as the magnetization curve. The hysteresis loss represented by the loop area is usually 
lumped with the eddy-current loss (Sec. 2.6) and the two together are known as the core (or iron) loss which 
is parameterized by material thickness and frequency and is expressed as loss per unit volume (speciﬁc loss). 
Sheet Steels 
Nearly all transformers and certain parts of electric machines use silicon steel in the form of sheets, thinly 
insulated on each side. Silicon is added to steel to increase its resistivity thereby reducing the eddy-current 
loss. Building the core out of thin sheets (laminations) greatly aids in reduction of the eddy-current loss (see 
Sec. 2.6). 
The crystalline structure of silicon steel is body centred cubic—an atom at each corner of the cube and an 
atom at the cube centre. The cubic structure presents considerable ease of magnetization (high mr) along the 
cube edge as compared to the diagonal on the cube side and the diagonal through the cube body which is most 
difﬁcult to magnetize. Therefore, if silicon steel crystals are aligned so that the cube edges lie parallel to the 

Magnetic Circuits and Induction 
27
direction of magnetization, the material has a much higher 
relative permeability and can be operated at much higher 
ﬂux densities with moderate exciting currents and also 
has superior core-loss qualities. This crystal arrangement 
is illustrated in Fig. 2.14. The crystal arrangement is 
practically achieved by cold-rolling steel sheets. The 
material is then termed as cold-rolled grain-oriented steel 
(crgos) and is invariably employed in electromechanical 
devices. Annealing of silicon steel sheets further helps in 
proper alignment of crystals. The saturation ﬂux density 
and electric resistivity are of course independent of the 
grain orientation.  
Magnetostriction
When ferromagnetic materials are subjected to magnetizing mmf, these undergo small changes in dimensions. 
The lengthwise change is of the order of 10–5 m and is accompanied by transverse changes of the opposite sign. 
These changes are caused by magnetostriction. Their nature is hysteric with consequent dissipation of energy 
when magnetization is alternating. Further, there are associated mechanical stresses which produce noise 
in audible bandwidth which can be a nuisance for high ﬂux densities employed in transformers in modern 
practice. Magnetostriction noise may, therefore, be the subject of limiting speciﬁcations in transformers. 
Magnetization Curves 
Typical magnetization curves of transformer steel are given in Fig. 2.15 and a comparative set of magnetization 
curves are given in Fig. 2.16. 
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
B (T)
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.5
1
2
3
5
H (kAT/m)
crgos
Fig. 2.15 
Magnetization curves: transformer steel 
2.4 
MAGNETICALLY INDUCED EMF AND FORCE 
Faraday’s law of induction, which is the integral form of the fourth Maxwell’s equation, is given as 
 


 E dl
◊
Ú
 = -
∂
∂◊
Ú


B
t
ds  
(2.15)
Fig. 2.14 
Crystal arrangement in grain-oriented 
steel

28 Electric Machines
The integrated form of Eq. (2.15) for a coil of N turns is
 
e = - N d
dt
f  = - d
dt
l  
(2.16)
where 
l = Nf = ﬂux linkages of the coil (Wb-Turns)
The positive direction of current in the coil is that direction which establishes positive ﬂux and ﬂux linkages. 
The negative sign in Eq. (2.16) means that the induced emf owing to an increase in l is in opposite direction 
to that of positive current. If this fact is separately remembered (it is known as Lenz’s law), Eq. (2.16) may 
be written 
 
e = N d
dt
f  = d
dt
l  
(2.17) 
with the sign of the emf determined by Lenz’s law. 
Change in ﬂux linkages of a coil may occur in three ways: 
 
(i) The coil remains stationary with respect to ﬂux, but the ﬂux through it changes with time. The emf 
induced is known as statically induced emf.
 (ii) Flux density distribution remains constant and stationary but the coil moves relative to it. The emf 
induced is known as dynamically induced (or motional) emf.
 (iii) Both changes (i) and (ii) may occur simultaneously, i.e. the coil moves through time-varying ﬂux. Both 
statically and dynamically induced emfs are then present in the coil. 
The dynamically induced emf (case (ii) above) in a conductor of length l placed at 90° to a magnetic ﬁeld 
of ﬂux density B and cutting across it at speed v is given by 
 
e = 

v
B
¥
l = Blv sin q 
(2.18a) 
where q is the angle between the direction of ﬂux density and conductor velocity, and l the conductor along 
which the ﬂux density is assumed uniform. In electric machines q = 90°, so that 
 
e = Blv 
(2.18b)
2.0
1.6
1.2
0.8
0.4
0 0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
crgos
ms
cs
ci
Magnetic fields strength
(kAT/m)
H
Flux density
( )
B T
Fig. 2.16 Magnetization curves: comparative [Cold-rolled grain-oriented steel (crgos), mild steel, cast steel, cast iron]

Magnetic Circuits and Induction 
29
This is known as the ﬂux-cutting rule and the direction of emf is given by 

v
B
¥
 or by the well-known 
Fleming’s right-hand rule*.
Inductance 
Equation (2. 17) may be written as
 
e = N d
dt
f  = N d
di
di
dt
f
 = L di
dt  
(2.19a)
where 
L = N d
di
f  = d
di
l  H 
(2.19b) 
is the self-inductance of the circuit. For a magnetic circuit having a linear B-H relationship (constant 
permeability of material) or with a dominating air-gap, the inductance L is a constant, independent of current 
and depends only on the geometry of circuit elements and permeability of the medium. In this case Eq. (2.19) 
can also be expressed as 
 
L = l
i  
(2.20)
The inductance can be written in terms of ﬁeld quantities as
 
L = N BA
Hl
2
 = N2m A
l  = N 2
R  = N2P H 
(2.21) 
Thus self-inductance is proportional to N2. 
The inductance concept is easily extendable to the mutual inductance of two coils sharing a common 
magnetic circuit. Thus, 
 
M
i
M
i
12
12
2
21
21
1
=
H
=
H
l
l
¸
˝
ÔÔ
˛
Ô
Ô
 
(2.22) 
where 
l12 = ﬂux linkages of coil 1 due to current in coil 2
 
l21 = ﬂux linkages of coil 2 due to current in coil 1
For a bilateral* magnetic circuit,
 
M = M12 = M21 
It can also be shown that for tight coupling, i.e. all the ﬂux linking both the coils (no leakage) 
 
M = 
L L
1 2  
(2.23a)
In general, 
 
M = k
L L
1 2  
(2.23b)
where 
k = coupling coefﬁcient (which can be at most unity)
From Eq. (2.20) 
l = Li 
 
* Extend the thumb, ﬁrst and second ﬁngers of the right hand so that they are mutually perpendicular to each other. 
If the thumb represents the direction of v (conductor with respect to B) and the ﬁrst ﬁnger the direction of B, then 
the second ﬁnger represents the direction of emf along l.

30 Electric Machines
In static magnetic conﬁguration, L is ﬁxed independent of time so that the induced emf is given by 
Eq. (2.19a). In rotating devices both L and i vary with time giving the induced emf 
 
e
L di
dt
i dL
dt
=
Statically
induced
  emf
Dynamically
   indu




+
ced
    emf

 
(2.24) 
Force
Force of electromagnetic origin is given by the Lorentz force equation 
 
dF

 = Idl
B


¥
 
(2.25)
where I is the current ﬂowing in the differential conductor of length dl. Integrating over the conductor length 
along which B is assumed uniform, the total force is obtained as 
 

F  = Il
B


¥
 = BIl sin q aF  N 
(2.26a)
where q is the angle between the direction of conductor and the magnetic ﬁeld and aF  is unit vector in the 
direction deﬁned by the cross product. For q = 90° which is used in most machine conﬁgurations, Eq. (2.26a) 
reduces to 
 
F = BIl  N 
(2.26b)
The direction of force being given by Il
B


¥
 or by the well-known Fleming’s lefthand rule*. It immediately 
follows from Eq. (2.26b) that B can be imagined to have unit of N/Am. 
EXAMPLE 2.7 For the magnetic circuit of Fig. 2.17 ﬁnd the self and mutual inductances between the two 
coils. Core permeability = 1600. 
6 cm
1 cm
2 cm
4 cm
N2 = 1000
turms
Thickness
2 cm
N1 = 500
turms
R 0
R 1
R 2
3 cm
Fig. 2.17
 
* Extend the thumb, ﬁrst and second ﬁngers of the left hand so that they are mutually perpendicular to each other. 
If the ﬁrst ﬁnger represents the direction of B and the second ﬁnger the direction of I, then the thumb points in the 
direction of force on the conductor. 

Magnetic Circuits and Induction 
31
SOLUTION
 
l1 = (6 + 0.5 +  1) ¥ 2 + (4 + 2) = 21 cm
 
l2 = (3 + 0.5 + 1) ¥ 2 + (4 + 2) = 15 cm
 
l0 = 4 + 2 = 6 cm
 
R1 = 
21
10
4
10
1600
2
2
10
2
7
4
¥
¥
¥
¥
¥
¥
-
-
-
p
 = 0.261 ¥ 106 
 
R2 = 
15
10
4
10
1600
2
2
10
2
7
4
¥
¥
¥
¥
¥
¥
-
-
-
p
 = 0.187 ¥ 106 
 
R0 = 
6
10
4
10
1600
1
2
10
2
7
4
¥
¥
¥
¥
¥
¥
-
-
-
p
 = 0.149 ¥ 106
 
(i) Coil 1 excited with 1A
 
  
R = R1 + R0 || R2
 
  
 = 0.261 + 0.1871 || 0.149 = 0.344 ¥ 106
 
  
f1 = (500 ¥ 1)/(0.344 ¥ 106) = 1.453 mWb
 
  
f21 = f2 = 1.453 ¥ 0.149/(0.149 + 0.187) = 0.64 mWb
 
  
L11 = N1fl = 500 ¥ 1.453 ¥ 10–3 = 0.7265 H
 
  
M21 = N2f21 = 1000 ¥ 0.649 ¥ 10–3 = 0.64 H 
 
(ii) Coil 2 excited with 1 A
 
  
R = R2 + (R0R1)/R0 + R1)
 
  
 = [0.187 + (0.149 ¥ 0.281)/(0.149 + 0.281)] ¥ 106
 
  
 = 0.284 ¥ 106
 
  
f2 = (1000 ¥ 1)/(0.284 ¥ 106) = 3.52 mWb
 
  
L22 = N2f2 =1000 ¥ 3.52 ¥ 10–3 = 3.52 H
 
  
M12 = M21 (bilateral) = 0.65 H
2.5 AC OPERATION OF MAGNETIC CIRCUITS
The magnetic circuits of transformers, ac machines and several other electromagnetic devices are excited 
from ac rather than dc sources. With ac operation, inductance is effective even in steady-state operation. 
Often, the ﬂux is determined by the impressed voltage and frequency, and the magnetization current has to 
adjust itself in accordance with the ﬂux so that B-H relationship is satisﬁed.
Except when linearity is desirable, economic utilization of material demands that working ﬂux density 
should lie in the nonlinear zone (but not in the region of deep saturation). Exact and accurate analysis, 
therefore, cannot be predicted on the basis of constant inductance. Still circuit models (equivalent circuits) 
with constant parameters are often used. It will be seen in later chapters that these not only provide simpliﬁed 
approach but at the same time yield the desired accuracy for engineering applications. 
Consider the N-turn iron-core coil of Fig. 2.1. Complete linearity of the magnetic circuit will be assumed. 
Magnetic ﬂux f is produced by the exciting current i. Let the current and so the ﬂux vary sinusoidally with 
time. Then 
 
f = fmax sin wt 
(2.27)

32 Electric Machines
where  
fmax = maximum value of ﬂux in core (Wb) 
 
w = 2pf, where f is frequency in Hz 
The induced emf in the coil as per Faraday’s law (Eq. (2.17)) is 
 
e = N d
dt
f  = w Nfmax cos wt V 
(2.28) 
and its rms value is 
 
E = 2
2
p  fNfmax = 4.44 f Nfmax 
(2.29) 
 
E = 444 f NAcBmax 
(2.30) 
where Bmax is the maximum value of the ﬂux density and Ac is the core’s area of cross-section.
The polarity of the emf must, in accordance with Lenz’s law, oppose the ﬂux change and, therefore, is 
as shown in Fig. 2.1 when the ﬂux is increasing. Since the current produces the ﬂux instantaneously and in 
proportion to it (quasi-static ﬁeld), they are in phase. From Eqs. (2.27) and (2.28), it is found that the induced 
emf leads the ﬂux (hence the current) by 90°. The induced emf and coil resistance drop oppose the impressed 
voltage. However, resistance drop in many ac electromagnetic devices is quite small and may be neglected 
to a close approximation. 
The electric power input into the magnetic circuit of Fig. 2.1 through the coil terminals is 
 
p = ie = i d
dt
l  
(2.31)
The electric energy input which gets stored in the magnetic ﬁeld* in the time interval tl to t2 is
 
Wf = 
p dt
t
t
1
2Ú
 = 
idl
l
l
1
2Ú
 
(2.32)
where Wf = increase in ﬁeld energy as the coil ﬂux linkages change from l1 to l2. In ﬁeld quantities 
 
Wf = 
H l
N
c c
B
B Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
Ú
1
2
(AcN )dBc = Aclc
Hc
B
B
1
2Ú
dBc 
(2.33)
wherein Aclc is the volume of the core. Thus the energy density in the ﬁeld is given by 
 
wf (density) = 
Hc
B
B
1
2Ú
dBc  J/m3 
(2.34) 
EXAMPLE 2.8 For the magnetic circuit of Example 2.1 and Fig. 2.4(a), ﬁnd the following:
 (a) Induced emf e for Bc = 1.2 sin 314t T,
 (b) reluctance Rc and Rg
 (c) coil inductance, L and
 (d) magnetic ﬁeld energy at Bc = 1.2 T
 
* It will be seen in Chapter 4 that a part of this energy is converted to mechanical form if mechanical motion is 
permitted between parts of the magnetic system.

Magnetic Circuits and Induction 
33
SOLUTION
 
(a) In Example 2.1 the value of l was found as 1.152 Wb-T for Bc = 1.2 T. Therefore, for sinusoidai variation of Bc,
 
  
l = 1.152 sin 314t Wb-T
 
 The emf is
 
  
e = 
d
dt
l
 =361.7cos 314t V
 
(b)  
Rc = 
l
A
c
r
c
m m
0
 = 
0 4
4
10
6000
16
10
7
4
.
p ¥
¥
¥
¥
-
-
 
  
 = 3.317 ¥ 104
 
  
Rg = 
l
A
g
g
m0
 = 
6
10
4
10
16
10
4
7
4
¥
¥
¥
¥
-
-
-
p
 = 29.856 ¥ 104
 
(c) From Example 2.1
 
  
i = 1.06 A
 
 \ 
L = l
i  = 1 152
1 06
.
.
 =1.09 H
 
 It can also be found by using Eq. (2.21). Thus
 
  
L = N2P = N 2
R  = 
N
c
g
2
R
R
+
 = 
(
)
( .
.
)
600
3 316
29 84
10
2
4
+
¥
 
  
 = 1.08 H
 
(d) The energy stored in the magnetic ﬁeld is from Eq. (2.32)
 
  
Wf = 
id l
l
0Ú
 = 
l
l
l
L d
0Ú
 = 1
2
2
l
L
 
  
 = 1
2
1 152
1 08
2
¥ ( .
)
.
 = 0.6144 J
When a magnetic material undergoes cyclic magnetization, two kinds of power losses occur in it—hysteresis 
and eddy-current losses—which together are known as core-loss. The core-loss is important in determining 
heating, temperature rise, rating and efﬁciency of 
transformers, machines and other ac run magnetic 
devices. 
Hysteresis Loss 
Figure 2.18 shows a typical hysteresis loop of a 
ferromagnetic material. As the mmf is increased from 
zero to its maximum value, the energy stored in the ﬁeld 
per unit volume of material is 
 
-Ú B
B
B
f
b
m
=
HdB = area ofabgo
e
d
a
0
B
g
c
b
H
Bm
Hm
Bf
dw1= HdB
Fig. 2.18 
Hysteresis loss

34 Electric Machines
As H is now reduced to zero, dB being negative, the energy is given out by the magnetic ﬁeld (from the 
exciting coil back to the voltage source) and has a value 
 
B
B
B
b
m
c
=
Ú
HdB = area cbg
The net energy unrecovered in the process is area ofabco which is lost irretrievably in the form of heat and 
is called the hysteresis loss. The total hysteresis loss in one cycle is easily seen to be the area of the complete 
loop (abcdefa) and let it be indicated as wh (hysteresis loss/unit volume). Then hysteresis loss in volume V of 
material when operated at f Hz is
 
Ph = whVf W 
(2.35)
In order to avoid the need for computation of the loop area, Steinmetz gave an empirical formula for 
computation of the hystersis loss based on experimental studies according to which
 
Ph = kh  f Bn
m W/m3 
(2.36)
where kh is a characteristic constant of the core material, Bm is the maximum ﬂux density and n, called the 
Steinmetz exponent, may vary from 1.5 to 2.5 depending upon the material and is often taken as 1.6.
Eddy-current Loss
When a magnetic core carries a time-varying ﬂux, voltages are induced in all possible paths enclosing the ﬂux. 
The result is the production of circulating currents in the core (all magnetic materials are conductors). These 
currents are known as eddy-currents and have power loss (i2R) associated with them called eddy-current loss. 
This loss, of course, depends upon the resistivity of the material and lengths of the paths of circulating currents 
for a given cross-section. Higher resistivity and longer paths increase the effective resistance offered by the 
material to induced voltages resulting in reduction of eddy-current loss. High resistivity is achieved by adding 
silicon to steel and hence silicon steel is used for cores conducting alternating ﬂux. Dividing up the material 
into thin laminations along the ﬂow of ﬂux, with each lamination lightly insulated (varnish is generally used) 
from the adjoining ones, increases the path length of the circulating currents with consequent reduction in 
eddy-current loss. The loss in fact can be shown to depend upon the square of lamination thickness. The 
lamination thickness usually varies from 0.3 to 5 mm for electromagnetic devices used in power systems and 
from about 0.01 to 0.5 mm for devices used in electronic applications where low core-loss is desired. 
The eddy-current loss can be expressed by the empirical formula 
 
pe = ke  f 2B2 W/m3 
(2.37)
wherein 
 
ke = K¢e d2/r 
(2.38)
d being the thickness of lamination and r the resistivity of material. 
It is only an academic exercise to split the core-loss into its two components. The core loss in fact 
arises from two types of ﬂux variations: (i) ﬂux that has a ﬁxed axis and varies sinusoidally with time as 
in transformers (this is the type visualized in the above discussion), (ii) ﬂux density is constant but the ﬂux 
axis rotates. Actually in ac machines as well as in armature of dc machines the ﬂux variation comprises both 
these types occurring simultaneously. The core-loss is measured experimentally on material specimen and 
presented graphically. Typical values of the speciﬁc core-loss (W/kg of material) are displayed in Figs 2.19 
(a) and (b) for cold-rolled grain-oriented (crgos) steel. It is easy to see from these ﬁgures that for reasons 
mentioned above speciﬁc core loss is much higher in machines than in transformers. 

Magnetic Circuits and Induction 
35
5
4
3
2
1
Specific loss (W/kg)
0
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
B
T
Flux density ( )
(a)
Specific loss (W/kg)
50
40
30
20
10
0
0.8
1.2
1.6
2.0
2.4
Flux density ( )
T
(b)
0.5 mm 0.4
mm
0.35 mm
crgos
0.35 mm
Fig. 2.19 Core-loss at 50 Hz: (a) transformers, (b) machines
EXAMPLE 2.9 The total core loss of a specimen of silicon steel is found to be 1500 W at 50 Hz. Keeping 
the ﬂux density constant the loss becomes 3000 W when the frequency is raised to 75 Hz. Calculate separately 
the hysteresis and eddy current loss at each of those frequencies.
SOLUTION 
From Eqs. (2.36) and (2.37) for constant ﬂux density, total core loss can be expressed as
 
P = Af + Bf  2   or 
P/f = A + Bf
 
1500/50 = A + 50 B   or 
30 = A + 50 B 
(i)
 
3000/75 = A + 75 B   or 
40 = A + 75 B 
(ii)
Solving Eqs. (i) and (ii), we get A = 10, B = 2/5
Therefore 
P = 10f + 2/5 f  2 = Ph + Pe 
(iii)
At 50 Hz 
Ph = 10 ¥ 50 = 500 W 
 
Pe = 2/5 ¥ 2500 = 1000 W 
At 75 Hz 
Ph = l0 ¥ 75 = 750 W 
 
Pe = 2/5 ¥ (75)2 = 2250 W
2.7 
PERMANENT MAGNETS
The permanent magnet is an important excitation source (life long) commonly employed for imparting energy 
to magnetic circuits used in rotating machines and other types of electromechanical devices. There are three 
classes of permanent magnet materials (or hard magnetic materials) used for permanent magnet dc (PMDC) 
motors: Alnicos, ceramics (ferrites) and rare-earth materials. Alnico magnets are used in motors up to  
200 kW, while ceramic magnets are most economical in fractional kW motors. The rare-earth magnetic 
materials are very costly, but are the most economic choice in very small motors. Latest addition is 
neodymium-iron boron (Nd FeB). At room temperature, it has the highest energy product (to be explained 
later in this section) of all commonly available magnets. The high permeance and coercivity allow marked 
reductions in motor frame size for the same output compared to motors using ferrite (ceramic) magnets. For 
very high temperature applications Alnico or rare-earth cobalt magnets must be used. 

36 Electric Machines
Two important qualities of a permanent magnet (PM) are deﬁned below with reference to the second 
quadrant of its hysteresis loop. 
Permanent Magnetization or Residual Flux Density (Br)
It is the ﬂux density trapped in closed magnetic structure if the applied mmf (and therefore the magnetic ﬁeld 
intensity, H) were reduced to zero.
Coercivity
It is the measure of mmf (or H) which, when applied to the magnetic circuit, would reduce its ﬂux density to 
zero, i.e. it would demagnetize the material. Its value is negative and in units of kA/m. 
The second quadrant of the hysteresis loops for Alnico 5 and M-5 steel are shown respectively in 
Figs. 2.20(a) and (b). Their residual ﬂux densities and coercivities are given below: 
 
Alnico 5 
: Br ª 1.25 T, Hc ª –50 kA/m 
 
M-5 steel 
: Br ª 1.4 T, Hc ª –6 kA/m 
It is therefore observed that while Br of M-5 steel is higher than that of Alnico 5 but the latter (Alnico 5) 
has a far greater coercivity. As we shall see below that materials with high coercivity qualify as PM materials. 
An important measure of the capability of permanent magnet is known as its maximum energy product. 
This corresponds to the largest BH product, (BH)max, which is a point on the second quadrant of the hysteresis 
loop; see Fig. 2.20(a). It has the dimensions of energy density (J/m3) and it can be shown that operation of 
a given PM material at this point will result in the minimum volume of material required to produce a given 
ﬂux density in the air gap. 
.
.
.
.
Point of
maximum
energy
product
50
40
30
b
B T
( )
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.5
1.0
1.5
( )
B T
a
–50
– 40
–30
–20
–10
0
–10
–5
0
H(kA/m)
(a) Alnico 5
H(A/m)
kJ/m3
Br
Hc
Br
Hc
(b) M-5 electrical steel
Fig. 2.20 Second quadrant of hysteresis loop for (a) Alnico 5 and (b) M-5 electrical steel 

Magnetic Circuits and Induction 
37
EXAMPLE 2.10 A magnetic circuit (Fig. 2.21a) consists of a core of very high permeability, an air-gap 
length of lg = 0.4 cm and a section of permanent magnet (made of Alnico 5) of length lm = 2.4 cm. Assume 
m of core = . 
Calculate the ﬂux density Bg in the air-gap. Given: Am = 4 mm2. 
Area Am
m
Magnet
Ag
lm
lg
Fig. 2.21(a) A Magnetic circuit with a PM 
SOLUTION
 
mcore =  ﬁHcore = 0 
From Ampere’s circuital law 
 
Hm lm + Hg lg = 0 = F 
(2.39)
or 
Hg = -
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
l
l
m
g
Hm 
(2.40) 
where Hg and Hm are the magnetic ﬁeld intensities in the air-gap and the PM respectively. Thus the existence of an air-gap 
is equivalent to the application of a negative ﬁeld to the PM material. 
As the ﬂux must be continuous around the path 
 
f = Bm Am = Bg Ag 
(2.41)
Also 
 
Bg = m0 Hg
We obtain from Eqs. (2.40) and (2.41) 
 
Bm = –m0
A
A
l
l
g
m
m
g
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ Hm 
(2.42)
Substituting values we get 
 
Bm = –6m0 Hm = –7.54 ¥ 10–6 Hm 
(2.43)
This is a straight line (also called load line) shown in Fig. 2.20(a), where its intersection with the demagnetization 
curve at point ‘a’ gives the solution for Bm. 
Thus 
Bg = Bm = 0.33 T 
Note: If we repeat the above problem for M-5 electrical steel, it is easy to ﬁnd the answer since the load line is the same 
as given by Eq. (2.43). It can be shown that Bm = 4 ¥ 10–5 T. This is much less than the value of Bm for Alnico 5.

38 Electric Machines
From Eq. (2.40) we can get the expression for Bg as 
 
Bg = m0Hg = – m0 l
l
m
g
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ Hm 
(2.44)
From Eqs. (2.41) and (2.44) we get 
 
B2
g = m0 l
A
l A
m
m
g
g
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ (–Hm Bm)
 
 = m0 Vol
Vol
m
g
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ (–Hm Bm) 
(2.45)
 
Volm = 
B Vol
H
B
g
g
m
m
m0(
)
-
; a positive value as Hm is negative (Fig. 2.20) 
(2.46)
Thus, to produce a ﬂux density Bg in an air-gap of volume Volg, minimum volume of magnet material would be 
required if the material is operated in the state represented by the maximum value of the product BmHm.
From Eq. (2.46) it may appear that one can get an arbitrarily large air-gap ﬂux density just by reducing the air-gap 
volume. However, in practice this cannot be achieved because the on increasing ﬂux density in the magnetic circuit 
beyond a given point, the magnetic core gets saturated and the assumption of inﬁnite core permeability becomes invalid. 
It may be noted that in Fig. 2.20(a) a set of constant BH product curves (hyperbolas) is also plotted.
EXAMPLE 2.11 For the magnetic circuit of Fig. 2.21(a) if Ag = 3.0 cm2 ﬁnd the minimum magnet volume 
required to produce an air-gap ﬂux density of 0.7 T. 
SOLUTION 
The smallest magnet volume will be obtained with the magnet operating at point as shown in Fig. 2.20(a) 
which corresponds to Bm = 1.0 T and Hm = –40 kA/m. 
From Eq. (2.41) 
 
Am = Bg Ag/Bm = (0.7 ¥ 3)/1 = 2.1 cm2
From Eq. (2.39) 
 
lm = – H l
H
g g
m
 = – B l
H
g g
m
m0
 
 = -
¥
¥
¥ -
¥
-
0 7
0 4
4
10
40
10
7
3
.
.
(
)
p
 = 5.57 cm
 
Minimum magnet volume = 2.1 ¥ 5.57 = 11.7 cm3 
Examples 2.10 and 2.11 depict the operation of hard (PM) magnetic materials. 
However, the situation is more complex as discussed in the next section. 
Now consider the case when an exciting coil is placed on the core of the 
permanent magnet. Circuit of Fig. 2.21(a) with Ni ampere-turns. The circuit is 
shown in Fig. 2.21(b).  
From the magnetic circuit
 
F = Ni = Hmlm + Hg lg 
(2.47)
As ﬂux lines are continuous and no leakage is assumed. 
So,  
Bm Am = Bg Ag = m0 Hg Ag 
(2.48)
m
Exciting coil
N
Am
Ag
lg
lm
i
Fig. 2.21(b)

Magnetic Circuits and Induction 
39
Equation (2.47) can be written as follows: 
 
Ni = Hm lm + B A
A
m
m
g
m0
 
(2.49)
This can be reorganized as follows: 
 
Bm = –m0
A
A
l
l
g
m
m
g
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ Hm + m0
A
A
l
g
m
g
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
1 (Ni) 
(2.50) 
This equation is the general form of the load line. The intersection of this line gives the operational point B, H. By 
adjusting the current in the exciting coil, the permanent magnet can be brought to desired magnetization state. This is 
accomplished as per steps below.
B-H (hysteresis) curve with desired value of Br (residual magnetization). 
B-H curve, ﬁnd Bmax and Hmax at the hysteresis loop tip. 
imax. Usually the desired B-H curve may not be available. So from 
Br we have to estimate Bmax and Hmax. This can be done by extrapolating the B-H curve from Br to about 4 times 
Hc (into positive H-side).
While magnetizing a permanent magnet the exciting current is raised to imax and then reduced to zero gradually. The 
exciting coil may then be removed. 
EXAMPLE 2.12 Consider the magnetic circuit of Fig. 2.21(a). The permanent magnet material Alinco-5 
is in demagnetized state. It is required to be magnetized to a reduced ﬂux density Br = 1.25 T. Magnetic 
circuit dimensions are: Am = Ag = 2.5 cm2, lm = 4 cm, lg = 0.2 cm. Excitation coil turns, N = 200. 
SOLUTION 
To ﬁnd the ﬁrst quadrant tip of the hysteresis loop, we assume 
 
Hmax = 3.5 Hc 
From Fig. 2.20(a)
 
Hc = 50 (magnitude)
So, 
Hmax = 170 kA/m
Extrapolating B-H curve into ﬁrst quadrant, we get
 
Bmax ª 2T
Substituting values in Eq. (2.50) 
 
Bmax = m0 -Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
+ Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
¥
¥
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
-
2
2
4
0 2
2
2
1
200
0 2
10 2
.
.
max
H
i
 
m0 = 4p ¥ 10–7 
\ 
Bmax = – 2.51 ¥ 10–5 Hmax + 12.57 ¥ 10–2 i 
Substituting for Bmax and Hmax 
 
2 = –2.51 ¥ 10–5 ¥ 170 ¥ 103 + 12.57 ¥ 102 i 
(2.51)
Solving Eq. (2.51), we get 
 
i = 49.86 A
Note: Equation (2.51) represents a straight line in B-H plane for a given i. Its intersection with B-H curve gives the state 
of the permanent magnet at that value of exciting current. 

40 Electric Machines
2.8 
APPLICATION OF PERMANENT MAGNET MATERIALS 
Typical values of the properties of four classes of PM materials are given in Table 2.1. These properties are: 
residual ﬂux density Br, coercive magnetizing force Hc, maximum energy stored (BH)max and resistivity. 
Table 2.1
 Type
Material
Br
(T)
Hc
kA/m
BHmax
kJ/m3
r
mm
A:
B
C
D
Ceramic
Metallic
Metallic
Rare-earth
Barium or
Strontium ferrite
carbonate powders
Alcomax
Hycomax
Somarium-cobalt
0.39
1.25
0.8
0.75
200
 60
100
600
 30
 45
 35
130
High
500
500
 60
Type A material is cheap but heavy, and suitable for low-rated production-run motors. Types B and C 
materials are hard and can be given simple shapes only. Type D material can be easily moulded and machined 
and is used for most electric motors but is costly. Materials with higher coercivities are much less prone to 
demagnetization. Figure 2.22 shows DC magnetization curves for a few commonly used materials. 
B T
( )
Neodymium-iron-boron
Somarium Cobalt
0.7
Alnico
Ceramic
H, kA/m –1000 –900 –800 –700 –600 –500 –400 –300 –200 –100
–0
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Fig. 2.22 DC magnetization curves for some commonly used PM materials

Magnetic Circuits and Induction 
41
The latest of the rare-earth magnetic materials is the 
neodymium-iron-boron material. It has larger Br, Hc 
and (BH)max than Somarium cobalt. It is cheaper and 
has good mechanical properties and this is expected to 
be used in a big way for PM applications.  
Consider the magnetic circuit of Fig. 2.23 consisting 
of a section of PM material in a core of highly permeable 
soft magnetic material with an N-turn exciting winding.
Figure 2.24 shows that the PM is initially unmag-
netised and current is applied to the exciting winding. 
As core is of inﬁnite permeability, the X-axis represents 
both i and H. 
Bmax
B T
( )
c
d
Recoil
line
b
a
Minor loop
0
Br
B1
– H1
– i1
Hlm
N
i =
HmaxH, kA/m
imax
i A
,
Fig. 2.24 
Demagnetization curve with recoil line
As current i is raised to its maximum value (saturation), the BH trajectory rises from the origin to its 
maximum value at point ‘a’. Now if the current is reduced to zero, the BH characteristic starts forming a 
hysteresis loop meeting Y-axis at point b at which B = Br and H = 0. As the current is further decreased to 
a negative value the BH curve continues to follow a hysteresis loop as shown in Fig. 2.24. For i = –i1, the 
operating point is c. It may be noted that the same operating point c would be arrived (see Ex. 2.10) if the 
material were to start at point b with zero excitation and air-gap length of lm (Ag/Am) (–m0 H1/B1) (Eq. (12.42)) 
were then inserted in the core. 
If the current is further reduced, the trajectory would further trace the BH curve toward d as shown in 
Fig. 2.24. However, if the current is reduced to zero, the trajectory does not normally retrace the loop toward 
point b. Instead it starts to trace out a minor hysteresis loop, as shown in Fig. 2.24. As the current varies from 
0 to i1. The minor hysteresis loop may usually be replaced with little error by a straight line called the recoil 
line. This line has a slope called the recoil permeability mrec, which is approximately the same as that of the 
original BH curve at H = 0, i.e., at B = Br. In fact the recoil line is essentially tangent to the BH curve for 
a large portion of the useful operating region for many materials such as Somarium Cobalt, Ceramic 7 etc. 
having large values of coercivity. 
PM
Core m
N turns
i
lm
Fig. 2.23 
Practical magnetic circuit having a PM

42 Electric Machines
As long as the negative value of applied magnetic ﬁeld intensity does not exceed H1, the magnet may be 
regarded as reasonably permanent. If, however, a negative ﬁeld intensity greater than H1 is applied, the ﬂux 
density will be reduced to a value lower than B1 and a new and lower minor loop will be created with a new 
recoil line and recoil permeability. 
The demagnetization effects of negative excitation which have been discussed above are equivalent to 
those of an air-gap in the magnetic circuit. 
Thus, we see that these materials produce enough magnetic ﬂux even in magnetic circuits with air-gaps. 
With proper design they can be operated stable even when subjected to a wide range of destabilizing forces 
and mmf’s, Permanent magnets are increasingly ﬁnding greater applications in many small devices such 
as loud speakers, ac and dc motors, microphones, analog electric meters, driving, windshield wipers, radio 
antennas, airconditioners, etc.
 
 
 The role of the electromagnetic system is to establish and control electromagnetic ﬁelds for carrying 
out conversion of energy, its processing and transfer.
 
 The Ampere’s law, 





J ds
H dl
S
◊
=
◊
Ú
Ú
 
 where 

J = conduction current density
 
  

H = magnetic ﬁeld intensity
 
  
S = the surface enclosed by the closed path of length l
 
  
ds = differential surface
 
  
dl

 = differential length
 
 In all practical circuits most of the ﬂux is conﬁned to the intended path by use of magnetic cores but 
a small amount of ﬂux always leaks through the surrounding air.  The stray ﬂux is called the leakage 
ﬂux.
 
 The effect of the fringing ﬁeld is to increase the effective cross-sectional area Ag of the air-gap.
Magnetic circuit law
 
  
f = F
R  = FP = ﬂux (Wb)
 
  
F = mmf (AT)
 
  
R = reluctance = 
l
A
c
c
c
m
 (AT/Wb)
 
  
P = permeance = 1/R 
Electrical analog of magnetic circut
 
F ~ E, R ~ R, f ~ i

 Hysleresis loss, ph = kh   f Bn
m W/m3



n = Stenmetz exponent, 1.5 to 2.5 upto taken as 1.6
Eddy current loss, pe = ke f  2B2
m W/m3 

Magnetic Circuits and Induction 
43
 Magnetic cores are made up of thin, lightly insulated (coating of varnish) laminations to reduce power 
loss in cores due to the eddy current phenomenon.  As a result, the net cross-sectional area of the core 
occupied by the magnetic material is less than its gross cross-section, their ratio (less than unity) being 
known as stacking factor.
 
 Super paramagnetic materials are made from powdered iron or other magnetic particles.  These 
materials are used in transformers for electronics and cores for inductors.
 
 Magnetically induced EMF and FORCE is given by 
 
  
e = BlV—Fleming’s right hand rule determines the direction of emf
 
  
F = BIl—Fleming’s left hand rule determines the direction of force
 
  
B = ﬂux density (Wb/m2 or T)
 
  
V = conductor speed m/s relative to ﬂux
 
  
l = conductor length (m)
 
  
I = conductor current (A)
 
 Energy stored in magnetic ﬁeld 
 
 
 W
LI
L
f =
=
1
2
1
2
2
2
l
 
 where 
L – self-inductance, (H)
 
  
I = current (A),
 
  
l = ﬂux linkages (Wb-T)
 
Permanent Magnet – Br = residual ﬂux
 
 Coercerlity – H (negative) needed to reduce
 
 B to zero
2.1 A square loop of side 2d is placed with two of 
its sides parallel to an inﬁnitely long conductor 
carrying current I. The centre line of the 
square is at distance b from the conductor. 
Determine the expression for the total ﬂux 
passing through the loop. What would be the 
loop ﬂux if the loop is placed such that the 
conductor is normal to the plane of the loop. 
Does the loop ﬂux in this case depend upon 
the relative location of the loop with respect 
to the conductor? 
 2.2 For the magnetic circuit of Fig. P.2.2, ﬁnd the 
ﬂux density and ﬂux in each of the outer limbs 
and the central limbs. Assume the relative 
permeability of iron of the core to be (a) 
, 
(b) 4500. 
A
Core thickness
5 cm
1000
turns
0.5 A
5cm
30 cm
10 cm
B
30 cm
5cm
2 mm
1 mm
40cm
Fig. P 2.2 
Note: Unless otherwise speciﬁed, neglect leakage and fringing. 

44 Electric Machines
 2.3 For the magnetic circuit shown in Fig. P.2.3, 
calculate the exciting current required to 
establish a ﬂux of 2 mWb in the air-gap. Take 
fringing into account empirically. Use the B-H 
curve of Fig. 2.15.  
200 turns
0.1 cm
Ac
cm2
= 5
4
¥
20 cm
20 cm
15cm
Fig. P 2.3
 2.4 A steel ring has a mean diameter of 20 cm, a 
cross-section of 25 cm2 and a radial air-gap 
of 0.8 mm cut across it. When excited by a 
current of 1 A through a coil of 1000 turns 
wound on the ring core, it produces an air-
gap ﬂux of 1 m Wb. Neglecting leakage and 
fringing, calculate (a) relative permeability of 
steel, and (b) total reluctance of the magnetic 
circuit.
 2.5 The core made of cold rolled silicon steel 
(B-H curve of Fig. 2.15) is shown in Fig. P.2.5. 
It has a uniform cross-section (net iron) of  
5.9 cm2 and a mean length of 30 cm. Coils A, 
B and C carry 0.4, 0.8 and 1 A respectively in 
the directions shown. Coils A and B have 250 
and 500 turns respectively. How many turns 
must coil C have to establish a ﬂux of 1 mWb 
in the core? 
A
C
B
Fig. P 2.5
 2.6 In the magnetic circuit shown in Fig. P.2.6, the 
coil F1 is supplying 4000 AT in the direction 
indicated. Find the AT of coil F2 and current 
direction to produce air-gap ﬂux of 4 mWb 
from top to bottom. The relative permeability 
of iron may be taken as 2500. 
 2.7 For the magnetic circuit shown in Fig. P.2.7, 
the air-gap ﬂux is 0.24 mWb and the number 
of turns of the coil wound on the central limb 
is 1000.
 
 Calculate (a) the ﬂux in the central limb, (b) 
the current required. The magnetization curve 
of the core is as follows: 
 
 H(AT/m) 
200 
400 
500 
600
 
  
800 
1060 
1400
 
 B(T) 
0.4  
0.8  
1.0 
1.1
 
  
1.2 
1.3 
1.4 
F2
F1
2 mm
Area of cross-
section 40
throughout
cm2
50
cm
50 cm
20 cm
Fig. P 2.6

Magnetic Circuits and Induction 
45
 2.8 The magnetic circuit shown in Fig. P.2.8 has 
a coil of 500 turns wound on the central limb 
which has an air-gap of 1 mm. The magnetic 
path from A to B via each outer limb is 
100 cm and via the central limb 25 cm (air-
gap length excluded). The cross-sectional area 
of the central limb is 5 cm ¥ 3 cm and that 
each outer limb is 2.5 cm ¥ 3 cm. A current 
of 0.5 A in the coil produces an air-gap ﬂux 
of 0.35 mWb. Find the relative permeability 
of the medium. 
A
B
Fig. P 2.8
 2.9 A cast steel ring has an external diameter of 
32 cm and a square cross-section of 4 cm 
side. Inside and across the ring a cast steel 
bar 24 ¥ 4 ¥ 2 cm is ﬁtted, the butt-joints 
being equivalent to a total air-gap of 1 mm. 
Calculate the ampere-turns required on half of 
the ring to produce a ﬂux density of 1 T in the 
other half. Given:
 
 H(AT/m)  0 
200 
400 
600 
800
 
  
1000 1200 
1400 
1600
 
 B(T) 
0 
0.11 
0.32 
0.6 
0.8
 
  
1.0 
1.18 
1.27 
1.32 
 2.10 In Prob. 2.2 the B-H curve of the core material 
is characterized by the data given below. Find 
now the ﬂux and ﬂux densities in the three 
limbs of the core.
 
 H(AT/m) 
50 
100 
150 
200
 
  
250 
300 
350
 
 B(T) 
0. 14 
0.36 
0.66 
1.00
 
  
1.22 
1.32 
1.39
 
 Hint: This problem can be solved by the 
graphical-cum-iterative technique.
 2.11 A ring of magnetic material has a rectangular 
cross-section. The inner diameter of the 
ring is 20 cm and the outer diameter is  
25 cm, its thickness being 2 cm. An air-gap of 
1 mm length is cut across the ring. The ring 
is wound with 500 turns and when carrying a 
current of 3 A produces a ﬂux density of 1.2 T 
in the air-gap. Find (a) magnetic ﬁeld intensity 
in the magnetic material and in the air-gap. (b) 
relative permeability of the magnetic material, 
and (c) total reluctance of the magnetic circuit 
and component values.
 2.12 For the magnetic ring of Prob. 2.11, the 
exciting current is again 3 A. Find the 
following: 
15 cm
2 cm
4 cm
2 cm
2cm
2 cm
Air-gap, 1 mm
Core thickness
3 cm uniform
10 cm
10 cm
15 cm
2cm
Fig. P 2.7

46 Electric Machines
 
(a) Inductance of the coil, 
 
(b) energy stored in the magnetic material 
and in the air-gap, and 
 
(c) rms emf induced in the coil when it 
carries alternating current of 3 sin 314t.
 2.13 Assume that the core of the magnetic circuit 
of Fig. P.2.3 has mr = 2500.
 
(a) Calculate the energy stored in the core 
and in the air-gap for an excitation 
current of 5 A.
 
 What will be these values if mr = ?
 
(b) What will be the excitation current to 
produce a sinusoidally varying ﬂux of 
0.5 sin 314t mWb in the air-gap?
 
(c) Calculate the inductance of the coil. 
What will be the inductance if mr = ?
 2.14 The magnetic circuit of Fig. P.2.14 has a 
magnetic core of relative permeability 1600 
and is wound with a coil of 1500 turns 
excited with sinusoidal ac voltage, as shown. 
Calculate the maximum ﬂux density of the 
core and the peak value of the exciting current. 
What is the peak value of the energy stored in 
the magnetic system and what percentage of it 
resides in the air-gap? 
 2.15 The material of the core of Fig. P.2.15, wound 
with two coils as shown, is sheet steel (B-H 
curve of Fig. 2.15). Coil 2 carries a current  
2 A in the direction shown. What current (with 
direction) should coil 1 carry to establish a ﬂux 
density of 1.4 T in the core in the indicated 
direction? 
f
20 cm
400 turns
1
2
Thickness 5 cm
800 turns
25 cm
10 cm
10 cm
10 cm
10 cm
Fig. P 2.15 
 2.16 The ﬂux in a magnetic core is alternating 
sinusoidally at a frequency of 600 Hz. The 
maximum ﬂux density is 2 T and the eddy-
current loss is 15 W. Find the eddy-current 
loss in the core if the frequency is raised to 
800 Hz and the maximum ﬂux density is 
reduced to 1.5 T.
 2.17 The core-loss (hysteresis + eddy-current loss) 
for a given specimen of magnetic material is 
found to be 2000 W at 50 Hz. Keeping the ﬂux 
density constant, the frequency of the supply 
is raised to 75 Hz resulting in core-loss of 
3200 W. Compute separately hysteresis and 
eddy-current losses at both the frequencies. 
Hint: PL = Pc + Pk = ke  f 2B2
mV + kh  fBn
mV; V = 
ﬁxed core volume
Cross- sectional
area = 5 cm2
f
0.15 mm
20 cm
i
200 V
= 50 Hz
f
+
E
–
Fig. P 2.14

Magnetic Circuits and Induction 
47
 
 Since Bm remains constant
 
  
PL = k¢e  f 2 + k¢h f
 
 or 
PL / f = k¢e  f + k¢h
 
 which gives a straight line from which k¢e and 
k¢h can be determined.
 2.18 A permanent magnet (PM) made of neodymi-
um-iron boron alloy is placed in the magnetic 
circuit of Fig. P.2.18. Given
 
  
Ag = 4 cm2, lg = 0.4 cm 
 
 It is desired to have air gap ﬂux density Bg = 
0.5 T. For optimum design (minimum volume 
of PM) determine lm,
 
 Note 
Am = Ag.
 2.19 In the PM circuit of Fig. P.2.18
 
 Ag is reduced to 2 cm2,
 
 Determine Bg and Bm.
 2.20 The armature in the PM circuit Fig. 2.18 is 
now taken out and its height reduced so that 
when it is placed back in the circuit the air gap 
length lg is now 0.5 cm. Determine Bg and Bm.
 2.21 On the core of Fig. P.2.18 an exciting coil 
is wound with 200 turns and is fed with an 
exciting current of 1 A. Determine air-gap 
ﬂux density Bg. Note that direction of exciting 
current is such that it aids magnetization. 
 
1. State Ohm’s law for magnetic circuits.
 
2. Deﬁne magnetic reluctance.
 
3. Explain why a ferromagnetic material exhibits 
its typical B-H behaviour.
 
4. Explain the practical use made of magnetic 
saturation.
 
5. Explain the origin of magnetostriction noise 
in ferromagnetic materials.
 
6. Advance a qualitative explanation for reduc-
tion of eddy current loss by using a core com-
posed of silicon steel laminations.
 
7. What are the important qualities of a PM?
 
8. What is the phase angle between ﬂux and in-
duced emf in an ac excited coil wound on an 
iron core?
 
9. Write the expression for inducted emf (rms) in 
an ac excited coil wound in an iron core. Use 
stantard symbols.
 10. Write the expression for the self inductance of 
a coil wound on an iron core.
 
Am
Magnetic core
m
Total air gap lg
can be shifted
P 2.19
Ag values for
Armature
lm
PM
Fig. P 2.18

48 Electric Machines
3.1 
INTRODUCTION
A transformer is a static device comprising coils coupled through a magnetic 
medium connecting two ports at different voltage levels (in general) in an electric 
system allowing the interchange of electrical energy between the ports in either 
direction via the magnetic ﬁeld. The transformer is one of the most important 
component of a variety of electrical circuits ranging from low-power, low-current 
electronic and control circuits to ultra high-voltage power systems. Transformers 
are built in an astonishing range of sizes from the tiny units used in communication systems to monsters 
used in high-voltage transmission systems, weighing hundreds of tons. A circuit model and performance 
analysis of transformers is necessary for understanding of many electronic and control systems and 
almost all power systems. The transformer being an electromagnetic device, its analysis greatly aids in 
understanding the operation of electromechanical energy conversion devices which also use magnetic ﬁeld 
but the interchange of energy is between electrical and mechanical ports.
 The most important tasks performed by transformers are: (i) changing voltage and current levels in 
electric power systems, (ii) matching source and load impedances for maximum power transfer in 
electronic and control circuitry, and (iii) electrical isolation (isolating one circuit from another or isolating 
dc while maintaining ac continuity between two circuits). Transformers are used extensively in ac power 
systems because they make possible power generation at the most desirable and economical level (10– 
20 kV), power transmission at an economical transmission voltage (as high as 400–1000 kV) and power 
utilization at most convenient distribution voltages (230/400 V) for industrial, commercial and domestic 
purposes but in industrial applications voltages may have to be as high as 3.3, 6.6 or 11 kV for large 
motors. In communication and electronic systems where frequency ranges from audio to radio and video, 
transformers are used for a wide variety of purposes. For instance input/output transformers (used to connect 
the microphone to the ﬁrst amplifying stage/to connect the last amplifying stage to the loudspeaker) and 
interstage transformers are to be found in radio and television circuits. Indeed the transformer is a device 
which plays an important and essential role in many facets of electrical engineering. 
 A transformer, in its simplest form, consists essentially of two insulated windings interlinked by a 
common or mutual magnetic ﬁeld established in a core of magnetic material. When one of the windings, 
termed the primary, is connected to an alternating-voltage source, an alternating ﬂux is produced in the 
core with an amplitude depending on the primary voltage, frequency and number of turns. This mutual ﬂux 
links the other winding, called the secondary. A voltage is induced in this secondary of the same frequency 
as the primary voltage but its magnitude depends on the number of secondary turns. When the number 
of primary and secondary turns are properly proportioned, almost any desired voltage ratio, or ratio of 
transformation can be achieved. The subscript “1” will be associated with the primary and “2” with the 
3

Transformers 
49
3.2 
TRANSFORMER CONSTRUCTION AND PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS
The type of construction adopted for transformers is intimately related to the purpose for which these are to 
be used; winding voltage, current rating and operating 
frequencies. The construction has to ensure efﬁcient 
removal of heat from the two seats of heat generation—
core and windings, so that the temperature rise is limited 
to that allowed for the class of insulation employed. 
Further, to prevent insulation deterioration, moisture 
ingress to it must not be allowed. These two objectives 
are simultaneously achieved in power transformers, 
other than those in very small sizes, by immersing 
the built-up transformer in a closed tank ﬁlled with 
noninﬂammable insulating oil called transformer oil. 
To facilitate natural oil circulation and to increase the 
cooling surface exposed to the ambient, tubes or ﬁns 
are provided on the outside of tank walls. In large-size 
transformers tubes may be forced-cooled by air. For still 
larger installations the best cooling system appears to 
be that in which the oil is circulated by pump from the 
top of the transformer tank to a cooling plant, returning 
when cold to the bottom of the tank. In small sizes 
the transformers are directly placed in a protective 
housing or are encased in hard rubber moulding and 
are air-cooled. Figures 3.1. (a), (b) and (c) show the 
constructional details of practical transformers. 
secondary. The reader should note that these are arbitrary terms and in no way affect the inherent properties 
of a transformer. 
 If the secondary voltage is greater than the primary value, the transformer is called a step-up transformer; 
if it is less, it is known as a step-down transformer; if primary and secondary voltages arc equal, the 
transformer is said to have a one-to-one ratio. One-to-one transformers are used to electrically isolate 
two parts of a circuit. Any transformer may be used as a step-up or step-down depending on the way it is 
connected. 
 In order to ensure the largest and most effective magnetic linkage of the two windings, the core, which 
supports them mechanically and conducts their mutual ﬂux, is normally made of highly permeable iron 
or steel alloy (cold-rolled, grain oriented sheet steel). Such a transformer is generally called an iron-core 
transformer. Transformers operated from 25–400 Hz are invariably of iron-core construction. However, 
in special cases, the magnetic circuit linking the windings may be made of nonmagnetic material, in 
which case the transformer is referred to as an air-core transformer. The air-core transformer is of interest 
mainly in radio devices and in certain types of measuring and testing instruments. An intermediate type, 
exempliﬁed by a type of induction coils and by small transformers used in speech circuits of telephone 
systems, utilizes a straight core made of a bundle of iron wires on which the primary and secondary coils 
are wound in layers.
Fig. 3.1 (a) 
Single-phase transformer core and 
windings

50 Electric Machines
Power transformers are provided with a conservative through which the transformer breathes into the 
atmosphere The conservative is a smaller-sized tank placed on top of the main tank. This arrangement ensures 
that surface area of transformer oil exposed to atmosphere is limited so as to prevent fast oxidization and 
consequent deterioration of insulating properties of the oil.
Fig. 3.1 (b) Three-phase transformer core and windings 
The magnetic core of a transformer is made up of stacks of thin laminations (0.35 mm thickness) of cold-
rolled grain-oriented silicon steel sheets lightly insulated with varnish. This material allows the use of high 
ﬂux densities (1–1.5 T) and its low-loss properties together with laminated construction reduce the core-loss 
to fairly low values. The laminations are punched out of sheets and the core is then built of these punching. 
Before building the core, the punched laminations are annealed to relieve the mechanical stresses set in at 
the edges by the punching process; stressed material has a higher core-loss. Pulse transformers and high-
frequency electronic transformers often have cores made of soft ferrites. 
The primary and secondary coils are wound on the core and are electrically insulated from each other 
and from the core. Two types of cores are commonly employed in practice—core-type and shell-type. In 
core-type construction shown in Fig. 3.2(a) the windings are wound around the two legs of a rectangular 
magnetic core, while in shell-type construction of Fig. 3.2(b), the windings are wound on the central leg of 
a three-legged core. Though most of the ﬂux is conﬁned to a high permeability core, some ﬂux always leaks 
through the core and embraces paths which partially lie in the air surrounding the core legs on which the coils 
are wound. This ﬂux which links one of the windings without linking the other, though small in magnitude, 

Transformers 
51
has a signiﬁcant effect on the transformer behaviour. Leakage is reduced by bringing the two coils closer. 
In a core-type transformer this is achieved by winding half low-voltage (LV) and half high-voltage (HV) 
winding on each limb of the core as shown in Fig. 3.2(a). The LV winding is wound on the inside and HV on 
outside to reduce the amount of insulation needed. Insulation between the core and the inner winding is then 
stressed to low voltage. The two windings are arranged as concentric coils. In shell-type construction leakage 
is reduced by subdividing each winding into subsections (wound as pancake coils) and interleaving LV and 
HV windings as shown in Fig. 3.2(b).  
Top core
clamp
L.V. winding
H.V. winding
Oil ducts
L.V. SIDE
L.V. insulating
cylinder
H.V. insulating
cylinder
Bottom core clamps
Coil stack end
insulation
Tapping leads
to switches
H.V.  SIDE
Conservator
Fig. 3.1 (c) Transformer showing constructional details

52 Electric Machines
The core-type construction has a longer mean length of core and a shorter mean length of coil turn. This 
type is better suited for EHV (extra high voltage) requirement since there is better scope for insulation. The 
shell-type construction has better mechanical support and good provision for bracing the windings. The 
shell-type transformer requires more specialized fabrication facilities than core-type, while the latter offers 
the additional advantage of permitting visual inspection of coils in the case of a fault and ease of repair 
at substation site. For these reasons, the present 
practice is to use the core-type transformers in large 
high-voltage installations.
Transformer windings are made of solid or 
stranded copper or aluminium strip conductors. For 
electronic transformers, “magnet wire” is normally 
used as conductor. Magnet wire is classiﬁed by an 
insulation class symbol, A, B, C, F and H, which is 
indication of the safe operating temperature at which 
the conductor can be used. Typical ﬁgures are the 
lowest 105 °C for class-A and highest 180 °C for 
class-H.
The windings of huge power transformers use 
conductors with heavier insulation (cloth, paper, 
etc.) and are assembled with greater mechanical 
support and the winding layers are insulated from 
each other—this is known as minor insulation for 
which pressed board or varnished cloth is used. 
Major insulation, insulating cylinders made of 
specially selected pressed board or synthetic resin 
bounded cylinders, is used between LV and core and 
LV and HV. Insulating barriers are inserted between 
adjacent limbs when necessary and between coils 
and core yokes.
Transformer Cooling (Large Units) 
Some idea of transformer losses, heating and cooling has been presented above. Details of transformer losses 
will be presented in Section 3.6. Basically, there are two seats of losses in a transformer namely: 
 (1) Core, where eddy current and hysteresis losses occur (caused by alternating ﬂux density).
 (2) Windings (primary and secondary) where I2R or copper loss occurs because of the current ﬂowing in 
these. 
Heat due to losses must be removed efﬁciently from these two main parts of the transformer so that steady 
temperature rise is limited to an allowable ﬁgure imposed by the class of insulation used. The problem 
of cooling in transformers (and in fact for all electric machinery) is rendered increasingly difﬁcult with 
increasing size of the transformer. This is argued as below: 
The same speciﬁc loss (loss/unit volume) is maintained by keeping constant core ﬂux density and 
current density in the conductor as the transformer rating is increased. Imagine that the linear dimensions 
1/2 LV
1/2 HV
Windings
(a) Core-type transformer
Core yoke
Core
Core yoke
1/2 LV
1/2 HV
Windings
Sandwiched LV
HV windings
Core
(b) Shell-type transformer
f/2
f/2
Fig. 3.2

Transformers 
53
of transformer are increased k times. Its core ﬂux and conductor current would then increase by k2 times 
and so its rating becomes k4 times. The losses increase by a factor of k3 (same as volume), while the surface 
area (which helps dissipate heat) increases only by a factor of k2. So the loss per unit area to be dissipated is 
increased k times. Larger units therefore become increasingly more difﬁcult to cool compared to the smaller 
ones. This can lead to formation of hot spots deep inside the conductors and core which can damage the 
insulation and core properties. More effective means of heat removal must therefore be adopted with ducts 
inside the core and windings to remove the heat right from the seats of its generation. 
Natural Cooling 
Smaller size transformers are immersed in a tank containing 
transformer oil. The oil surrounding the core and windings 
gets heated, expands and moves upwards. It then ﬂows 
downwards by the inside of tank walls which cause it to 
cool and oil goes down to the bottom of the tank from 
where it rises once again completing the circulation cycle. 
The heat is removed from the walls of the tank by radiation 
but mostly by air convection. Natural circulation is quite 
effective as the transformer oil has large coefﬁcient of 
expansion. Still for large sizes, because of the arguments 
presented earlier, the cooling area of the tank must be 
increased by providing cooling ﬁns or tubes (circular or 
elliptical) as shown in Fig. 3.3. This arrangement is used 
for all medium size transformers. 
Forced Cooling
For transformer sizes beyond 5 MVA additional cooling would be needed which is achieved by supplementing 
the tank surface by a separate radiator in which oil is circulated by means of a pump. For better cooling oil-to-
air heat exchanger unit is provided as shown in Fig. 3.4(a). For very large size transformers cooling is further 
strengthened by means of oil-to-water heat exchanger as shown in Fig. 3.4(b). 
Conservator
Water inlet
Oil/air heat
exchanger
Oil/water
heat-
exchanger
Oil
pump
Fan
(a)
(b)
Fig. 3.4 
Forced cooling in transformers
Fig. 3.3 
Natural cooling in transformers

54 Electric Machines
As already pointed out, ducts are provided in core and windings for effective heat removal by oil. Vertical 
ﬂow is more effective compared to horizontal ﬂow but for pancake coils some of the ducts will have to be 
horizontal. 
The problem of cooling in transformers is more acute than in electric machines because the rotating 
member in a machine causes forced air draft which can be suitably directed to ﬂow over the machine part for 
efﬁcient heat removal. This will be discussed in Section 5.10. 
Buchholz Relay
Buchholz relay is used in transformers for protection against all kinds of faults. It is a gas-actuated relay and 
installed in oil-immersed transformers. It will give an alarm in case of incipient faults in the transformer. 
This relay also disconnects the transformer in 
case of severe internal faults. A Buchholz relay 
looks like a domed vessel and it is placed between 
main tank of transformer and the conservator. 
The upper part of the relay consists of a mercury-
type switch attached to a ﬂoat. The lower part 
contains mercury switch mounted in a hinged-
type ﬂat located in the direct path of the ﬂow of 
oil from the transformer to the conservator. The 
upper mercury-type switch closes an alarm circuit 
during incipient fault, whereas the lower mercury 
switch is used to trip the circuit breaker in the 
case of sever faults. The Buchholz relay is shown 
in Fig. 3.4 (c).
Figure 3.5 shows the schematic diagram of a two-winding transformer on no-load, i.e. the secondary terminals 
are open while the primary is connected to a source of constant sinusoidal voltage of frequency f  Hz. The 
simplifying assumption that the resistances of the windings are negligible, will be made. 
+
i0
e1
N1
N2
e2 v2
Primary
Core (magnetic material)
–
Secondary
terminals
open
+
–
+
+
–
–
Secondary
f
Fig. 3.5 Transformer on no-load
Conservator
Buchholz relay
9.5°
Transformer
main
tank
Fig. 3.4 (c) 
Buchholz relay set up

Transformers 
55
The primary winding draws a small amount of alternating current of instantaneous value i0, called the 
exciting current, from the voltage source with positive direction as indicated on the diagram. The exciting 
current establishes ﬂux f in the core (positive direction marked on diagram) all of which is assumed conﬁned 
to the core i.e., there is no leakage of ﬂux. Consequently the primary winding has ﬂux linkages, 
 
l1 = N1f
which induces emf in it is given by
 
e1 = d
dt
l1  = N1
d
dt
f  
(3.1)
As per Lenz’s law, the positive direction of this emf opposes the positive current direction and is shown by 
+ and – polarity marks on the diagram. According to Kirchhoff’s law, 
 
v1 = e1 (winding has zero resistance) 
(3.2)
and thus e1 and therefore f must be sinusoidal of frequency f  Hz, the same as that of the voltage source. Let 
 
f = fmax sin wt 
(3.3)
where 
fmax = maximum value of core ﬂux 
 
w = 2pf  rad/s ( f = frequency of voltage source)
The emf induced in the primary winding is 
 
e1 = N1
d
dt
f  = w N1fmax cos wt 
(3.4)
From Eqs (3.3) and (3.4) it is found that the induced emf leads the ﬂux by 90°*. This is indicated by the 
phasor diagram of Fig. 3.6. The rms value of the induced emf is 
 
E1 = 
2 pf N1fmax = 4.44 f N1fmax 
(3.5)
Since E1 = V1 as per Eq. (3.2), 
 
fmax = E
V
f N
1
1
1
4 44
(
)
.
=
 
(3.6)
Even if the resistance of the primary winding is taken into account, 
 
E1 ª V1 
(3.7)
as the winding resistances in a transformer are of extremely small order. It is, therefore, seen from Eq. (3.6) 
that maximum ﬂux in a transformer is determined by V1/f (voltage/frequency) ratio at which it is excited.
According to Eq. (3.6) the ﬂux is fully determined by the applied voltage, its frequency and the number of 
winding turns. This equation is true not only for a transformer but also for any other electromagnetic device 
operated with sinusoidally varying ac and where the assumption of negligible winding resistance holds. 
All the core ﬂux f also links the secondary coil (no leakage ﬂux) causing in it an induced emf of 
 
e2 = N2 
d
dt
f  
(3.8)
The polarity of e2 is marked + and – on Fig. 3.5 according to Lenz’s law (e2 tends to cause a current ﬂow 
whose ﬂux opposes the mutual ﬂux f).  Further, it is easily seen from Eqs. (3.1) and (3.8) that e1 and e2 are in 
 
* cos wt leads sin w t by 90°

56 Electric Machines
phase. This is so indicated by phasor diagram of Fig. 3.6 where E1 , and E2  are the corresponding phasors in 
terms of the rms values. As the secondary is open-circuited, its terminal voltage is given as 
 
v2 = e2
From Eqs (3.1) and (3.8) we have the induced emf ratio of the transformer windings as 
 
e
e
1
2
 = N
N
1
2
 = a
 
E
E
1
2
 = N
N
1
2
 = a  ratio of transformation 
(3.9) 
This indeed is the transformation action of the transformer. Its current transformation which is in inverse 
ratio of turns will be discussed in Section 3.4. 
The value of exciting current i0 has to be such that the required mmf is established so as to create the ﬂux 
demanded by the applied voltage (Eq. (3.6)). If a linear B-H relationship is assumed (devoid of hysteresis and 
saturation), the exciting current is only magnetizing in nature and is proportional to the sinusoidal ﬂux and 
in phase with it. This is represented by the phasor Im , in Fig. 3.6, lagging the induced emf by 90°. However, 
the presence of hysteresis and the phenomenon of eddy-currents, though of a different physical nature, both 
demand the ﬂow of active power into the system and as a consequence the exciting current I0  has another 
component Ii  in phase with E1 . Thus, the exciting current lags the induced emf by an angle q0 slightly less 
than 90° as shown in the phasor diagram of Fig. 3.6. Indeed it is the hysteresis which causes the current 
component Ii  leading Im  by 90° and eddy-currents add more of this component. The effect of saturation 
nonlinearity is to create a family of odd-harmonic components in the exciting current, the predominant being 
the third harmonic; this may constitute as large as 35–40% of the exciting current. While these effects will 
be elaborated in Sec. 3.10, it will be assumed here that the current Io  and its magnetizing component Im  
and its core-loss component Ii  are sinusoidal on equivalent rms basis. In other words, Im  is the magnetizing 
current and is responsible for the production of ﬂux, while Ii  is the core-loss current responsible for the 
active power* being drawn from the source to provide the hysteresis and eddy-current loss. 
To account for the harmonics, the exciting current Io  is taken as the rms sine wave equivalent of the 
actual non-sinusoidal current drawn by the transformer on no-load. Since the excitation current in a typical 
transformer is only about 5% of the full-load current, the net current drawn by the transformer under loaded 
condition is almost sinusoidal. 
From the phasor diagram of Fig. 3.6, the core-loss is given by 
 
Pi = E1I0 cos q0 
(3.10) 
In a practical transformer, the magnetizing current (Im) is kept low and the core-loss is restrained to an 
acceptable value by use of high permeability silicon-steel in laminated form. 
From the no-load phasor diagram of Fig. 3.6, the parallel circuit model** of exciting current as shown 
in Fig. 3.7 can be easily imagined wherein conductance Gi accounts for core-loss current Ii  and inductive 
susceptance Bm for magnetizing current Im. Both these currents are drawn at induced emf E1  = V1  for 
resistance-less, no-leakage primary coil; even otherwise E1  ª V1 .
 
* Sufﬁx i is used as this current provides the core-loss which occurs in the iron core and is also referred as iron-loss.
 
** Series circuit is equally possible but not convenient for physical understanding.

Transformers 
57
 
E2
I m
l i
a0
q0
E1
1
= V
l0
f
 
l i
Gi
V1
l0
lm
Bm
+
–
E1
+
–
 Fig. 3.6 
Phasor relationship of induced emf,  
Fig. 3.7 
Circuit model of transformer on  
EXAMPLE 3.1 A transformer on no-load has a core-loss of 50 W, draws a current of 2 A (rms) and has 
an induced emf of 230 V (rms). Determine the no-load power factor, core-loss current and magnetizing 
current. Also calculate the no-load circuit parameters of the transformer. Neglect winding resistance and 
leakage ﬂux. 
SOLUTION
Power factor, 
cos q0 = 
50
2
230
¥
 = 0.108 lagging; 
 
q0 = 83.76°
Magnetizing current, 
Im = I0 sin q0 = 2 sin (cos–1 0.108) = 1.988 A
Since q0 ª 90°, there is hardly any difference between the magnitudes of the exciting current and its magnetizing 
component. 
 
Core-loss current, Ii = I0 cos q0
 
 = 2 ¥ 0.108 = 0.216 A 
In the no-load circuit model of Fig. 3.7 core loss is given by
 
Gi V 2
1 = Pi 
or 
Gi = P
V
i
1
2  = 
50
230 2
(
)
 = 0.945 ¥ 10–3  
Also 
Im = Bm V1
or 
Bm = Im
V1
 
 = 1 988
230
.
 = 8.64 ¥ 10–3 
EXAMPLE 3.2 The BH curve data for the core of the transformer shown in Fig. 3.8 is given in Problem 2.10. 
Calculate the no-load current with the primary excited at 200 V, 50 Hz. Assume the iron loss in the core to be 
3 W/kg. What is the pf of the no-load current and the magnitude of the no-load power drawn from the mains? 
Density of core material = 7.9 g/cc. 

58 Electric Machines
200 V
10 cm
20 cm
150
turns
5 cm thick
75 turns
25 cm
Fig. 3.8 
SOLUTION 
Substituting values in Eq. (3.5) 
 
200 = 4.44 ¥ 50 ¥ 150 ¥ fmax
or 
fmax = 6.06 mWb
 
Bmax = 6 06
10
10
5
10
3
4
.
¥
¥
¥
-
-
 = 1.212 T
From the data of BH curve of Problem 2.10, we get 
 
Hmax = 250 AT/m 
 
ATmax = 250 lC = 250 ¥ 2 (30 + 35) ¥ 10–2
 
 = 325 
 
Im(max) = 325
150  = 2.17 A 
 
Im(rms) = 2 17
2
.
 = 1.53 A
 
Core volume = 2(20 ¥ 10 ¥ 5) + 2(45 ¥ 10 ¥ 5)
 
 = 6500 cm3 
 
Weight of core = 6500 ¥ 7.9 ¥ 10–3 = 51.35 kg
 
Core loss = 51.35 ¥ 3 = 154.7 W 
 
Ii = 154 7
200
.
 = 0.77 A
Referring to the phasor diagram of Fig. 3.7 
 
 
I0  = 0.77 – j 2.17 = 2.3 ––70.5°
 
 
I0 = 2.3 A (no-load current)
 
No-load 
pf = cos 71.5° = 0.334 lagging 
3.4 
IDEAL TRANSFORMER 
In order to visualize the effect of ﬂow of secondary current in a transformer, certain idealizing assumptions 
will be made which are close approximations for a practical transformer. A transformer possessing these 

Transformers 
59
ideal properties is hypothetical (has no real existence) and is referred to as the ideal transformer. It possesses 
certain essential features of a real transformer but some details of minor signiﬁcance are ignored which will 
be reintroduced at a reﬁned stage of analysis. The idealizing assumptions made are listed below: 
 
(i) The primary and secondary windings have zero resistance. It means that there is no ohmic power loss 
and no resistive voltage drop in the ideal transformer. An actual transformer has ﬁnite but small winding 
resistances. It will also be assumed that there is no stray capacitance, though the actual transformer has 
inter-turn capacitance and capacitance between turns and ground but their effect is negligible at 50 Hz.
 (ii) There is no leakage ﬂux so that all the ﬂux is conﬁned to the core and links both the windings. An 
actual transformer does have a small amount of leakage ﬂux which can be accounted for in detailed 
analysis by appropriate circuit modelling.
 (iii) The core has inﬁnite permeability so that zero magnetizing current is needed to establish the requisite 
amount of ﬂux (Eq. (3.6)) in the core.
 (iv) The core-loss (hysteresis as well as eddy-current loss) is considered zero. 
Figure 3.9 shows an ideal transformer having a primary of N1 turns and a secondary of N2 turns on a 
common magnetic core. The voltage of the source 
to which the primary is connected is  
 
v1 = 
2 V1 cos wt 
(3.11)
while the secondary is initially assumed to be 
an open circuited. As a consequence, ﬂux f is 
established in the core (Eq. (3.6)) such that 
 
e1 = v1 = N1
d
dt
f  
(3.12)
but the exciting current drawn from the source is 
zero by virtue of assumption (iii) above. The ﬂux 
f which is wholly mutual (assumption (ii) above) 
causes an emf 
 
e2 = N2
d
dt
f  
(3.13)
to be induced in the secondary of polarity* marked on the diagram for the winding direction indicated. The 
dots marked at one end of each winding indicate the winding ends which simultaneously have the same 
polarity due to emfs induced. From Eqs (3.12) and (3.13) 
 
e
e
1
2
 = N
N
1
2
 = a 
(3.14)
Since a, the transformation ratio, is a constant, e1 and e2 are in phase. The secondary terminal voltage is 
 
v2 = e2 
(3. 15)
Hence 
v
v
1
2
 = e
e
1
2
 = N
N
1
2
 = a 
(3. 16)
–
v1
i1
e1
N1
F1
F2
N2
i2
e2
v2
–
–
+
+
+
Primary
Secondary
Load
z
f
Fig. 3.9 
Ideal transformer on load
 
* The reader may check these polarities by applying Lenz’s law while assuming that ﬂux f is increasing. 

60 Electric Machines
It is, therefore, seen that an ideal transformer changes (transforms) voltages in direct ratio of the number 
of turns in the two windings. In terms of rms values Eq. (3. I 6) implies 
 
V
V
1
2
 = E
E
1
2
 = N
N
1
2
 = a (same as Eq. (3.9)) 
(3.17) 
Now let the secondary be connected to a load of impedance Z2 so that the secondary feeds a sinusoidal 
current of instantaneous value i2 to the load. Due to this ﬂow of current, the secondary creates mmf F2 = 
i2N2 opposes the ﬂux f. However, the mutual ﬂux f cannot change as otherwise the (v1, e1) balance will be 
disturbed (this balance must always hold as winding has zero leakage and resistance). The result is that the 
primary draws a current i1 from the source so as to create mmf F1 = i1 N1 which at all time cancels out the load 
caused mmf i2 N2 so that f is maintained constant independent of the load current ﬂow, Thus 
 
i1 N1 = i2 N2 
(3.18)
or 
i
i
1
2
 = N
N
2
1
 = 1
a  
(3.19)
Obviously i1 and i2 are in phase for positive current directions marked on the diagram (primary current 
in at the dotted terminal and secondary current out of the dotted terminal). Since ﬂux f is independent of 
load, so is e2, and v2 must always equal e2 as the secondary is also resistanceless. Therefore, from Eqs (3.17) 
and (3.19) 
 
i
i
1
2
 = N
N
2
1
 = v
v
2
1
or 
v1i1 = v2i2 
(3.20) 
which means that the instantaneous power into primary equals the instantaneous power out of secondary, a 
direct consequence of the assumption (i) which means a loss-less transformer.
In terms of rms values Eq. (3.19) will be written as 
 
I
I
1
2
 = N
N
2
1
 = 1
a  
(3.21)
which implies that currents in an ideal transformer transform in inverse ratio of winding turns. 
Equation (3.20) in terms of rms values will read 
 
V1 I1 = V2 I2 
(3.22)
i.e. the VA output is balanced by the VA input. 
Figure 3.10(a) shows the schematic of the ideal transformer of Fig. 3.9 with dot marks identifying similar 
polarity ends. It was already seen above that V1  and V2  are in phase and so are I1 and I2 . Now 
 
V
V
1
2
 = N
N
1
2
 
(3.23a)
and 
I
I
1
2
 = N
N
2
1
 
(3.23b) 
Dividing Eq. (3.23a) by Eq. (3.23b)
 
V V
I
I
1
2
1
2
/
/
 = N
N
N
N
1
2
2
1
/
/

Transformers 
61
or 
V
I
1
1
 = 
N
N
V
I
1
2
2
2
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 = 
N
N
Z
1
2
2
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
(3.24) 
or 
Z1 = 
N
N
Z
1
2
2
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 = a Z
2
2  = 
¢
Z2  
(3.25)
It is concluded from Eq. (3.25) that the impedance on the secondary side when seen (referred to) on the 
primary side is transformed in the direct ratio of square of turns. Equivalence of Eqs (3.24) and (3.25) to the 
original circuit of Fig. 3.10(a) is illustrated through Figs 3.10(b) and (c). Similarly an impedance Z1 from the 
primary side can be referred to the secondary as 
 
¢
Z1  = 
N
N
Z
2
1
2
1
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 = 1
2
1
a
Z  
(3.26)
Transferring an impedance from one side of a transformer to the other is known as referring the impedance 
to the other side. Voltages and currents on one side have their counterpart on the other side as per Eqs (3.23(a) 
and (b)).
In conclusion it may be said that in an ideal transformer voltages are transformed in the direct ratio of 
turns, currents in the inverse ratio and impedances in the direct ratio squared; while power and VA remain 
unaltered. 
Equation (3.25) illustrates the impedance-modifying property of the transformer which can be exploited 
for matching a ﬁxed impedance to the source for purposes of maximum power transfer by interposing a 
transformer of a suitable turn-ratio between the two.
EXAMPLE 3.3 Assume the transformer of Fig. 3.8 to be the ideal transformer. The secondary is connected 
to a load of 5 –30°. Calculate the primary and secondary side impedances, current and their pf, and the 
real powers. What is the secondary terminal voltage? 
–
N
N
1
2
:
b
a
+
V1
I1
I2
V2
Z2
(a)
I
Z
1
1
2
2
(
)
N IN
2
V1
I2
I1
V1
(
)
N IN
=
1
2
2
2
2 Z
Z¢
N
N
1
2
:
a
+
–
b
(b)
+
a
–
b
(c)
Fig. 3.10 Ideal transformer; referring impedance from secondary to primary

62 Electric Machines
SOLUTION 
The circuit model of the ideal transformer is drawn in Fig. 3.11. 
 
Z2  = 5 –30° W
 
a = N1/N2 = 150/75 = 2
 
Z1  = 
¢
Z2  = (2)2 5 –30° = 20 –30° W
 
V2 = 200/2 = 100 V;
 
(secondary terminal voltage)
 
I2  = 100 –0°/5 –30° = 20 ––30° A 
or 
I2 = 20 A; pf = cos 30° = 0.866 lagging
 
I1  = ¢I2  = 20 –30°/2 = 10 ––30° A
or 
I1 = 10 A; pf = cos 30° = 0.866 lagging 
 
P2 (secondary power output) = (20)2 ¥ Re 5 –30°
 
 = 400 ¥ 4.33 = 1.732 kW 
 
P1 (primary power input) = P2 (as the transformer is lossless)
 
 = 1.732 kW
or otherwise 
P1 = V1I1 cos q1 = 200 ¥ 10 ¥ 0.866 
 
 = 1.732 kW
3.5 
REAL TRANSFORMER AND EQUIVALENT CIRCUIT 
Figure 3.12 shows a real transformer on load. Both the primary and secondary have ﬁnite resistances R1 and 
R2 which are uniformly spread throughout the winding; these give rise to associated copper (I2R) losses. 
While a major part of the total ﬂux is conﬁned to the core as mutual ﬂux f linking both the primary and 
secondary, a small amount of ﬂux does leak through paths which lie mostly in air and link separately the 
individual windings. In Fig. 3.12 with primary and secondary for simplicity assumed to be wound separately 
on the two legs of the core, leakage ﬂux fl1 caused by primary mmf I1N1 links primary winding itself and fl2 
caused by I2N2 links the secondary winding, thereby causing self-linkages of the two windings. It was seen 
in Sec. 3.2 with reference to Fig. 3.2(a) that half the primary and half the secondary is wound on each core 
leg. This reduces the leakage ﬂux linking the individual windings. In fact it can be found by tracing ﬂux paths 
that leakage ﬂux is now conﬁned to the annular space between the halves of the two windings on each leg. 
In shell-type construction, the leakage will be still further reduced as LV and HV pancakes are interleaved. 
Theoretically, the leakage will be eliminated if 
the two windings could be placed in the same 
physical space but this is not possible; the 
practical solution is to bring the two as close 
as possible with due consideration to insulation 
and constructional requirements. Shell-type 
construction though having low leakage is still 
not commonly adopted for reasons explained in 
Sec. 3.2. Actually some of the leakage ﬂux will 
link only a part of the winding turns. It is to be 
understood here that fl1 and fl2 are equivalent 
leakage ﬂuxes linking all N1 and N2 turns 
respectively. 
+
l1
l2
V2
200 V
–
150 : 75
5 30°
–
W
Fig. 3.11
+
l1
V1
N1
N2
Z2
V2
l2
Mutual flux
–
+
–
Primary
leakage fI1
Secondary
leakage fI2
f
Fig. 3.12 
Real transformer

Transformers 
63
As the leakage ﬂux paths lie in air for considerable part of their path lengths, winding mmf and its self-
linkage caused by leakage ﬂux are linearly related in each winding; therefore contributing constant leakage 
inductances (or leakage reactances corresponding to the frequency at which the transformer is operated) of 
both primary and secondary windings. These leakage reactances* are distributed throughout the winding 
though not quite uniformly. 
Both resistances and leakage reactances of the transformer windings are series effects and for low operating 
frequencies at which the transformers are commonly employed (power frequency operation is at 50 Hz only), 
these can be regarded as lumped parameters. The real transformer of Fig. 3.12 can now be represented as 
a semi-ideal transformer having lumped resistances R1 and R2 and leakage reactances symbolized as Xll 
and Xl2 in series with the corresponding windings as shown in Fig. 3.13. The semi-ideal transformer draws 
magnetizing current to set up the mutual ﬂux f and to provide for power loss in the core; it, however, has no 
winding resistances and is devoid of any leakage. The induced emfs of the semi-ideal transformer are E1 and 
E2 which differ respectively from the primary and secondary terminal voltages V1 and V2 by small voltage 
drops in winding resistances and leakage reactances (R1, Xl1 for primary and R2, Xl2 for secondary). The ratio 
of transformation is 
 
a = N
N
1
2
 = E
E
1
2
 ª V
V
1
2
 
(3.27)
+
l1
V1
E1
E2
V2
l2
R1
X/1
N1
N2
X/2
R2
–
+
+
+
–
–
–
f–
Fig. 3.13 Circuit model of transformer employing semi-ideal transformer 
because the resistances and leakage reactance of the primary and secondary are so small in a transformer that 
E1 ª V1 and E2 ª V2. 
Equivalent Circuit
In Fig. 3.13 the current I1 ﬂowing in the primary of the semi-ideal transformer can be visualized to comprise 
two components as below: 
 
(i) Exciting current I0  whose magnetizing component Im  creates mutual ﬂux f  and whose core-loss 
component Ii  provides the loss associated with alternation of ﬂux.
 (ii) A load component ¢I2  which counterbalances the secondary mmf I2 N2 so that the mutual ﬂux remains 
constant independent of load, determined only by E1 . Thus 
 
I1 = I
I
0
2
+ ¢  
(3.28)
 
* The transformer windings possess inter-turn and turns-to-ground capacitances. Their effect is insigniﬁcant in the 
usual low-frequency operation. This effect must, however, be considered for high-frequency end of the spectrum 
in electronic transformers. In low-frequency transformers also, capacitance plays an important role in surge phe-
nomenon caused by switching and lightning. 

64 Electric Machines
where 
¢I
I
2
2
 = 
N
N
2
1  
(3.29)
The exciting current I0  can be represented by the circuit model of Fig. 3.7 so that the semi-ideal 
transformer of Fig. 3.13 is now reduced to the true ideal transformer. The corresponding circuit (equivalent 
circuit) modelling the behaviour of a real transformer is drawn in Fig. 3.14( a) wherein for ease of drawing 
the core is not shown for the ideal transformer.  
The impedance (R2 + jXl2) on the secondary side of the ideal transformer can now be referred to its 
primary side resulting in the equivalent circuit of Fig. 3.14(b) wherein 
 
X¢l2 = 
N
N
1
2
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ Xl2 
(3.30a)
 
R¢2 = 
N
N
1
2
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ R2 
(3.30b)
The load voltage and current referred to the primary side are 
 
¢
V2  = 
N
N
V
1
2
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
(3.31a)
 
¢I2  = 
N
N
I
2
1
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
(3.31b) 
Therefore there is no need to show the ideal transformer reducing the transformer equivalent circuit to the 
T-circuit of Fig. 3.14(c) as referred to side 1. The transformer equivalent circuit can similarly be referred to 
side 2 by transforming all impedances (resistances and reactances), voltages and currents to side 2. It may be 
noted here that admittances (conductances and susceptances) are transformed in the inverse ratio squared in 
contrast to impedances (resistances and reactances) which as already shown in Sec. 3.4 transform in direct 
ratio squared. The equivalent circuit of Fig. 3.14(c) referred to side 2 is given in Fig. 3.14(d) wherein 
 
¢
V1  = N
N V
2
1
1
 
 ¢=
I
N
N I
1
1
2
1
 
G¢i = 
N
N
1
2
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ Gi; B¢m = 
N
N
1
2
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ Bm
 
R¢2 = 
N
N
2
1
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ R2; X¢l1 = 
N
N
2
1
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ Xl1
With the understanding that all quantities have been referred to a particular side, a superscript dash can be 
dropped with a corresponding equivalent circuit as drawn in Fig. 3.14(d).
In the equivalent circuit of Fig. 3.14(c) if Gi is taken as constant, the core-loss is assumed to vary as E2
1 or 
f 2
max f 2 (Eq. (3.6)). It is a fairly accurate representation as core-loss comprises hysteresis and eddy-current 

Transformers 
65
+
Gi
R1
X/1
l¢2
X/2
R2 l2
l1
l0
li
lm
E2
V2
V1
–
+
+
–
–
+
–
E1
Gi
Bm
(a)
Ideal transformer
+
–
–
+
+
–
+
–
(b)
Ideal transformer
+
–
(c)
–
+
+
–
(d)
–
+
+
–
+
–
(e)
l1
V1
E1
li
lm
V¢2
V2
X/1
R1
X¢/2
R¢2 I¢2
l2
N
N
1
2
:
Bm
I0
l1
R1
Xl1
X¢/2
R¢2
I¢2
V1
E1
Gi
Bm
V¢2
l0
l¢1
R¢1
X¢/1
X/2
R2
I2
I0
V¢1
G¢i
E2
B¢m
V2
I1
R1
X/1
X¢l2
R¢2
I¢2
V¢2
Bm
Gi
E1
V1
N
N
1
2
:
I0
Fig. 3.14 
Evolution of transformer equivalent circuit

66 Electric Machines
loss expressed as (Khf1.6
max f + Kef 2
max f 2). The magnetizing current for linear B-H curve varies proportional 
to fmax μ E
f
1 . If inductance (Lm) corresponding to susceptance Bm is assumed constant.
 
Im = 
E
f Lm
1
2p
 = Bm E1
It therefore is a good model except for the fact that the saturation effect has been neglected in which case 
Bm would be a nonlinear function of E1/f. It is an acceptable practice to ﬁnd the shunt parameters Gi, Bm at 
the rated voltage and frequency and assume these as constant for small variations in voltage and frequency. 
The passive lumped T-circuit representation of a transformer discussed above is adequate for most 
power and radio frequency transformers. In transformers operating at higher frequencies, the interwinding 
capacitances are often signiﬁcant and must be included in the equivalent circuit. The circuit modiﬁcation to 
include this parameter is discussed in Sec. 3.12. 
The equivalent circuit given here is valid for a sinusoidal steady-state analysis. In carrying out transient 
analysis all reactances must be converted to equivalent inductances. 
The equivalent circuit developed above can also be arrived at by following the classical theory of 
magnetically coupled circuits, section 3.22. The above treatment is, however, more instructive and gives a 
clearer insight into the physical processes involved. 
Phasor Diagram of Exact Equivalent Circuit of Transformer [Fig. 3.14(a)] 
The KVL equations for the primary and secondary circuits are
 
V1  = E
I R
j I X
1
1 1
1
1
+
+
 
V2  = E
I R
j I X
2
2
2
2
1
-
-
The ideal transformer relationships are
E
E
1
2
 = a ; 
¢I
I
2
2
 = 1
a
The nodal equation for the primary side currents is
I1 = ¢ + ¢
¢ +
+
(
)
I
I
I
I
I
i
m
2
0
2
=
where 
Ii  is in phase with E1  
 
Im is 90° lagging E1
The exact phasor diagram from these equations is drawn in Fig. 3.15.
Alternative Phasor Diagram 
Alternatively if we use e = - d
dt
l ; direction of E1 and E2 will reverse in Fig. 3.13 and these will lag the ﬂux 
phasor by 90°. The direction of secondary current is now into the dotted terminal. So for mmf balance 
¢ = -
I
I
2
2. The KVL equation on the primary side is 
V1  = (
)
-
+ ¢
+
¢
E
I R
j I X
1
2
2
2
2
The corresponding phasor diagram is drawn in  Fig. 3.16. Note that the polarity of V2 reverses in Fig. 3.13 
but it is of no consequence.

Transformers 
67
Ii
q2
I0
Im
q1
v2
I X
2
2
I R
2
2
I R
1
1
E1
E2
I X
1
1
I¢2
I1
I0
I2
V1
O
Fig. 3.15
I1
I¢2
Im
q1
q2
V2
E2
I X
2
2
I R
2
2
I2
–E1
O
I X
1
1
V1
I R
1
1
Ii
f–
Fig. 3.16
EXAMPLE 3.4 Consider the transformer of Example 3.2 (Fig. 3.8) with load impedance as speciﬁed in 
Example 3.3. Neglecting voltage drops (resistive and leakage reactive drops), calculate the primary current 
and its pf. Compare with the current as calculated in Example 3.3. 
SOLUTION 
As per Eqs (3.28) and (3.29) 
 
I1  = I
I
0
2
+ ¢  and 
¢I
I
2
2
 = N
N
2
1
As calculated in Example 3.3 
 
¢I2  = 10 ––30° A

68 Electric Machines
Further as calculated in Example 3.2 
 
I0  = 1.62 ––71.5°
Hence 
I1  = 1.62 ––71.5° + 10 ––30°
 
 = (0.514 – j 1.54) + (8.66 – j 5) 
 
 = 9.17 – j 6.54 = 11.26 ––35° A 
 
I1 = 11.26 A, pf = cos 35° = 0.814 lagging 
Compared to the primary current computed in Example 3.3 (ignoring the exciting current) the magnitude of the 
current increases slightly but its pf reduces slightly when the exciting current is taken into account. 
In large size transformers the magnitude of the magnetizing current is 5% or less than the full-load current and so its 
effect on primary current under loaded conditions may even be altogether ignored without any signiﬁcant loss in accuracy. 
This is a usual approximation made in power system computations involving transformers.
EXAMPLE 3.5 A 20-kVA, 50-Hz, 2000/200-V distribution transformer has a leakage impedance of 0.42 
+ j 0.52 W in the high-voltage (HV) winding and 0.004 + j 0.05 W in the low-voltage (LV) winding. When 
seen from the LV side, the shunt branch admittance Y0 is (0.002 – j 0.015)  (at rated voltage and frequency). 
Draw the equivalent circuit referred to (a) HV side and (b) LV side, indicating all impedances on the circuit. 
SOLUTION 
The HV side will be referred as 1 and LV side as 2. 
Transformation ratio, a = N
N
1
2
 = 2000
200  = 10 (ratio of rated 
voltages; see Eq. (3.27)) 
 
(a) Equivalent circuit referred to HV side (side 1)
 
  
¢
Z2  = (10)2 (0.004 + j 0.005) = 0.4 + j 0.5 W
 
  
¢
Y0  = 
1
10 2
(
)
(0.002 – j 0.015) (Notice that in 
transforming admittance is divided by a2)
 
 The equivalent circuit is drawn in Fig. 3.17(a). 
 
(b) Equivalent circuit referred to LV side (side 2).
 
  
¢
Z1  = 
1
10 2
(
)
(0.42 + j 0.52) = 0.0042 + j 0.0052
 
 The equivalent circuit is drawn in Fig. 3.17(b).  
Approximate Equivalent Circuit
In constant frequency (50 Hz) power transformers, approximate forms of the exact T-circuit equivalent of 
the transformer are commonly used. With reference to Fig. 3.14(c), it is immediately observed that since 
winding resistances and leakage reactances are very small, V
E
1
1
ª
 even under conditions of load. Therefore, 
the exciting current drawn by the magnetizing branch (Gi || Bm) would not be affected signiﬁcantly by shifting 
it to the input terminals, i.e. it is now excited by V1  instead of E1  as shown in Fig. 3.18(a). It may also be 
observed that with this approximation, the current through R1, Xl1 is now I¢2 rather than I1 = I
I
0
2
+ ¢ . Since I0  
is very small (less than 5% of full-load current), this approximation changes the voltage drop insigniﬁcantly. 
Thus it is basically a good approximation. The winding resistances and reactances being in series can now 
0.42 + 0.52
j
W
0.4 + 0.5
j
W
10:1
(0.002 – 0.015)
j
¥ 10 –2
1
1¢
(a)
2¢
2
10:1
1
0.0042 + 0.0052
j
W
0.004 + 0.005
j
W
2
1¢
2¢
(b)
(0.002 – 0.015)
j
W
W
Fig. 3.17

Transformers 
69
be combined into equivalent resistance and reactance of the transformer as seen from the appropriate side (in 
this case side 1). Remembering that all quantities in the equivalent circuit are referred either to the primary 
or secondary dash in the referred quantities and sufﬁxes l, 1 and 2 in equivalent resistance, reactance and 
impedance can be dropped as in Fig. 3.18(b). 
Here 
Req (equivalent resistance) = R1 + R2
 
Xeq (equivalent reactance) = Xl1 + Xl2
 
Zeq (equivalent impedance) = Req + j Xeq 
In computing voltages from the approximate equivalent 
circuit, the parallel magnetizing branch has no role to play 
and can, therefore, be ignored as in Fig. 3.18(b). 
The approximate equivalent circuit offers excellent 
computational ease without any signiﬁcant loss in the 
accuracy of results. Further, the equivalent resistance and 
reactance as used in the approximate equivalent circuit 
offer an added advantage in that these can be readily 
measured experimentally (Sec. 3.7), while separation of 
Xl1 and Xl2 experimentally is an intricate task and is rarely 
attempted. 
The approximate equivalent circuit of Fig. 3.18(b) in 
which the transformer is represented as a series impedance 
is found to be quite accurate for power system modelling 
[7]. In fact in some system studies, a transformer may be 
represented as a mere series reactance as in Fig. 3.18(c). 
This is a good approximation for large transformers which 
always have a negligible equivalent resistance compared to 
the equivalent reactance. 
The sufﬁx ‘eq’ need not be carried all the time so that R and X from now onwards will be understood to be 
equivalent resistance and reactance of the transformer referred to one side of the transformer. 
Phasor Diagram 
For the approximate equivalent circuit of Fig. 3.18(b), (sufﬁx ‘eq’ is being dropped now), 
 
V2  = V
I Z
1 -
 
(3.32a)
or 
V1  = V
I
2 +
(R + jX ) 
(3.32b) 
The phasor diagram corresponding to this equation is drawn in Fig. 3.19(a) for the lagging power factor 
(phase angle* f between V2 and I ) and in Fig. 3.19(b) for the leading power factor (pf ). It is immediately 
observed from these phasor diagrams that for the phase angle indicated 
 
V2 < V1  for lagging pf
and 
V2 > V1  for leading pf 
It will be shown in Sec. 3.9 that V2 > V1 only when leading phase angle f is more than tan–1(R/X ) (see 
Eq. (3.67). 
R
R
R
X
X
X
eq
1
2
eq
/1
/2
¢
¢
=
+
=
+
l1
V1
I0
I¢2
Bm
V¢2
Gi
+
–
(a)
–
+
+
–
(b)
–
+
I1
Req
Xeq
l
V1
V2
Xeq
+
–
–
+
V1
V2
(c)
–
–
l–
l–
Fig. 3.18
transformer 
 
* Phase angle f should not be confused with ﬂux though the same symbol has been used. 

70 Electric Machines
lZ
V1
O
d
f
f
f
B
D
E
F
C
IR
IX
I
90°
V2
(a) Lagging pf
A
I
V1
IX
V2
IR
f
d
(b) leading pf
O
Fig. 3.19
In the plasor diagrams of Figs. 3.19(a) and (b) (these are not drawn to scale), the angle d is such that V1 
leads V2. This is an indicator of the fact that real power ﬂows from side 1 to side 2 of the transformer (this 
is proved in Section 8.9). This angle is quite small and is related to the value of the equivalent reactance: 
resistance of the transformer being negligible. 
Name Plate Rating 
The voltage ratio is speciﬁed as V1 (rated)/V2 (rated). It means that when voltage V1 (rated) is applied to the 
primary, the secondary voltage on fullload at speciﬁed pf is V2 (rated). The ratio V1 (rated)/V2 (rated) is not 
exactly equal to N1/N2, because of voltage drops in the primary and secondary. These drops being small are 
neglected and it is assumed that for all practical purposes 
 
V
V
1
2
(
)
(
)
rated
rated  = N
N
1
2
 
(3.33) 
The rating of the transformer is speciﬁed in units of VA/kVA/MVA depending upon its size. 
 
kVA(rated) = V
I
(
)
(
)
rated
full-load
¥
1000
 
(3.34)
where V and I are referred to one particular side. The effect of the excitation current is of course ignored.
The transformer name plate also speciﬁcs the equivalent impedance, but not in actual ohm. It is expressed 
as the percentage voltage drop (see Sec. 3.8) expressed as 
 
I
Z
V
(
)
(
)
full-load
rated
 ¥ 100%
where all quantities must be referred to anyone side. 
EXAMPLE 3.6 The distribution transformer described in Example 3.5 is employed to step down the 
voltage at the load-end of a feeder having an impedance of 0.25 + j 1.4 W. The sending-end voltage of 
the feeder is 2 kV. Find the voltage at the load-end of the transformer when the load is drawing rated 
transformer current at 0.8 pf lagging. The voltage drops due to exciting current may be ignored. 

Transformers 
71
SOLUTION 
The approximate equivalent circuit referred 
to the HV side, with the value of transformer impedance from 
Fig. 3.17(a), is drawn in Fig. 3.20. The feeder being the HV 
side of the transformer, its impedance is not modiﬁed. 
 Rated load current (HV side) = 20
2  = 10 A 
 
Z  = (0.25 + j 1.4) + (0.82 + j 1.02)
 
 = 1.07 + j 2.42 = R + jX 
One way is to compute V2 from the phasor Eq. (3.32). However, the voltage drops being small, a quick, approximate 
but quite accurate solution can be obtained from the phasor diagram of Fig. 3.19(a) without the necessity of carrying out 
complex number calculations. 
From Fig. 3.19(a)
 
OE = 
(
)
(
)
OA
AE
2
2
-
From the geometry of the phasor diagram
 
AE = AF – FE
 
 = IX cos f – IR sin f 
 
 = 10(2.42 ¥ 0.8 – 1.07 ¥ 0.6) = 12.94 V 
Now 
OE = 
(
)
(
.
)
2000
12 94
2
2
-
 = 1999.96 V 
It is therefore seen that 
 
OE ª OA = V1 (to a high degree of accuracy; error is 2 in 105)
V2 can then be calculated as 
 
V2 = OE – BE 
 
 ª V1 – BE
Now 
BE = BD + DE 
 
 = I(R cos f + X sin f) 
 
 = 10(1.07 ¥ 0.8 + 2.42 ¥ 0.6) = 23.08 V
Thus 
V2 = 2000 – 23.08 = 1976.92 V
 
Load voltage referred to LV side = 1976 92
10
.
 = 197.692 V 
Remark It is noticed that to a high degree of accuracy, the voltage drop in transformer impedance can be approximated 
as 
 
V1 – V2 = I(R cos f + X sin f); lagging pf 
(3.35a)
It will soon be shown that 
 
V1 – V2 = I(R cos f – X sin f); leading pf 
(3.35b)
3.6 TRANSFORMER LOSSES 
The transformer has no moving parts so that its efﬁciency is much higher than that of rotating machines. The 
various losses in a transformer are enumerated as follows: 
Feeder
0.25 + 1.4
j
0.82 + 1.02
j
I = 10 A 0.8 pf lag
Transformer
–
+
Load
+
–
V2
V1 = 2000V
Fig. 3.20

72 Electric Machines
Core-loss 
These are hysteresis and eddy-current losses resulting from alternations of magnetic ﬂux in the core. 
Their nature and the remedies to reduce these have already been discussed at length in Sec. 2.6. It may be 
emphasized here that the core-loss is constant for a transformer operated at constant voltage and frequency 
as are all power frequency equipment. 
Copper-loss (I2R-loss) 
This loss occurs in winding resistances when the transformer carries the load current; varies as the square of 
the loading expressed as a ratio of the full-load. 
Load (stray)-loss
It largely results from leakage ﬁelds inducing eddy-currents in the tank wall, and conductors. 
Dielectric-loss 
The seat of this loss is in the insulating materials, particularly in oil and solid insulations. 
The major losses are by far the ﬁrst two: Pi, the constant core (iron)-loss and Pc, the variable copper-loss. 
Therefore, only these two losses will be considered in further discussions. 
It will be seen in Sec. 3.7 that transformer losses and the parameters of its equivalent circuit can be easily 
determined by two simple tests without actually loading it.
3.7 TRANSFORMER TESTING 
Two chief difﬁculties which do not warrant the testing of large transformers by direct load test are: (i) large 
amount of energy has to be wasted in such a test, (ii) it is a stupendous (impossible for large transformers) 
task to arrange a load large enough for direct loading. Thus performance characteristics of a transformer 
must be computed from a knowledge of its equivalent circuit parameters which, in turns, are determined by 
conducting simple tests involving very little power consumption, called nonloading tests. In these tests the 
power consumption is simply that which is needed to supply the losses incurred. The two nonloading tests 
are the Open-circuit (OC) test and Short-circuit (SC) test. 
In both these tests voltage, current and power are measured from which the resistance and reactance of 
the input impedance can be found, as seen in each test. Thus only four parameters can be determined which 
correspond to the approximate equivalent circuit of Fig. 3.16(a). 
Before proceeding to describe OC and SC tests, a simple test will be advanced for determining similar 
polarity ends on the two windings of a transformer. 
Polarity Test 
Similar polarity ends of the two windings of a transformer are those ends that acquire simultaneously positive 
or negative polarity of emfs induced in them. These are indicated by the dot convention as illustrated in 
Sec. 3.4. Usually the ends of the LV winding are labelled with a small letter of the alphabet and are sufﬁxed 
1 and 2, while the HV winding ends are labelled by the corresponding capital letter and are sufﬁxed 1 and 2 
as shown in Fig. 3.21. The ends sufﬁxed 2 (a2, A2) have the same polarity and so have the ends labelled 1 
(a1, A1). 

Transformers 
73
In determining the relative polarity of the two-windings of a transformer the two windings are connected 
in series across a voltmeter, while one of the windings is excited from a suitable voltage source as shown in 
Fig. 3.21. If the polarities of the windings are as marked on the diagram, the voltmeter should read V = V1 ~ 
V2. If it reads (V1 + V2), the polarity markings of one of the windings must be interchanged. 
The above method of polarity testing may not be convenient in ﬁeld testing of a transformer. Alternatively 
the polarity testing can be easily carried out by a dc battery, switch and dc voltmeter (permanent magnet type 
which can determine the polarity of a voltage) as shown in the simple setup of Fig. 3.21(b). As the switch 
on the primary side is closed, the primary current increases and so do the ﬂux linkages of both the windings, 
inducing emfs in them. The positive polarity of this induced emf in the primary is at the end to which the 
battery pasitive is connected (as per Lenz’s law). The end of secondary which (simultaneously) acquires 
positive polarity (as determined by the dc voltmeter) is the similar polarity end. The reverse happens when the 
switch is opened, i.e. the similar polarity end of the secondary is that end which acquires negative potential. 
+
V1
V1
A2
a2
A1
a1
V2
–
–
+
+
–
V
S
i
DC voltmeter
V
(a)
(b)
 
Fig. 3.21 
(a) Polarity test on two-winding transformer 
 
 
(b)
Open-circuit (OC) or No-load Test
The purpose of this test is to determine the shunt branch parameters of the equivalent circuit of the transformer 
(Fig. 3.14(c)). One of the windings is connected to supply at rated voltage, while the other winding is kept 
open-circuited. From the point of view of convenience and availability of supply the test is usually performed 
from the LV side, while the HV side is kept open circuited as shown in Fig. 3.22. If the transformer is to be 
used at voltage other than rated, the test should be carried out at that voltage. Metering is arranged to read. 
 
voltage = V1; current = I0 and power input = P0 
(3.36) 
AC supply
I0
+
–
W
A
V
LV
HV
Fig. 3.22 Connection diagram for open-circuit test 

74 Electric Machines
Figure 3.23(a) shows the equivalent circuit as 
seen on open-circuit and its approximate version 
in Fig. 3.23(b). Indeed the no-load current I0 is so 
small (it is usually 2-6% of the rated current) and 
R1 and X1 are also small, that V1 can be regarded 
as = E1 by neglecting the series impedance. This 
means that for all practical purposes the power 
input on no-load equals the core (iron) loss i.e., 
 
P0 = Pi (iron-loss) 
(3.37) 
The shunt branch parameters can easily be determined from the three readings (Eq. (3.36)) by the following 
circuit computations and with reference to the no-load phasor diagram of Fig. 3.6. 
 
Y0  = Gi – jBm 
(3.38)
Now  
Y0 = I
V
0
1
 
(3.39)
 
V 2
1 Gi = P0
or 
Gi = P
V
0
1
2  
(3.40)
It then follows that
 
Bm = 
Y
Gi
0
2
2
-
 
(3.41) 
These values are referred to the side (usually LV) from which the test is conducted and could easily be 
referred to the other side if so desired by the inverse square of transformation ratio. The transformation ratio 
if not known can be determined by connecting a voltmeter on the HV side as well in the no-load test. 
It is, therefore, seen that the OC test yields the values of core-loss and parameters of the shunt branch of 
the equivalent circuit. 
Short-circuit (SC) Test This test serves the purpose of determining the series parameters of a transformer. 
For convenience of supply arrangement* and voltage and current to be handled, the test is usually conducted 
from the HV side of the transformer, while the LV is short-circuited as shown in Fig. 3.24. The equivalent 
circuit as seen from the HV under short-circuit conditions is drawn in Fig. 3.25(a). Since the transformer 
resistances and leakage reactances are very small, the voltage VSC needed to circulate the full-load current 
under short-circuit is as low as 5-8% of the rated voltage. As a result the exciting current I0 (SC) under these 
I0
R1
X1
I0
V1
Gi
B E
V
E G
m
i
1
1
1
ª
=
Ii
Im
Bm Y0
+
–
(a)
(b)
+
+
–
–
Fig. 3.23 
Equivalent circuit as seen on open-circuit
 
* Voltage needed for the SC test is typically 5% of the rated value. For a 200 kVA, 440/6600- V transformer, test on 
the HV side would require 
 
  
6600
5
100
¥
 = 330 V   and 
200
1000
6600
¥
 = 30 A supply
 
 while if conducted from the LV side it would need 
 
  
440
5
100
¥
 = 22 V   and 
200
1000
440
¥
 = 445 A supply
 
 Low-voltage, high-current supply needed for conducting the SC test from the LV side is much more difﬁcult to 
arrange than the supply required for the same test from the HV side. 

Transformers 
75
conditions is only about 0.1 to 0.5% of the full-load current (I0 at the rated voltage is 2-6% of the full-load 
current). Thus the shunt branch of the equivalent circuit can be altogether neglected giving the equivalent 
circuit of Fig. 3.25(b).  
While conducting the SC test, the supply voltage is gradually raised from zero till the transformer draws 
full-load current. The meter readings under these conditions are:  
 
voltage = VSC; current = ISC; power input = PSC
Isc
R1
X1
X2
R2
I0(sc)
Vsc
Gl
Bm
ª Vsc
lsc
R1
R2
X1
X2
+
–
(a)
–
+
(b)
R
X
Fig. 3.25 
Equivalent circuit under short-circuit conditions
Since the transformer is excited at very low voltage, the iron-loss is negligible (that is why shunt branch is 
left out), the power input corresponds only to the copper-loss, i.e. 
 
PSC = Pc (copper-loss) 
(3.42)
From the equivalent circuit for Fig. 3.25(b), the circuit parameters are computed as below: 
 
Z = V
I
SC
SC
 = 
R
X
2
2
+
 
(3.43)
Equivalent resistance, 
R = 
P
I
SC
SC
(
)2  
(3.44)
Equivalent reactance, 
X = 
Z
R
2
2
-
 
(3.45)
These values are referred to the side (HV) from which the test is conducted. If desired, the values could 
be easily referred to the other side. 
HV
W
Isc
Low-voltage supply
(variable)
A
V
LV
Fig. 3.24 Short-circuit test on transformer

76 Electric Machines
It is to be observed that the SC test has given us the equivalent resistance and reactance of the transformer; 
it has not yielded any information for separating* these into respective primary and secondary values. 
It was observed that OC and SC tests together give the parameters of the approximate equivalent circuit of 
Fig. 3.16(a) which as already pointed out is quite accurate for all important computations.
EXAMPLE 3.7 The following data were obtained on a 20 kVA, 50 Hz, 2000/200 V distribution transformer: 
Draw the approximate equivalent circuit of the transformer referred to the HV and LV sides respectively. 
Table 3.1
Voltage
(V)
Current
(A)
Power
(W)
OC test with HV open-circuited
SC test with LV short-circuited
200
60
4
10
120
300
SOLUTION 
OC test (LV side)
 
Y0 = 
4
200  = 2 ¥ 10–2  ; Gi = 
120
200 2
(
)
 = 0.3 ¥ 10–2  
 
Bm = 
Y
Gi
0
2
2
-
 = 1.98 ¥ 10–2 
SC test (HV side) 
 
Z = 60
10  = 6 W ; R = 300
10 2
(
)
 = 3 W
 
X = 
Z
R
2
2
-
 = 5.2 W
Transformation ratio, 
N
N
H
L
 = 2000
200  = 10
Equivalent circuit referred to the HV side: 
 
Gi (HV) = 0.3 ¥ 10–2 ¥ 
1
10 2
(
)
 = 0.3 ¥ 10–4 
 
Bm (HV) = 1.98 ¥ 10–2 ¥ 
1
10 2
(
)
 = 1.98 ¥ 10–4 
The equivalent circuit is drawn in Fig. 3.26(a). 
Equivalent circuit referred to the LV side: 
 
R(LV) = 3 ¥ 
1
10 2
(
)
 = 0.03 W 
 
* Resistances could be separated out by making dc measurements on the primary and secondary and duly correcting 
these for ac values. The reactances cannot be separated as such. Where required, these could be equally appor-
tioned to the primary and secondary, i.e. 
 
 
X1 = X2 (referred to anyone side)
 
 This is sufﬁciently accurate for a well-designed transformer.

Transformers 
77
 
X(LV) = 5.2 ¥ 
1
10 2
(
)
 = 0.052 W
The equivalent circuit is drawn in Fig. 3.26(b). 
EXAMPLE 3.8 The parameters of the equivalent circuit of a 150-kVA, 2400/240-V transformer are: 
 
R1 = 0.2 W 
R2 = 2 ¥ 10–3 W
 
X1 = 0.45 W 
X2 = 4.5 ¥ 10–3 W
 
Ri = 10 kW 
Xm = 1.6 kW (as seen from 2400-V side) 
Calculate:
 (a) Open-circuit current, power and pf when LV is excited at rated voltage
 (b) The voltage at which the HV should be excited to conduct a short-circuit test (LV shorted) with full-
load current ﬂowing. What is the input power and its pf? 
SOLUTION 
Note: 
Ri = 1
Gi
, Xm = 1
Bm
 
Ratio of transformation, a = 2400
240  = 10
 
(a) Referring the shunt parameters to LV side
 
  
Ri (LV) = 10
1000
10 2
¥
(
)
 = 100 W
 
  
Xm (LV) = 1 6
1000
10 2
.
(
)
¥
 = 16 W
 
  
I0 (LV) = 240 0
100
240 0
16
– ∞-
– ∞
j
 
  
 = 2.4 – j 15 = 15.2–– 80.9° A
 
 or 
I0 = 15.2 A, pf = cos 80.9° = 0.158 lagging
 
(b) LV shorted, HV excited, full-load current ﬂowing: Shunt parameters can be ignored under this condition. 
Equivalent series parameters referred to HV side:
 
  
R = 0.2 + 2 ¥ 10–3 ¥ (10)2 = 0.4 W
 
  
X = 0.45 + 4.5 ¥ 10–3 ¥ (10)2 = 0.9 W
 
  
Z  = 0.4 + j 0.9 = 0.985 –66° W
IH
0.03 W
VH
IOH
I¢L
V¢L
V¢H
I¢H
VL
0.3 ¥ 10–4
1.98 ¥ 10–4
1.98 ¥ 10–2
0.3 ¥ 10–2
3 W
5.2 W
W
W
W
W
0.052 W
(a) Referred to HV
(b) Referred to LV
lOL
lL
Fig. 3.26 
Equivalent circuit

78 Electric Machines
 
  
Ifl (HV) = 150
1000
2400
¥
 = 62.5 A
 
  
VSC (HV) = 62.5 ¥ 0.958 = 59.9 V or 60 V (say)
 
  
PSC = (62.5)2 ¥ 0.4 = 1.56 kW
 
  
pfSC = cos 66° = 0.406 lagging
Sumpner’s (Back-to-Back) Test 
While OC and SC tests on a transformer yield its equivalent circuit parameters, these cannot be used for the 
‘heat run’ test wherein the purpose is to determine the steady temperature rise if the transformer was fully 
loaded continuously; this is so because under each of these tests the power loss to which the transformer is 
subjected is either the core-loss or copper-loss but not both. The way out of this impasse without conducting 
an actual loading test is the Sumpner’s test which can only be conducted simultaneously on two identical 
transformers*. 
In conducting the Sumpner’s test the primaries of the two transformers are connected in parallel across 
the rated voltage supply (V1), while the two secondaries are connected in phase opposition as shown in 
Fig. 3.27. For the secondaries to be in phase opposition, the voltage across T2T4 must be zero otherwise it will 
be double the rated secondary voltage in which case the polarity of one of the secondaries must be reversed. 
Current at low voltage (V2) is injected into the secondary circuit at T2T4. The supply (1) and supply (2) are 
from the same mains.
W1
–
A1
2l0
T1
T3
T2
T4
lfl
V2
A2
W2
AC supply (1)
+
Low
Voltage supply (2)
V1
Fig. 3.27 Sumpner’s test on two identical single-phase transformers 
 
* In very large sizes two identical transformers may not be available as these are custom-built.

Transformers 
79
As per the superposition theorem, if V2 source is assumed shorted, the two transformers appear in open-
circuit to source V1 as their secondaries are in phase opposition and therefore no current can ﬂow in them. 
The current drawn from source V1 is thus 2I0 (twice the no-load current of each transformer) and power is 2P0
(= 2Pi, twice the core-loss of each transformer). When the ac supply (1) terminals are shorted, the transformers 
are series-connected across V2 supply (2) and are short-circuited on the side of primaries. Therefore, the 
impedance seen at V2 is 2Z and when V2 is adjusted to circulate full-load current (Ifl), the power fed in is 2Pc 
(twice the full-load copper-loss of each transformer). Thus in the Sumpner’s test while the transformers are 
not supplying any load, full iron-loss occurs in their cores and full copper-loss occurs in their windings; net 
power input to the transformers being (2P0 + 2Pc). The heat run test could, therefore, be conducted on the two 
transformers, while only losses are supplied. 
In Fig. 3.27 the auxiliary voltage source is included in the circuit of secondaries; the test could also be 
conducted by including the auxiliary source in the circuit of primaries. 
The procedure to connect a 3-phase transformer for the back-to-back test will be explained in Sec. 3.12. 
EXAMPLE 3.9 Two transformers of 20 kVA each with turn-ratios respectively of 250 : 1000 and 250 : 
1025 are connected in back-to-back test; the two primaries being fed from a 250 V supply and secondaries 
being connected in phase opposition. A booster transformer connected on primary side to the same 250 V 
supply is used to inject voltage in the circuit of secondaries such as to circulate a current of 20 A. The 
core losses of each transformer are 350 W and each transformer has a reactance 2.5 times its resistance. 
Calculate the possible readings of the wattmeter connected to measure the input to the primaries. 
SOLUTION 
Using the principle of superposition the currents on the primary side are ﬁrst found, caused by the 
circulating current in the secondaries with the primary voltage source shorted; the voltage injected on the secondary side 
being intact. The primary currents necessary to balance the secondary circulating current are shown in Fig. 3.28; these 
being in phase with each other. The difference of these currents is 2 A which ﬂows in the lines connecting the primaries 
to the main (refer to ﬁgure). This current has a power factor of 
 
cos tan–1 2.5 = 0.371 
Therefore, the power exchanged with the mains by this current is
 
250 ¥ 2 ¥ 0.371 = 185.5 W 
This power will be drawn from or fed into the mains depending on the polarity of the injected voltage.  
Mains
250 V
2A
250:1000
20
1000
250
¥
= 80 A
250: 1025
20
1025
250
¥
= 82 A
20 A
Fig. 3.28

80 Electric Machines
Consider now the currents owing to the voltage source connected to the primaries with the secondary injected voltage 
source shorted. The primaries now draw the magnetizing currents from the mains with associated core-loss of both 
the transformers equal to 2 ¥ 350 = 700 W. The currents in the secondaries because of the small voltage unbalance 
(transformers have a slightly different turn ratio) would be small with very little associated loss.*
Hence power drawn from the mains is 
 
700 ± 185.5 = 885.5 W or 514.5 W
3.8 THE PER UNIT SYSTEM
While carrying out the analysis of electrical machines (or electrical machine systems), it is usual to express 
voltage, current, VA and impedance in per unit (or percentage**) of the base or reference values of these 
quantities. The per unit (pu) value of any quantity is deﬁned as the ratio of: 
 
The actual value in any units 
The base or reference value in the same units 
While the base values can be selected arbitrarily, it is normal to choose the rated value of the device as its 
base values. 
There are two important advantages that accrue from the use of the pu system. First, the parameters of 
transformers as well as rotating machines lie roughly in the same range of numerical values irrespective of 
their ratings if expressed in per unit of their ratings; correctness of analysis becomes immediately obvious in 
this system. 
Second, the pu system is most convenient in power systems as it relieves the analyst of the need to refer 
circuit quantities to one or other side of the transformers. It is a universal practice to use the pu system for 
modelling real-life large integrated power systems and in computer simulation of machine systems for their 
transient and dynamic analysis.
Base values of various quantities are related to each other by the usual electrical laws. For a single-phase 
system, 
 
Pbase, Qbase, (VA)base = Vbase/Ibase 
(3.46)
 
Rbase, Xbase, Zbase = Vbase/Ibase 
(3.47)
 
Gbase, Bbase, Ybase = Ibase/Vbase 
(3.48)
Always, (VA)base and Vbase are ﬁrst selected and their choice automatically ﬁxes the other base values as 
per Eqs (3.46)-(3.48). It immediately follows from these equations that 
 
ZB = 
V
VA
B
B
2
(
)
 
* The unbalanced voltage in secondary circuit because of unequal turn ratio is 25 V, while the rated secondary volt-
age is 1000 V. Assuming a high voltage side transformer impedance of 40 W, the circulating current caused by the 
unbalanced voltage would be 
 
  
25
2
40
¥
 = 0.3125 A
 
 The ratio of losses because of this current to the losses caused by the 20A current is 
 
  
0 3125
20
2
.
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = 2.44 ¥ 10–4 
 
 This being of negligible order, there is no error of consequence in neglecting the effect of unequal turn ratio. 
 
** Per cent values are not preferred as a factor of 100 has to be carried.

Transformers 
81
Then 
Z(pu) = Z
VA
V
B
B
( )
(
)
W ¥
2
 
(3.49)
In large devices and systems it is more practical to express the bases in kVA/ MVA and kV. Then Eq. (3.49) 
is written as 
 
Z(pu) = Z
B
B
( )
(
)
(
)
W ¥ kVA
kV
1000
2
 
(3.50a) 
or 
Z(pu) = Z
B
B
( )
(
)
(
)
W ¥ MVA
kV 2
 
(3.50b)
When (MVA)B and (kV)B are modiﬁed, the new pu impedance is given by 
 
Z(pu)new = Z(pu)old
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
,
,
MVA
MVA
kV
kV
,new
old
,old
new
B
B
B
B
¥
2
2
 
(3.51) 
It can be easily shown that in a transformer equivalent circuit using pu notations, the need for an ideal 
transformer is eliminated because the pu impedance of a transformer is the same whether computed from 
the primary or secondary side so long as the voltage bases on the two sides are selected in the ratio of 
transformation (see Example 3.10). A procedure universally adopted is to translate all quantities to pu values 
for carrying out analysis and to convert the results obtained back to actual units. 
As has been mentioned earlier the pu parameters of transformers (and electric machines) lie within a 
narrow range. For example, the magnetizing current normally lies between 0.02 and 0.05 pu, the equivalent 
resistance between 0.005 pu (large transformers) and 0.02 pu (small transformers) and the equivalent 
reactance usually varies from 0.05 (large) to 0.1 pu (small transformers). This information helps a great deal 
in comparing units of a given size made by various manufacturers. 
In the 3-phase system, the bases are chosen as 
 
(MVA)B = 3-phase MVA 
 
(kV)B = line-to-line kV
Assuming star connection (equivalent star can always be found), 
 
ZB = 
((
) /
)
(
)
kV
MVA
B
B
3
1
3
2
 = (
)
kV
(MVA)
B
B
2
Then 
Z(pu) = Z
B
B
( )
(
)
W ¥ MVA
(kV)2
 
(3.52)
which relationship is indeed the same as Eq. (3.50) for the single-phase system.
Consider three impedances, Z each, connected in delta. Then with 3-phase (MVA)B and line-to-line (kV)B, 
 
ZB(D) = 
(
)
/
kV
(MVA)
B
B
2
3  = 3
2
(
)
kV
(MVA)
B
B
Therefore 
Z(pu) = 
( / )(
)
(
)
Z
B
B
3
2
MVA
kV
Since Z/3 is the equivalent star impedance, the pu impedance for delta or its equivalent star is the same for 
a given 3-phase MVA base and line-to-line kV base.

82 Electric Machines
EXAMPLE 3.10 The exciting current was found to be 3 A when measured on the LV side of a 20-kVA, 
2000/200- V transformer. Its equivalent Impedance (referred to the HV side) is 8.2 + j 10.2 W. Choose the 
transformer rating as the base.
 (a) Find the exciting current in pu on the LV as well as HV side.
 (b) Express the equivalent impedance in pu on the LV as well as HV side. 
SOLUTION
 
VB(HV) = 2000 V 
VB(LV) = 200 V
 
IB(HV) = 10 A 
IB(LV) = 100 A
 
ZB(HV) = 2000
10
 = 200 W
 
ZB(LV) = 200
100 2 W
 
(a)  
I0(LV) = 3
100  = 0.03 pu
 
 The exciting current referred to the HV side is 0.3 A
 
  
I0(HV) = 0 3
10
.
 = 0.03 pu
 
(b)  
Z(HV)(pu) = 8 2
10 2
200
.
.
+ j
 = 0.041 + j 0.051
 
  
Z(LV) = 8 2
10 2
10 2
.
.
(
)
+ j
 = 0.082 + j 0.102
 
  
Z(LV)(pu) = 0 082
0 102
2
.
.
+ j
 = 0.041 + j 0.051
Remark The earlier remark is, therefore, conﬁrmed that pu values referred to either side of the transformer 
are the same so long as voltage bases on the two sides are in the ratio of transformation of the transformer. 
3.9 
EFFICIENCY AND VOLTAGE REGULATION
Power and distribution transformers are designed to operate under conditions of constant rms voltage and 
frequency and so the efﬁciency and voltage regulation are of prime importance. 
The rated capacity of a transformer is deﬁned as the product of rated voltage and full load current on the 
output side. The power output depends upon the power factor of the load.
The efﬁciency h of a transformer is deﬁned as the ratio of the useful power output to the input power. Thus
 
h = output
input  
(3.53)
The efﬁciency of a transformer is in the range of 96–99%. It is of no use trying to determine it by measuring 
the output and input under load conditions because the wattmeter readings are liable to have an error of 1–2%. 

Transformers 
83
The best and accurate method of determining efﬁciency would be to ﬁnd the losses from the OC and SC tests. 
With this data efﬁciency can then be calculated as
 
h = 
output
output
losses
+
 = 1 -
+
losses
output
losses  
(3.54)
In Eq. (3.54) the effect of meter readings is conﬁned to losses only so that the overall efﬁciency as obtained 
from it is far more accurate than that obtained by direct loading. 
Various losses in a transformer have already been enumerated in Sec. 3.6 and the two important losses 
(iron-loss Pi and copper-loss Pc) are shown in Fig. 3.29 of a loaded transformer. 
V1
P
P
input
in
(
)
+
–
l1
l2
P
P
output
0
(
)
P
P
iron (
)i
P
P
copper (
)
c
+
–
Load
V2
Fig. 3.29(a) Transformer on load 
The iron (core) losses depend upon the ﬂux density and so on the induced emf. As E1 ª V1 at all loads, these 
losses can be regarded as constant (independent of load) for constant primary voltage.
Copper losses in the two windings are
 
Pc = I 2
1 R1 + I 2
2 R2
 
 = I 2
2 Req(2)
where Req(2) = equivalent resistance referred to the secondary side. Thus it is found that copper losses vary 
as the square of the load current. 
 
Transformer output, P0 = V2 I2 cos q2
 
cos q2 = load pf 
From Eq. (3.54) 
 
h = 
V I
V I
P
I R
i
2 2
2
2 2
2
2
2
2
cos
cos
( )
q
q +
+
eq
 
(3.55) 
where V2 is the rated secondary voltage. It varies slightly with the load but the variation is so small (about
3-5%) that it can be neglected for computing efﬁciency.
Equation (3.55) shows that for a given power factor, efﬁciency varies with load current. It can be written as 
 
h = 
V
V
P
I
I R
i
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
cos
cos
( )
q
q +
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
eq
 
(3.56)

84 Electric Machines
For maximum value of h for given cos q2 (pf), the denominator of Eq. (3.56) must have the least value. The 
condition for maximum h, obtained by differentiating the denominator and equating it to zero, is 
 
I 2
2 Req(2) = Pi 
(3.57)
or 
Copper-loss (variable) = core-loss (constant) 
It means that the efﬁciency is maximum at a load when the copper-loss (variable loss) equals the core-loss 
(constant loss). Thus for maximum efﬁciency, 
 
I 2
2 = 
P
R
i
eq( )
2
Dividing by I 2
2fl on both sides
 
I
I
fl
2
2
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = 
P
I
R
i
fl
2
2
2
eq( )
 = k2
or 
k = 
P
P
fl
i
c(
)  
(3.58) 
where 
k = I2/I2fl 
(3.59a)
and 
Pc( fl) = full-load copper-loss
Thus the efﬁciency is maximum at a fractional load current given by Eq. (3.59a). Multiplying the numerator 
and denominator of Eq. (3.59a) by rated V2
 
k = V I
V I
fl
2
2
2 2
 
(3.59b)
Thus the maximum efﬁciency is given at a load k(V2I2ﬂ) or kS2, where S2, is VA (or kVA) rating of the 
transformer. The expression for maximum efﬁciency is given by 
 
hmax = 
kS
kS
Pi
2
2
2
2
2
cos
cos
q
q +
 
(3.60)
It can be easily observed from Eq. (3.60) that hmax increases with increasing pf (cos q2) and is the highest 
at unity pf. Also hmax = 0 when cos q = 0, i.e. at zero pf (purely reactive load). Therefore, knowledge of 
transformer losses is as important as its efﬁciency.
Power transformers used for bulk power 
transmission are operated near about full load 
at all times and are therefore designed to have 
maximum efﬁciency at full-load. On the other 
hand, the distribution transformers supply load 
which varies over the day through a wide range. 
Such transformers are, therefore, designed to 
have maximum efﬁciency at about three-fourths 
the full load.
Normally transformer efﬁciency is maximum 
when the load power factor is unity. From 
Fig. 3.29(b), it is seen that the maximum efﬁciency 
occurs at same load current independent of power 
I2 (rated)
Load
current
PF = 1.00
P.F = 0.80
P.F = 0.60
Efficiency
100
50
Fig. 3.29(b)

Transformers 
85
factor, because the total core loss Pc, and equivalent resistance Req(2) are not affected by load power factor. Any 
way reduction of load power factor reduces the transformer output and the transformer efﬁciency also reduced.
The all-day efﬁciency of a transformer is the ratio of the total energy output (kWh) in a 24-h day to the 
total energy input in the same time. Since the core losses are constant independent of the load, the all-day 
efﬁciency of a transformer is dependent upon the load cycle; but no prediction can be made on the basis of 
the load factor (average load/peak load). It is an important ﬁgure of merit for distribution transformers which 
feed daily load cycle varying over a wide load range. Higher energy efﬁciencies are achieved by designing 
distribution transformers to yield maximum (power) efﬁciency at less than full load (usually about 70% of 
the full load). This is achieved by restricting the core ﬂux density to lower values by using a relatively larger 
core cross-section. (It means a larger iron/copper weight ratio.)
EXAMPLE 3.11 For the transformer of Example 3.7 calculate the efﬁciency if the LV side is loaded fully 
at 0.8 power factor. What is the maximum efﬁciency of the transformer at this power factor and at what pu 
load would it be achieved?
SOLUTION 
 
Power output = V2I2 cos q2 
 
 = 200 ¥ 100 ¥ 0.8 = 16000 W (independent of lag/lead)
 
Total loss PL = Pi + k2Pc
 
 = 120 + 1 ¥ 300 = 420 W
\ 
h = 1 – 
P
P
P
L
L
0 +
 
 = 1 – 
420
16000
420
+
 = 97 44%
For maximum efﬁciency
 
k = 
P
P
i
c
 = 
120
300  = 0.632 
i.e. at 0.632 pu load (this is independent of power factor). Now
 
hmax (cos q2 = 0.8) = 1 – 
2
2
0
P
P
P
i
i
+
 
 
 = 1 – 
2
120
16000
0 632
2
120
¥
¥
+
¥
.
 
 = 97.68%
EXAMPLE 3.12 A 500 kVA transformer has an efﬁciency of 95% at full load and also at 60% of full 
load; both at upf .
 (a) Separate out the losses of the transformer.
 (b) Determine the efﬁciency of the transformer at 3/4th full load. 
SOLUTION
 
(a)  
h = 
500
1
500
1
¥
¥ +
+
P
P
i
c
 = 0.95 
(i)

86 Electric Machines
 
 Also 
500
0 6
500
0 6
0 6 2
¥
¥
+
+
.
.
( . )
P
P
i
c
 = 0.95 
(ii)
 
 Solving Eqs (i) and (ii) we get
 
  
Pi = 9.87 kW
 
  
Pc = 16.45 kW
 
(b) At 3/4th full load upf
 
  
h = 
500
0 75
500
0 75
9 87
0 75
16 45
2
¥
¥
+
+
¥
.
.
.
( .
)
.
 
  
 = 95.14% 
EXAMPLE 3.13 A transformer has its maximum efﬁciency of 0.98 at 15 kVA at upf. Compare its all-day 
efﬁciencies for the following load cycles: 
 (a) Full load of 20 kVA 12 hours/day and no-load rest of the day.
 (b) Full load 4 hours/day and 0.4 full-load rest of the day. 
Assume the load to operate on upf all day.
SOLUTION 
 
hmax = 
P
P
Pi
0
0
2
+
    or 
0.98 = 
15
15
2
+ Pi
or 
Pi = 0.153 kW 
Now 
k2 = P
P
i
c
     or 
15
20
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 = 0 153
.
Pc
or 
Pc = 0.272 kW
(a)  P0 
Time, h 
W0 
Pin = P0 + Pi + k2Pc 
Win
 
20 
12 
240 
20 + 0.153 + 0.272 = 20.425 
245.1
 
0 
12 
 0 
0 + 0.153 = 0.153 
1.8
 
 
         240 kWh  
 
 246 9. kWh
hallday = S
S
W
W
0
in
 = 240
246 9.
 = 97.2% 
(b)  P0 
Time, h 
W0 
Pin = P0 + Pi + k2Pc 
Win 
 
20 
4 
80 
20 + 0.153 + 0.272 = 20.425 
81.7 
 
8 
20 
160 
8 + 0.153 + 
8
20
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 ¥ 0.272 = 8.196  163.9 
 
 
 
  
240 kWh  
 
245 6. kWh
hallday = 240
245 6.
 = 97.7%
Remark 
Even though the load factor is the same in each case [(240/24)/20 = 0.5] the all day efﬁciencies still differ 
because of the difference in the nature of the two load cycles. 

Transformers 
87
Voltage Regulation 
Constant voltage is the requirement of most domestic, commercial and industrial loads. It is, therefore, 
necessary that the output voltage of a transformer must stay within narrow limits as the load and its power 
factor vary. This requirement is more stringent in distribution transformers as these directly feed the load 
centres. The voltage drop in a transformer on load is chieﬂy determined by its leakage reactance which must 
be kept as low as design and manufacturing techniques would permit.
The ﬁgure of merit which determines the voltage drop characteristic of a transformer is the voltage 
regulation. It is deﬁned as the change in magnitude of the secondary (terminal) voltage, when full-load (rated 
load) of speciﬁed power factor supplied at rated voltage is thrown off, i.e. reduced to no-load with primary 
voltage (and frequency) held constant, as percentage of the rated load terminal voltage. In terms of symbols 
 
% Voltage regulation = V
V
V
fl
fl
20
2
2
-
.
.
 ¥ 100 
(3.61) 
where 
V2, fl = rated secondary voltage while supplying full load at speciﬁed power factor 
 
V20 = secondary voltage when load is thrown off.
Figure 3.30(a) shows the transformer equivalent circuit* referred to the secondary side and Fig. 3.30(b) 
gives its phasor diagram. The voltage drops IR and IX are very small in a well-designed transformer (refer 
Example 3.6). As a result the angle d between V1 and V2 is of negligible order, so that** 
 
V1 ª OE 
 
V1 – V2 ª BE = I(R cos f + X sin f); f lagging 
(3.62a)
 
 = I(R cos f – X sin f); f leading 
(3.62b)
V1
R
X
l
+
–
–
+
Load
O
d
f
f
f
B
IR
IX
I
A
E
(a) Equivalent circuit referred to secondary
(b) Phasor diagram (not proportional)
V2
V2
V1
Fig. 3.30
When the load is thrown off 
 
V20 = V1
\ 
V20 – V2 = I(R cos f ± sin f) 
(3.63) 
 
* In approximate equivalent circuit, the magnetizing shunt branch plays no role in determining voltages and hence 
is left out.
 
** V1  could be calculated from the phasor equation 
 
  
V1  = V2  + I –f (R + jX)
 
 but the approximate method is very much quicker and quite accurate (see Example 3.6).

88 Electric Machines
where I is the full-load secondary current and V2, the full-load secondary voltage (equal to the value of V2 
(rated)). Thus 
 
% Voltage regulation, Reg = V
V
V
20
2
2
-
 ¥ 100
 
 = I R
X
V
(
cos
sin )
f
f
±
2
 ¥ 100 
(3.64) 
Recognizing that 
IR
V2
 = R(pu) and 
IX
V2
 = X(pu)
We have 
Per unit voltage regulation = R(pu) cos f ± X(pu) sin f 
(3.65)
It is seen from Eq. (3.64) that the voltage regulation varies with power factor and has a maximum value 
when 
 
d
d
Reg
f
 = 0 = –R sin f + X cos f
or 
tan f = X
R
or 
cos f = 
R
R
X
2
2
+
; lagging 
(3.66) 
Equation (3.66) implies that voltage regulation is 
the maximum when the load power factor (lagging) 
angle has the same value as the angle of the 
equivalent impedance. From Eq. (3.64), the voltage 
regulation is zero when 
 
R cos f – X sin f = 0
or 
tan f = R
X ; leading 
(3.67) 
For f (leading) larger than that given by 
Eq. (3.67), the voltage regulation is negative (i.e. 
the secondary full-load voltage is more than the no-
load voltage). 
The complete variation of % regulation with 
power factor is shown in Fig. 3.31.  
EXAMPLE 3.14 Consider the transformer with data given in Example 3.7. 
 (a) With full-load on the LV side at rated voltage, calculate the excitation voltage on the HV side. The 
load power factor is (i) 0.8 lagging, (ii) 0.8 leading. What is the voltage regulation of the transformer 
in each case?
 (b) The transformer supplies full-load current at 0.8 lagging power factor with 2000 V on the HV side. 
Find the voltage at the load terminals and the operating efﬁciency. 
% Reg
5
4
3
2
1
Leading pf
0
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Lagging pf
– 1
– 2
– 3
– 4
– 5
Fig. 3.31 
Percentage regulation versus power factor; R = 

Transformers 
89
SOLUTION
 
(a) The HV side equivalent circuit of Fig. 3.26(a) will be used.
 
  
VL = 200 V, 
IL = 200
1000
200
¥
 = 100 A
 
  
V¢L = 2000 V, 
I ¢L = 10 A
 
 Now 
VH = V¢L + I¢L (RH cos f ± XH sin f); 
RH =: 30 W
 
  
  
XH = 5.2 W
 
(i)  
cos f = 0.8 lagging, sin f = 0.6
 
  
VH = 2000 + 10(3 ¥ 0.8 + 5.2 ¥ 0.6) = 2055.2 V
 
  
Voltage regulation = 2055 2
2000
2000
. -
 ¥ 100 = 2.76%
 
(ii)  
cos f = 0.8 leading, sin f = 0.6
 
  
VH = 2000 + 10 (3 ¥ 0.8 – 5.2 ¥ 0.6) = 1992.8 V
 
  
Voltage regulation = 1992 8
2000
2000
. -
 ¥ 100 = –0.36%
 (b)  IL(full-load) = 100 A, 0.8 lagging pf
 
  
V¢L = V¢H – I¢L (RH cos f + XH sin f)
 
  
 = 2000 – 10(3 ¥ 0.8 + 5.2 ¥ 0.6) = 1944.8 V
 
 or 
VL = 194.48 V
 
 Efﬁciency
 
  
Output, P0 = VLIL cos f
 
  
 = 194.48 ¥ 100 ¥ 0.8 = 15558.4 W
 
  
PLOSS = Pi + Pc
 
  
Pi = 120 W (Ex. 3.7)
 
  
Pc = (10)2 ¥ 3 = 300 W
 
 \ 
PLOSS = 420 W
 
  
h = 1 – 
420
15558 4
420
. ¥
 = 97.38% 
Example 3.14 is solved by writing the following MATLAB code.
clc
clear
S=20*1000;
V1=200;
V2=2000;
I1=S/V1;
I2=S/V2;
RH=3;
XH=5.2;
Cosine-phi=0.8;
Sin-phi=0.6;
VH=V2+I2*(RH*cosine-phi+XH*sin-phi)
Vreg=(VH-V2)*100/V2

90 Electric Machines
%% case2
VH=V2+I2*(RH*cosine-phi-XH*sin-phi)
Vreg=(VH-V2)*100/V2
Il=100;
Vll=V2-I2*(RH*cosine-phi+XH*sin-phi);
Vl=Vll/10
Ploss=120+10*10*3;
Pop=Vl*Il*cosine-phi;
eff=(1-(Ploss/(Ploss+Pop)))*100
Answer:
VH = 2.0552e+003
Vreg = 2.7600
VH = 1.9928e+003
Vreg = –0.3600
Vl = 194.4800
eff =  97.3715
EXAMPLE 3.15 For the 150 kVA, 2400/240 V transformer whose circuit parameters are given in 
Example 3.8, draw the circuit model as seen from the HV side. Determine therefrom the voltage regulation 
and efﬁciency when the transformer is supplying full load at 0.8 lagging pf on the secondary side at rated 
voltage. Under these conditions calculate also the HV side current and its pf. 
SOLUTION
 
R(HV) = 0.2 + 2 ¥ 10–3 ¥ (10)2 = 0.4 W
 
X(HV) = 0.45 + 4.5 ¥ 10–3 ¥ (10)2 = 0.9 W 
The circuit model is drawn in Fig. 3.32.
 
I2(fl) = 150
1000
240
¥
 = 625 A, 0.8 pf lagging
 
V2 = 240 V
 
I2 = 625
10  = 62.5 A, 0.8 pf lagging
 
V¢2 = 2400 V
 
Voltage drop = 62.5(0.4 ¥ 0.8 + 0.9 ¥ 0.6)
 
 = 53.75 V 
 
Voltage regulation  = 53 75
2400
.
 ¥ 100 = 2.24% 
 
V1 = 2400 + 53.75 = 2453.75 = 2454 V
 
P(out) = 150 ¥ 0.8 = 120 kW 
 
Pc(copper loss) = (62.5)2 ¥ 0.4 = 1.56 kW 
 
Pi(core loss) = (
)
2454
10
1000
2
¥
 = 0.60 kW 
 
PL = Pi + Pc = 0.60 + 1.56 = 2.16 kW 
I1
+
I0
V¢2
V1
I¢2
0.4 W
0.9 W
+
–
10 kW
1.6 kW
–
Fig. 3.32

Transformers 
91
 
h = 
120
120
2 16
¥ .
 = 98.2% 
 
I0  = 2454
0
10
1000
2454
0
1 6
1000
– ∞
¥
-
– ∞
¥
j .
 
 
 = 0.245 – j 1.53 A 
 
¢I2  = 62.5 (0.8 – j 0.6) = 50 – j 37.5 A
 
I1  = I
I
0
2
+
 = 50.25 – j 39.03 
 
  
   = 63.63 ––37.8° A
or  
I1 = 63.63 A, pf = 0.79 lagging
3.10 
EXCITATION PHENOMENON IN TRANSFORMERS
It was stated in Sec. 3.3 that the no-load current in a transformer is nonsinusoidal. The basic cause for 
this phenomenon, which lies in hysteresis and saturation non-linearities of the core material, will now be 
investigated; this can only be accomplished graphically. 
Assume that the voltage v1 applied to the transformer of Fig. 3.5 is sinusoidal. Since the ohmic drop (r1i0) 
is assumed negligible compared to the magnitude of the applied voltage, the induced emf which balances 
the applied voltage must also be sinusoidal and so must be the ﬂux established in the core (see Eqs (3.3) 
and (3.4)). Further, the ﬂux must lag the induced emf by 90° as shown in the emf and ﬂux waveforms drawn 
in Fig. 3.33. The current necessary to set up sinusoidal ﬂux can be obtained graphically by looking up the 
hysteresis curve (f-i0 curve) also drawn in Fig. 3.33. 
90°
f
f
t
e0
i02
i01
i03
t0
t1
t2
t3
a0
– f1
– fmax
fmax
l0,max
f2
f1
i0
fmax
f1
– f1
fmax
i0
i0 max
i02
i03
i01
f2
Fig. 3.33
Assume that the steady-state operation has been reached so that hysteresis loop of Fig. 3.33 is being 
repeated in successive cycles of the applied voltage. Consider the instant when the ﬂux has a value – f1, the 
corresponding exciting current being zero. When the ﬂux becomes zero (at time instant t1), the current is a 
small positive value i01. When the ﬂux has a positive value f2 as shown in the ﬁgure, there are two possible 
values of current, i02 when the ﬂux is on the increasing part of the hysteresis loop and i03 when the ﬂux is 
on the decreasing part of the loop; i02 > i03. The ﬂux maximum + fmax coincides with the current maximum

92 Electric Machines
+ i0 max. The current becomes zero once again for ﬂux + f1. So far the positive half of exciting current has 
been traced out; the negative half will be symmetrical (odd symmetry) to it because of the inherent symmetry 
of the magnetic hysteresis loop. The complete cycle of the exciting current is sketched in Fig. 3.33. 
From the exciting current wave shape of Fig. 3.33, it is observed that it is nonsinusoidal and peaky *. 
While odd symmetry is preserved and the current and ﬂux maximas occur simultaneously, the current zeros 
are advanced** in time with respect to the ﬂux wave shape. As a consequence the current has fundamental 
and odd harmonics, the strongest being the third harmonic which can be as large as 40% of the fundamental. 
Further, the fundamental of the exciting current leads the ﬂux by a small angle a0 (also refer Fig. 3.6); so that 
the current fundamental has a component in phase with ﬂux (Im of Fig. 3.6) and a much smaller component 
in quadrature to the ﬂux (leading) or in phase with voltage (Ii of Fig. 3.6). While Im is responsible for creation 
of core ﬂux, Ii accounts for the power lost in the core due to hysteresis. 
Current Ii must of course be modiﬁed to account for the eddy-current loss in the core. The corresponding 
current component apart from being in phase with V1 is sinusoidal in nature as it balances the effect of 
sinusoidal eddy-currents caused by the sinusoidal core ﬂux. It is, therefore, seen that eddy-currents do not 
introduce any harmonics in the exciting current. 
When the transformer feeds current to a linear load, the load current is sinusoidal and being much larger 
than the excitation current would ‘swamp out’ the nonsinusoidalness in the resultant primary current; as a 
consequence the primary current on load is sinusoidal for all practical purposes. 
In certain 3-phase transformer connections, third-harmonic current cannot ﬂow (Sec. 3.12), as a result the 
magnetizing current im is almost sinusoidal. To satisfy the B-H curve, the core ﬂux must then be nonsinusoidal; 
it is a ﬂat-topped wave. This can be veriﬁed by assuming a sinusoidal im and then ﬁnding out the f wave shape 
from the f-im relationship, the normal magnetizing curve†. Since the ﬂux is ﬂattopped, the emf which is its 
derivative will now be peaky with a strong third-harmonic content. The various waveforms are illustrated in 
Fig. 3.34. 
im
f
Third-harmonic
e
Fundamental
Third-harmonic
Fundamental
Fig. 3.34 Case of sinusoidal magnetizing current 
In the discussion above steady-state operation was assumed so that v1 and f are both sinusoidal, f lagging 
v1 by 90° as shown once again in Fig. 3.35(a). The f-i0 relationship is shown in Fig. 3.35(b). The normal 
 
* Peakiness in exciting current is due to saturation phenomenon and would be present even if hysteresis were ab-
sent. 
 
** This shift in phase is contributed by the hysteric nature of f-i0 curve. 
 
† Hysteresis contributes ii in phase with v1 which is not being considered here. 

Transformers 
93
exciting current under these conditions is about 0.05 pu if the transformer is designed with Bmax about 1.4 T. 
When the voltage v1 is switched on to the transformer, the core ﬂux and the corresponding exciting current 
undergo a transient before reaching steady-state values. The severity of the switching transient is related to 
the instant when the voltage wave is switched on; the worst conditions being when the applied voltage has 
zero value at the instant of switching as shown in Fig. 3.35(c). It is assumed here that the initial ﬂux in the 
transformer at the instant of switching has zero value. It is seen from this ﬁgure that the steady-state value of 
ﬂux demanded at this instant is – fm, while the ﬂux can only start with zero value (in the inductive circuit). 
As a consequence, a transient ﬂux component (off-set ﬂux) ft = fm originates so that the resultant ﬂux is
(ft + fss) which has zero value at the instant of switching. The transient component ft will decay according 
to the circuit time constant (L/R) which is generally low in a transformer. If the circuit dissipation (core-loss) 
is assumed negligible, the ﬂux transient will go through a maximum value of 2fm, a phenomenon called 
v1m
f
fm
v1
fss
fm
t
i0, max
i0
(a)
(b)
v
fm
– fm
(c)
2fm
f
f
t
m
=
2fm
fss
i0,max
i0
f
t
(d) Low hysteresis loss
f
f
m
r
+
2
+
f
f
m
r
f
f
f
t
r
m
=
+
– fm
fr
fss
2
+
f
f
m
r
fr
i0,max i0
t
f
(e)
(f) Very  low hysteresis loss
Fig. 3.35 Transformer inrush current

94 Electric Machines
doubling effect. The corresponding exciting current will be very large as the core goes into deep saturation 
region of magnetization (Bm = 2 ¥ 1.4 = 2.8 T); it may indeed be as large as 100 times the normal exciting 
current, i.e, 5 pu (normal exciting current being 0,05 pu) producing electromagnetic forces 25 times the 
normal. This is why the windings of large transformers must be strongly braced. In subsequent half-periods 
ft gradually decays till it vanishes and the core ﬂux acquires the steady-state value, Because of the low 
time constant of the transformer circuit, distortion effects of the transient may last several seconds. The 
transformer switching transient is referred to as the inrush current.  
The initial core ﬂux will not be zero as assumed above but will have some residual value fr because of 
retentivity. As shown in Figs. 3.35(e) and (f ), the transient will now be even more severe; ft = fm + fr and the 
core ﬂux will now go through a maximum value of (2fm + fr). 
It is observed from Figs. 3.35(c) and (e) that the offset ﬂux is unidirectional so that the transient ﬂux and 
exciting current are unidirectional in the initial stage of the transient. A typical oscillogram of the inrush 
current is shown in Fig. 3.36.
Normal
magnetizing
current
Time
Fig. 3.36 
Inrush current wave shape
3.11 AUTOTRANSFORMERS 
So far two-winding transformers have been discussed wherein the windings are electrically isolated. When 
the primary and secondary windings are electrically connected so that a part of the winding is common to 
the two as shown in Fig. 3.36 (core is not shown here), the transformer is known as an autotransformer. 
Such a transformer is particularly economical where the 
voltage ratio is less than 2 in which case electrical isolation 
of the two windings is not essential. The major applications 
are induction motor starters, interconnection of HV systems at 
voltage levels with ratio less than 2, and in obtaining variable 
voltage power supplies (low voltage and current levels). The 
autotransformer has lower reactance, lower losses, smaller 
exciting current and better voltage regulation compared to its 
two-winding counterpart, All this is on account of the fact that 
in an autotransformer a part of the energy transfer is through 
the conduction process. 
l1
+
V1
N1
N2
R1
X1
R2
X2
l1
l2
V2
(
–
)
l2
1l
–
C
B
+
–
A
Fig. 3.37 Autotransformer

Transformers 
95
Figure 3.37 shows a single-phase autotransformer having N1 turns primary with N2 turns tapped for a 
lower voltage secondary. The winding section BC of N2 turns is common to both primary and secondary 
circuits. In fact it is nothing but a conventional two-winding transformer connected in a special way. The 
winding section AB must be provided with extra insulation, being at higher voltage.  
It will be assumed here that the magnetizing current is negligible; but it can easily be determined by a no-
load test and accounted for. 
With reference to Fig. 3.37 the two-winding voltage and turn-ratio is 
 
a = V
V
V
1
2
2
-
 = N
N
N
1
2
2
-
; N1 > N2 
(3.68)
As an autotransformer its voltage and turn-ratio is 
 
a¢ = V
V
1
2
 = N
N
1
2
 > 1 
(3.69)
It is easy to see that Eqs (3.68) and (3.69) are related as
 
a¢ = 1 + a 
(3.70)
Visualizing that in Fig. 3.37 a two-winding transformer is connected as an autotransformer, let us compare 
the VA ratings of the two. As a two-winding transformer 
 
(VA)TW = (V1 – V2)I1 = (I2 – I1)V2 
(3.71)
When used as an autotransformer 
 
(VA)auto = V1 I1 = V2 I2 
(3.72)
Equation (3.71) can be written as 
 
(VA)TW = 1
2
1
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
V
V
(V1 I1) = 1
2
1
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
N
N
(VA)auto
or 
(VA)auto = 
1
1
1
-
¢
È
ÎÍ
˘
˚˙
( /
)
a
(VA)TW; a¢ = N1/N2 > 1 
(3.73)
It immediately follows that 
 
(VA)auto > (VA)TW 
(3.74) 
It is therefore seen that a two-winding transformer of a given VA rating when connected as an 
autotransformer can handle higher VA. This is because in the autotransformer connection (Fig. 3.37) part of 
the VA is transferred conductively. It is also noted from Eq. (3.74) as a¢ = N1/N2 (the autotransformation ratio) 
approaches unity, 
 
(VA)auto >> (VA)TW 
(3.75)
It is for this reason that autotransformer is commonly used when turn-ratio needed is 2 or less, like 
in interconnecting two high-voltage systems at different voltage levels. For low voltage, low VA rating 
autotransformer is used to obtain a variable voltage supply for testing purposes. Here a¢ = N1/N2 is varied by 
changing the N2-tap.
It will also be shown in the example that follows that an autotransformer compared to its two-winding 
counterpart has a higher operating efﬁciency. 

96 Electric Machines
Let us see the problem from the design point of view by comparing winding copper needed for a given 
voltage ratio and VA rating for a two-winding transformer and an autotransformer. Assuming constant 
conductor current density, we can write 
 
G
GTW
auto  = I
N
N
I
I
N
I N
I N
1
1
2
2
1
2
1
1
2
2
(
)
(
)
-
+
-
+
 
 = 1 – 2
2
1
2
1
1
I N
I N
(∵ I1 N1 = I2 N2)
 
 = 1 – N
N
2
1
 = 1 – V
V
2
1
 
(3.76)
where G stands for weight of winding material. It then follows from Eq. (3.76) that 
 
GTW – Gauto = 1
¢
a GTW 
 
 
 = saving of conductor material in using autotransformer 
If a¢ = 10, saving is only 10% but for a¢ = 1.1, saving is as high as 90%. Hence the use of autotransformer 
is more economical when the turn-ratio is close to unity. 
The interconnection of EHV systems (e.g. 220 kV and 132 kV) by the autotransformers results in 
considerable saving of bulk and cost as compared to the conventional two-winding transformers. Of course, 
a 3-phase autotransformer will be required. 
It can be easily shown with reference to Fig. 3.37 that
 
R¢2 = 
N
N
1
2
2
1
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ R2; X¢2 = 
N
N
1
2
2
1
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ X2 
(3.77)
as seen on the primary side. 
EXAMPLE 3.16 The 2000/200-V, 20-kVA transformer of Ex. 3.7 is connected as a step-up autotransformer 
as in Fig. 3.38 in which AB is 200 V winding and BC is 2000-V winding. The 200-V winding has enough 
insulation to withstand 2200-V to ground. Calculate (a) the LV and HV side voltage ratings of the 
autotransformer; (b) its kVA rating; (c) kVA transferred inductively and conductively; (d) its efﬁciency at 
full-load 0.8 pf. 
SOLUTION
 
(a)  
V1 = 2000 V;
 
  
V2 = 2000 + 200 = 2200 V
 
(b)  
I2 = 20
1000
200
¥
 = 100 A
 
  
I1 – I2 = 10 A; I1 = 110 A
 
  
kVA  rating = 2200
100
1000
¥
 = 220
 
 It 
is, 
therefore 
seen 
that 
a 
20-kVA 
two-winding 
transformer has a rating of 220 kVA as autotransformer, an  
11 times increase.
(
–
)
l1
2l
I2
I1
V1
V2
+
–
C
A
+
B
–
Fig. 3.38

Transformers 
97
 
(c) kVA transferred inductively = V I
I
1
1
2
1000
(
)
-
 = 2000
100
1000
¥
 
 kVA transferred coductively = 220 – 20 = 200
 
(d) With data given in Ex. 3.7;
 
 Core-loss (excitation voltage 2000 V) = 120 W
 
 Full-load copper loss 
300 W
 
 (I2 = 100 A, I1 – I2 = 10 A)
 
  
420 W (Total loss)
 
  
Full-load output = 2200 ¥ 100 ¥ 0.8 = 176 kW
 
  
h = 1 – 
420
176000  = 99.76%
 
  It was shown in Ex. 3.11 that this transformer as a two-winding transformer has a full-load efﬁciency of 
97.44%. The reason for such high efﬁciency (99.76%) for the autotransformer is its higher output for the same 
excitation voltage and winding currents i.e., for the same losses. 
EXAMPLE 3.17 A 240V/120V, 12 kVA transformer has full-load unity pf efﬁciency of 96.2%. It is 
connected as an auto-transformer to feed a load at 360 V. What is its rating and full-load efﬁciency at  
0.85 pf lagging?
SOLUTION 
240 V/120 V, 12 kVA has rated currents of 50 A/100 A. It’s connection as an autotransformer as shown 
in Fig. 3.39
 
Auto-transformer rating = 360 ¥ 100 ¥ 10–3 = 36 kVA
It is 3-times 2-winding connection.
As 2-winding connection,
 
Output, P0 = 12 ¥ 1 = 12 kW
 
h = 
P
P
PL
0
0 +
 = 
1
1
0
+ P
P
L  = 0.962
from which ﬁnd full-load loss
 
1 = 0.962 + 0.962 
P
P
L
0
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
or 
P
P
L
0
 = 0 038
0 962
.
.
; PL = 12 ¥ 0 038
0 962
.
.
 0.474 kW
In auto connection full-load loss remains the same. At 0.85 pf
 
P0 = 36 ¥ 0.85 = 30.6 kW
 
h = 
1
1
0 474
30 6
+
.
.
 = 0.985 or  98.5%
3.12 VARIABLE FREQUENCY TRANSFORMER 
So far we have considered transformers which operate at ﬁxed frequency (50 Hz). Their purpose is to transform 
electric power from one voltage level to another; their performance measures being high efﬁciency and 
low voltage regulation. Small transformers (usually iron-cored) are used for coupling purposes in electronic 
100 A
120 V
+
–
+
–
+
150 A
50 A
+
–
–
240 V
240 V
360 V
Fig. 3.39

98 Electric Machines
circuits for communication, measurement and control. These transformers process signals which contain a 
wide band of frequencies (the width of band depends upon the signal measurement and control, audio, video, 
etc). The two basic applications of these transformers are: 
the impedance transforming property of the transformer. Under condition of impedance matching the 
over-all efﬁciency of the system is as low as 50%. But in electronic circuit applications the performance 
criterion is the maximum power unlike the maximum efﬁciency in power system applications. Such 
transformers are known as output transformers while in audio applications these are known as audio-
transformers.
An important requirement of these transformers is that the amplitude voltage gain (ratio of output/input 
voltage amplitude) should remain almost constant over the range of frequencies (bandwidth) of the signal. 
Further, it is desirable that the phase shift of output signal from the input signal over the signal bandwidth be 
small. We shall now investigate the gain and phase frequency characteristics of the transformer. This would 
of course include the effect of the output impedance (resistance) of the electronic circuit output stage. In these 
characteristics as the frequency range is quite large the frequency scale used is logarithmic. 
The circuit model of a transformer fed from a source of ﬁnite output resistance is drawn in Fig. 3.40(a) 
where the transformer core loss is ignored and leakage and magnetizing effects are shown in their frequency 
dependent form i.e., X = wL. It may be observed here that Lm (megnetizing inductance) = L11 (self inductance 
of the primary coil).
Amplitude and phase response can be divided into three regions wherein the response calculations are 
simpliﬁed by making suitable approximations as below. 
Mid-band Region 
In this region the series leakage inductances can be ignored (as these cause negligible voltage drops) and the 
shunt inductance (magnetizing inductance) can be considered as open circuit. With these approximations the 
equivalent circuit as seen on the primary side is drawn in Fig. 3.40(b). It immediately follows from the circuit 
analysis that VL and VS are in phase, the circuit being resistive only. As for the amplitude gain, it is given as  
 
V¢L = VS
¢
+
¢
È
ÎÍ
˘
˚˙
R
R
R
L
L
; R = RS + R1 + R¢2 
 
N
N
1
2
È
ÎÍ
˘
˚˙ VL = VS
¢
+
¢
È
ÎÍ
˘
˚˙
R
R
R
L
L
 
A0 = V
V
L
S
 = N
N
R
R
R
L
L
2
1
È
ÎÍ
˘
˚˙
¢
+
¢
È
ÎÍ
˘
˚˙ ; – A0 = 0 
(3.78)
High-frequency Region 
In this region the series inductances must be taken into account but the shunt inductance is an effective open 
circuit yielding the approximate equivalent circuit of Fig. 3.40(c). Amplitude and phase angle as function of 
frequency are derived below. 
 
AH  = V
V
L
S
 = N
N
R
R
R
j L
L
L
2
1
È
ÎÍ
˘
˚˙
¢
+
¢ +
(
)
w

Transformers 
99
where 
L = Ll1 + Ll2 = total leakage inductance as seen on primary side. 
Further rearrangement leads to 
 
AH  = 
N
N
R
R
R
j
L
R
R
L
L
L
2
1
1
1
È
ÎÍ
˘
˚˙
¢
+
¢
È
ÎÍ
˘
˚˙
+
+
¢
w[ /(
)]  
We can write 
 
R
R
L
L
+
¢  = wH = corner frequency of high-frequency region 
Rs
N
N
1
2
:
R1
wLl1
wLm
R2
wLl2
RL
Vs
VL
+
–
(a) Circuit model of transformer
+
–
+
–
(b) Approximate circuit model in mid-frequency region
+
–
Vs
V¢L
R¢L
Vs
V¢L
R¢L
Rs
R1
R2
+
–
(c) Approximate circuit model in high-freuency region
+
–
wLl1
wL¢l2
R
R
+
–
+
–
(d) Approximate circuit model low-frequkency region
V¢L
Vs
wLm
R¢L
wL
Rs
R1
R¢2
Rs
R1
R¢2
R
Fig. 3.40

100 Electric Machines
Also recognizing 
N
N
R
R
R
L
L
2
1
È
ÎÍ
˘
˚˙
¢
+
È
ÎÍ
˘
˚˙  = A0, we get 
 
AH = 
A
j
H
0
1+ w w
/
 
(3.79)
or 
AH = 
A
H
0
2 1 2
1[
(
/
) ] /
+ w w
; – AH = tan–1 w/wH 
(3.80)
As per Eq. (3.80) the gain falls with frequency acquiring a valve of A0/
2  at w/wH = 1 and a phase angle 
of ––45°. This indeed is the half power frequency (wH).
In this region the series effect of leakage inductances is of no consequence but the low reactance (wLm) 
shunting effect must be accounted for giving the approximate equivalent circuit of Fig 3.39(d). Amplitude 
and phase angle of frequency response is derived below. 
The corner frequency wL of this circuit is obtained by considering the voltage source as short circuit. This 
circuit is Lm in parallel with R||R¢L. Thus 
 
wL = R R
L
L
m
|| ¢
È
ÎÍ
˘
˚˙  
The complex gain can then be expressed as 
 
AL  = 
A
j
L
0
1+ (
/
)
w w
 
(3.81) 
or 
AL = 
A
L
0
2 1 2
1[
(
/
) ] /
+ w w
; –AL  = tan–1 w/wL 
(3.82) 
Again the lower corner frequency is the half power frequency. 
The complete amplitude and phase response of the transformer (with source) on log frequency scale 
are plotted in Fig. 3.41. At high frequencies the interturn and other stray capacitances of the transformer 
windings begin to play a role. In fact the capacitance-inductance combination causes parallel resonance effect 
A
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Lead
Lag
–A
0.2
0.5
1.0
2
5
0.2
0.5
1.0
2
5
80°
60°
40°
20°
20°
0°
40°
60°
80°
Low-frequency
region
Relative
voltage
ratio
High-frequency
region
Phase
angle
w/ L
w
w/ H
w
Fig. 3.41 Normalized frequency characteristic of output transformers

Transformers 
101
on account of which an amplitude peak shows up in the high-frequency region of the frequency response. No 
reasonably accurate modelling of these effects is possible and best results are obtained experimentally. The 
frequency response of Fig. 3.41 gives a general guidance as to its nature.  
In generation, transformation, transmission and utilization of electric energy it can be shown that it is 
economical to use the three-phase system rather than the single-phase. For three-phase transformation, 
three single-phase transformers are needed. Two arrangements are possible: a bank of three single-phase 
transformers or a single three-phase transformer with the primary and secondary of each phase wound on 
three legs of a common core. The three-phase transformer unit costs about 15% less than that of a bank 
and furthermore, the single unit occupies less space. There is little difference in reliability, but it is cheaper 
to carry spare stock of a single-phase rather than a three-phase transformer. In underground use (mines) a 
bank of single-phase units may be preferred as it is easier to transport these units. The bank also offers the 
advantage of a derated open-delta operation when one single-phase unit becomes inoperative. Reduced cost 
being an overweighing consideration, it is common practice to use a three-phase transformer unit. 
In a three-phase bank the phases are electrically connected but the three magnetic circuits are independent. 
In the more common three-phase, 3-limb core-type transformer (Fig. 3.42(a)), the three magnetic circuits 
are also linked. Where delinking of the magnetic circuits is desired in a three-phase unit, a 5-limb shell type 
transformer could be used (Fig. 3.42(b)). 
(a) Core type (commonly used)
(b) Shell type, 5 -limb core
Fig. 3.42 Three-phase transformer cores
Three-phase Transformer Connections 
A variety of connections are possible on each side of a 3-phase transformer (single unit or bank). The three 
phases could be connected in star, delta, open-delta or zigzag star. Each of the three phases could have two 
windings or may have autoconnection. Further, certain types of connections require a third winding known 
as tertiary (refer Sec. 3.14). 
Labelling of Transformer Terminals 
Terminals on the HV side of each phase will be labelled as 
capital letters A, B, C and those on the LV side will be labelled 
as small letters a, b, c. Terminal polarities are indicated by 
sufﬁxes 1 and 2 with 1’s indicating similar polarity ends and 
so do 2’s Labelling of terminals is illustrated in Fig. 3.43 for 
phase a. Assuming the transformer to be ideal, VA2A1 (voltage 
of terminal A2 with respect to A1) is in phase with Va2a1 and 
IA is in phase with Ia.  
–
A1
Va2 1
a
+
–
+
a1
A2
a2
Ia
IA
VA2 1
A
Fig. 3.43

102 Electric Machines
Star/Star (Y/Y) Connection 
Star connection is formed on each side by connecting to-
gether phase winding terminals sufﬁxes 1 as in Fig. 3.44(a). 
The phasor diagram is drawn in Fig. 3.44(b) from which it 
is easily seen that the voltages of the corresponding phases 
(and therefore of the corresponding lines) are in phase. This 
is known as the 0°-connection. The letters within brackets on 
the phasor diagram indicate the lines, to which the terminals 
are connected. If the winding terminals on secondary side are 
reversed, the 180°-connection is obtained. 
It is also observed from Fig. 3.44 that if the phase 
transformation ratio is x : 1, the line transformation (line-to-
line voltages, line currents) the ratio is also x : 1. 
Delta/Delta (D/D) Connection 
Figure 3.45(a) shows the delta/delta connection* and the 
corresponding phasor diagram is given in Fig. 3.45(b). The 
sum of voltages around the secondary delta must be zero; 
otherwise delta, being a closed circuit, means a short circuit. 
With polarities indicated on the primary and secondary 
sides, voltages Va2a1, Vb2b1 and Vc2c1 add to zero as per the 
phasor diagram if the delta is formed by connecting a1b2, 
b1c2 and c1a2. It is easily seen from the phasor diagram that 
the primary and secondary line voltages are in phase so it is 
the 0°-connection. However, if the secondary leads a, b, c are 
taken out from the delta nodes a1b2, b1c2, c1c2, the secondary 
voltages are in phase opposition to the primary voltages can 
be visualized from the phasor diagram of Fig. 3.45(b). This is 
the 180°-connection.
It is also seen from Fig. 3.45(a) that if the phase transfor-
mation ratio is x : 1, the transformation ratio for line quantities 
is also x : 1.
A
I
V
B
N
C
x 1
x 1
x 1
(a)
To line A
To line a
N
n
(b)
A2
A
A
( )
2
A1B2
B1C2
C1
a
a
( )
2
C
C
( )
2
B
B
( )
2
c
c
( )
2
b
b
( )
2
3
V
a
xl
V x/
b
N
c
A2
a1 b2
b1 c2
c1
3x
V
Fig. 3.44 Star/star 0°-connection
A2
A
B
C
l
V
V
x
1
x
1
x
1
a
Ix
Vlx
b
c
(a)
A1
B1
B2
C2
C1
a2
a1
b2
b1
c2
c1
A
A
( )
2
N
n
(b)
a
a
( )
2
C
C
( )
2
B
B
( )
2
c
c
( )
2
b (b)
2
V x/
3
l/
3
Ix/
Fig. 3.45  
Delta/delta connection
 
* The star and delta connections in later parts of the book will generally be indicated as in Fig. 3.46. The style 
temporarily adopted here is for the sake of clarity of identifying the primary and secondary of each phase. Further-
more, it also stresses the fact that physical disposition of the windings in the connection diagram has no relation-
ship to the phasor diagram. 
Star
Delta
Fig. 3.46

Transformers 
103
In the delta/delta connection if one of the transformers is disconnected, the resulting connection is known 
as open-delta. Supposing the b-phase transformer in Fig. 3.47(a) is removed, and the open-delta is excited 
from balanced 3-phase supply, then it easily follows from the phasor diagram of Fig. 3.47(b) that the voltage 
Vb2b1 = Vbc does not change as it equals – (Vca + Vab); thus the voltages on the secondary side still remain 
balanced 3-phase. The open-delta connection supplying a balanced load is shown in Fig. 3.47(a). If the 
maximum allowable secondary phase current is Iph, the transformer can handle VA of 
Sopen-delta = 
3 VIph ; Iph = Iline
which for normal delta/delta connection is 
Sdelta = 3VIph
Thus the open-delta connection has a VA rating of 1/
3  = 0.58 of the rating of the normal delta/delta 
connection. 
Iph
A
B
C
a
b
c
V
Iph
T1
T2
Fig. 3.47(a) Open-delta or V-connection 
The phasor diagram of open-delta is drawn in Fig. 3.47(b). Vba  and Iab  pertain to transformer T1 and Vca  
and Ica  to T2.
Va
Ia
Vb
Iab
Vba
Vca
(30° – )
f
(30° + )
f
f
Vc
Ic
ac
= I
Fig. 3.47(b)
f

104 Electric Machines
Power output of T1 
P1 = VIph cos (30° – f)
and that of T2 
P2  = VIph cos (30° + f)
Total power delivered 
P = P1 + P2 = VIph [cos (30° – f) + cos (30° + f)]
Upon simpliﬁcation, we ﬁnd 
P = 
3 VIph cos f
The two transformers supply equal power at upf, i.e., f = 0.
Star/Delta (Y/D) Connection 
Star connection is formed on primary side by connecting together 1 sufﬁxed terminals; 2 sufﬁxed terminals 
being connected to appropriate lines; the delta is formed by connecting c1a2, a1b2 and b1c2 with the lines 
connected to these junctions being labelled as a, b and c respectively as shown in Fig. 3.48(a). The phasor 
diagram is drawn in Fig. 3.48(b). It is seen from the phasor diagram on the delta side that the sum of voltages 
around delta is zero. This is a must as otherwise closed delta would mean a short circuit. It is also observed 
from the phasor diagram that phase a to neutral voltage (equivalent star basis) on the delta side lags by – 30° 
to the phase-to-neutral voltage on the star side; this is also the phase relationship between the respective line-
to-line voltages. This connection, therefore, is known as – 30°-connection. 
The + 30°-connection follows from the phasor diagram of Fig. 3.49(a) with the corresponding connection 
diagram as in Fig. 3.49(b).
 
A
A
A
2( )
A2
B
C
l
N
V
x 1
x 1
x 1
a
b
c
(a)
–30°
N
(b)
A1 B2
B1C2
C1
a2
a1 b2
b1 c2
c1
xl
a
a
2( )
C
C
2( )
B2(B)
b
b
2( )
n
c
c
2( )
3
V
3
V
3xl
V
x
3
x
 
N
n
(a)
A
B
C
N
a
b
c
(b)
+30°
A
A
2( )
a
a
2( )
C
C
2( )
B
B
2( )
c
c
2( )
b
b
2( )
A2
A B
2
2
B C
1
2
C1
a2
a1 b2
b c
1
2
c1
 
Fig. 3.48
Fig. 3.49
Similarly ± 90°-connections are also possible in the star/delta connection by relabelling the delta side 
lines. For example for + 90° connection relabel c Æ a, b Æ c and a Æ b. Reader may work out relabelling for 
– 90° connection. 
In Indian and British practices ± 30°-connections are employed. The American practice is to use 
± 90°-connections. 

Transformers 
105
It follows from Fig. 3.48(a) that if the phase transformation ratio of the star/delta connection is x : 1, the 
line transformation ratio in magnitude is 
3 x: 1.
Delta/Star (D/Y) Connection 
This connection is simply the interchange of primary and secondary roles in the star/delta connection. 
One just interchanges capital and small letter sufﬁxings in Figs 3.48 and 3.49. Of course what was the  
– 30°-connection will now be the + 30°-connection and vice versa. If the phase transformation ratio is x : 1 
(delta/star), the transformation ratio for line quantities will be (x/
3 ) : 1.
Delta/Zig-zag Star Connection 
The winding of each phase on the star side is divided into two equal halves with labelling as in Fig. 3.50. 
Each leg of the star connection is formed by using halves from two different phases. The phasor diagram for 
this connection is given in Fig. 3.51 from which the connection diagram easily follows. Obviously it is the 
0°-connection. Reversal of connections on the star side gives us the 180°-connection. 
 
Phase transformation = x : 1
 
Line transformation = x : 
3
2  or 2
3
x : 1 
–
a1
+
–
+
Va2a1
Va4a3
a2 a3
a4
Fig. 3.50 
x
a
a
( )
4
A
A
( )
2
C
C
( )
2
B
B
( )
2
c
c
( )
4
b1
c1
a1
b
b
4 ( )
N
n
1/2
1/2
Line voltage =   3/2
Fig. 3.51 
Delta/zig-zag star 0°-connection 
Star/Zig-zag Star 
The connection is indicated by the phasor diagram of Fig. 3.52.  
 
Phase transformation = x : 1
 
Line transformation = 
3 x : 3
2
 or 2
3
x : 1

106 Electric Machines
a
a
( )
4
a
a
( )
4
b1
c
c
( )
4
c1 b1
A
A
( )
2
C
C
( )
2
B
B
( )
2
a1
b
b
( )
4
c (c)
4
x
N
n
–30° connection
30°
n
1/2
1/2
30°
c1
b
b
( )
4
a1
+30° connection
Fig. 3.52 Star/zig-zag star
Phase Groups
Various transformer connections with the same phase shift are grouped together. Thus there are Group I (0°), 
Group II (180°), Group III (30°) and Group IV (–30°). 
In star connection with earthed neutral, the maximum voltage of the phase winding to ground is 1/
3  or 58% 
of the line voltage, while in delta connection this is equal to the line voltage in case of earthing of one of the 
lines during a fault. Therefore, for very high voltage transformers the star connection on the HV side is about 
10% cheaper than delta connection on account of insulation cost. A delta-connected primary is necessary for 
a star-connected LV secondary feeding mixed 3-phase and 1-phase (line-to-neutral) loads. This is because the 
lines on the primary side can only carry current which add to zero. In the case of unbalanced 1-phase loads on 
secondary, delta-connected primary is needed to allow the ﬂow of zero sequence current 
I0  = In
3  = 1
3 (
)
I
I
I
a
b
c
+
+
 
as shown in Fig. 3.53 so that 
I
I
I
A
B
C
+
+
 = 0
This means that only positive and negative sequence currents ﬂow in the lines on the delta side. 
IA
l =
0
3
l l
n
IB
lo
lc
la
ln
lb
Fig. 3.53

Transformers 
107
This could also be achieved by star-connected primary provided the primary and secondary star points are 
grounded. But this is not recommended on account of ﬂow of ground current for unbalanced secondary loads. 
Choice of Transformer Connections
Star/star 
This is economical for small HV transformers as it minimizes the turns/phase and winding insulation. 
A neutral connection is possible. However, the Y /Y connection is rarely used* because of difﬁculties 
associated with the exciting current. 
Delta/delta 
This suits large LV transformers as it needs more turns/phase of smaller section. A large load unbalance can 
be tolerated. The absence of a star point may be a disadvantage. This connection can operate at 58% normal 
rating as open-delta when one of the transformers of the bank is removed for repairs or maintenance. (This 
has already been explained.) 
Star/delta 
This is the most commonly used connection for power systems. At transmission levels star connection is on 
the HV side, i.e. D/Y for step-up and Y/D for step-down. The neutral thus available is used for grounding on 
the HV side. At the distribution level the D/Y transformer is used with star on the LV side which allows mixed 
3-phase and 1-phase loads, while delta allows the ﬂow of circulating current to compensate for neutral current 
on the star side (Fig. 3.53). 
The Y/D connection has an associated phase shift of ± 30° which must be accounted for in power system 
interconnections. 
Harmonics 
It was seen in Sec. 3.10 that when the third-harmonic current is permitted to ﬂow, by circuit conditions, along 
with the sinusoidal magnetizing current in a transformer, the core ﬂux is sinusoidal and so is the induced 
emf. On the other hand, when the circuit does not permit the ﬂow of the third-harmonic current, i.e. the 
magnetizing current is sinusoidal, the ﬂux is ﬂat-topped containing “depressing” third-harmonic and as a 
consequence third-harmonic voltages are present in the induced emfs. This problem in 3-phase transformers 
will now be examined. 
It is to be observed here that the phase difference in third-harmonic currents and voltages on a 3-phase 
system is 3 ¥ 120° = 360° or 0° which means that these are cophasal. Therefore, third-harmonic (in general 
harmonics of order 3n called triplens) currents and voltages cannot be present on the lines of a 3-phase 
system as these do not add up to zero. 
Three-phase Bank of Single-phase Transformers
Delta/delta connection 
The supply voltage provides only sinusoidal magnetizing current so that core ﬂux is ﬂat-topped; but the 
third-harmonic emfs induced (cophasal) cause circulating currents in deltas restoring the ﬂux to almost 
sinusoidal. The third-harmonic voltages are very small as the transformer offers low impedance to third-
harmonic currents. 
 
* Recently a favourable trend is developing for reasons of economy. 

108 Electric Machines
Star/delta and delta/star connection 
Because of one delta connection the same conditions are obtained as in D/D connection except that the 
impedance offered to the ﬂow of third-harmonic currents in delta is now larger and so are third-harmonic 
voltages. 
Star/star connection 
In the case of isolated neutrals, third-harmonic voltages are present in each phase as explained earlier. Further, 
since these voltages are cophasal, no third-harmonic voltages are present between lines. The voltage of phase 
a to neutral can now be expressed as 
eaN = ea sin wt + ea3 sin 3wt
While fundamental frequency voltages in the three phases have a relative phase difference of 120°, the 
third-harmonic voltages in them are cophasal (with 
respect to each other), but their phase with respect to the 
fundamental frequency (voltage changes at the rate of  
2 w, twice the fundamental frequency). This situation is 
illustrated in the phasor diagram of Fig. 3.54 from which 
it is immediately observed that the voltage of the neutral 
point oscillates at frequency 2w. The phenomenon is 
known as oscillating neutral and is highly undesirable 
because of which the star/star connection with isolated 
neutrals is not used in practice. 
If the neutrals are connected, it effectively separates 
the three transformers. Third-harmonic currents can now 
ﬂow via the neutrals. 
Three-phase Transformer
In core type transformer (Fig. 3.42(a)), the third-harmonic ﬂuxes in all the three limbs are simultaneously 
directed upwards or downwards so that this ﬂux must return through air (high-reluctance path). The high-
reluctance path tends to suppress the third-harmonic ﬂux. The phenomenon gets more complex now and at 
core densities exceeding 1.5 T, the total harmonic content (particularly ﬁfth) is very marked in the magnetizing 
current (ﬁfth harmonic currents can ﬂow on lines as their relative phase difference is 5 ¥ 120° = 600° or 120°). 
To reduce the strong ﬁfth harmonic in the magnetizing current for the star/star connection with isolated 
neutral, a path must be provided through iron for the third-harmonic ﬂux. Hence, the use of a 5-limb core as 
in Fig. 3.42(b). 
Back-to-Back Test on Three-phase Transformers 
Fig. 3.55(a) shows the connection arrangement for the back-to-back test on two identical 3-phase transformers. 
The two secondaries must be connected in phase opposition and in proper phase sequence. The auxiliary 
transformer for circulating full-load current is included in the circuit of the two secondaries; it could also be 
included in the circuit of the primaries. Thus with only losses (core-loss and copper-loss) supplied from the 
mains, a “heat run” test could be conducted on the transformers. 
N
Ea
a
2w
c
b
Cophasal third-harmonic
voltage (
)
E3
EaN
Fig. 3.54 Oscillating neutral

Transformers 
109
3-phase
mains
Auxiliary
transformer
a1
1
a2
1
a2
2
a1
2
T1
T2
Fig. 3.55(a)
 
Delta/Delta Connected Transformers 
The primaries are normally excited from the mains. Each secondary delta is opened at one junction and 
a single-phase transformer can be employed to circulate full-load current in both the deltas as shown in 
Fig. 3.55(b). 
1-phase supply
Delta secondaries
Auxiliary transformer
Fig. 3.55(b)
D/D transformers

110 Electric Machines
EXAMPLE 3.18 A 3-phase transformer bank consisting of three 1-phase transformers is used to step-
down the voltage of a 3-phase, 6600 V transmission line. If the primary line current is 10 A, calculate the 
secondary line voltage, line current and output kVA for the following connections: (a) Y/D and (b) D/Y. The 
turns ratio is 12. Neglect losses.
SOLUTION 
 
(a) The Y/D connection is drawn in Fig. 3.56(a).
 
  
VPY = 6600
3
 
  
VPD = VLD = 
6600
3
12
¥
 = 317.55 V
 
  
IPD = 10 ¥ 12 = 120 A
 
  
ILD = 120
3  = 207.84 A
 
  
Output kVA = 
3
6600
3
12
120 3
1
1000
¥
¥
¥
¥
 
  
 = 66
3  = 114.3
 
(b) The D/Y connection is drawn in Fig. 3.56(b).
 
  
IPD = 10
3 A
 
  
ILY = 12
10
¥
3
 = 69.28 A
 
  
VPY = 6600
12
V
 
  
VLY  = 
6600 3
12
 925.6 V
 
  
Output kVA = 
3
6600 3
12
120
3
1
1000
¥
¥
¥
 
  
 = 114.3 (same as in part (a))
EXAMPLE 3.19 A D/Y connected 3-phase transformer as shown in Fig. 3.57 has a voltage ratio of 
22 kV (D)/345 kV(Y) (line-to-1ine). The transform is feeding 500 MW and 100 MVAR to the grid (345 kV). 
Determine the MVA and voltage rating of each unit (single-phase). Compute all currents and voltages of 
both magnitude and phase angle in all the windings (primaries and secondaries). Assume each single-phase 
transformer to be ideal. 
a
b
c
1 : a
C
B
A
Load
Fig. 3.57
l
= 10 A =
LY
PY
l
VPY
VLY = 6600
12:1
lPD
lLD
V
V
L
P
D
D
=
(a)
(b)
lLD = 10 A
l
l
PY
PY
=
V
V
L
P
D
D
= 6600 V =
lPD
12:1
VPY
VLY
Fig. 3.56

Transformers 
111
SOLUTION
 
Load MVA, S  = 500 + j 100
 
S = 510 
 
MVA rating of each (single phase) transformer = 510/3 = 170 
 
Voltage rating of each transformer = 345
3
22
/
 = 9.054
Let us choose voltage of star phase A as reference then 
Star side 
VA  = VAN  = 345
3  –0° = 199.2 –0° kV
 
VB  = 199.2 ––120° kV, VC  = 199.2 ––240° kV
Note: Phase sequence is ABC 
 
VAB  = V
V
A
B
-
 = 345 –30° kV
 
VBC  = 345 ––90° kV
 
VCA  = 345 ––210° kV
 
IA*  = 500
100
3
199 2
+
¥
j
.
 = 0.837 + j 0.167 kA; as S  = VI*
or 
IA  = 0.837 – j 0.167 = 0.853 ––11.3° kA
 
IB  = 0.853 ––131.3° kA 
 
IC  = 0.853 ––251.3° kA 
Delta side 
 
Vab  = V
a
A  = 199 2
9 054
.
.
–0° = 22–0° kV
 
Vbc  = 22 ––120° kV
 
Vca  = 22 ––240° kV
 
Iab  = 9.054 ¥ 0.853 ––11.3° =7.723 ––11.3° kA
 
Ibc  = 7.723 ––131.3° kA 
 
Ica  = 7.723 ––251.3° kA 
 
Ia  = I
I
ab
bc
-
 = 
3  ¥ 7.723 –(–11.3° – 30°) = 13.376 ––41.3°
 
Ib  = 13.376 –(–120° –  11.3°) = 13.376 ––131.3° kA 
 
Ic  = 13.376 –(–240° – 11.3°)=13.376 ––251.3° kA
Note 
It is easily observed from above that line voltages and currents on the star side lead those on the delta side 
by 30°.
EXAMPLE 3.20 Three 1-phase 20-kVA, 2000/200-V transformers identical with that of Ex. 3.3 are 
connected in Y/D in a 3-phase, 60 kVA bank to step-down the voltage at the load end of a feeder having 
impedance of 0.13 + j 0.95 W/phase. The line voltage at the sending-end of the feeder is 3464 V. The 
transformers supply a balanced 3-phase load through a feeder whose impedance is 0.0004 + j 0.0015 W/
phase. Find the load voltage (line-to-line) when it draws rated current from transformers at 0.8 lagging 
power factor. 

112 Electric Machines
SOLUTION 
Figure 3.58 gives the circuit diagram of the system. The computations will be carried out on per phase-Y 
basis by referring all quantities to the HV (Y-connected) side of the transformer bank. 
LV feeder impedance referred to the HV side is 
2000 3
200
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
(0.0004 + j 0.0015) = 0.12 + j 0.45 W/phase 
0.13 + 0.95
/phase
j
W
0.0004 + 0.0015
/phase
j
W
Load
3
3464 V = 2000
Fig. 3.58 
The total series impedance of the HV and LV feeders referred to the HV side is
 
ZF = (0.13 + j 0.95) + (0.12 + j 0.45) 
 
 = 0.25 + j 1.4 W/phase 
From Ex. 3.5, the equivalent impedance of the transformer bank is referred to the HV side 
 
ZT = 0.82 + j 1.02 W/phase Y
 
Sending-end feeder voltage = 3464
3  = 2000 V/phase Y 
 
Load current on the HV side = rated current of transformer 
 
 = 10 A/phase Y
It is now seen that the equivalent circuit for one phase referred to the Y-connected HV side is exactly the same as in  
Ex. 3.6, Fig. 3.20. Thus the load voltage referred to the HV side is 197.692 V to neutral. The actual load voltage is 
197.688 V, line-to-line (since the secondaries are D-connected).
PU method In such problems it is convenient to use the pu method. We shall choose the following base values: 
 
(MVA)B = 
3
20
1000
¥
 = 0.06 
 
Voltage base on HV side = 2
3  kV (line-to-line)
 
Voltage base on LV side = 0.2 kV (line-to-line) 
Note 
The voltage base values are in the ratio of line-to-line voltages (same as phase voltages on equivalent star basis). 
 
Z1 (LV line) (pu) = (0.0004 + j 0.0015) ¥ 0 06
0 2 2
.
( . )
 
 
 = (0.06 + j 0.225) ¥ 10–2 
 
Z2 (HV line) (pu) = (0.13 + j 0.95) ¥ 
0 06
2 3 2
.
(
)
 
 
 = (0.065 + j 0.475) ¥ 10–2 

Transformers 
113
 
ZT (star side) (pu) = (0.82 + j 1.02) ¥ 
0 06
2 3 2
.
(
)
 
 = (0.41 + j 0.51) ¥ 10–2 
Note: Suppose the transformer impedance was given on the delta side 
 
ZT (delta side) = 
200
2000
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 ¥ (0.82 + j 1.02) 
 
 = (0.82 + j 1.02) ¥ 10–2 W (delta phase) 
 
Equivalent star impedance = 1
3 (0.82 + j 1.02) ¥ 10–2 W 
 
ZT (pu) = 0 06
0 2
1
3
2
.
( . )
¥
 (0.82 + j 1.02) ¥ 10–2 
 
 = (0.41 + j 0.51) ¥ 10–3 (same as calculated above)
 
Z (total) (pu) = 0.06 + j 0.225
 
0.065 + j 0.475
 
0.41 + j 0.51 
 
( .
.
)
0 535
1 21
10 2
+
¥
-
j
 
V1 (sending–end voltage) = 2
3  kV (line) or 1 pu
 
I1 (= rated current) = 1 pu; pf= 0.8 lag 
 
V2 (load voltage) = 1 – 1 ¥ (0.535 ¥ 0.8 + 1.2 ¥ 0.6) ¥ 10–2
 
 = 0.98846 pu 
 
 = 0.98846 ¥ 200 = 197.692 V (line)
EXAMPLE 3.21 Three transformers, each rated 20 kVA, 2 kV/200 V, are connected D/D and are fed 
through a 2000 V (line-to-line) 3-phase feeder having a reactance of 0.7 W/phase. The reactance of each 
transformer is 0.0051 pu. All resistances are to be ignored. At its sending-end the feeder receives power 
through the secondary terminals of a 3-phase Y/D connected transformer whose 3-phase rating is 200 kVA, 
20/2 kV (line-to-line). The reactance of the sending-end transformer is 0.06 pu on its own rating. The 
voltage applied to the primary terminals is 20 kV (line-to-line). 
A 3-phase fault takes place at the 200 V terminals of the receiving-end transformers. Calculate the fault 
current in the 2 kV feeder lines, in the primary and secondary windings of the receiving-end transformers 
and at the load terminals (200 V terminals). 
SOLUTION 
Choose a common 3-phase base of 60 kVA. Line-to-line voltage bases are in ratio of transformation 
20 kV : 2 kV : 200 V. It is observed that 
XT (sending-end*) = 0.06 ¥ 60
200  = 0.018 pu 
For the 2 kV feeder 
 
VB = 2000
3  = 1154.7 V (line-to-neutral)
 
* Transformer impedance in pu is independent of the connection.

114 Electric Machines
 
IB = 60
1000
3
2000
¥
¥
 = 17.32 A, phase Y
 
ZB = 1154 7
17 32
.
.
 = 66.6 W/phase Y
 
Xfeeder = 0 7
66 6
.
.
 = 0.0105 pu
 
XT (receiving-end*) = 0.0051 pu 
Total reactance from the sending-end to the fault point (on the secondary side of the receiving-end transformer) = 
0.018 + 0.0105 + 0.0051 = 0.0336 pu 
 
Sending-end voltage = 20
20  = 1.0 pu 
 
Fault current = 
1 0
0 0336
.
.
 = 29.76 pu 
The current in any part of the system can be easily computed as below: 
 
Current in 2 kV feeder = 29.76 ¥ 17.32 = 515.4 A 
 
Current in 2 kV winding of D/D transformer = 515.3
3  = 297.56 A 
 
Current in 200 V winding of D/D transformer = 297.56 ¥ 10 = 2975.6 A
 
Current at load terminals = 2975.6
3  = 5154 A
EXAMPLE 3.22 A 3-phase bank of three single-phase transformer are fed from 3-phase 33 kV (line-to-
line). It supplies a load of 6000 kVA at 11 kV (line-to-line). Both supply and load are 3-wire. Calculate the 
voltage and kVA rating of the single-phase transformer for all possible 3-phase transformer connection.
SOLUTION
 
1. Star-Star connection
 
  
Primary-side phase voltage, VP1 = 33
3
 = 19.05 kV
 
  
Secondary-side phase voltage, VP2 = 11
3  = 6.35 kV
 
  
Transformer voltage rating = 19.05/6.35 kV
 
  
kVA rating = 6000
3
 = 2000
 
2. Star-Delta connection
 
  
VP1 = 19.05 kV, VP2 = 11 kV
 
  
Transformer rating = 19.05/11 kV, 2000 kVA
 
3. Delta-Star connection
 
  
Transformer rating = 33/6.35 kV, 2000 kVA
 
4. Delta-Delta connection
 
  
Transformer rating = 33/11 kV, 2000 kVA
 
* Transformer impedance in pu is independent of the connection. 

Transformers 
115
EXAMPLE 3.23 A 6.6 kV/400 V, 75 kVA single-phase transformer has a series reactance of 12%
(0.12 pu).
 (a) Calculate the reactance in ohms referred to LV and HV sides.
 (b) Three such transformers are connected in Star-Star, calculate (i) the line voltage and kVA rating, 
(ii) pu reactance of the bank, (iii) series reactance in ohms referred to HV and LV sides
 (c) Repeat part (b) if the bank is connected star on HV side and delta on LV side.
SOLUTION
 
(a)  
X(pu) = X ( )
W MVA
kV
(
)
2
 
 HV side
 
  
0.12 = X ( )
( . )
W ¥
¥
-
75
10
6 6
3
2
 
  
X(W) = 0 12
6 6
75
10
2
3
.
( . )
¥
¥
-
 = 69.696 W
 
 LV side
 
  
0.12 = X ( )
( . )
W ¥
¥
-
75
10
0 4
3
2
 
  
X(W) = 0.256 W
 
(b) Star-Star connection
 
(i) Line voltage
 
  
HV 6.6
3  = 11.43 kV 
 
  
LV 400
3  = 692.8 V
 
  
Rating = 3 ¥ 75 = 225 kVA 
 
(ii)  
X(pu) = X ( )
(
)
)
W MVA
phase
kV(line
3
2
-
(
)
 = 69 696
225
10
6 6 3
3
2
.
( .
)
¥
¥
-
 = 0.12
 
(iii) HV side
 
  
X(W) = 69.696 W/phase
 
 LV side
 
  
X(W) = 0.256 W/phase
 
(c) Star-Delta
 
(i) Line voltages
 
  
Star side 6.6
3  = 11.43 kV
 
  
Delta side = 400 V
 
  
Rating = 3 ¥ 75 = 225 kVA
 
(ii)  
X(pu) = 0.12
 
(iii) Star side 
X = 69.69 W/phase
 
 Delta side 
X = 0.256 W/phase
 
 X(pu), calculated from delta side
 
  
X(pu) = 
0 256 3
225
10
0 4
3
2
.
/
( . )
(
) ¥
¥
-
 = 0.12

116 Electric Machines
3.14 
PARALLEL OPERATION OF TRANSFORMERS
When the load outgrows the capacity of an existing transformer, it may be economical to install another one 
in parallel with it rather than replacing it with a single larger unit. Also, sometimes in a new installation, two 
units in parallel, though more expensive, may be preferred over a single unit for reasons of reliability—half 
the load can be supplied with one unit out. Further, the cost of maintaining a spare is less with two units in 
parallel. However, when spare units are maintained at a central location to serve transformer installations in a 
certain region, single-unit installations would be preferred. It is, therefore, seen that parallel operation of the 
transformer is quite important and desirable under certain circumstances.
The satisfactory and successful operation of transformers connected in parallel on both sides requires that 
they fulﬁl the following conditions:
 
(i) The transformers must be connected properly as far as their polarities are concerned so that the net 
voltage around the local loop is zero. A wrong polarity connection results in a dead short circuit.
 (ii) Three-phase transformers must have zero relative phase displacement on the secondary sides and 
must be connected in a proper phase sequence. Only the transformers of the same phase group can be 
paralleled. For example, Y/Y and Y/D transformers cannot be paralleled as their secondary voltages 
will have a phase difference of 30°. Transformers with +30° and –30° phase shift can, however, be 
paralleled by reversing the phase-sequence of one of them. 
 (iii) The transformers must have the same voltage-ratio to avoid no-load circulating current when 
transformers are in parallel on both primary and secondary sides. Since the leakage impedance is low, 
even a small voltage difference can give rise to considerable no-load circulating current and extra I2R 
loss.
 (iv) There should exist only a limited disparity in the per-unit impedances (on their own bases) of the 
transformers. The currents carried by two transformers (also their kVA loadings) are proportional 
to their ratings if their ohmic impedances (or their pu impedances on a common base) are inversely 
proportional to their ratings or their per unit impedances on their own ratings are equal. The ratio 
of equivalent leakage reactance to equivalent resistance should be the same for all the transformers. 
A difference in this ratio results in a divergence of the phase angle of the two currents, so that one 
transformer will be operating with a higher, and the other with a lower power factor than that of the 
total output; as a result, the given active load is not proportionally shared by them. 
Parallel Transformers on No-load
The parallel operation of transformers can be easily 
conceived on a per phase basis. Figure 3.59 shows 
two transformers paralleled on both sides with proper 
polarities but on no-load. The primary voltages V1 
and V2 are obviously equal. If the voltage-ratio of 
the two transformers are not identical, the secondary 
induced emf’s, E1 and E2 though in phase will not 
be equal in magnitude and the difference (E1 – E2) 
will appear across the switch S. When secondaries 
are paralleled by closing the switch, a circulating 
current appears even though the secondaries are 
not supplying any load. The circulating current will 
V1
Primary
Secondary
Load
1
2
S
E1
ZL
V2
E2
Fig. 3.59

Transformers 
117
depend upon the total leakage impedance of the two transformers and the difference in their voltage ratios. 
Only a small difference in the voltage-ratios can be tolerated.  
Equal voltage-ratios 
When the transformers have equal voltage ratio, E1 = E2 
in Fig. 3.59, the equivalent circuit of the two transformers 
would then be as shown in Fig. 3.60 on the assumption that 
the exciting current can be neglected in comparison to the 
load current. It immediately follows from the sinusoidal 
steady-state circuit analysis that  
 
I1 = 
Z
Z
Z IL
2
1
2
+
 
(3.83) 
and 
I2  = 
Z
Z
Z IL
1
1
2
+
 
(3.84) 
Of course 
I
I
1
2
+
 = IL  
(3.85) 
Taking VL  as the reference phasor and deﬁning complex 
power as V
I
*
, the multiplication of VL*  on both sides of 
Eqs (3.83) and (3.84) gives 
 
S1  = 
Z
Z
Z SL
2
1
2
+
 
(3.86)
 
S2  = 
Z
Z
Z SL
1
1
2
+
 
(3.87)
where 
S1  = VL* I1
 
S2  = VL* I2
 
SL  = VL* IL
These are phasor relationships giving loadings in the magnitude and phase angle. Equations (3.86) and 
(3.87) also hold for pu loads and leakage impedances if all are expressed with reference to a common base. 
It is seen from Eqs (3.83) and (3.84) that the individual currents are inversely proportional to the respective 
leakage impedances. Thus, if the transformers are to divide the total load in proportion to their kVA ratings, it 
is necessary that the leakage impedances be inversely proportional to the respective kVA ratings, i.e. 
 
Z
Z
1
2
 = S
S
2
1
(
)
(
)
rated
rated  
(3.88)
This condition is independent of the power factor of the total load. The condition of Eq. (3.88) can be 
written as 
 
Z
Z
1
2
 = V I
V I
L
L
2
1
(
)
(
)
rated
rated
V1
Z1
I1
Z2
I2
IL
ZL
VL
Fig. 3.60

118 Electric Machines
or 
Z I
VL
1 1(
)
rated  = Z I
VL
2 2(
)
rated
or 
Z1(pu) = Z2 (pu); on own rating 
(3.89) 
It means that if individual transformer loadings are to be in the ratio of their respective kVA ratings, their 
pu impedances (on their own ratings) should be equal. If 
 
Z1 < Z2
S
S
2
1
(
)
(
)
rated
rated  
(3.90a)
the transformer 1 will be the ﬁrst to reach its rated loading as the total kVA load is raised. The maximum 
permissible kVA loading of the two in parallel without overloading anyone is then given by 
 
S1(rated) = 
Z
Z
Z
2
1
2
|
|
+
SL(max) 
or 
SL(max) = S1(rated) |
|
Z
Z
Z
1
2
2
+
 
(3.90b) 
Similarly if 
 
Z2 < Z1
S
S
1
2
(
)
(
)
rated
rated  
(3.91a)
then 
SL(max) = S2(rated) |
|
Z
Z
Z
1
2
1
+
 
(3.91b) 
In either case (Eq. (3.90a) or (3.91a)) 
 
SL(max) < S1(rated) + S2(rated) 
(3.92)
Unequal Voltage Ratios 
It has already been mentioned that a small difference in voltage ratios can be tolerated in the parallel operation 
of transformers. Let E1 and E2 be the no-load secondary emfs of two transformers in parallel. With reference 
to Fig. 3.58, if a load current IL  is drawn at voltage VL , two mesh voltage balance equations can be written 
as 
 
E1  = I Z
I Z
I Z
I
I
Z
L
L
L
1 1
1 1
1
2
+
+
+
=
(
)
 
(3.93)
and 
E2  = I Z
I Z
I Z
I
I
Z
L
L
L
2
2
2
2
1
2
+
+
+
=
(
)
 
(3.94)
\ 
E
E
1
2
-
 = I Z
I Z
1 1
2
2
-
 
(3.95) 
On no-load IL  = 0, so that the circulating current between the two transformers is given by 
 
I1 = -
-
+
I
E
E
Z
Z
2
1
2
1
2
=
 
(3.96) 
On short-circuit 
I1 = E
Z
I
E
Z
1
1
2
2
2
,
=
 
(3.97)
On loading 
I1 = (
)
E
E
I Z
Z
1
2
2
2
1
-
+

Transformers 
119
Substituting for I1: in Eq. (3.94) we get 
 
E2  = I Z
E
E
I Z
Z
I
ZL
2
2
1
2
2
2
1
2
+
-
+
+
È
Î
Í
˘
˚
˙
(
)
\ 
I2  = E Z
E
E
Z
Z Z
Z
Z
Z
L
L
2
1
1
2
1
2
1
2
-
-
+
+
(
)
(
)  
(3.98)
Similarly 
I1 = E Z
E
E
Z
Z Z
Z
Z
Z
L
L
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
-
-
+
+
(
)
(
)  
(3.99) 
Normally E1  and E2  are in phase or their phase difference is insigniﬁcant. Severe results of paralleling 
transformers not belonging to the same phase-groups (say Y/Y and Y/D transformers) are immediately 
obvious from Eq. (3.96) for no-load circulating current. When many transformers are in parallel, their load 
sharing can be found out using the Millman theorem [2].
EXAMPLE 3.24 A 600-kVA, single-phase transformer with 0.012 pu resistance and 0.06 pu reactance is 
connected in parallel with a 300-kVA transformer with 0.014 pu resistance and 0.045 pu reactance to share 
a load of 800 kVA at 0.8 pf lagging. Find how they share the load (a) when both the secondary voltages are 
440 V and (b) when the open-circuit secondary voltages are respectively 445 V and 455 V. 
SOLUTION
 
(a) The pu impedances expressed on a common base of 600 kVA are
 
  
Z1  = 0.012 + j 0.06 = 0.061 –79°
 
  
Z2  = 2(0.014 + j 0.045) = 0.094 –73°
 
  
Z
Z
1
2
+
 = 0.04 + j 0.15 = 0.155 –75°
 
 The load is
 
  
SL  = 800(0.8 – j 0.6) = 800 ––37° kVA
 
 From Eqs (3.86) and (3.87)
 
  
S1  = 800 – –37° ¥ 0 094
73
0 155
75
.
.
–
∞
–
∞ = 485 ––39° = 377 – j 305.2
 
  
S2  = 800 ––37° ¥ 0 061 79
0 155
75
.
.
–
∞
–
∞ = 315 ––33° = 264 – j171.6
 
  It may be noted that the transformers are not loaded in proportion to their ratings. At a total load of 800 kVA, 
the 300 kVA transformer operates with 5% overload because of its pu impedance (on common kVA base) being 
less than twice that of the 600 kVA transformer.
 
  The maximum kVA load the two transformers can feed in parallel without any one of them getting overloaded 
can now be determined. From above it is observed that the 300 kVA transformer will be the ﬁrst to reach its full-
load as the total load is increased. In terms of magnitudes
 
  
0 061
0 155
.
.
SL(max) = S2(rated) = 300 kVA
 
 \ 
SL(max) = 300
0 155
0 061
¥ .
.
 = 762.3 kV A
 
 while the sum of the ratings of the two transformers is 900 kVA. This is consequence of the fact that the transformer 
impedances (on common base) are not in the inverse ratio of their ratings.

120 Electric Machines
 
(b) In this case it is more convenient to work with actual ohmic impedances. Calculating the impedances referred to 
secondary
 
  
Z1 (actual) = (0.012 + j 0.06) ¥ 
440
600
1000
440
¥
 = 0.0039 + j 0.0194
 
  
 = 0.0198 –79°
 
  
Z2 (actual) = (0.028 + j 0.09) ¥ 
440
600
1000
440
¥
 = 0.009 + j 0.029
 
  
 = 0.0304 –73°
 
  
Z
Z
1
2
+
 = 0.0129 + j 0.0484 = 0.05 –75°
 
 The load impedance ZL  must also be estimated. Assuming an output voltage on load of 440 V,
 
  
V I
L
L
*
 ¥ 10–3 = (
/
)
V
Z
L
L
2
 ¥ 10–3 = 800 ––37°
 
 \ 
ZL  = 
(
)
440
800
10
37
2
3
¥
– -
∞
 = 0.242 –37°
 
  
 = 0.1936 + j 0.1452
 
 From Eqs (3.98) and (3.99)
 
  
I1  = 
445
0 0304
73
10
0 242
37
0 0198
79
0 0304
73
0 242
37
¥
–
∞-
¥
–
∞
–
∞¥
–
∞+
–
∞
.
.
.
.
.
¥
–
∞
0 05
75
.
 
  
 = 940 ––34° A
 
  
I2  = 
445
0 0198
79
10
0 242
37
0 0198
79
0 0304
73
0 242
37
-
–
∞-
¥
–
∞
–
∞¥
–
∞+
–
∞
.
.
.
.
.
¥
–
∞
0 05
75
.
 
  
 = 883 ––44° A
 
 The corresponding kV As are
 
  
S1  = 440 ¥ 940 ¥ 10–3 ––34° = 413.6 ––34°
 
  
S2  = 440 ¥ 883 ¥ 10–3 ––4444° = 388 ––44°
 
 The total output power will be
 
  
413.6 cos 34° + 388 cos 44° = 621.5 kW
 
 This is about 3% less than 800 ¥ 0.8 = 640 kW required by the load because of the assumption of the value of the 
output voltage in order to calculate the load impedance.
 
 The secondary circulating current on no-load is
 
  
(
)
|
|
E
E
Z
Z
1
2
1
2
-
+
 = -10
0 05
.
 = – 200 A
 
 which corresponds to about 88 kVA and a considerable waste as copper-loss.
Transformers may be built with a third winding, called the tertiary, in addition to the primary and secondary. 
Various purposes which dictate the use of a tertiary winding are enumerated below:
 
(i) To supply the substation auxiliaries at a voltage different from those of the primary and secondary 
windings.

Transformers 
121
 (ii) Static capacitors or synchronous condensers may be connected to the tertiary winding for reactive 
power injection into the system for voltage control.
 (iii) A delta-connected tertiary reduces the impedance offered to the zero sequence currents thereby 
allowing a larger earth-fault current to ﬂow for proper operation of protective equipment. Further, it 
limits voltage imbalance when the load is unbalanced. It also permits the third harmonic current to 
ﬂow thereby reducing third-harmonic voltages.
 (iv) Three windings may be used for interconnecting three transmission lines at different voltages.
 (v) Tertiary can serve the purpose of measuring voltage of an HV testing transformer. 
When used for purpose (iii) above the tertiary winding is called a stabilizing winding. 
The star/star transformer comprising single-phase units or a single unit with a 5-limb core offers high 
reactance to the ﬂow of unbalanced load between the line and neutral. Any unbalanced load can be divided 
into three 3-phase sets (positive, negative and zero sequence components). The zero-sequence component 
(cophasal currents on three lines, I0 = In/3) caused by a line-to-neutral load on the secondary side cannot 
be balanced by primary currents as the zero-sequence currents cannot ﬂow in the isolated neutral star-
connected primary. The zero-sequence currents on the secondary side therefore set up magnetic ﬂux 
in the core. Iron path is available for the zero sequence ﬂux* in a bank of single-phase units and in 
the 5-limb core and as a consequence the impedance offered to the zero-sequence currents is very high 
(0.5 to 5 pu) inhibiting the ﬂow of these currents. The provision of a delta-connected tertiary permits the 
circulation of zero-sequence currents in it, thereby considerably reducing the zero-sequence impedance. 
This is illustrated in Fig. 3.61. 
0
I0
0
0
Stabilizing
tertiary winding
I0
I0
I0
I
l
n
3 0
=
Fig. 3.61
Equivalent Circuit 
The equivalent circuit of a 3-winding transformer can be represented by the single-phase equivalent circuit 
of Fig. 3.62 wherein each winding is represented by its equivalent resistance and reactance. All the values 
are reduced to a common rating base and respective voltage bases. The subscripts 1, 2 and 3 indicate the 
primary, secondary and tertiary respectively. For simplicity, the effect of the exciting current is ignored in the 
equivalent circuit. It may be noted that the load division between the secondary and tertiary is completely 
 
* In a 3-limb core the zero-sequence ﬂux (directed upwards or downwards in all the limbs) must return through the 
air path, so that only a small amount of this ﬂux can be established; hence a low zero-sequence reactance. 

122 Electric Machines
arbitrary. Three external circuits are connected between terminals 1, 2 and 3 respectively and the common 
terminal labelled 0. Since the exciting current is neglected, I
I
I
1
2
3
+
+
 = 0.
I1
1
+
–
Common 0
A
3
2
+
+
–
–
V1
Z1
Z2
l2
Z3
l3
V3
V2
Fig. 3.62
The impedance of Fig. 3.62 can be readily obtained from three simple short-circuit tests. If Z12  indicates 
the SC impedance of windings 1 and 2 with winding 3 open, then from the equivalent circuit, 
 
Z12  = Z
Z
1
2
+
 
(3.100)
Similarly 
Z23  = Z
Z
2
3
+
 
(3.101)
 
Z13 = Z
Z
1
3
+
 
(3.102)
where 
Z23  = SC impedance of windings 2 and 3 with winding 1 open.
 
Z13 = SC impedance of windings 1 and 3 with winding 2 open.
All the impedances are referred to a common base.
Solving Eq. (3.100) to Eq. (3.102) yields 
 
Z1 = 1
2
12
13
23
(
)
Z
Z
Z
+
-
 
(3.103)
 
Z2  = 1
2
23
12
13
(
)
Z
Z
Z
+
-
 
(3.104)
 
Z3  = 1
2
13
23
12
(
)
Z
Z
Z
+
-
 
(3.105)
The open-circuit test can be performed on anyone of the three windings to determine the core-loss, 
magnetizing impedance and turn-ratio.
EXAMPLE 3.25 The primary, secondary and tertiary windings of a 50-Hz, single-phase, 3-winding 
transformer are rated as 6.35 kV, 5 MVA; 1.91 kV, 2.5 MVA; 400 V, 2.5 MVA respectively. Three SC tests on 
this transformer yielded the following results:
 
(i) Secondary shorted, primary excited: 500 V, 393.7 A
 (ii) Tertiary shorted, primary excited: 900 V, 393.7 A
 (iii) Tertiary shorted, secondary excited: 231 V, 21 312.1 A
Resistances are to be ignored. 
 (a) Find the pu values of the equivalent circuit impedances of the transformer on a 5 MVA, rated voltage 
base.

Transformers 
123
 (b) Three of these transformers are used in a 15 MVA, Y-Y-D, 3-phase bank to supply 3.3 kV and 400 V 
auxiliary power circuits in a generating plant. Calculate the pu values of steady-state short-circuit 
currents and of the voltage at the terminals of the secondary windings for a 3-phase balanced short-
circuit at the tertiary terminals. Use 15 MVA, 3-phase rated voltage base. 
SOLUTION
 
(a) Let us ﬁrst convert the SC data to pu on 5 MVA base/phase.
 
 For primary, 
VB = 6.35 kV
 
  
IB = 5000
6 35
.
 = 787.4 A
 
 For secondary, 
VB = 1.91 kV
 
  
IB = 5000
1 91
.
 = 2617.8A
 
 Converting the given test data to pu yields:
Test No.
Windings involved
V
I
1
2
3
P and S
P and T
S and T
0.0787
0.1417
0.1212
0.5
0.5
0.5
 
 From tests 1,2 and 3, respectively. 0.0787
 
  
X12 = 0 0787
0 5
.
.
 = 0.1574 pu
 
  
X13 = 0 1417
0 5
.
.
 = 0.2834
 
  
X23 = 0 1212
0 5
.
.
 = 0.2424 pu
 
 From (3.103) – (3.105)
 
  
X1 = 0.5(0.1574 + 0.2834 – 0.2424) = 0.0992 pu
 
  
X2 = 0.5(0.2424 + 0.1574 – 0.2834) = 0.05825 pu
 
  
X3 = 0.5(0.2834 + 0.2424 – 0.1574) = 0.1842 pu
 
(b) The base line-to-line voltage for the Y-connected primaries is 
3  ¥ 6.35 = 11 kV, i.e. the bus voltage is 1 pu. 
From Fig. 3.62, for a short-circuit at the terminals of the tertiary, V3 = 0. Then
 
  
ISC = 
V
X
X
1
1
3
+
 = V
X
1
13
 = 1 00
0 2834
.
.
 = 3.53 pu
 
  
SC current primary side = 3.53 ¥ 787.4 = 2779.5 A
 
  
SC current tertiary side = 3.53 ¥ 5000
1000
¥
400
3
/
 = 76424 A (line current)
 
 Neglecting the voltage drops due to the secondary load current, the secondary terminal voltage is the voltage at 
the junction point A (Fig. 3.63), i.e
 
  
VA = ISC X3 = 3.53 ¥ 0.1842 = 0.6502 pu
 
  
VA(actual) = 0.6502 ¥ 1.91
3  = 2.15 kV (line-to-line) 

124 Electric Machines
V1
0.0992
0.05825
0.1842
A
lsc
V3 = 0
V2
Fig. 3.63
3.16 
PHASE CONVERSION
Phase conversion from three to two phase is needed in special cases, such as in supplying 2-phase electric 
arc furnaces.
The concept of 3/2-phase conversion follows from the voltage phasor diagram of balanced 3-phase 
supply shown in Fig. 3.64(b). If the point M midway on VBC could be located, then VAM leads VBC by 90°. A 
2-phase supply could thus be obtained by means of transformers; one connected across AM, called the teaser 
transformer and the other connected across the lines B and C. Since VAM = (
3 /2) VBC, the transformer 
primaries must have 
3 N1/2 (teaser) and N1 turns; this would mean equal voltage/turn in each transformer. 
A balanced 2-phase supply could then be easily obtained by having both secondaries with equal number of 
turns, N2. The point M is located midway on the primary of the transformer connected across the lines B and 
C. The connection of two such transformers, known as the Scott connection, is shown in Fig. 3.64(a), while 
the phasor diagram of the 2-phase supply on the secondary side is shown in Fig. 3.64(c). 
The neutral point on the 3-phase side, if required, could be located at the point N which divides the primary 
winding of the teaser in the ratio 1 : 2 (refer Fig. 3.64(b)).
A
a2
lA
lA
la
Va
lA/2
lA l2
lC
N l
1 2
N l
1 2
IBC
b2
b1
N2
Vb
Va
Vb
N
N2
a1
lB
+
–
B
M
C
C
–
+
(a)
(b)
A
N
M
B
(c)
3 N1/2
Ib
Fig. 3.64 Scott connection 

Transformers 
125
Load Analysis
If the secondary load currents are Ia  and Ib, the currents can be easily found on the 3-phase side from 
Fig. 3.64(a). 
 
I A  = 2
3
2
1
N
N
Ia  = 2
3
Ia (for N1/N2 = 1)
 
IBC  = N
N I
I
b
b
2
1
=
 (for N1/N2 = 1)
 
IB  = I
I
BC
A
-
/2
 
IC  = – I
I
BC
A
-
/2
The corresponding phasor diagram for balanced secondary side load of unity power factor is drawn 
in Fig. 3.65 from which it is obvious that the currents drawn from the 3-phase system are balanced and 
cophasal with the star voltages. The phasor diagram for the case of an unbalanced 2-phase load is drawn 
in Fig. 3.66. 
–lBC
–lAl2
lC
lb
Vb
Va
la
l
= 1
BC
A
B
C
1
1
3
IA = 2
3
–
= 1/
IA/2
3
= 2/
1+1/3
IB =
Fig. 3.65
A
–lBC
lA
lC
IB
IBC
lA/2
Va
la
fa
fb
Vb
lb
C
B
–lA/2
Fig. 3.66
 

126 Electric Machines
Three/One-phase Conversion 
A single-phase power pulsates at twice the frequency, while the total power drawn by a balanced 3-phase 
load is constant. Thus a 1-phase load can never be transferred to a 3-phase system as a balanced load without 
employing some energy-storing device (capacitor, inductor or rotating machine). Suitable transformer 
connections can be used in distributing a 1-phase load on all the three phases though not in a balanced 
fashion. For large 1-phase loads, this is better than allowing it to load one of the phases of a 3-phase system. 
A variety of transformer connections are possible. Figure 3.67(a) shows how Scott-connected transformers 
could be used for this purpose and Fig. 3.67(b) shows the corresponding phasor diagram. 
B
A
C
V
l
(a)
VB
lBC = 1
–
= 1
lBC
(b)
Va
A
B
C
l = 1
V
3 – 1
3
2
3
I
I
3 + 1
3
I
3 – 1
3
I
=
1
3
IB = 1 –
3 + 1
3
=
1
3
IC = 1 +
2
3
IA =
Fig. 3.67
 
Three Phase/Six-phase Conversion 
Each secondary phase is divided into two equal halves with polarity labelling as in Fig. 3.50. Six-phase 
voltages (characteristic angle 360°/6 = 60°) are obtained by means of two stars in phase opposition, each 
star being formed from three respective half-windings as shown in Fig. 3.68. This connection is employed in 
rectiﬁers and thyristor circuits where a path for the dc current is needed. 
C
B2
C2
A2
B
A
c4
a1
b1
a4
b4
c1
Fig. 3.68
 
EXAMPLE 3.26 Two single-phase furnaces A and B are supplied at 100 V by means of a Scott-connected 
transformer combination from a 3-phase 6600 V system. The voltage of furnace A is leading. Calculate the 
line currents on the 3-phase side, when the furnace A takes 400 kW at 0.707 pf lagging and B takes 800 kW 
at unity pf. 

Transformers 
127
SOLUTION 
With reference to Fig. 3.64(a) 
 
N
N
1
2
 = 6600
100  = 66
\ 
3
2
1
2
N
N
 = 57.16
Furnace currents are 
 
Ia = 400
1000
100
0 707
¥
¥ .
 = 5658 A;  fa = 45° lagging 
 
Ib = 800
1000
100
1
¥
¥
 = 8000 A;  fb = 0° 
Furnace voltages and currents are drawn in the phasor diagram of Fig. 3.69(a). 
45°
IC
Va
la
lb
Vb
49.5A
45°
–
= 121.2
IBC
IA = 99A
IBC = 121.2
IB
45°
49.5 A
(b)
(a)
Fig. 3.69
On the 3-phase side 
 
IA = 5658
57 16
.
 = 99 A 
 
IBC = 8000
66  = 121.2 A 
From the phasor diagram of Fig. 3.69(b) 
 
IB  = 121.2 – 49.5(0.707 + j 0.707)
 
 = 86.2 – j 35 
or 
IB  = 93 A 
 
IC  = 121.2 + 49.5 (0.707 – j 0.707)
 
 = 156.2 – j 35 
or  
IC = 160 A
3.17 TAP CHANGING TRANSFORMERS 
Voltage variation in power systems is a normal phenomenon owing to the rapid growth of industries and 
distribution network. System voltage control is therefore essential for: 
 
(i) Adjustment of consumers’ terminal voltage within prescribed limits.

128 Electric Machines
 (ii) Control of real and reactive power ﬂow in the network.
 (iii) Periodical adjustment (1–10%) to check off-set load variations. 
Adjustment is normally carried out by off-circuit tap changing, the common range being 5% in 2.5% steps. 
Daily and short-time control or adjustment is carried out by means of on-load tap changing gear. 
Besides the above, tapping are also provided for one of the following purposes:
 
(i) For varying the secondary voltage.
 (ii) For maintaining the secondary voltage constant with a varying primary voltage.
 (iii) For providing an auxiliary secondary voltage for a special purpose, such as lighting.
 (iv) For providing a low voltage for starting rotating machines.
 (v) For providing a neutral point, e.g. for earthing.
The principal tapping is one to which the rating of the winding is related. A positive tapping means more, 
and a negative tapping implies less turns than those of the principal tap. Tap changing may be achieved in one 
of the three conditions, viz. 
 
(i) voltage variation with constant ﬂux and constant voltage turn,
 (ii) with varying ﬂux,
 (iii) a mix of (i) and (ii). In (i) the percentage tapping range is same as the voltage variation. 
Location 
The taps may be placed on the primary or secondary side which partly depends on construction. If tappings 
are near the line ends, fewer bushings insulators are required. If the tappings are placed near the neutral ends, 
the phase-to-phase insulation conditions are eased. 
For achieving large voltage variation, tappings should be placed near the centres of the phase windings 
to reduce magnetic asymmetry. However, this arrangement cannot be put on LV windings placed next to the 
core (as in core type transformer) because of accessibility and insulation considerations. The HV winding 
placed outside the LV winding is easily accessible and can, thus, be tapped easily. 
It is not possible to tap other than an integral number of turns and this may not be feasible with LV side 
tappings. For example 250 V phase winding with 15 V/turn cannot be tapped closer than 5%. It is therefore 
essential to tap the HV windings which is advantageous in a step-down transformer. 
Some of the methods of locating tappings are depicted in Fig. 3.70(a) and (b). 
(a) Taps at one end for small transformers
(b) Large transformer taps centrally placed for
both delta and star transformer
Fig. 3.70 
Location of transformer tappings 

Transformers 
129
Axial mmf unbalance is minimized by thinning out the LV winding or by arranging parts of the winding 
more symmetrically. For very large tapping ranges a special tapping coil may be employed. 
Tap changing causes changes in leakage reactance, core loss, I2R loss and perhaps some problems in 
parallel operation of dissimilar transformers. 
The cheapest method of changing the turn ratio of a transformer is the use of off-circuit tap changer. As the 
name indicates, it is required to deenergize the transformer before changing the tap. A simple no-load tap 
changer is shown in Fig. 3.71. It has eight studs marked one to eight. The winding is tapped at eight points. 
The face plate carrying the suitable studs can be mounted at a convenient place on the transformer such as 
upper yoke or located near the tapped positions on the windings. The movable contact arm A may be rotated 
by handwheel mounted externally on the tank.
If the winding is tapped at 2% intervals, then as the rotatable arm A is moved over to studs 1, 2; 2, 3; … 
…6, 7; 7, 8 the winding in circuit reduces progressively by it from 100% with arm at studs (1, 2) to 88% at 
studs (7, 8).
The stop F which ﬁxes the ﬁnal position of the arm A prevents further anticlockwise rotation so that stud 
1 and 8 cannot be bridged by the arm. Adjustment of tap setting is carried out with transformer deenergized. 
For example, for 94% tap the arm is brought in position to bridge studs 4 and 5. The transformer can then be 
switched on.
7
5
3
1
2
4
6
8
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
A
6
F
Fig. 3.71 
No-load tap changer 
To prevent unauthorized operation of an off-circuit tap changer, a mechanical lock is provided. Further, 
to prevent inadvertent operation, an electromagnetic latching device or microswitch is provided to open the 
circuit breaker so as to deenergize the transformer as soon as the tap changer handle is moved; well before 
the contact of the arm with the stud (with which it was in contact) opens. 

130 Electric Machines
On-load Tap Changing 
On-load tap changers are used to change the turn ratio of transformer to regulate system voltage while the 
transformer is delivering load. With the introduction of on-load tap changer, the operating efﬁciency of 
electrical system gets considerably improved. Nowadays almost all the large power transformers are ﬁtted 
with on-load tap changer. During the operation of an on-load tap changer the main circuit should not be 
opened to prevent (dangerous) sparking and no part of the tapped winding should get short-circuited. All 
forms of on-load tap changing circuits are provided with an impedance, which is introduced to limit short-
circuit current during the tap changing operation. The impedance can either be a resistor or centre-tapped 
reactor. The on-load tap changers can in general be classiﬁed as resistor or reactor type. In modern designs 
the current limiting is almost invariably carried out by a pair of resistors. 
On-load tap changing gear with resistor transition, in which one winding tap is changed over for each 
operating position, is depicted in Fig. 3.72. The ﬁgure also shows the sequence of operations during the 
transition from one tap to the next (adjoining) (in this case from tap 4 to tap 5). Back-up main contractors are 
provided which short-circuit the resistor for normal operation. 
6
r1
5
4
3
1
2
r2
l
l
Diverter
switch
(a) Tap 4
r1
r2
5
4
l
l
(b) Tap 4 and r1
(c) Taps 4 and 5
5
4
l
i
/2 –
l
i
/2 +
i
l
5
l
l
(d) Tap 5 and r2
l
(e) Tap 5
5
l
r2
r2
Fig. 3.72 Simple switching sequence for on-load tap changing 
To ensure that the transition once started gets completed, an energy storage (usually a spring device) is 
provided which acts even if the auxiliary power supply happens to fail. In resistor-aided tap changing the 
current break is made easier by the fact that the short-circuit resistor causes the current to be opened to have 
unity power factor. 
On-load tap changer control gear can be from simple push-button initiation to complex automatic control 
of several transformers operating in parallel. The aim is to maintain a given voltage level within a speciﬁed 
tolerance or to raise it with load to compensate for the transmission line voltage drop. The main components 
are an automatic voltage regulator, a time delay relay, and compounding elements. The time delay prevents 

Transformers 
131
unwanted initiation of a tap change by a small transient voltage ﬂuctuation. It may be set for a delay upto 
1 min. 
At present tap changers are available for the highest insulation level of 1475 kV (peak) impulse and  
630 kV power frequency voltage. Efforts are underway to develop tap changers suitable for still higher 
insulation levels. More compact tap changers with high reliability and performance are being made by 
employing vacuum switches in the diverter switch. Also, now thyristorized tap changers are available for 
special applications where a large number of operations are desired. 
3.18 VOLTAGE AND CURRENT TRANSFORMERS 
These transformers are designed to meet the speciﬁc need of measurement and instrumentation systems, 
which accept voltages in the range of 0–120 V and currents upto 5 A. Power system voltages can be as high 
as 750 kV and currents upto several tens of kA. Their measurement requires accurate ratio voltage and current 
transformations, which is accomplished by potential and current transformers.
Potential Transformer (PT) 
It must transform the input voltage accurately to output voltage both in magnitude and phase. The impedance 
presented by the instrument on measurement system to the transformer output terminals is called burden. It 
is mainly resistive in nature and has a large value, e.g. the impedance (practically a resistance) of a voltmeter. 
The circuit model of a PT is drawn in Fig. 3.73. It is the same as that of an ordinary transformer but ideally 
should have
 
V
V
1
2
 = N
N
1
2
 – 0°
l2
V1
V2
I1
R1
X1
R¢2
X¢2
N
N
1
2
:
Xm
Zb
(burden)
Fig. 3.73 Circuit model of a PT 
The current drawn by the burden causes a voltage drop in (R¢2 + j X¢2) and this current referred to primary 
plus the magnetizing current (all phasors) causes a voltage drop in (R1 + j X1). Therefore V V
2
1
/
 differs 
from the desired value (N1/N2) in magnitude and phase resulting in magnitude and phase errors. The errors 
are to be kept within the limit deﬁned by the precision required. In order to achieve this a PT is designed 
and constructed to have low leakage reactance, low loss and high magnetizing reactance (low magnetizing 
current).
Low reactance is achieved by interlacing primary and secondary both on core limb. High magnetizing 
reactance requires minimum iron path and high permeability steel. Low loss requires low-loss steel and very 
thin laminations. 
Most important thing for low PT errors is to make the burden (Zb) as high as feasible.

132 Electric Machines
Current Transformer (CT) 
It is the current ratio transformer meant for measuring large currents and provide a step down current to 
current measuring instruments like an ammeter. Such instruments present a short-circuit to the CT secondary. 
It means that burden Zb ª 0. An ideal CT current ratio is 
 
I
I
2
1
 = N
N
1
2
–0° 
Causes of CT errors and their remedy are the same as for a PT discussed earlier in this section. 
In power system applications CT has a single-turn primary which 
is the line itself as shown in Fig. 3.74. The secondary is rated 1–5 A.
The burden impedance (which in fact is practically resistive) 
cannot be allowed to exceed beyond a limit. Most important 
precaution in use of a CT is that in no case should it be open 
circuited (even accidently). As the primary current is independent 
of the secondary current, all of it acts as a magnetizing current when 
the secondary is opened. This results in deep saturation of the core 
which cannot be returned to the normal state and so the CT is no 
longer usable.  
EXAMPLE 3.27 A 250 A/5 A, 50 Hz current transformer has the following parameters as seen on 250 A 
side
 
X1 = 505 mW, 
X¢2 = 551 mW,   Xm = 256 mW
 
R1 = 109 mW, 
R¢2 = 102 mW
 (a) The primary is fed a current of 250 A with secondary shorted. Calculate the magnitude and phase of 
the secondary current.
 (b) Repeat part (a) when the secondary is shorted through a resistance of 200 mW.
SOLUTION 
 
(a) The equivalent circuit with secondary shorted is drawn in Fig. 3.75.
I1
R1
X1
R¢2
X¢2
I¢2
Xm
N
N
2
1
=250
5
= 50
Fig. 3.75
 
 By current division
 
  
¢I2  = 
j X
R
j X
j X
m
m
¢ +
¢ +
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
2
2
I1
Line
current
A
Burden
Fig. 3.74 Current transformer for 
power-line current

Transformers 
133
 
  
I1  = 250 –0° A
 
  
¢I2  = 
j
j
256
10
109
551
256
10
3
3
¥
+
+
¥
(
)
 ¥ 256
 
  
¢I2  = 
j 256
256 51 89 975
.
.
–
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  ¥ 250 A
 
  
I2  = 
j 256
256 5
89 975
.
.
–
∞ ¥ 5; I2 = 
N
N
1
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ I¢2 = 1
50  ¥ 250° = 5 A
 
  
I2 = 4.989 A phase = 0.025° (negligible)
 
  
Error = 5
4 989
5
- .
 ¥ 100 = 0.22 %
 
(b)  
R¢b = 200 mW in series with R¢2, X¢2, Rb = 
1
50
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  ¥ 200 = 0.08 mW
 
  
¢I2  = 
j
j
256
10
109
0 08
551
256
10
3
3
¥
+
+
+
¥
(
.
)
(
)
 ¥ 250 A
 
  
¢I2  = 
256
90
256 551 89 975
–
∞
–
∞
.
.
 ¥ 5 = 4.989 –0.025°
 
 No change as R¢b = 0.08 mW is negligible
EXAMPLE 3.28 A 6000 V/100 V, 50 Hz potential transformer has the following parameters as seen from 
HV side.
 
R1 = 780 W 
X1 = 975 W   Xm = 443 kW
 
R¢2 = 907 W 
X ¢2 = 1075 W 
 (a) The primary is excited at 6500 V and the secondary is left open. Calculate the secondary voltage, 
magnitude and phase.
 (b) The secondary is loaded with 1 k W resistance, repeat part (a)
 (c) The secondary is loaded with 1 k W reactance, repeat part (a)
SOLUTION 
The potentiometer equivalent circuit as seen from HV side is drawn on Fig. 3.76.
Turn ratio, N
N
1
2
 = 6000
1000  = 60
 (a) Secondary open; 
Zb = 
 
  
V1 = 6500 V
 
  
V ¢2 = 
j X
R
j X
m
1
1
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ V1
 
  
V¢2 = 
j
j
443
10
780
443
10
3
3
¥
+
¥
 ¥ 6500
 
  
V¢2 = 1 –0.1° ¥ 6500 = 6500 –0.1° V
 
  
V2 = 6500 ¥ 
N
N
2
1
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = 108 V, –0.1°

134 Electric Machines
 
(b)  
Zb = Rb = 1 kW, R¢b = (60)2 ¥ 1 = 3600 kW
 
 As R¢b is far larger than R¢2 and X¢2, we can ignore R¢2, X¢2
 
 Then
 
  
Zm  = jXm || R¢b
 
  
Zm  = 
j
j
443
3600
3600
443
¥
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = 439.7 –83° = 53.6 + j 436.4 kW
 
  
(R1 + j X1) + Zm  = (0.78 + j 0.975) + (53.6 + j 436.4)
 
  
 = 54.38 + j 473.4 = 440.77 –82.9° kW
 
  
Vm  = 
Z
R
j X
Z
m
m
(
)
1
1
+
+
È
Î
Í
˘
˚
˙ V1
 
  
Vm  = 
439 7
83
440 77
82 9
.
.
.
–
∞
–
∞
È
Î
Í
˘
˚
˙  ¥ 6500 = 6484 –0.1°
 
  
¢
V2  = Vm  = 6484 –0.1° V
 
  
V2 = 6484
60
 = 108.07 V ; phase 0.1°
 
  
Exact value should be 6500
60
 = 108.33
 
  
Error = 108 33
108 07
108 33
.
.
.
-
 = 0.26% 
 
(c)  
Zb  = jXb ; Xb = 1 kW
 
  
¢
Zb  = j 3600 kW
 
 Ignoring R¢2, X¢2 in comparison
 
  
Zm  = j 443 || j 3600 = j 443
3600
443
3600
¥
+
 = j 394.45 kW
 
  
(R1 + jX1) + Zm  = (0.78 + j 0.975) + j 394.45 = 0.78 + j 395.425
 
  
 = 395.426 –89.89°
V1
+
–
R1
X1
Vm
R¢2
X¢2
Xm
+
–
V¢2
Z¢b
Zm
Fig.3.76

Transformers 
135
 
  
¢
V2  = Vm  = 
394 45
90
395 426
89 89
.
.
.
–
∞
–
 ¥ 6500 = 6484 –0.01°
 
  
V2 = 6484
60
 = 108.07, phase 0.01°
 
 V2 is same as in resistive load (part (b) except for change in phase. In any case phase is almost zero.
It is used at the output stage of audio frequency electronic ampliﬁer for matching the load to the output 
impedance of the power ampliﬁer stage. Here the load is ﬁxed but the frequency is variable over a band 
(audio, 20 Hz to 20 kHz), the response being the ratio V2/V1. A ﬂat frequency response over the frequency 
band of interest is most desirable. The corresponding phase angle (angle of V2 w.r.t. V1) is called phase 
response. A small angle is acceptable.
The transformer is used in electronic circuits (control, communication, measurement etc.) for stepping up 
the voltage or impedance matching. They are normally small in size and have iron cores. It is essential that 
distortion should be as low as possible. 
Figure 3.77 shows the exact circuit model of a 
transformer with frequency variable over a wide range. 
Here the magnetizing shunt branch is drawn between 
primary and secondary impedances (resistance and 
leakage reactance). Also represented is the shunting 
effect of transformer windings stray capacitance Cs. 
In the intermediate frequency (IF) range the shunt 
branch acts like an open circuit and series impedance 
drop is also negligibly small such that V2/V1 remains 
ﬁxed (ﬂat response) as in Fig. 3.77. 
IF
range
V lV
2
1
LF
range
HF
range
Phase angle
2
10
50
100
log f
103
104
105
0
Fig. 3.78
/V
In the LF (low frequency) region the magnetizing susceptance is low and draws a large current with a 
consequent large voltage drop in (r1 + jwL1). As a result V2/V1 drops sharply to zero as Bm = 0 (Fig. 3.78). In 
the HF (high frequency) region Bs = 1/w Cs (stray capacitance susceptance) has a strong shunting effect and 
V2/V1 drops off as in Fig. 3.78, which shows the complete frequency response of a transformer on logarithmic 
frequency scale. 
+
–
IT
+
–
Load
r1
wL1
r¢2
w ¢
L 2
V1
Gi
Bs
B
L
m
m
w
=
B
C
s
s
w
= 1/
I0
V2
Fig. 3.77

136 Electric Machines
3.20 GROUNDING TRANSFORMER 
In case the neutral of the power transformer is not available for grounding (e.g. when a D-D transformer is 
used), a special Y-D transformer is employed only for neutral grounding as shown in Fig. 3.79(a). Such a 
transformer is called a grounding transformer and it is a step down transformer. The star connected primaries 
are connected to the system and its neutral is grounded. The secondaries are in delta and generally do not 
supply any load but provide a closed path for triplen harmonic currents to circulate in them. Under balanced 
conditions the current in a grounding transformer is its own exciting current. Under fault conditions (such 
as LG fault) large current may ﬂow in it. Hence a grounding transformer should be of sufﬁcient rating to 
withstand the effects of LG (line to ground) faults. Transformers with ‘zigzag’ connection are sometimes 
employed as grounding transformers as shown in Fig. 3.78(b).
R
B
y
N
Y
N
R
B
 Fig. 3.79(a) Grounded transformer connections 
Fig. 3.79(b) Zig-zag grounding connections
Welding transformer is basically a step-down transformer with high reactance both in primary and secondary. 
Its primary and secondary winding are placed in separate limbs or in the same limbs but spaced distance 
apart. This high reactance causes steeply drooping V-I characteristics. That is with increase in current, the 
leakage ﬂux increase and the induced emf will come down. This is why the increase in primary or secondary 
current increases the reactance voltage drop across the respective windings, which is essential to limit the 
welding current as the weld is practically a short circuit. The schematic of a welding transformer is shown 
in Fig. 3.80.
Py
Sy
Electrodes
Fig. 3.80 Welding transformer

Transformers 
137
3.22 TRANSFORMER AS A MAGNETICALLY COUPLED CIRCUIT
In Sections 3.3, 3.4 and 3.5 the equivalent circuit of a transformer was developed in terms of primary and 
secondary resistances, leakage reactances, magnetizing shunt reactance, core loss shunt resistance and an 
ideal transformer. This development was through magnetizing current needed to setup core ﬂux and emf s 
induced in the winding by sinusoidally varying core ﬂux, the concept of the ideal transformer and representing 
core loss by an equivalent shunt resistance. The following section treats the transformer as mutually coupled 
circuit wherein voltages and currents are related in terms of resistances and inductances. Here the core 
is assumed to have constant permeability so the magnetic saturation is neglected. This model gives more 
physical meaning of equivalent circuit parameters, in terms of transformer magnetic ﬁeld.
A two winding transformer is shown in Fig. 3.81, where R1 and R2 are primary and secondary winding 
resistances.
R1
i1
R2
i2
fc1
+
–
+
–
fc2
fl2
N2
fl1
N1
v2
v1
Fig. 3.81 Two winding transformer
The primary current i1 into the dotted terminal produces
 
core ﬂux (mutual ﬂux) = fc1
 
leakage ﬂux = fl1
 
total ﬂux, f1 = fc1 + fl1
in the direction indicated. The secondary current i2 out of the dotted terminal produces
 
core ﬂux (mutual ﬂux) = fc2
 
leakage ﬂux = fl2
 
total ﬂux, f2 = fc2 + fl2
The core ﬂux fc2 is in apposite directions to fc1.
Then net core ﬂux due to i1 and i2 is f = fc1 – fc2
The primary and secondary windings have self inductances L1 and L2 and mutual inductance M. In a 
bilateral circuit
 
M12 = M21 = M refer Section 2.4 

138 Electric Machines
It can be easily proved as the core offers the same permeance to (N1i1) and (N2i2).
The transformer as a coupled circuit is drawn in Fig. 3.82(a). From the basic laws the kVL equations of 
primary and secondary are written below. 
Primary 
v1 = R1i1 + L1 di
dt
1  – M di
dt
2 ; minus sign results from the fact that
 
  
i2 ﬂows out of dotted terminal 
(3.106a)
Secondary 
v2 = M di
dt
1  – L2
di
dt
2  – R2i2  
(3.106b)
we will now refer the secondary side quantities to the primary side.
Turn ratio, 
a = N
N
1
2
then 
v¢2 = a v2
 
i¢2 = i
a
2
Equation (3.106(a)) is then written as
 
v1 = R1i1 + L1
di
dt
aM d
dt
i
a
1
2
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
Adding and subtracting aM di
dt
1 , we get
 
v1 = R1i1 + (L1 – aM) di
dt
aM d
dt i
i
a
1
1
2
+
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  
(3.107)
It is easily recognized that
 
i1 – i
a
2  = im, the core magnetizing current 
(3.108)
Converting secondary equation to primary side
 
av2 = aM di
dt
a L d
dt
i
a
a R
i
a
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ -
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  
(3.109)
Adding and subtracting aM d
dt
i
a
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ and reorganizing we get
 
v¢2 = av2 = aM d
dt i
i
a
a L
aM
d
dt
i
a
a R
i
a
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ -
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ -
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
(
)
 
(3.110)
From Eqs (3.107) and (3.110) the equivalent circuit is drawn in Fig. 3.82(b).

Transformers 
139
R1
i1
L1
M
R2
i2
L2
–
+
R1
i1
i2
a
aM
L – aM
1
a2L – aM
2
a R2
2
Ê
ˆ
-
Ë
¯
2
1
=
m
i
i
i
a
(a)
(b)
v1
v2 v1
v
= a
¢2
2
v
 
Fig. 3.82
We now need to recognize leakage inductance. Using the basic deﬁnitions 
 
L1 – aM = N
i
N
N
N
i
N
i
c
l
c
l
1
1
1
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
(
)
f
f
f
f
+
-
◊
=
 = l1
 
(a2L2 – aM) = a2 L
M
a
a
N
i
N
N
N
i
c
l
c
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
2
2
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ =
+
-
◊
È
ÎÍ
˘
˚˙
(
)
f
f
f
 
 = a
N
i
l
2
2
2
2
f
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = a2l2
 
aM = N
N
N
i
N
i
c
c
1
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
◊
=
f
f
 = Lm1
Equations (3.107) and (3.110) can now be written as 
 
v1 = R1i1 + li di
dt
L
di
dt
m
m
1
1
+
 
(3.111a)
 
av2 = Lm1
di
dt
a l
d
dt
i
a
a R
i
a
m -
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ -
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
2
2
2
2
2
2
 
(3.111b)
From these equations the equivalent circuit is drawn in Fig. 3.83. 
R1
l1
a2 l2
a2 R2
i2
a
+
–
v1
i1
im
Lm1
av2 = v ¢2
+
–
Fig. 3.83 Conductively coupled equivalent circuit of transformer 

140 Electric Machines
 Sinusoidal Applied Voltage When the sinusoidal applied voltage is considered, the equivalent leakage 
reactance X1 and X2 are equal to wl1 and wl2 respectively and magnetizing reactance Xm is equal to wLm1. The 
shunt resistance Rc is takes care of core losses and it is parallel with Xm. Now the equivalent circuit is shown 
in Fig. 3.84 is similar to Figure wherein voltages and currents are phasors.
R1
X1
R2¢
V1
I2/a
aV2 = V2¢
X2¢
I1
Ri
Xm
E1
+
–
Ii
Im
I0
Fig. 3.84 Equivalent circuit of a transformer with sinusoidal applied voltage
Induced emf in primary winding, E1 = XmIm = wLm1 Im
It may be noted that Ri has been connected in parallel to Xm to account for core loss.
 
Ri = E
Pi
1
2
For the coupled-circuit of Fig. 3.82(a), Eqs 3.106(a) and (b) take the form
 
V
R I
j L I
j MI
V
j MI
j L I
R I
1
1 1
1 1
2
2
2
2 2
2 2
=
=
+
-
-
-
¸
˝Ô
˛Ô
w
w
w
w
 
(3.112)
 It is a measure of leakage ﬂuxes in a magnetically coupled-circuit. We begin by 
deﬁning the coupling factor of each winding as
 
k = mutual flux due to winding current
total flux due to winding current  = f
f
c
The factor is less than unity as f = fc + fl.
For primary winding
 
k1 = f
f
c1
1
 = (
)/
(
)/
N
i
N
i
c
2
1
1
2 1
1
f
f
 
(i)
or 
k1 = 
M
N
N
N
i
2
1
1 1
1
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
f
 = 
N
N
M
L
1
2
1
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
(ii)

Transformers 
141
Similarly, 
k2 = 
N
N
M
L
2
1
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ ◊
Taking the geometric mean yields the coupling coefﬁcient as
 
k = 
k k
1 2  = 
M
L L
1 2
or 
M = k
L L
1 2 ; k < 1 
(iii)
For a tight coupling k = 1 as fc1 = f1 and fc2 = f2, no leakage. It follows from Eqs (i) and (ii) that 
 
N
N
M
L
1
2
1
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 = 
N
N
M
L
2
1
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
or 
N
N
1
2
 = 
L
L
1
2
 To reduce primary and secondary voltage drop leakage ﬂux of both 
winding should be kept low which would result in high M (tight coupling). The methods for reducing leakage 
ﬂux have already been discussed in Section 3.2. 
EXAMPLE 3.29 A transformer has turn ratio of a = 10. The results of two open-circuit tests conducted 
on the transformer are given below:
 (a) The primary on application of 200 V draws 4 A with secondary open circuited which is found to have 
a voltage of 1950 V.
 (b) The secondary on application of 2000 V draws 0.41 A with the primary open circuited.
Calculate L1 and L2 and coupling coefﬁcient. What is the voltage of primary in part (b).
SOLUTION
 
(a)  
Xm = 240
4  = 50 W, Xm = 2p f L1
 
  
L1 = 
200
2
50
p ¥
 = 0.159 H
 
  
1950 = 
2 p N2fmax = 
2 pymax
 
  
ymax = 1950
2p  = 8.78 Wb–T

142 Electric Machines
 
  
M = y max
(max)
i1
 = 8 78
2
4
.
¥
 = 1.55 H
 
(b)  
E1 = 
2 p f N2fmax = 
2 p fymax
 
  
y max
(max)
i2
 = M, ymax = 
2  ¥ 0.42 ¥ 1.55
 
 \ 
E1 = 
2 p ¥ 50 ¥ 
2  ¥ 0.41 ¥ 1.55 = 199.6 A
 
  
L2 = 
2000
2
50
1
2
0 41
p ¥
◊
¥ .
 = 15.53 H
 
 Coupling coefﬁcient, 
k = 
1 55
0 159
15 53
.
.
.
¥
 = 0.986
EXAMPLE 3.30 A 150 kVA transformer 2400/240 V rating has the following parameters:
 
R1 = 0.2 W, 
R2 = 2 ¥ 10–3
 
X1 = 0.45 W, 
X2 = 4.5 ¥ 10–3
 
Ri = 10 kW 
Xm = 1.6 kW (referred to HV)
Calculate the leakage inductances, magnetizing inductance, mutual inductance and self-inductances.
SOLUTION
 
a = N
N
1
2
2400
240
ª
 = 10
 
X1 = 2p f l1, l1 = 0 45
314
.
 ¥ 10–3 = 0.01433 mH
 
X2 = 2p f l2, l2 = 4 5
10
314
3
. ¥
-
 = 0.01433 mH
Magnetizing inductance
 
2p f Lm1 = Xm = 1.6 ¥ 103
 
Lm1 = 5.096 H
Self inductances
 
l1 = L1 – Lm1
 
L1 = 5.096 + 0.01433 ¥ 10–3 = 5.096 H
 
Lm1 = aM, M = L
a
m1  = 5 096
10
.
 = 0.5096 H

Transformers 
143
 
l2 = L2 – M
a
 
L2 = l2 + M
a  = 0.01433 ¥ 10–3 + 0 5096
10
.
 
 = 0.05098 H
Coupling factor 
k = 
M
L L
1 2
 = 
0 5096
5 096
0 05098
.
.
.
¥
 = 0.09998 ª 1
EXAMPLE 3.31 Solve Problem 3.8 using Matlab*. Also calculate % voltage regulation and h at full load 
and 0.8 pf lagging. 
SOLUTION 
Steps for computing circuit model parameters, voltage regulation and Efﬁciency at full load for a 
Transformer using MATLAB. 
Open-Circuit Test The equivalent circuit as seen on open-circuit test is given in Fig. 3.23(b). 
 
Applied voltage = V1 (rated) Current drawn = 10 
 
Power input = I0
 
Power input = P0 = Pi (core loss) 
 
Y0 = I
V
0
1
, Gi = P
V
0
1
2
 
Bm = 
Y
Gi
0
2
2
-
Short-Circuit Test The equivalent circuit as seen during short-circuit test is drawn in Fig. 3.23(b). 
 
Applied voltage = Vsc (a fraction of rated value)
 
Current drawn = Isc (nearly full load value)
 
Power input = Psc = Pc (copper loss)
 
Z = V
I
sc
sc
,  R = 
P
I
sc
sc
(
)2
 
X = 
Z
R
2
2
-
Voltage Regulation 
 
% voltage regulation = 
voltage drop
rated secondary voltage at full load and specified pf  ¥ 100 
 
* For detailed write-up on MATLAB, the reader is encouraged to read Appendix G of the authors’ book “Modern 
Power System Analysis”, 3rd ed. Tata McGraw-Hill, New Delhi, 2003. 

144 Electric Machines
or,  
VR = I R
X
V
(
cos
sin
)
f
f
±
2
 ¥ 100; + for lagging pf;
 
 
– for leading pf
where I = secondary current 
 
R = equivalent resistance referred to secondary
 
X = equivalent reactance referred to secondary
 
f = power factor angle 
Efﬁciency at full load
 
Efﬁciency at full load = 
Full load output
100
Full load output + Core loss + Copper 
¥
loss at full load 
 
 = 
P
P
P
P
i
c
+
+
 ¥ 100
MATLAB PROGRAM 
P=50000; 
V1=2200; 
V2=110; 
V0=110; 
I0=10; 
P0=400; 
Y0=I0./V0
Gi=P0./(V0^2)
Bm=sqrt (Y0^2-Gi^2)
Vsc=90; 
Isc=20.5; 
Psc=808; 
Z=Vsc./Isc
R=Psc./Isc^2)
X=sqrt (Z^2-R^2)
TR=2200/110;
Gi_HV=Gi./(TR^2)
Bm_HV=Bm./(TR^2)
R_LV=R./(TR^2) 
X _LV=X./(TR^2)
I2=P./V2
pf=0.8;

Transformers 
145
Th=acos(pf) 
dV=I2.*(R_LV.*cos(Th)+X_LV.*sin(Th)) 
VR=(dV./V2)*100
Pi=P0 
Pc=Psc 
EFF_Full_load=(P*100)./(P+Pi+Pc)
y0 = 
  0.0909 
Gi =
  0.0331
Bm =
  0.0847
Z =
  4.3902 
R =
  1.9227 
X =
  3.9468 
Gi_HV =
  8.2645e-005
Bm_HV = 
  2.1171e-004
R_LV = 
  0.0048 
X_LV = 
  0.0099 
I2 =
  454.5455
Th =
  0.6435 
dV =
  4.4389 
VR =
  4.0354 
Pi =
  400 
Pc =
  808
EFF_Full_load =
  97.6410 
Note: For manual solution, refer solved Problem 3.3 of the Authors’ book [76].

146 Electric Machines
 
 
 A transformer is a static device comprising coupled coils (primary and secondary) wound on common 
magnetic core. The arrangement transfers electric energy from one coil (primary) at a particular 
voltage level to the other coil (secondary) at another voltage level via the magnetic ﬂux carried by the 
core.
 
 In a transformer, all voltages and currents are sinusoidal. The device is bilateral i.e. electric energy can 
be made to ﬂow in either direction with reversal of roles of the two coils.
 
 Ideal transformer 
 
(a) The core is inﬁnitely permeable and is lossless.
 
(b) Both windings have no resistance and there is no leakage ﬂux; so no voltage drop in either winding.
 
 Two types of transformer cores are commonly employed in practice - core type and shell type. In the 
core type, the windings are wound around the two legs of a rectangular magnetic core, while in shell 
type, the windings are wound on the central leg of a three legged core.
 
 Transformer windings are made of solid or stranded copper or aluminium strip conductors. For 
electronic transformers, ‘magnetic wire’ is normally used as conductor.
 
 Transformer ratio a = 
E
E
N
N
I
I
1
2
1
2
2
1
=
=
; (Ideal transformer)
 
 Primary induced emf
 
  
E1 = 
2 p f N1fmax = 4.44 f N1fmax
 
 Correspondingly, E2 = E1/a
 
 When a current I2 is drawn from secondary, the current I1 drawn from primary comprises three 
compound
 
  Im = magnetizing current to establish core ﬂux. It lags by 90°
 
  Ii = core (iron) loss current in phase with E1
 
  I¢2 = current to counter secondary AT = 
N
N
I
a I
2
1
2
2
1
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
=
 
 Then
 
  
I1 = (
)
I
I
I
I
I
m
i
+
+ ¢ =
+ ¢
2
0
2
 
  
I0  = I
I
m
i
+
 = no-load current, secondary open circuits.
 
 Voltage drop in a transformer is due to primary and secondary resistance and leakage reactance (a 
series effect).
 
 Impedance is transferred from one side to the other in direct square of turn-ratio. susceptance to 
transfer in inverse square of turn-ratio. Thus
 
 Secondary impedance as seen on primary side
 
  
Z¢2 = a2Z2, a = N
N
1
2

Transformers 
147
 
 Similarly, 
Z¢1 = 1
2
a
Z1
 
 The transformer equivalent circuit as seen from any side;
 
 Shunt branch (Gi || Bm) draws Im and Ii
 
 Series branch (R + jX) carries load current I¢2
 
  
R = R1 + a2R2, X = X1 + a2X2
 
 The equivalent circuit parameters are determined by two non-loading tests:
 
 Open-circuit test – rated voltage applied on one side the other left open
 
  
Determines: Gi , Bm and core loss, Pi
 
 Short-circuit test – one side shorted, reduced voltage applied on other to carry full-load current
 
  
Determines: R, X and full-load copper loss, Pc
 
 Transformer losses
 
  
Pi = core (iron) loss, constant at constant primary voltage
 
  
Pc = copper loss (I2R loss) proportional to square of load current
 
 Transformer efﬁciency
 
  
h = P
V I
P
P
P
i
c
0
2 2
0
=
cosq
(
)
+
+
 
 For h(max)
 
  
Pc = I 2
2 R2(eq) = Pi
 
 or 
I2(load) = 
P
R
i
2(
)
eq
Voltage registation, 
VR = V
V
V
20
2
2
-
 ¥ 100
 
  
 = I R
X
V
(
cos
sin
)
f
f
±
2
 ¥ 100;   
 
 
  
+ for laging pf
 
  
  
– for leading pf
 
In an auto-transformer the primary and secondary windings are electrically connected so that a part 
of the windings is common to the two. As a result, a part of the power is transferred conductively. It, 
therefore has higher efﬁciency and kVA compared to the corresponding two-winding transformer.
 
In a 3-phase transformer, three single-phase transformers are connected in star/delta (various possible 
connection). Depending on labeling and phase sequence, the line voltage undergoes a phase shift of 
± 30 or ± 90°. The common practice is to use 30° phase shift.

148 Electric Machines
 
 3.1 The emf per turn for a single-phase 2200/220- 
V, 50-Hz transformer is approximately 12 V. 
Calculate 
 
(a) the number of primary and secondary 
turns, and 
 
(b) the net cross-sectional area of core of a 
maximum ﬂux density of 1.5 T. 
 3.2 A transformer has primary and secondary 
turns of 1250 and 125 respectively. It has 
core cross-section of 36 cm2 and its rms ﬂux 
density is to be limited to 1.4 T (to prevent 
core saturation). What maximum 50 Hz 
voltage can be applied on the primary side 
and the corresponding open-circuit secondary 
voltage? 
 
 The core has a mean length of 150 cm and 
its relative permeability can be assumed to be 
8000. What would be the rms exciting current 
when the transformer’s primary winding is 
excited at a voltage as calculated above? Also 
calculate the magnetizing susceptance as seen 
from primary and secondary sides. 
 
 If the transformer were to be excited at 60 
Hz, what should be the maximum primary 
voltage for the core ﬂux density limit not to 
be exceeded? What would be the magnetizing 
susceptance as seen on each side in this case? 
 3.3 A single-phase transformer is rated 600/200 V, 
25 kVA, 50 Hz. The transformer is supplying 
full load on secondary side at 0.707 pf lagging. 
What is the load impedance? Assuming the 
transformer to be ideal what impedance is 
seen on the primary side; also the primary 
current and its pf. 
 3.4 A single-phase 50 Hz transformer has a 
voltage ratio of 230/2300 V. A capacitor rated 
30 kVAR is connected on the 2300 V side. 
Calculate the value of this capacitor. What is 
the kVAR of the capacitor and the value of its 
capacitance as seen on 230-V side. Assume 
the transformer to be ideal. 
 3.5 A transformer has 200 primary and 400 
secondary turns. The primary draws a current 
of (44.68 + j 2.37) A when the secondary 
supplies a load current of (21.62 + j0) A. (a) 
Find the exciting current. (b) If the core has a 
permeance of 7.69 ¥ 10–5 H/T2, ﬁnd the peak 
value of core ﬂux. (c) Find the primary and 
secondary induced emfs if the frequency is  
50 Hz. (d) Find the core loss. 
 
 Remark: This is a learning exercise. This is 
not how the exciting current is measured in a 
transformer because this needs differentiating 
of two nearly equal quantities which introduces 
large measurement error. As elaborated in this 
chapter the exciting current is measured by a 
no-load test. 
 3.6 A 23 kVA, 50 Hz, 2300/230 V transformer 
has primary and secondary turns of 200/20. 
When rated voltage is applied, calculate 
the mutual core ﬂux neglecting the winding 
voltage drops. At full load the leakage ﬂux 
linking each winding is 1% of the mutual ﬂux. 
Calculate the primary and secondary leakage 
reactances and the total reactance as referred 
to either side. 
 
 Hint: fl1 is caused by I1N1 and by I1N2, while 
the mutual ﬂux is caused by (I1N1 – I2N2). 
Refer Fig. 3.11. 
 3.7 A 100 kVA, 1100/230 V, 50-Hz transformer 
has an HV winding resistance of 0.1 W and a 
leakage reactance of 0.4 W. The LV winding 
has a resistance of 0.006 W and a leakage 
reactance of 0.01 W. Find the equivalent 
winding resistance, reactance and impedance 
referred to the HV and LV sides. Convert 
these to pu values. 
 3.8 A 50 kVA, 2200/110 V transformer when 
tested gave the following results: 
 
  OC test, measurements on the LV side: 400 W, 
10 A, 110 V
 
  SC test, measurements on the HV side; 808 W, 
20.5 A, 90 V 

Transformers 
149
 
 Compute all the parameters of the equivalent 
circuit referred to the HV and LV sides of 
the transformer. Also calculate % voltage 
regulation and efﬁciency at full load and  
0.8 pf lagging. 
 3.9 A 22/127 kV, 125 MVA transformer has 
primary and secondary impedances of 0.015 
+ j 0.06 pu each. Its magnetizing reactance is 
j 120 pu. The pu values are expressed on the 
base of the transformer rating. Calculate the 
primary and secondary impedances in ohms 
and also the magnetizing reactance in ohms 
on the LV side. 
 3.10 A 20 kVA, 2000/200 V, 50 Hz transformer is 
operated at no-load on rated voltage, the input 
being 150 W at 0.12 power factor. When it is 
operating at rated load, the voltage drops in the 
total leakage reactance and the total resistance 
are, respectively, 2 and 1 per cent of the rated 
voltage. Determine the input power and power 
factor when the transformer delivers 10 kW 
at 200 V at 0.8 pf lagging to a load on the LV 
side. 
 3.11 A single-phase load is fed through a 66-kV 
feeder whose impedance is 120 + j 400 W and 
a 66/6.6 kV transformer whose equivalent 
impedance (referred to LV) is 0.4 + j 1.5 W. 
The load is 250 kW at 0.8 leading power 
factor and 6 kV. 
 
(a) Compute the voltage at the sending-end of 
the feeder. 
 
(b) Compute the voltage at the primary 
terminals of the transformer.
 
(c) Compute the complex power input at the 
sending-end of the feeder. 
 3.12 An audio-frequency ideal transformer is 
employed to couple a 60-W resistance load 
to an electric source which is represented by 
a constant voltage of 6 V in series with an 
internal resistance of 2400 W.
 
(a) Determine the turn-ratio required to ensure 
maximum power transfer by matching 
the load and source impedances (i.e. by 
making the 60 W secondary impedance to 
2400 W when referred to the primary). 
 
(b) Find the load current, voltage and power 
under the conditions of maximum power 
transfer. 
 3.13 Draw a clear phasor diagram of a transformer 
operating at rated values. Refer to Fig. 3.14(a) 
and assume N1/N2 = 1.5 and I1R1 = 0.15 E1, 
I2R2 = 0.15 V2, I1X1 = 0.3 E1, I2X2 = 0.25 V2,
Ii = 0.1 I¢2, Im = 0.25 I¢2 
 
 Consider the load power factor to be (a)  
0.8 lagging (b) 0.8 leading. Use V2 as the 
reference phasor. 
 3.14 An ideal transformer has a primary winding 
of 200 turns. On the secondary side the 
number of turns between A and B is 600 and 
between B and C is 400 turns, that between A 
and C being 1000. The transformer supplies 
a resistor connected between A and C which 
draws 10 kW. Further, a load of 2000 –45° W 
is connected between A and B. The primary 
voltage is 2 kV. Find the primary current. 
 3.15 A 5-kVA, 400/80-V transformer has Req (HV) 
= 0.25 W and Xeq (HV) = 5 W and a lagging 
load is being supplied by it resulting in the 
following meter readings (meters are placed 
on the HV side). 
 
 
I1 = 16 A, V1 = 400 V, P1 = 5 kW 
 
 For this condition calculate what a voltmeter 
would read if connected across the load 
terminals. Assume the exciting current to be 
zero. 
 3.16 A 25-kVA, 230/115-V, 50-Hz transformer has 
the following data 
 
  
R1 = 0.12 W 
R2 = 0.04 W
 
  
X1 = 0.2 W 
X2 = 0.05 W
 
 Find the transformer loading which will make 
the primary induced emf equal in magnitude 
to the primary terminal voltage when the 
transformer is carrying the full load current. 
Neglect the magnetizing current. 

150 Electric Machines
 3.17 The resistances and leakage reactances of 
a 10 kVA, 50 Hz, 2200/220 V distribution 
transformer are as follows: 
 
  
R1 = 4 W 
R2 = 0.04 W
 
  
X1 = 5 W 
X2 = 0.05 W 
 
 Each quantity is referred to its own side of the 
transformer. (Sufﬁx ‘1’ stands for HV and ‘2’ 
for LV). 
 
(a) Find the total leakage impedance referred 
to (i) HV side (ii) LV side. 
 
(b) Consider the transformer to give its rated 
kVA at 0.8 pf lagging to a load at rated 
voltage. Find the HV terminal voltage and 
% voltage regulation. 
 
(c) Repeat (b) for a pf of 0.8 leading. 
 
(d) Consider the core-loss to be 80 W. Find 
the efﬁciency under the conditions of part 
(b). Will it be different for the conditions 
under part (c)? 
 
(e) If the load in part (b) gets short-circuited, 
ﬁnd the steady-state current in the HV 
lines, assuming that the voltage applied to 
the transformer remains unchanged.
 3.18 For Problem 3.10, assume that the load power 
factor is varied while the load current and 
secondary terminal voltage are held ﬁxed. 
With the help of a phasor diagram, ﬁnd the 
load power factor for which the voltage 
regulation is zero. 
 3.19 A 20 kVA, 2000/200 V, single-phase 
transformer has the following parameters: 
 
 HV winding: R1 = 3 W 
X1 = 5.3 W
 
 L V winding: R2 = 0.05 W 
X2 = 0.05 W
 
(a) Find the voltage regulation at (i) 0.8 pf 
lagging (ii) upf (iii) 0.707 pf leading. 
 
(b) Calculate the secondary terminal voltage 
at (i) 0.8 pf lagging (ii) upf (iii) 0.707 pf 
leading when delivering full-load current 
with the primary voltage held ﬁxed at 
2 kV. 
 3.20 The approximate equivalent circuit of a 
4 kVA, 200/400 V single-phase transformer, 
referred to the LV side, is shown in Fig. P3.20. 
 
(a) An open-circuit test is conducted by 
applying 200 V to the LV side, keeping 
the HV side open. Calculate the power 
input, power factor and current drawn by 
the transformer. 
 
(b) A short-circuit test is conducted by passing 
full-load current from the HV side keeping 
the LV side shorted. Calculate the voltage 
required to be applied to the transformer 
and the power input and power factor. 
V¢2
0.15 W
V1
0.4 W
800 W
400 W
+
–
+
–
Fig. P 3.20
 3.21 A 20 kV A, 2000/200 V transformer has name 
plate leakage impedance of 8%. What voltage 
must be applied on the HV side to circulate 
full-load current with the LV shorted? 
 3.22 Derive the condition for zero voltage 
regulation. Also show that the magnitude of 
maximum voltage regulation equals the pu 
value of equivalent leakage impedance. 
 3.23 The following test results were obtained for 
a 20 kVA, 50 Hz, 2400/240 V distribution 
transformer: 
 
 Open-circuit test (LV): 240 V, 1.066 A, 126.6 W
 
 Short-circuit test (HV): 57.5 V, 8.34 A, 284 W 
 
(a) When the transformer is operated as a step-
down transformer with the output voltage 
equal to 240 V, supplying a load at unity 
power factor, determine the maximum 
efﬁciency and the unity power factor load 
at which it occurs. 

Transformers 
151
 
(b) Determine the power-factor of the rated 
load, supplied at 240 V, such that the 
terminal voltage observed on reducing the 
load to zero is still 240 V. 
 3.24 In a 25 kVA, 2000/200 V transformer, the 
iron and copper losses are 300 and 400 W 
respectively.
 
(a) Calculate the efﬁciency on unity power-
factor at (i) full-load (ii) half-load. 
 
(b) Determine 
the 
load 
for 
maximum 
efﬁciency and the iron-and the copper-loss 
in this case. 
 3.25 The efﬁciency of a 1000 kVA, 110/220 V, 
50 Hz, single-phase transformer is 98.5% at 
half full-load at 0.8 pf leading and 98.8% at 
full-load upf.
 
 Determine: (a) iron-loss, (b) full-load copper-
loss, and (c) maximum efﬁciency at upf.
 3.26 Open and short-circuit tests performed on a 
500 kVA, 6600/2300 V, 50 Hz transformer 
yielded the following data: 
 
  No-load loss = 3 kW 
 
  Full-load short circuit loss = 4 kW 
 
(a) Calculate the load (kVA) at which the 
transformer efﬁciency would be maximum 
for a given power factor. Calculate this 
efﬁciency for a pf of 0.85. 
 
(b) The transformer supplies the following 
load cycle. 
 
  
12 hours, full load 0.8 pf. 
 
  
12 hours, half full load 0.9 pf. 
 
 Calculate the energy efﬁciency of the 
transformer. 
 3.27 A transformer has its maximum efﬁciency of 
0.98 at 20-kVA at unity power factor. During 
the day it is loaded as follows: 
 
  12 hours; 2 kW at power factor 0.6
 
  6 hours; 10 kW at power factor 0.8 
 
  6 hours; 20 kW at power factor 0.9 
 
 Find the ‘all-day’ efﬁciency of the transformer.
 3.28 A 20 kVA, 200/500 V, 50 Hz, single-phase 
transformer is connected as an auto-trans-
former as shown in Fig. P3.28. Determine its 
voltage-ratio and the kVA rating. Mark on the 
diagram, the magnitudes and relative direc-
tions of the currents in the winding as well as 
in the input and output lines when delivering 
the rated kVA to load. 
500 V
Input
200V
Load
Fig. P3.28
 3.29 A 400/100 V, 10 kVA, 2-winding transformer 
is to be employed as an autotransformer to 
supply a 400 V circuit from a 500 V source. 
When tested as a 2-winding transformer at 
rated load, 0.85 pf lagging, its efﬁciency is 
0.97%. 
 
(a) Determine its kVA rating as an autotrans-
former. 
 
(b) Find its efﬁciency as an autotransformer. 
 3.30 A 20 kVA, 2000/200 V, two-winding trans-
former is to be used as an autotransformer, 
with a constant source voltage of 2000 V. 
At full-load of unity power factor, calculate 
the power output, power transformed and 
power conducted. If the efﬁciency of the two-
winding transformer at 0.7 pf is 97%, ﬁnd the 
efﬁciency of the autotransformer. 
 3.31 A 200/400 V, 20 kVA, and 50 Hz transformer is 
connected as an autotransformer to transform 
600 V to 200 V. 
 
(a) Determine the autotransformer ratio a¢. 
 
(b) Determine the kVA rating of the auto-
transformer. 

152 Electric Machines
 
(c) With a load of 20 kVA, 0.8 pf lagging 
connected to 200 V terminals, determine 
the currents in the load and the two 
transformer windings. 
 3.32 An audio frequency output transformer 
couples a variable frequency source of output 
resistance 4.5 kW to a load of 10 W. The 
transformer has a turn ratio of 25.4. On test 
the following inductance data are measured 
on the transformer. 
 
(i) Inductance seen on the primary side with 
secondary open = 18.7 H. 
 
(ii) Inductance seen on the primary side with 
secondary shorted = 0.215 H. 
 
 In terms of the frequency response calculate 
(a) lower corner frequency (b) upper corner 
frequency and (c) voltage gain and phase 
angle at the geometric mean of the frequencies 
in parts (a) and (b) 
 
 Hint: It is sufﬁciently accurate to assume that 
test
 
(i) yields Lm, the magnetizing inductance and 
test 
 
(ii) yields the leakage inductance seen on 
primary side. Transformer winding resis-
tance is ignored. 
 3.33 A 20 kVA, 4400/220 V transformer with an 
equivalent impedance of 0.01 W is to operate 
in parallel with a 15 kVA, 4400/220 V 
transformer with an equivalent impedance of 
0.015 W. The two transformers are connected 
in parallel and made to carry a load of 25 kVA. 
Assume both the impedances to have the same 
angle. 
 
(a) Find the individual load currents. 
 
(b) What per cent of the rated capacity is used 
in each transformer? 
 3.34 Two 
single-phase 
transformers, 
rated 
1000 kVA and 500 kVA respectively, are 
connected in parallel on both HV and LV sides. 
They have equal voltage ratings of 11 kV/400 
V and their per unit impedances are (0.02 + j 
0.07), and (0.025 + j 0.0875) W respectively. 
What is the largest value of the unity power 
factor load that can be delivered by the parallel 
combination at the rated voltage? 
 3.35 Two 
single-phase 
transformers 
rated 
600 kVA and 500 kVA respectively, are 
connected in parallel to supply a load of 
1000 kVA at 0.8 lagging power factor. 
The resistance and reactance of the ﬁrst 
transformer are 3% and 6.5% respectively, 
and of the second transformer 1.5% and 8% 
respectively. Calculate the kVA loading and 
the power factor at which each transformer 
operates. 
 3.36 An ideal 3-phase step-down transformer, 
connected delta/star delivers power to a 
balanced 3-phase load of 120 kVA at 0.8 
power factor. The input line voltage is 11 kV 
and the turn-ratio of the transformer, phase-to-
phase is 10. Determine the line voltages, line 
currents, phase voltages and phase currents on 
both the primary and the secondary sides. 
 3.37 A D/Y connected bank of three identical 
60 kVA 2000/100 V, 50 Hz transformers 
is fed with power through a feeder whose 
impedance is 0.75 + j 0.25 W per phase. The 
voltage at the sending-end of the feeder is held 
ﬁxed at 2 kV line-to-line. The shortcircuit test 
when conducted on one of the transformers 
with its LV terminals shortcircuited gave the 
following results: 
 
  
VHV = 40 V 
f = 50 Hz 
 
  
IHV = 35 A 
P = 800 W 
 
(a) Find the secondary line-to-line voltage 
when the bank delivers rated current to a 
balanced 3-phase upf load. 
 
(b) Calculate the currents in the transformer 
primary and secondary windings and in the 
feeder wires on the occurrence of a solid 
3-phase short-circuit at the secondary line 
terminals. 
 3.38 Each phase of 3-phase transformer is rated 
6.6 kV/230V, 200 kVA with a series reactance 
of 8%. 

Transformers 
153
 
(a) Calculate the reactance in ohm referred to 
HV/LV sides. 
 
(b) The transformer is connected Y/Y. What is 
its 3-phase rating (voltage and kVA) and 
the per unit reactance. 
 
(c) Calculate the pf of load (rated) at which 
voltage regulation would be maximum. If 
this load is fed at rated voltage on LV side, 
what should be the HV side line voltage? 
 3.39 A 2400/220 V, 300 kVA, 3-phase transformer 
has a core loss of 33 kW at rated voltage. Its 
equivalent resistance is 1.6%. Calculate the 
transformer efﬁciency at 1.8 pf at (i) full load 
(ii) at half load. 
 
 What is the load at which the transformer 
efﬁciency would be maximum? Calculate its 
value at a pf of 0.8. 
 
 Hint: Use the pu method. 
 3.40 A 3-phase 50 kVA, 6.6/0.4 kV 50 Hz 
transformer is D/Y connected. It yielded the 
following test results: 
 
  
OC Test 
SC Test
 
  
P0 = 520 W 
PSC = 610 W 
 
  
I0 = 4.21 A 
ISC = 4.35 A 
 
  
V0 = 400 V 
VSC = 340 V 
 
 Calculate the pu circuit parameters of the 
transformer. Determine its efﬁciency and 
voltage regulation at full load 0.8 pf lagging. 
Calculate also the maximum efﬁciency and 
the load (0.8 pf ) at which it will occur. 
 3.41 A 6.6/0.4 kV, 100 kVA distribution transformer 
is connected D/Y. The transformer has 1.2% 
resistance and 5% reactance. Find the voltage 
regulation at full load, 0.8 pf leading. With  
0.4 kV as secondary voltage (on load), what is 
the primary voltage?
 
 Hint: Use pu system.
 3.42 A single-phase, 50 Hz, three-Winding trans-
former is rated at 2200 V on the HV side with 
a total of 250 turns. Of the two secondary 
windings, each can handle 200 kVA, one is 
rated at 550 V and the other at 220 V. Compute 
the primary current when the rated current 
in the 220 V winding is at upf and the rated 
current in the 550 V winding is 0.6 pf lagging. 
Neglect all leakage impedance drops and 
magnetizing current.
 3.43 A small industrial unit draws an average load 
of 100 A at 0.8 lagging pf from the secondaries 
of its 2000/200 V, 60 kVA Y/D transformer 
bank. Find:
 
(a) The power consumed by the unit in kW,
 
(b) the total kVA used,
 
(c) the rated line currents available from the 
transformer bank,
 
(d) the rated transformer phase currents of the 
D-secondaries,
 
(e) per cent of rated load on transformers,
 
(f ) primary line and phase currents, and
 
(g) the kVA rating of each individual 
transformer.
 3.44 The HV terminals of a 3-phase bank of three 
single-phase transformers are connected to a 
3-wire, 3-phase, 11 kV (line-to-line) system. 
The LV terminals are connected to a 3-wire, 
3-phase load rated of 1000 kVA and 2200 V 
line-to-line. Specify the voltage, current and 
kVA ratings of each transformer (both HV and 
LV windings) for the following connections:
 
(a) HV – Y, LV – D 
(b) HV – D, LV – Y
 
(c) HV – Y, LV – Y 
(d) HV – D, LV – D.
 3.45 A 3-phase bank consisting of three single-
phase 3-winding transformers (Y/D/Y) is 
employed to step-down the voltage of a 
3-phase, 220 kV transmission line. The data 
pertaining to one of the transformers are given 
below:
 
 Ratings 
 
 Primary 1: 20 MVA, 220 kV
 
 Secondary 2: 10 MVA, 33 kV
 
 Tertiary 3: 10 MVA, 11 kV 
 
 Short-circuit reactances on 10 MV A base
 
   
X12 = 0.15 pu
 
   
X23 = 0.1 pu 

154 Electric Machines
 
   
X13 = 0.2 pu 
 
 Resistances are to be ignored. The D-connected 
secondaries supply their rated current to a 
balanced load at 0.85 power factor lagging, 
whereas the tertiaries provide the rated current 
to a balanced load at upf (constant resistance). 
 
(a) Compute the primary line-to-line voltage 
to maintain the rated voltage at the 
secondary terminals.
 
(b) For the conditions of part (a) ﬁnd the line-
to-line voltage at the tertiary terminals.
 
(c) If the primary voltage is held ﬁxed as in 
part (a), to what value will the tertiary 
voltage increase when the secondary load 
is removed? 
 3.46 A 500-kVA, 11/0.43-kV, 3-phase delta/star 
connected transformer has on rated load HV 
copper-loss of 2.5 kW and LV loss of 2 kW. 
The total leakage reactance is 0.06 pu. Find 
the ohmic values of the equivalent resistance 
and leakage reactance on the delta side. 
 3.47 Two transformers each rated 250-kVA, 
11/2-kV and 50-Hz are connected in open-
delta on both the primary and secondary. 
 
(a) Find the load kVA that can be supplied 
from this transformer connection. 
 
(b) A delta connected three-phase load of 
250 kVA, 0.8 pf, 2 kV is connected to 
the low-voltage terminals of this open-
voltage 
transformer. 
Determine 
the 
transformer currents on the 11 kV side of 
this connection. 
 3.48 Two 110-V, single-phase furnaces take loads 
of 500 kW and 800 kW respectively at a 
power factor of 0.71 lagging and are supplied 
from 6600 V, 3-phase mains through a Scott-
connected transformer combination. Calculate 
the currents in the 3-phase lines, neglecting 
transformer losses. Draw the phasor diagram. 
 3.49 Figure P3.49 shows a Scott-connected 
transformer, supplied from 11 kV, 3-phase,  
50 Hz mains. Secondaries, series connected as 
shown, supply 1000 A at a voltage of 100
2  
to a resistive load. The phase sequence of the 
3-phase supply is ABC. 
 
(a) Calculate the turn-ratio of the teaser 
transformer. 
 
(b) Calculate the line current IB and its phase 
angle with respect to the voltage of phase 
A to neutral on the 3-phase side. 
Teaser
A
1000 A
11 kv, 3-phase
supply
Resistive load
Main
M
B
C
2
100
Volts
Fig. P3.49
 3.50 A 15 kVA, 2200/220 V, 50 Hz transformer 
gave the following test results:
 
 OC (LV side) V = 220 V 
I = 2.72 A
 
  
P = 185 W
 
 SC (HV side) V = 112 V 
I = 6.3 A
 
  
P = 197 W
 
 Compute the following:
 
(a) Core loss
 
(b) Full-load copper loss
 
(c) Efﬁciency at full-load 0.85 lagging of
 
(d) Voltage regulation at full-load 0.8 lagging/
leading pf
 3.51 A transformer of rating 20 kVA, 2000/200 V 
has the following parameters:
 
  
Req(HV side) = 2.65 W
 
  
Zeq(HV side) = 4.23 W
 
 Core loss at rated voltage = 95 W
 
(a) Calculate transformer efﬁciency when 
delivering 20 kVA at 200 V at 0.8 pf 
lagging.

Transformers 
155
 
(b) What voltage must be applied on the HV 
side for load as in part (a).
 
(c) Find the percentage voltage regulation.
 3.52 A 100 kVA, 11 kV/231 V transformer has HV 
and LV winding resistances of 8.51 W and 
0.0038 W respectively. It gave the following 
test results:
 
 OC (LV side) 
231 V  
15.2 A 
1.25 kW
 
 SC (HV side) 
440 V 
9 A 
Not
 
  
 
 
measured
 
 Calculate
 
(a) Equivalent leakage reactance of the 
transformer
 
(b) Full load copper loss
 
(c) Efﬁciency at full-load and half full-load at 
0.85 lagging power factor
 3.53 A 100 kVA, 2200 V/220 V transformer has the 
following circuit parameters.
 
  
R1 = 0.23 W 
R2 = 0.0023 W
 
  
X1 = 1.83 W 
X2 = 0.013 W
 
  
R1 (HV side) = 5.6 kW 
 
Xm(HV side) = 1.12 kW
 
 The transformer is subjected to the following 
daily load cycle = 4 h on no load, 8 h on 1/4th 
full-load at 0.8 pf, 8 h on 1/2 full-load at upf, 
and 4 h on full-load at 0.9 pf.
 
 Determine the all-day energy efﬁciency of the 
transformer.
 3.54 A 400/200 V, 50 Hz transformer has a primary 
impedance of 1.2 + j 3.2 W and secondary 
impedance of 0.4 + j 1.0 W. A short-circuit 
occurs on the secondary side with 400 V 
applied to the primary. Calculate the primary 
current and its power factor.
 3.55 A 50 Hz, 3-winding transformer can be 
considered as an ideal transformer. The 
primary is rated 2400 V and has 300 turns. 
The secondary winding is rated 240 V,  
400 kVA and supplies full-load at upf. The 
tertiary is rated 600 V, 200 kVA and supplies 
full-load at 0.6 pf lagging. Determine the 
primary current.
 3.56 An ideal transformer has 200 primary turns 
and 360 secondary turns, the primary being 
excited at 600 V. The full secondary has a 
resistive load of 8 kW. The secondary is also 
tapped at 240 turns which supplies a pure 
inductive load of 10 kVA. Find the primary 
current and its pf.
 3.57 A 50 kVA, 2300 V/230 V transformer draws 
power of 750 W at 0.5 A at no load when 
2300 V is applied to the HV side. The HV 
winding resistance and leakage reactance are 
1.8 W and 4 W respectively. Calculate:
 
(a) the no load pf 
 
 
(b) the primary induced emf
 
(c) the magnetizing current and
 
(d) the core loss component of current.
 3.58 Two single-phase transformers operate in 
parallel to supply a load of 44 + j 18.6 W. The 
transformer A has a secondary emf of 600 V 
on open circuit with an internal impedance 
of 1.8 + j 5.6 W referred to the secondary. 
The corresponding ﬁgures for transformer 
B are 610 V and 1.8 + j 7.4 W. Calculate the 
terminal voltage, current and power factor of 
each transformer.
 3.59 Each phase of a 3-phase transformer is rated 
6.6 kV/230 V, 200 kVA with a series reactance 
of 8%
 
(a) Calculate the reactance in ohm referred to 
HV/LV sides.
 
(b) The transformer is connected Y/Y. What is 
its 3-phase rating (voltage and kVA) and 
the per unit reactance.
 
(c) Calculate the pf of load (rated) at which 
voltage regulation would be maximum. If 
this load is fed at rated voltage on LV side, 
what should be the HV side line voltage?

156 Electric Machines
 
 
1. What is a transformer? Explain the functions 
it fulﬁls as an element of a power system.
 
2. Differentiate between core and shell-type 
transformers.
 
3. Explain brieﬂy the ideal transformer as a 
circuit element. Can voltage and current ratios 
be adjusted independently?
 
4. Explain the operation and application of the 
impedance transforming property of an ideal 
transformer.
 
5. State how the LV and HV windings are 
arranged in a core-type transformer. Advance 
the reason why?
 
6. What is the phase relationship between the 
core ﬂux; the magnetizing current and the 
induced emfs in the primary and secondary 
winding of a transformer? Draw the phasor 
diagram.
 
7. What determines the maximum value of 
ﬂux in a transformer core when it is excited 
from the primary side? Does the value of ﬂux 
change substantially when the secondary is 
loaded? Explain the reason why.
 
8. Why cannot the SC test separate out the 
primary and secondary resistances and 
leakage inductances?
 
9. Justify that under SC test that the core loss is 
negligible.
 10. Prove that in the system, if the voltage bases 
are selected in the ratio of transformation, the 
pu impedance of the transformer is same on 
either side.
 11. State and prove the condition from maximum 
efﬁciency of a transformer.
 12. Draw the phasor diagram of a transformer 
as seen from any one side for zero voltage 
regulation.
 13. From the phasor diagram of Question 12, 
derive the approximate condition for zero 
voltage regulation.
 14. Justify the statement that in the circuit model 
of a transformer in a power system, the 
magnetizing branch can be ignored.
 15. Explain the meaning of all the items in the 
nameplate of a transformer.
 16. How can we refer the transformer winding 
resistance and leakage reactance from one 
side to the other?
 17. From the percentage impedance given as the 
nameplate, ﬁnd the voltage to be applied for 
full load current to ﬂow in SC test.
 18. Why are transformers needed in a power 
system?
 19. Why are transformers placed in oil-ﬁlled tanks?
 20. Describe how the primary current adjusts 
itself as the load on a transformer is increased.
 21. Explain why the core ﬂux in a transformer is 
almost independent of load current.
 22. Why is an OC test generally performed at 
rated voltage on LV side of a transformer?
 23. Why is the SC test performed at reduced 
voltage on the HV side?
 24. Where is an autotransformer employed in a 
power system? Why?
 25. In a transmission system the star side of a 
star/delta transformer is HV side, while in a 
distribution system the star side is the LV side. 
Explain.
 26. Explain the basic purpose of a tertiary 
winding. To what additional use can it be put?

Transformers 
157
 
 3.1 The core in a large power transformer is built 
of
 
(a) cast iron 
(b) mild steel
 
(c) ferrite 
(d) silicon steel
 3.2 Cruciform shape is used in transformer core
 
(a) to reduce core loss
 
(b) to reduce winding copper
 
(c) to provide mechanical strength
 
(d) to reduce core reluctance
 3.3 No load current in a transformer
 
(a) lags the applied voltage by 90°
 
(b) lags the applied voltage by somewhat less 
than 90°
 
(c) leads the applied voltage by 90°
 
(d) leads the applied voltage by somewhat 
less than 90°
 3.4 A 200/100 V, 50 Hz transformer is to be 
excited at 40 Hz from the 100 V side. For 
the exciting current to remain the same, the 
applied voltage should be
 
(a) 150 V 
(b) 125 V
 
(c) 100 V 
(d) 80 V
 3.5 Power input to a transformer on no load at 
rated voltage comprises predominantly
 
(a) copper loss
 
(b) hysteresis loss
 
(c) core loss
 
(d) eddy current loss
 3.6 A 2/1 ratio, two-winding transformer is 
connected as an auto transformer. Its kVA 
rating as an auto transformer compared to a 
two-winding transformer is
 
(a) same 
(b) 1.5 times
 
(c) 2 times 
(d) 3 times
 3.7 The high frequency hum in the transformer is 
mainly due to
 
(a) laminations being not sufﬁciently tight
 
(b) magnetostriction
 
(c) oil of the transformer
 
(d) tank walls
 3.8 The efﬁciency of a transformer at full-load 
0.85 pf lag is 95%. Its efﬁciency at full-load 
0.85 pf lead will be
 
(a) less than 95%
 
(b) more than 95%
 
(c) 95%
 
(d) 100%
 3.9 Under balanced load conditions, the main 
transformer rating in the Scott connection is 
greater than that of the teaser transformer by
 
(a) 5% 
(b) 15%
 
(c) 57.7% 
(d) 85%
 3.10 Non-loading heat run test on transformer is 
performed by means of 
 
(a) SC test
 
(b) OC test
 
(c) half time on SC and half time on OC
 
(d) Sumpner’s test

158 Electric Machines
4.1 
INTRODUCTION
The chief advantage of electric energy over other forms of energy is the relative 
ease and high efﬁciency with which it can be transmitted over long distances. Its 
main use is in the form of a transmitting link for transporting other forms of energy, 
e.g. mechanical, sound, light, etc. from one physical location to another. Electric 
energy is seldom available naturally and is rarely directly utilized. Obviously two 
kinds of energy conversion devices are needed—to convert one form of energy 
to the electric form and to convert it back to the original or any other desired form. Our interests in this 
chapter are the devices for electromechanical energy conversion. These devices can be transducers for 
low-energy conversion processing and transporting. These devices can be transducers for processing and 
transporting low-energy signals. A second category of such devices is meant for production of force or 
torque with limited mechanical motion like electromagnets, relays, actuators, etc. A third category is the 
continuous energy conversion devices like motors or generators which are used for bulk energy conversion 
and utilization. 
 Electromechanical energy conversion takes place via the medium of a magnetic or electric ﬁeld—the 
magnetic ﬁeld being most suited for practical conversion devices. Because of the inertia associated with 
mechanically moving members, the ﬁelds must necessarily be slowly varying, i.e. quasistatic in nature. The 
conversion process is basically a reversible one though practical devices may be designed and constructed 
to particularly suit one mode of conversion or the other.
 This chapter is mainly devoted to the understanding of the principle of electromechanical energy 
conversion. Simple examples will be used for illustrative purposes. In later chapters the analysis of 
continuous energy conversion equipment will be carried out. 
4
4.2 
ENERGY IN MAGNETIC SYSTEM 
Energy can be stored or retrieved from a magnetic system by means of an exciting coil connected to an 
electric source. Consider, for example the magnetic system of an attracted armature relay of Fig. 4.1. The 
resistance of the coil is shown by a series lumping outside the coil which then is regarded as an ideal loss-less 

Principles of Electromechanical Energy Conversion 
159
coil. The coil current causes magnetic ﬂux to be established in the magnetic circuit. It is assumed that all the 
ﬂux f is conﬁned* to the iron core and therefore links all the N turns creating the coil ﬂux linkages of 
 
l = Nf 
(4.1) 
The ﬂux linkage causes a reaction emf of 
 
e = d
dt
l  
(4.2)
to appear at the coil terminals with polarity (as per 
Lenz’s law) shown in the Fig. 4.1. The associated 
circuit equation is 
 
v = iR + e 
 
 = iR + d
dt
l  
(4.3)
The electric energy input into the ideal coil due to the ﬂow of current i in time dt is 
 
dWe = ei dt 
(4.4)
Assuming for the time being that the armature is held ﬁxed at position x, all the input energy is stored in 
the magnetic ﬁeld. Thus 
 
dWe = ei dt = dWf 
(4.5)
where dWf is the change in ﬁeld energy in time dt. When the expression for e in Eq. (4.2) is substituted in 
Eq. (4.5), we have 
 
dWe = idl = F df = dWf 
(4.6)
where F = Ni, the magnetomotive force (mmf ). 
The relationship i-l or F-l is a functional one corresponding to the magnetic circuit which in general is 
nonlinear (and is also history-dependent, i.e. it exhibits hysteresis). The energy absorbed by the ﬁeld for ﬁnite 
change in ﬂux linkages for ﬂux is obtained from Eq. (4.6) as
 
DWf = 
l
l
1
2Ú
i(l) dl = 
f
f
1
2Ú
F(f) df 
(4.7)
As the ﬂux in the magnetic circuit undergoes a cycle f1Æf2Æf1, an irrecoverable loss in energy takes 
place due to hysteresis and eddy-currents in the iron, assuming here that these losses are separated out and 
are supplied directly by the electric source. This assumption renders the ideal coil and the magnetic circuit 
as a conservative system with energy interchange between themselves so that the net energy is conserved. 
The energy absorbed by the magnetic system to establish ﬂux f (or ﬂux linkages l) from initial zero ﬂux is 
 
Wf = 
0
lÚ
i(l) dl = 
0
fÚ
F(f) df 
(4.8)
This then is the energy of the magnetic ﬁeld with given mechanical conﬁguration when its state corresponds 
to ﬂux f (or ﬂux linkages l). 
 
* The leakage ﬂux (which is of course small) does not take part in the energy conversion process. It can be ac-
counted for by placing an imaginary coil in series with the ideal coil which produces exactly the ﬂux linkages 
corresponding to the leakage ﬂux. As in the case of transformers, the inductance of such a coil is referred to as the 
leakage inductance. Here the leakage inductance is assumed to be negligible.
Core
Flux f
x
Armature
R
i
+
–
v
+
–
e
N
Hinge
Fig. 4.1 Attracted armature relay

160 Electric Machines
The i-l relationship is indeed the magnetization curve 
which varies with the conﬁguration variable x (Fig. 4.1: the 
air-gap between the armature and core varies with position 
x of the armature. The total reluctance of the magnetic path 
decreases as x increases). The i-l relationship for various 
values of x is indicated in Fig. 4.2. It immediately follows 
that this relationship can be expressed as 
 
i = i(l, x)
if l is the independent variable or as 
 
l = l(i, x)
if i is the independent variable. 
Therefore, the ﬁeld energy (Eq. (4.8)) is in general a function of two variables,
i.e. 
Wf = Wf (l, x) 
(4.9a)
or 
Wf = Wf (i, x) 
(4.9b)
According to Eqs (4.9a) and (4.9b) ﬁeld energy is determined by the instantaneous values of the system 
states ((l, x) or (i, x) and is independent of the path followed by these states to reach the present values. This 
means that the ﬁeld energy at any instant is history independent. 
A change in l with ﬁxed x causes electric-magnetic energy interchange governed by the circuit Eq. (4.3) 
and the energy Eq. (4.6). Similarly, if x is allowed to change with ﬁxed l, energy will interchange between 
the magnetic circuit and the mechanical system. The general case of such energy interchanges (electric-
magnetic-mechanical) is the subject matter of Sec. 4.3. 
As per Eq. (4.8) the ﬁeld energy is the area between the l-axis and i-l. curve as shown in Fig. 4.3. A new 
term, co-energy is now deﬁned as 
 
W¢f (i, x) = il – Wf (l, x) 
(4.10)
wherein by expressing l as l(i, x), the independent variables of W¢f  become i and x. The coenergy on Fig. 4.3 
is shown to be the complementary area of the i-l curve. It easily follows from Fig. 4.3 that 
 
W¢f = 
l di
i
0Ú
 
(4.11)
Wf = field energy
W'f = coenergy
i
x
-
curve for fixed
l
l-axis
l
i-axis
0
i
Fig. 4.3 
Field energy and coenergy 
l
0
i
x1
x2
x3
x
x
x
1
2
3
>
>
Fig. 4.2 
i -l relationship with variable x 

Principles of Electromechanical Energy Conversion 
161
Linear Case
Electromechanical energy conversion devices are built with air-gaps in the magnetic circuit which serve to 
separate the stationary and moving members. As a result the i-l relationship of the magnetic circuit is almost 
linear; also the losses of magnetic origin are separately accounted for by semi-empirical methods. With the 
linearity assumption the analysis is greatly simpliﬁed. Losses and certain nonlinear effects may then be 
incorporated at a later-stage. 
Assuming linearity, it follows from Eq. (4.8) or Fig. 4.3 that 
 
Wf = 1
2 il = 1
2 Ff = 1
2 Rf2 
(4.12)
where, as it is known, R = F/f = reluctance of the magnetic circuit. Since the coil inductance 
 
L = l/i 
the ﬁeld energy can be expressed as 
 
Wf = 1
2
2
l
L  
(4.13)
In the linear case the inductance L is independent of i but is a function of conﬁguration x. Thus the ﬁeld 
energy is a special function of two independent variables l and x, i.e. 
 
Wf (l, x) = 1
2
2
l
L x
( )  
(4.14)
The ﬁeld energy is distributed throughout the space occupied by the ﬁeld. Assuming no losses and constant 
permeability, the energy density* of the ﬁeld is 
 
wf = 
0
BÚ
HdB = 1
2 HB = 1
2
2
B
m  J/m3 
(4.15)
where 
H = magnetic ﬁeld intensity (AT/m)
 
B = magnetic ﬂux density (T)
The energy density expression of Eq. (4.15) is important from the point of view of design wherein the 
capability of the material is to be fully utilized in arriving at the gross dimensions of the device. 
For the linear case it easily follows from Eq. (4.11) that coenergy is numerically equal to energy, i.e. 
 
W¢f = Wf = 1
2 li = 1
2 Ff = 1
2 PF 2 
(4.16)
where P = f/F = permeance of the magnetic circuit.
Also in terms of the coil inductance 
 
W¢f = 
0
iÚ
(l = Li)di = 1
2 Li2
or in general 
 
¢
W
i x
f ( , ) = 1
2 L(x)i2 
(4.17)
 
* If A(m2) and l(m) are the area and length dimensions of the ﬁeld, then from Eq. (4.8)
 
wf = 
W
Al
iN
l d
NA
H dB
f
B
=
=
l
l
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ Ú
Ú
0
0

162 Electric Machines
The expression for coenergy density is 
 
w¢f = 
0
HÚ
B dH 
(4.18a)
which for the linear case becomes 
 
w¢f = 1
2 mH2 =
1
2
2
B
m  
(4. 18b)
4.3 
FIELD ENERGY AND MECHANICAL FORCE 
Consider once again the attracted armature relay excited by an electric source as in Fig. 4.4. The ﬁeld produces 
a mechanical force Ff in the direction indicated which drives the mechanical system (which may be composed 
of passive and active mechanical elements). The mechanical work done by the ﬁeld when the armature moves 
a distance dx in positive direction is 
 
dWm = Ff dx 
( 4.19)
Mechanical
system
Armature
Electric
source
R
+
–
v
e
+
–
i
N
x
Ff
Fig. 4.4 
Production of mechanical force 
This energy is drawn from the ﬁeld by virtue of change dx in ﬁeld conﬁguration. As per the principle of 
energy conservation 
 
Mechanical energy output = electrical energy input – increase in ﬁeld energy 
(4.20)
or in symbolic form 
 
Ff dx = idl – dWf  
(4.21)
It may be seen that Ff dx is the gross mechanical output, a part of which will be lost in mechanical friction. 
From Eq. (4.10)
 
Wf = il – W¢f (i, x)
Then 
dWf = d(il) – dWf (i, x)
 
 = idl + ldi – ∂
¢
∂
+ ∂
¢
∂
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
W
i
di
W
x dx
f
f
 
(4.22)
Substituting for dWf from Eq. (4.22) in Eq. (4.21), we have 
 
Ff dx = idl – id
di
W
i
di
W
x dx
f
f
l
l
+
- ∂
¢
∂
+ ∂
¢
∂
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙

Principles of Electromechanical Energy Conversion 
163
or 
Ff dx = ∂
¢
∂
-
È
ÎÍ
˘
˚˙
+ ∂
¢
∂
W
i
di
W
x dx
f
f
l
 
(4.23)
Because the incremental changes di and dx-are independent and di is not present in the left-hand side of 
Eq. (4.23), its coefﬁcient on the right-hand side must be zero i.e. 
 
∂
¢
∂
W
i
f  – l = 0
 
l = – ∂
¢
∂
W
x
f  
(4.24)
It then follows from Eq. (4.23) that
 
Ff = 
∂
¢
∂
W
i x
x
f ( , )
 
(4.25)
This expression for mechanical force developed applies when i is an independent variable, i.e. it is a 
current excited system 
If (l, x) are taken as independent variables, 
 
Wf = Wf (l, x)
 
dWf = ∂
∂
+ ∂
∂
W
d
W
x dx
f
f
l
l
 
(4.26)
Substituting Eq. (4.26) in Eq. (4.21) 
 
Ff dx = idl – ∂
∂
- ∂
∂
W
d
W
x dx
f
f
l
l
or 
Ff dx = – 
∂
∂
+
- ∂
∂
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
W
x dx
i
W
d
f
f
l
l  
(4.27)
Since dl, the independent differential, is not present on the left hand side of this equation,
 
i
Wf
- ∂
∂l  = 0
or 
i = ∂
∂
W
x
f ( , )
l
l
 
(4.28)
Hence 
Ff = - ∂
∂
W
x
x
f ( , )
l
 
(4.29)
In this form of expression for the mechanical force of ﬁeld origin, l is the independent variable, i.e. it is a 
voltage-controlled system as voltage is the derivative of l. 
In linear systems where inductances are speciﬁed it is more convenient to use coenergy for ﬁnding the 
force developed (Eq. (4.25)). If the system is voltage-controlled, the current can be determined by writing the 
necessary circuit equations (see Examples 4.11 and 4.12). 
It is needless to say that the expressions of Eqs (4.25) and (4.29) for force in a translatory system will 
apply for torque in a rotational system with x replaced by angular rotation q.

164 Electric Machines
Direction of Mechanical Force Developed 
With reference to Eq. (4.29) it immediately follows that Ff is positive (i.e. it acts in the positive reference 
direction of x) if ∂Wf (l, x)/∂x is negative which means that stored energy of the ﬁeld is reduced with increase 
of x while ﬂux linkages l are held ﬁxed. In the particular case of Fig. 4.4 as x increases (i.e., the armature 
moves towards left), the ﬁeld energy for ﬁxed l is reduced because the air-gap is reduced. It means that Ff in 
this case acts in the positive direction. It is therefore, concluded that the mechanical force produced by the 
ﬁeld acts in a direction to reduce ﬁeld energy or in other words the system seeks a position of minimum ﬁeld 
energy. Similarly, it can be concluded from Eq. (4.25) that the system seeks a position of maximum coenergy. 
Also in Fig. 4.4, the force acts in a direction to increase x thereby reducing the magnetic circuit reluctance 
and increasing the coil inductance. 
Determination of Mechanical Force 
Nonlinear case It was seen above that the mechanical force is given by the partial derivatives of coenergy 
or energy as per Eqs (4.25) and (4.29). In the general nonlinear case, the derivative must be determined 
numerically or graphically by assuming a small increment Dx. Thus 
 
Ff ª 
D
D
¢
W
x
f
i=cost
 
(4.30a)
or 
Ff ª – 
D
D
W
x
f
l =cost
 
(4.30b)
These two expressions will give slightly different numerical values of Ff because of ﬁnite Dx. Obviously 
Ff is the same in each case as Dx Æ 0. Calculation of Ff by Eq. (4.30a) is illustrated in Ex. 4.2. 
Linear case From Eq. (4.17)
 
W¢f (i, x) = 1
2 L(x)i2
\ 
Ff = ∂
¢
∂
W
x
f  = 1
2
2i
L x
x
∂
∂
( )  
(4.31)
From Eq. (4.31), it is obvious that the force acts in a direction to increase the inductance of the exciting 
coil, a statement already made. 
Alternatively from Eq. (4.14)
 
Wf (l, x) = 1
2
2
l
L x
( )
\ 
Ff = - ∂
∂
W
x
f  = 1
2
2
l
L x
L x
x
( )
( )
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
∂
∂
 
(4.32)
It may be seen that Eqs (4.31) and (4.32) are equivalent as i = l/L. 
Also from Eq. (4.12)
 
Wf (f, x) = 1
2 R(x)f2 
\ 
Ff = - ∂
∂
W
x
f  = -
∂
∂
1
2
2
f
R( )
x
x
 
(4.33)

Principles of Electromechanical Energy Conversion 
165
It must be remembered here that there is no difference between l as independent variable or f as 
independent variable as these are related by a constant (l = Nf). It follows from Eq. (4.33) that the force acts 
in a direction to reduce reluctance of the magnetic system, a statement that has been made already. 
Another expression for Ff can be derived as below:
From Eq. (4.12) 
 
Wf (l, x) = 1
2 li(x)
\ 
Ff = - ∂
∂
W
x
f  = -
∂
∂
1
2
l i x
x
( )  
(4.34)
Mechanical Energy 
When the armature in Fig. 4.4 is allowed to move from position xa to xb with the coil current remaining 
constant at io, the mechanical energy output is
 
DWm = 
Ff
x
x
a
bÚ
dx 
(4.35)
Integrating Eq. (4.25)
 
DWm = 
Ff
x
x
a
bÚ
dx = DW¢f  (i remaining constant)
 
 = increase in coenergy 
(4.36)
The graphical representation of Eq. (4.36) is given in Fig. 4.5(a) for the general nonlinear case while 
Fig. 4.5(b) gives the linear case. In each case the electrical energy input is 
 
DWe = i0(l2 – l1) 
(4.37)
For the linear case, it follows from the geometry of Fig. 4.5(b) that 
 
DWf = DW ¢f   = DWm = 1
2 i0(l2 – l1) = 1
2 DWe 
(4.38)
which means that half the electrical energy input gets stored in the ﬁeld and the other half is output as 
mechanical energy. In this kind of operation the armature must move from position xa to xb inﬁnitely slowly 
for the excitation coil current to remain constant. 
l
l1
l2
DWe
DW
=
W'
m
f
D
DW
=
W'
m
f
D
DWe
l
l1
l2
0
b
a
i
0
i
i0
i0
b
a
(b) Linear case
(a) Nonlinear case
Fig. 4.5

166 Electric Machines
Let now the armature in Fig. 4.4 be allowed to move from xa and xb with coil ﬂux linkage l remaining 
constant. Integrating Eq. (4.29), 
 
DWm = 
x
x
a
bÚ
Ff dx = –DWf (l remaining constant)
 
 = decrease in ﬁeld energy 
(4.39)
This is illustrated in Fig. 4.6(a) for the general nonlinear case and in Fig. 4.6(b) for the linear case. In each 
case 
 
DWe = 0 
(4.40)
For the linear case 
 
DWm = 1
2 l0 (i1 – i2) 
(4.41)
For l to remain constant, the armature must move from xa to xb in zero time. Since there is no electrical 
input, the mechanical energy output is drawn from the ﬁeld energy which reduces by an equal amount. 
DW
= –
W
m
f
D
DW
= –
W
m
f
D
l0
l
l0
l
i
i2
i1
0
0
i2
i1
i
b
a
a
b
(a) Nonlinear case
(b) Linear case
Fig. 4.6
The actual armature movement lies between the two ideal cases illustrated above. The corresponding i-l 
relationship is a general path from a to b as shown in Figs. 4.7(a) and (b). In this general case 
 
DWe = area cabd 
 
DWf = area obd – area oac
l
l2
l1
DWm
i2
i1
c
d
b
e
f
a
i
(a) Nonlinear case
l
l2
l1
c
d
DWm
b
a
i2
i1
e
f
i
(b) Linear case
Fig. 4.7

Principles of Electromechanical Energy Conversion 
167
Now 
DWm = DWe – DWf
 
 = area cabd – area obd + area oac
 
 = area oab 
or 
Mechanical energy output = shaded area in Fig. 4.7
Since ab is a general movement, this area which represents the mechanical energy output has to be 
computed graphically or numerically. 
Flow of Energy in Electromechanical Devices 
Electromechanical energy conversion is a reversible process and Eqs (4.25) and (4.29) govern the production 
of mechanical force. In Fig. 4.4 if the armature is allowed to move on positive x direction under the inﬂuence 
of Ff, electrical energy is converted to mechanical form via the coupling ﬁeld. If instead the armature is moved 
in the negative x direction under the inﬂuence of external force, mechanical energy is converted to electrical 
form via the coupling ﬁeld. This conversion process is not restricted to translatory devices as illustrated but is 
equally applicable to rotatory devices (see Ex. 4.4). Electrical and mechanical losses cause irreversible ﬂow 
of energy out of a practical conversion device. The ﬂow of energy in electromechanical conversion in either 
direction along with irrecoverable energy losses is shown in Figs. 4.8(a) and 4.8(b).
Electrical losses
(ohmic and iron-loss)
Mechanical losses
Net electrical input
Gross mechanical output
Electrical
source
Mechanical
sink
Total conversion
process
ei dt
¢
Gross electrical
Net mechanical
output
Coupling
field
vidt
Fvdt or
T dt
w
input
(a)
F vdt
¢
or
T vidt
¢
Electrical losses
Mechanical losses
Ideal conversion
process
Net electrical
Gross mechanical
input
(b)
Electrical
sink
Mechanical
source
Coupling
field
vi dt
¢
output
Fvdt or
T dt
w
Gross electrical output
eidt
F vdt
¢
or
T
dt
¢w
Net mechanical input
Fig. 4.8

168 Electric Machines
EXAMPLE 4.1 Figure 4.9 shows the cross-sectional view of a cylindrical iron-clad solenoid magnet. The 
plunger made of iron is restricted by stops to move through a limited range. The exciting coil has 1200 turns 
and carries a steady current of 2.25 A. The magnetizing curve of the iron portion of the magnetic circuit is 
given below: 
 Flux, Wb 
0.0010 
0.00175 
0.0023 
0.0025 
0.0026 
0.00265
 MMF, AT 
60 
120 
210 
300 
390 
510
Calculate the magnetic ﬁeld energy and coenergy for air-gap of g = 0.2 cm and g = 1 cm with exciting 
current of 2.25 A in each case. 
g
Plunger
5 cm
dia
0.02 cm
1.2 cm
Solenoid
Fig. 4.9
SOLUTION 
The magnetic circuit has two air-gaps. The reluctance of each of these are calculated as follows: 
Case 1: g = 0.2 cm 
 
Reluctance of the circular air-gap = 
0 2
10
4
10
4
0 05
2
7
2
.
( .
)
¥
¥
¥
¥
-
-
p
p
 = 810.5 ¥ 103
 
Reluctance of the annular air-gap = 
0 02
10
4
10
0 05
0 012
2
7
.
.
.
¥
¥
¥
¥
¥
-
-
p
p
 = 84.4 ¥ 103
 
Total air-gap reluctance Rag = 895 ¥ 103
 
Fag = Rag f = 895 ¥ 103f AT 
The combined magnetization curve of iron and air-gaps for g = 0.2 cm is calculated below: 
l (WbT)
AT
i(A)
1.2
955
0.796
2.1
1686
1.405
2.76
2269
1.891
3.0
2538
2.115
3.12
2717
2.264
3.18
2882
2.40
The i-l curve is plotted in Fig. 4.10 from which the ﬁeld coenergy found graphically is 
 
Area oea = 3.73 J 
\ 
Energy area oaf = 3.11 ¥ 2.25 – 3.73 = 3.27 J 

Principles of Electromechanical Energy Conversion 
169
Case 2: g = 1 cm 
 
Reluctance of circular air-gap = 4052.5 ¥ 103
 
Reluctance of annular air-gap = 84.4 ¥ 103 
 
Rag = 4136.7 ¥ 103
Because of such high reluctance of air-gap, ampere-turns absorbed by iron part of the magnetic circuit can be 
neglected, e.g. for 
 
f = 0.0025 Wb
 
AT (air-gap) = 10342
 
AT (iron) = 390
Thus it is seen that even in the near saturation region, AT (iron) is less than 5% of the total AT required for establishing 
the ﬂux. 
For 
i = 2.25 A 
 
F = 1200 ¥ 2.25 = 2700 AT
 
f = 
2700
4136 7
103
. ¥
 = 0.653 ¥ 10–3 Wb 
 
l = Nf = 1200 ¥ 0.653 ¥ 10–3 = 0.784 Wb-T 
 
Field energy = coenergy = 1
2 il
 
 = 1
2  ¥ 2.25 ¥ 0.784 = 0.882 J
EXAMPLE 4.2 In Ex. 4.1 calculate the force on the plunger for g = 0.2 cm with an exciting current of 
2.25 A. 
SOLUTION  
Ff = 
∂
¢
∂
W
i g
g
f ( ,
)
where g is the air-gap. Given g = 0.2 ¥ 10–2 m. 
Case a: Reluctance of the iron path accounted for. 
This is the nonlinear case where the derivative desired can be found numerically. 
Assume 
 
Dg = –0.05 ¥ 10–2 m (a decrease)
 
g + Dg = 0.15 ¥ 10–2 m 
Air-gap reluctance  
 = 810.5 ¥ 103 ¥ 0 15
0 2
.
.
 + 84.4 ¥ 103
 
 = 692 ¥ 103 
For this air-gap
l
AT
i
1.2
752
0.626
2.1
1331
1.110
2.76
1802
1.501
3.0
2030
1.692
3.12
2189
1.824
3.18
2344
1.953

170 
Electric Machines
This is plotted in Fig. 4.10 from which increase in co energy for i = 2.25 A is the area oab, i.e. 
 
DW ¢f = 0.718 J
\ 
Ff = ∂
¢
∂
W
g
f  = 
0 718
0 05
10 2
.
.
-
¥
-
 = –1436 N
Since a decrease in g causes an increase in Wf, the force on plunger 
acts in negative direction (positive direction is in the increasing 
direction of g). Hence the force is attractive (tending to reduce g). 
It may be noted that better results will be obtained by choosing a 
smaller value of Dg.
Case b: The magnetization curve of iron is assumed linear 
(corresponding to the initial slope).
This is the linear case so that we can proceed analytically.
 Total reluctance R = 
60
0 001
.
 + 84.4 ¥ 103 + 
g
4
10
4 0 05
7
2
p
p
¥
¥
-
( .
)
 
 = 144.4 ¥ 103 + 4053g ¥ 105 
 
 = 144.4 (1 + 28.1 ¥ 102g) ¥ 103 
 
f = 
1200
144 4 1
28 1
10
10
2
3
i
g
. (
.
)
+
¥
¥
 Wb 
 
l = Nf = 
(
)
. (
.
)
1200
144 4 1
28 1
10
10
2
2
3
i
g
+
¥
¥
WbT
 
W¢f (i, g) = 1
2 il = 
(
)
. (
.
)
1200
2
144 4 1
28 1
10
10
2 2
2
3
i
g
¥
+
¥
¥
 
Ff = 
∂
¢
∂
W
g
f  = –
(
)
.
. (
.
)
1200
28 1
10
2
144 4 1
28 1
10
10
2 2
2
2
2
3
i
g
¥
¥
¥
+
¥
¥
For g = 0.2 ¥ 10–2 m 
 
Ff = – (
)
( .
)
.
. (
.
. )
1200
2 25
28 1
10
2
144 4 1
28 1
0 2
10
2
2
2
2
3
¥
¥
¥
¥
+
¥
¥
 
 = –1619 N 
The linearity assumption causes the values of force to differ by about 13% from that obtained by the nonlinear method. 
The actual difference will be still less as in the nonlinear case the derivative is obtained by approximation (Dg = 0.05 ¥ 
102 m). It may be noted here that the linearity assumption renders great computational saving and is hence commonly 
employed. 
EXAMPLE 4.3 In Ex. 4.1, assume the reluctance of the iron path to be negligible. The exciting current 
is 2.25 A. The plunger is now allowed to move very slowly from g = 1 cm to g = 0.2 cm. Find the electrical 
energy input to the exciting coil and the mechanical output. 
SOLUTION 
As already calculated in Ex. 4.2, the reluctance of the magnetic path as a function of the air-gap length is 
 
R = (84.4 + 4053 ¥ 102 g) ¥ 10–3
3.5
f
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0 e
2.5
i A
( )
l(WbT)
g = 0.15 cm
d
b
a
DW'f
g = 0.2 cm
l
Fig. 4.10

Principles of Electromechanical Energy Conversion 
171
Flux linkages for an exciting current of 2.25 A are 
 
 = 
(
)
.
(
.
)
1200
2 25
84 4
4053
10
10
2
2
2
3
¥
+
¥
¥
g
 = 
38 4
1
48
102
.
(
)
+
¥
g
WbT 
Since the plunger moves very slowly, the exciting current remains constant at 2.25 A. Hence 
 
DWe = i0 (l2 – l1) 
 
 = 2.25 ¥ 38.4 
1
1
48
0 2
1
1
48
1
+
¥
-
+
¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
.
 
 = 2.25 ¥ 38.4 (0.094 – 0.020) = 6.39 J
 
DWm = 1
2 DWe = 3.195 J
EXAMPLE 4.4 The magnetic ﬂux density on the surface of an iron face is 1.6 T which is a typical 
saturation level value for ferromagnetic material. Find the force density on the iron face.
SOLUTION 
Let the area of the iron face be A(m)2. Consider the ﬁeld energy in the volume contained between the two 
faces with a normal distance x. From Eq. (4.15)
 
Wf (B, x) = 1
2
2
B Ax
m
From Eq. (4.29), the mechanical force due to the ﬁeld is 
 
 Ff = – ∂
∂
W
B x
x
f ( , )  = – 1
2
2
B A
m
The negative sign indicates that the force acts in a direction to reduce x (i.e. it is an attractive force between the two 
faces). The force per unit area is 
 
|Ff | = 1
2
2
B
m
 
 = 1
2
1 6
4
10
2
7
¥
¥
-
( . )
p
 = 1.02 ¥ 106 N/m2
EXAMPLE 4.5 In the electromagnetic relay of Fig. 4.11 excited from a voltage source, the current and 
ﬂux linkages are related as 
 
i = l2 + 2l(1 – x)2 ; x < 1
Find the force on the armature as a function of l. 
SOLUTION 
 
Wf (l, x) = 
0
lÚ
idl
 
 = 1
3 l3 + l2(1 – x)2
 
Ff = - ∂
∂
W
x
f  = 2l2(l – x)2

172 Electric Machines
EXAMPLE 4.6 The electromagnetic relay of Fig. 4.11 is excited from a voltage source 
 
v = 
2 V sin wt 
Assuming the reluctance of the iron path of the magnetic circuit to be constant, ﬁnd the expression for the 
average force on the armature, when the armature is held ﬁxed at distance x.
~
+
v
–
i
N
A
x
Armature
Fig. 4.11 
SOLUTION 
Reluctance of the iron path = a (say)
 
Reluctance of the air path = 2
0
x
A
m
 = bx
 
Total reluctance of the magnetic path, R = a + bx
 
Wf (f, x) = 1
2 R(x)f2  (Note that l = Nf)
 
Ff = - ∂
∂
W
x
x
f ( , )
f
 = -
∂
∂
-
1
2
1
2
2
2
f
f
R
x
b
=
 
(4.42)
Notice that ∂R /∂x = b is positive, so that Ff is negative, i.e. it acts in a direction to reduce x (which means in a direction 
to reduce reluctance R ). 
Now i and v are related by the circuit equation 
 
v = R + L di
dt
whose steady-state solution is 
 
I  = 
V
R
L
L
R
2
2 2
1
+
– -
-
w
w
tan
 
(4.43)
Then 
 
 i = 
2
2
2 2
1
V
R
L
t
L
r
+
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
-
w
w
w
sin
tan
 
(4.44)
From Eq. (2.21) L = N2/R
Then 
f = Ni
R  = 
2
2
2
2
1
2
NV
R
N
t
N
R
(
)
(
)
sin
tan
R
R
+
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
-
w
w
w
 
(4.45)
Substituting f in Eq. (4.42)
 
Ff = –
bN V
R
N
t
N
R
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
(
)
(
)
sin
tan
R
R
+
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
-
w
w
w

Principles of Electromechanical Energy Conversion 
173
Time-average force is then 
 
Ff (av) = 1
0
T
TÚ
Ff dt; T = 2p
w
 
 = -
+
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
bN V
R
N
(
)
(
)
R
w
 
(4.46)
EXAMPLE 4.7 Figure 4.12 shows a rotational electromechanical device called the reluctance motor. It 
is required to determine the torque acting on the rotor as a function of current input to the exciting coil and 
the angle (q) of rotor and stator overlap.
Obviously the torque expression from coenergy, i.e. W¢f (i, f) must be developed. It is assumed that the 
cast steel magnetic path has negligible reluctance so that the reluctance encountered in the magnetic path 
is that due to the two annular air-gaps. 
SOLUTION  
Air-gap area normal to ﬂux, A = r
g
l
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
1
2
q
 
Total air-gap length along the ﬂux path = 2g
 
Reluctance of the air-gaps = 
2
1
2
0
g
r
g
l
m
q
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
(4.47)
 
Flux established, f = 
Ni
r
g
l
g
m
q
0
1
2
2
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
(4.48)
 
Flux linkage, l = fN 
 
 = 
N i
r
g
l
g
2
0
1
2
2
m
q
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
(4.49)
 
Coenergy, W¢f (i, q) = 1
2 li
 
 = 
N i
r
g
l
g
2 2
0
1
2
4
m
q
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
(4.50)
 Torque developed, Tf = ∂
¢
∂
W
i
f ( , )
q
q
 
 = 
N i
r
g l
g
2 2
0
1
2
4
m
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
(4.51)
This torque acts in a direction to increase coenergy for a given coil current i. This happens (see Eq. (4.50)) when q 
increases, i.e. the rotor tends to align itself with the stator. Also observe that the torque in this case is independent of 
angle q. 
Consider the problem from the design point of view. The design question is posed as to the maximum torque that can 
be developed, when the magnetic material is stressed to its saturation value (1.6 T). The torque expression of Eq. (4.51) 
i
N
T
q
g
Stator
Axial length
(normal to paper) = l
Rotor
Cast steel
r
Fig. 4.12 
Elementary reluctance machine

174 Electric Machines
above must therefore be expressed in terms of the ﬂux density rather than the exciting coil current. 
 
B = f/A = F/R  A
 
 = m0
2
Ni
g
 
(4.52)
Using Eq. (4.52) in Eq. (4.51), 
 
Tf = 
B gl r
g
2
0
1
2
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
m
 
(4.53)
Since the maximum value of B is ﬁxed from consideration of the magnetic material, any desired torque can be 
achieved by a suitable combination of g, r and l. The considerations in relative adjustment of these three dimensions of 
the device are beyond the scope of this book.
Let 
g = 0.0025 m
 
l = r = 0.025 m
 
B = 1.6 T 
Then 
Tf = 
( . )
.
.
.
.
1 6
0 0025
0 025 0 025
1
2
0 0025
4
10
2
7
¥
¥
+
¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
¥
-
p
 
 = 3.34 Nm 
In the nonoverlapping region of the rotor and stator, the ﬁeld geometry is very complex and an analytical expression 
for torque is not possible. It is interesting to examine this problem from the point of view of the coil inductance as a 
function of the rotor’s angular position. From Eq. (4.49)
 
L(q) = l/i 
 
 = 
N
l r
g
g
2
0
1
2
2
m
q
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
(4.54)
With constant air-gap length, in the overlapping region, the inductance increases linearly with q acquiring a maximum 
value when rotor is in the vertical position in Fig. 4.12 and then decreases linearly. From Eq. (4.54), the inductance is 
zero at q = 90°, i.e. no overlap between rotor and stator pole 
faces. However, it is known that the coil inductance is not zero 
for q = 90° which means that the inductance model of Eq. (4.54) 
is not valid in the region of low q. In fact, the inductance has 
a least value in the horizontal position of the rotor and rises to 
a maximum value when the rotor goes to the vertical position 
travelling from either direction. In a practical device the region 
between the two pole faces of the stator is narrow (Fig. 4.13) and 
the rotor and stator pole faces are so shaped that the reluctance 
of the magnetic circuit and therefore the coil inductance varies 
almost sinusoidally. The coil inductance has a maximum value 
when the rotor is aligned along the main pole axis (called the 
direct axis) and a minimum value when the rotor is at 90° to 
the main pole axis (called the quadrature axis) as shown in 
Fig. 4.13. It is convenient to choose the direct axis as the 
reference for angle q. 
Main pole
Position
of rotor at
= 0
t
Quadrature
axis
Rotor axis
Direct axis
w¢
d
q
Fig. 4.13

Principles of Electromechanical Energy Conversion 
175
It is readily seen from Fig. 4.13 that the coil inductance is a double frequency function of q (there are two cycles of 
L-variation in one complete rotation of the rotor). Therefore, L(q) can be written as:
 
L(q) = L1 + L2 cos 2q 
(4.55)
This variation of inductance is depicted in Fig. 4.14. 
L( )
q
0
p/2
p
3 /2
p
2p
q
Lq (rotor aligned to quadrature axis)
Ld (rotor aligned to direct axis)
L2 =
(
–
)
L
L
d
q
1
2
L1
Fig. 4.14 Variation of the coil inductance with rotor position in a reluctance machine
Assume the excitation current to be sinusoidal, 
 
i = Im cos wt 
(4.56)
Field coenergy is (Eq. (4.17))
 
W¢f (i, q) = 1
2 L(q)i2
The mechanical torque due to ﬁeld is then 
 
Tf = ∂
¢
∂
Wf
q
 = 1
2
2i
L
∂
∂
( )
q
q
 
 = –I 2
m L2 sin 2q cos2 wt 
(4.57)
In terms of the angular speed of the rotor (w¢)
 
q = w¢t – d 
(4.58)
where 0 is the position of rotor at t = 0 when current i is maximum. Then 
 
Tf = – I 2
m L2 sin 2 (w¢t – d) sin wt 
 
 = – 1
2 I 2
m L2 sin 2 (w¢t – d) (1 + cos 2 wt)
 
 = – 1
2 I 2
m L2{sin 2 (w¢t – d) + sin 2 (w¢t – d) cos 2 wt}
 
 = -
¢ -
+
¢ +
-
+
¢ -
-
ÏÌÓ
¸˝
1
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
I L
t
t
t
t
t
m
sin (
)
[sin (
)
sin (
)]
w
d
w
w
d
w
w
d
˛
 
(4.59)

176 Electric Machines
It is observed from Eq. (4.59) that the torque is time-varying with the average value zero if of w¢ π w. However, when 
the rotor runs at speed w¢ = w, called the synchronous speed, the average torque is 
 
Tf (av) = 1
4 I2
m L2 sin 2d 
(4.60)
From Fig. 4.14 
 
L2 = 1
2 (Ld – Lq)
\ 
Tf (av) = 1
8 I 2
m (Ld – Lq) sin 2d 
(4.61)
Thus, for example, with Im = 5 A, Ld = 0.25 H, Lq = 0.15 H, the maximum value of the average torque is 
 
Tf (av)|max = 1
8  ¥ 25 ¥ (0.25 – 0.15) = 0.3125 Nm
when 
d = 45°
Sinusoidal torque – d variation is typical of synchronous machines. 
Singly-excited devices discussed earlier, are generally employed for motion through a limited distance or 
rotation through a prescribed angle. Electro-mechanical transducers have the special requirement of producing 
an electrical signal proportional to forces or velocities or producing force proportional to electrical signal 
(current or voltage). Such transducers require two excitations—one excitation establishes a magnetic ﬁeld 
of speciﬁed strength while the other excitation produces the desired signal (electrical or mechanical). Also 
continuous energy conversion devices—motors and generators—require multiple excitation. One continuous 
energy conversion device has already been studied in Ex. 4.6 which is singly-excited (reluctance motor). 
Figure 4.15 shows a magnetic ﬁeld system with two electrical excitations—one on stator and the other 
on rotor. The system can be described in either of the two sets of three independent variables; (l1, l2, q) or 
(i1, i2, q). In terms of the ﬁrst set 
 
Tf = - ∂
∂
Wf (
,
, )
l l q
q
1
2
 
(4.62)
Stator
i1
+
–
1
2
q
+
–
Rotor
v1
l2
l1
Tf
v2
i2
Fig. 4.15 

Principles of Electromechanical Energy Conversion 
177
where the ﬁeld energy is given by
 
Wf (l1, l2, q) = 
i d
i d
1
1
2
2
0
0
2
1
l
l
l
l
+Ú
Ú
 
(4.63)
Analogous to Eq. (4.28)
 
i1 = ∂
∂
Wf (
,
, )
l l q
l
1
2
1
 
i2 = ∂
∂
Wf (
,
, )
l l q
l
1
2
2
Assuming linearity 
l1 = L11i1 + L12i2 
(4.64a)
 
l2 = L21i1 + L22i2; (L12 = L21) 
(4.64b)
Solving for i1 and i2 in terms of l1, l2 and substituting in Eq. (4.63) gives upon integration* 
 
Wf (l1, l2, q) = 1
2 b11l2
1 + b12l1l2 + 1
2 b22l2
2 
(4.65)
where 
b11 = L22/(L11L22 – L2
12)
 
b22 = L11/(L11L22 – L2
12)
 
b12 = b21 = –L12/(L11L22 – L2
12)
The self- and mutual-inductance of the two exciting coils are functions of angle q. 
If currents are used to describe the system state 
 
Tf = ∂
¢
∂
W
i i
f ( ,
, )
1
2 q
q
 
(4.66)
where the coenergy is given by 
 
W ¢f (i1, i2, q) = 
0
1iÚ
l1 di1 + 
0
2iÚ
l2 di2 
(4.67)
In the linear case 
 
W¢f (i1, i2, q) = 1
2 L11i 2
1 + L12i1i2 + 1
2 L22i 2
2
where inductances are functions of angle q.
 
*  
i1 = b11l11 + b12l2
 
  
i2 = b21l1 + b22l2; b21 = b12
 
  Wf (l1, l2, q) = 
(
)
(
)
b l
b l
l
b l
b
l
l
l
l
11 1
12 2
1
12 1
22 2
2
0
0
2
1
+
+
+
Ú
Ú
d
d
 
  
 = b
l
l
b
l
l
l
l
b
l
l
l
l
l
l
11
1
1
12
2
1
0
1
2
0
22
2
2
0
0
1
2
2
1
d
d
d
d
+
+
È
Î
ÍÍ
˘
˚
˙˙
+
Ú
Ú
Ú
Ú
 
  
 = b
l
l
b
l l
b
l
l
l
l l
l
11
1
1
12
1 2
22
2
2
0
0
0
2
1
2
1
d
d
d
+
+
Ú
Ú
Ú
(
)
,
 
  
 = 1
2
1
2
11 1
2
12 1 2
22 2
2
b l
b l l
b
l
+
+

178 Electric Machines
EXAMPLE 4.8 For the system of Fig. 4.15, various inductances are: 
 
L11 = (4 + cos 2q) ¥ 10–3 H
 
L12 = 0.15 cos q H 
 
L22 = (20 + 5 cos 2q) H
Find the torque developed if i1 = 1 A, i2 = 0.02 A.
SOLUTION
 
W¢f (i1, i2, q) = 1
2 (4 + cos 2q) ¥ 10–3 ¥ i2
1 + (0.15 cos q)i1i2 + 1
2 (20 + 5 cos 2q)i 2
2 
 
Tf = ∂
¢
∂
Wf
q
 = (sin 2q) ¥ 10–3 i2
1 – 0.15 (sin q)i1i2 – 5(sin 2q)i 2
2
 
 = –10–3 sin 2q – 3 ¥ 10–3 sin q
The ﬁrst term – 10–3 sin 2q is the reluctance torque which arises if the self-inductances are functions of space angle 
q. If L1 and L2 are independent of q (the rotor and stator are round with uniform air-gap, known as the round rotor 
construction) the reluctance torque becomes zero. The second term is the torque produced by the mutual component. It is 
also seen that the reluctance torque is a double frequency of the space angle as compared to the second term. The negative 
sign indicates that the torque is restoring in nature, i.e. it opposes the displacement q.
EXAMPLE 4.9 In the electromagnetic relay shown in Fig. 4.16
 
L11 = k1/x, L22 = k2/x, L12 = k3/x 
Find the expression for the force on the armature, if 
 
i1 = I1 sin w1t, i2 = I2 sin w2t 
write an expression for the average force. For what relationship between w1 and w2, the average force is (i) 
maximum (ii) minimum.  
SOLUTION 
 
W¢f (i1, i2, x) = 1
2
1k
x i2
1 + k
x
2 i1i2 + 1
2
3
k
x i 2
2
 
Ff = ∂
¢
∂
W
x
f  = - 1
2
1
2
k
x
i 2
1 – k
x
2
2 i1i2 – 1
2
3
2
k
x
i 2
2
Substituting for i1, i2
 
Ff = - 1
2
1
2
k
x
I 2
1 sin2 w1t – k
x
2
2 I1I2 sin w1t sin w2t – 1
2
3
2
k
x
I 2
2 sin2w 2t
 
Ff = - 1
4
1
2
2
k
x
I 2
1 + 1
4
1
2
2
k
x
cos 2w1t – 1
2
2
2
k
x
I1I2 cos(w1 – w2)t
 
   + 1
2
1
2
k
x
I1I2 cos (w1 + w2)t – 1
4
2
2
k
x
I 2
2 – 1
4
3
2
k
x
I 2
2 cos 2w2t
Since these are mixed frequency terms 
 
Ff (av) = lim
( )
T
f
T
T
F
t dt
Ú
1
0
l1
L11
i2
L22
L12
x
Fig. 4.16

Principles of Electromechanical Energy Conversion 
179
If w1 π w2,
 
Ff (av) = - 1
4
1
2
2
k
x
I 2
1 – 1
4
2
2
k
x
I 2
2 (minimum force)
If w1 = w2,
 
Ff (av) = - 1
4
1
2
2
k
x
I2
1 – 1
2
2
2
k
x
I1I2 – 1
4
2
2
k
x
I 2
2 (maximum force)
EXAMPLE 4.10 Two coupled coils have self- and mutual-inductance of 
 
L11 = 2 + 1
2x ; L22 = 1 + 1
2x ; L12 = L21 = 1
2x
over a certain range of linear displacement x. The ﬁrst coil is excited by a constant current of 20 A and the 
second by a constant current of –10 A. Find: 
 (a) Mechanical work done if x changes from 0.5 to 1 m.
 (b) Energy supplied by each electrical source in part (a). 
 (c) Change in ﬁeld energy in part (a). 
Hence verify that the energy supplied by the sources is equal to the increase in the ﬁeld energy plus the 
mechanical work done. 
SOLUTION 
Since it is the case of current excitations, the expression of coenergy will be used
 
W¢f (i1, i2, x) = 1
2 L11i 2
1 + L12i1i2 + 1
2 L22i 2
2
 
 = 2
1
2
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
x
 ¥ 200 + 1
2x  ¥ (–200) + 1
1
2
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
x
 ¥ 50 
 
 = 450 + 25
x
 
(a)  
Ff = ∂
¢
∂
W
x
f  = - 25
2
x
 
  
DWm = 
F dx
f
0 5
1
.Ú
 = 
-
Ú
25
2
0 5
1
x
.
dx = –25 J
 
(b)  
DWe1 = 
i
x
x
1
0 5
1
1
l
l
1
=
=
(
. )
(
)
Ú
dl1 = i1[l1 (x = 1) – l1(x = 0.5)]
 
  
l1 = L11i1 + L12i2
 
  
 = 2
1
2
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
x
 ¥ 20 + 1
2x  ¥ (–10) = 40 + 5
x
 
  
l1(x = 0.5) = 50, l1(x = 1) = 45
 
 \ 
DWe1 = 20(45 – 50) = –100 J
 
 Similarly 
DWe2 = i2[l2(x = 1) – l2(x = 0.5)]
 
  
l2 = L12i1 + L22i2

180 Electric Machines
 
  
l2 = 1
2x  ¥ 20 + 1
1
2
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
x
 ¥ (–10) = –10 + 5
x
 
  
l2(x = 0.5) = 0, l2 (x = 1) = –5
 
  
DWe2 = –10(–5) = 50 J
 
 Net electrical energy input, DWe = DWe1 + DWe2 
 
  
= –100 + 50 = –50 J 
 
(c) For calculating the change in the ﬁeld energy, b’s have to be obtained. 
 
  
b11 = L
D
22 ; D = L11L22 – L2
12
 
  
 = 2
1
4
3
x
x
+
+
 
 Similarly, 
b22 = 4
1
4
3
x
x
+
+
 
  
b12 = -
+
1
4
3
x
 
 At x = 0.5; 
b11 = 2
5 , b22 = 3
5 , b12 = - 1
5
 
 At x = 1; 
b11 = 3
7 , b22 = 5
7 , b12 = - 1
7
 
 The values of l have already been calculated at x = 0.5, 1 m. 
 
 As per Eq. (4.65), the ﬁeld energy is given by 
 
  
Wf = 1
2 b11l2
1 + b12l1l2 + b22l2
2
 
 The ﬁeld energy at x = 0.5 m and x = 1 m is then calculated as 
 
  
Wf (x = 0.5) = 1
2
2
5
¥
 ¥ (50)2 = 500 J 
 
  
Wf (x = 1) = 1
2
3
7
¥
 ¥ (45)2 – 1
7  ¥ 45 ¥ (–5) + 1
2
5
7
¥
 ¥ (–5)2
 
  
 = 475 J
 
 Hence 
DWf = Wf (x = 1) – Wf (x = 0.5) = 475 – 500 = –25 J
 
  
DWf + DWm = –25 – 25 = –50 = DWe (veriﬁed)
 
 Note: In the linear case with constant current excitation 
 
  
DWf = DW¢f 
 
 DWf can be easily calculated from part (a) without the need of calculating b’s. Thus
 
  
W¢f  = 450 + 25
x
 
  
DW¢f  = W¢f (x = 1) – W¢f (x = 0.5)
 
  
 = 475 – 500 = – 25 J
EXAMPLE 4.11 Two coupled coils have self- and mutual-inductances as in Ex. 4.10. Find the expression 
for the time-average force of ﬁeld origin at x = 0.5 m if: 

Principles of Electromechanical Energy Conversion 
181
 (a) both coils are connected in parallel across a voltage source of 100 cos 314t V,
 (b) both coils are connected in series across a voltage source of 100 cos 314t V,
 (c) coil 2 is shorted and coil 1 is connected to a voltage source of 100 cos 314t V, and
 (d) both coils are connected in series and carry a current of 0.5 cos 314t A.
SOLUTION 
Though cases (a), (b) and (c) pertain to voltage excitation, the coenergy approach works out to be more 
convenient and will be used here.
 
W¢f (i1, i2, x) = 1
2 L11i2
1 + L12i1i2 + 1
2 L22i 2
2
 
 = 1
2 2
1
2
1
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1 2
2
2
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
+
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
x i
x i i
x i
 
Ff = 
∂
¢
∂
W
i i
x
x
f ( ,
, )
1 2
 
 = -
-
-
1
4
1
2
1
4
2 1
2
2 1 2
2
2 2
2
x
i
x
i i
x
i
For x = 0.5 m
 
Ff = –i 2
1 – 2i1i2 – i 2
2
The force acts in a direction to decrease x. 
 
(a) Both coils connected in parallel across the voltage source: 
 
  
L11 = 2 + 1
2
0 5
x x= .
 = 3
 
  
L22 = 1 + 1
2
0 5
x x= .
 = 2
 
  
L12 = L21 = 1
2
0 5
x x= .
 = 1
 
 From Eqs (4.64a) and (4.64b)
 
  
v = e1 = d
dt
l1  = 3 di
dt
di
dt
1
2
+
 = 100 cos 314t
 
  
v = e2 = d
dt
l2  = di
dt
di
dt
1
2
2
+
 = 100 cos 314t
 
 Solving we get 
 
  
di
dt
1  = 20 cos 314t
 
  
di
dt
2  = 40 cos 314t
 
 Integrating 
 
  
i1 = 20
314 sin 314t
 
  
i2 = 40
314 sin 314t

182 Electric Machines
 
 Substituting for i1 and i2 in the expression for Ff, 
 
  
Ff = -
1
314 2
(
)
[(20)2 + 2 ¥ 20 ¥ 40 + (40)2] sin2 314t
 
  
 = -Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
60
314
2
sin2 314t
 
 But 
  
1
0
T
TÚ
sin2wt dt = 1
2
 
 \ 
Ff (av) = -
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
1
2
60
314
2
 = 0.0183 N
 
(b) Both coils connected in series across the voltage source: 
 
  
v = d
dt
d
dt
l
l
1
2
+
 
  
 = 3
2
1
2
1
2
di
dt
di
dt
di
dt
di
dt
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ +
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
 But i1 = i2 = i (series connection)
 
 \ 
v = 7 di
dt  = 100 cos 314t 
 
 Integrating we get
 
  
i = 
100
7
314
¥
 sin 314t
 
 Substituting in the expression for Ff,
 
  
Ff = –4 ¥ 
100
7
314
2
¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
sin2 wt
 
 or 
Ff (av) = –2
100
7
314
2
¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 = –0.00144 N
 
(c) Coil 2 shorted, coil 1 connected to voltage source:
 
  
100 cos 314t = 3 di
dt
di
dt
1
2
2
+
 
  
0 = di
dt
di
dt
1
2
2
+
 
 Solving we have
 
  
di
dt
1  = 40 cos 314t
 
  
di
dt
2  = 20 cos 314t
 
 Upon integration we get 
 
  
i1 = 40
314 sin 314t
 
  
i2 = - 20
314  sin 314t

Principles of Electromechanical Energy Conversion 
183
 
 Substituting for i1 and i2 in the expression for Ff,
 
  
Ff  = -
1
3142 [(40)2 – 2 ¥ 40 ¥ 20 + (20)2] sin2 314t
 
  
Ff (av) = -
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
1
2
20
314
2
 = –0.0203 N
 
(d) Both coils in series carrying current:
 
  
i = 0.5 cos 314t
 
 Substituting in the expression for Ff, 
 
  
Ff  = –(l + 2 + 1) ¥ (0.5)2 cos2 314t
 
  
Ff (av) = –0.5 N
EXAMPLE 4.12 A doubly-excited magnetic ﬁeld system has coil self-and mutual-inductances of 
 
L11 = L22 = 2 
 
L12 = L21 = cos q 
where q is the angle between the axes of the coils. 
 (a) The coils are connected in parallel to a voltage source v = Vm sin wt. Derive an expression for the 
instantaneous torque as a function of the angular position q. Find therefrom the time-average torque. 
Evaluate for q = 30°, v = 100 sin 314t. 
 (b) If coil 2 is shorted while coil 1 carries a current of i1 = Im sin wt, derive expressions for the 
instantaneous and time-average torques. Compute the value of the time-average torque when q = 45° 
and i1 = 
2 sin 314t.
 (c) In part (b) if the rotor is allowed to move, at what value of angle will it come to rest? 
SOLUTION 
Tf = ∂
¢
∂
W
i i
f ( ,
, )
1 2 q
q
 
 = 1
2
1
2
11
1
2
12
1 2
22
2
2
∂
∂
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
+
∂
∂
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
+
∂
∂
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
L
i
L
i i
L
i
q
q
q
Substituting the values of inductances, 
 
Tf = –(sin q) i1i2 
From circuit equations 
 
Vm cos wt = 2 di
dt
1  + (cos q) di
dt
2
 
Vm cos wt = (cos q) di
dt
di
dt
1
2
2
+
Solving these we get 
 
di
dt
1  = di
dt
2  = V
t
m sin
(
cos )
w
q
2 +
Integrating 
 
i1 = i2 = 
V
t
m sin
(
cos )
w
w
q
2 +

184 Electric Machines
Substituting in Tf,
 
Tf = -
+
Vm
2
2
2
2
sin
(
cos )
q
q
w
sin2 wt
 
Tf (av) = -
+
Vm
2
2
2
2 2
sin
(
cos )
q
q
w
Given: 
q = 30°, v = 100 sin 314t
\ 
Tf (av) = –
(
) sin
(
cos
)
(
)
100
30
2 2
30
314
2
2
2
∞
+
∞
¥
 = –0.069 Nm
 
(b) From circuit equations
 
  
0 = (cos q) di
dt
di
dt
1
2
2
+
 
 or 
di
dt
2  = - 1
2 (cos q) di
dt
1
 
 or 
i2 = - 1
2 (cos q)i1 
 
 Given: 
i1 = Im sin wt
 
 \ 
i2 = - 1
2 Im(cos q) sin wt
 
 Substituting in Tf, 
 
  
Tf = –(sin q) ¥ 1
2 I 2
m (cos q) sin2 wt
 
  
 = - 1
2 I 2
m(sin q)(cos q) sin2 wt 
 
  
Tf (av) = - 1
8 I2
m(sin 2q)
 
 Given: 
q = 45°, Im = 
2
 
 \ 
Tf (av) = 1
8  ¥ 2 sin 90° = 0.25 Nm
 
(c) The average torque is zero and changes sign at q = 0°, 90°, 180°. The rotor can come to rest at any of these values 
of q but the position of stable equilibrium will only be q = 90°, 270°, … (The reader should draw Tf (av) versus q 
and reason out).
4.5 
FORCES/TORQUES IN SYSTEMS WITH PERMANENT MAGNETS 
Method of ﬁnding forces in systems with permanent magnets is best illustrated by an example. Figure 4.17(b) 
shows a moving armature relay excited by a permanent magnet (PM). 
The dc magnetizing curve of the permanent magnet is drawn in Fig. 4.17(a) which upon linear extrapolation 
at the lower B-end can be expressed as 
 
Bm = mR (Hm – H¢c) = mR Hm + Br 
(4.68)
 
mR = recoil permeability of the PM material
 
 = Br/H¢c; on linearized basis

Principles of Electromechanical Energy Conversion 
185
Soft iron portion of the magnetic circuit including the armature is assumed to have m = . For ﬁnding the 
force on the armature, it will be convenient to use Eq. (4.25) for which we will need the expression of system 
coenergy W¢f (i, x) which must be independent of i as there is no exciting current in the system. Thus coenergy 
will be a function of the space variable x only i.e., 
 
W¢f (i, x) ﬁ W¢f (x)
Coenergy is given by the expression of Eq. (4.11), i.e. 
 
W¢f  = 
l di
i
0Ú
This expression needs to be carefully interpreted for the case of permanent magnetic excited systems. The 
limits of integration in this expression mean from state of zero ﬂux to a state of certain ﬂux (but with zero 
current). The state of zero ﬂux is imagined by means of a ﬁctitious exciting coil (of Nf turns) carrying current 
if as shown in Fig. 4.17(c). The current is assumed to be adjusted to value If causing the core ﬂux to reduce to 
zero and the original state is then reached by imaging the current (if) to reduce to zero. Thus
m
¢
R
r
C
=
/
B H
–
–
H
H
¢c,
c
Bm
Br
Hm
if
Nf
x
PM
d
Cross-
m =
m =
(a) B-H curve of permanent magnet (PM)
sectional area A (uniform)
x
(b)
Armature
x
PM
d
m =
m =
x
(c)
Fig. 4.17

186 Electric Machines
 
W¢f  = 
l f
I f
0Ú
dif 
(4.69)
At any value of if, we can write 
 
Nf if = Hmd + 2Hg x 
(4.70)
Continuity of ﬂux allows us to write 
 
Bm A = Bg A
or 
Bm = mR Hm = Bg = m0 Hg 
(4.71)
Substituting for Hg in Eq. (4.70)
 
Nf if = Hmd + 2(x/m0)Bm
Substituting for Hm from Eq. (4.68) and solving we get 
 
Bm = m
m
m
R
f
f
c
R
N i
H d
d
x
(
)
(
/
)
-
¢
+ 2
0
 
(4.72)
Flux linkages of the ﬁctitious coil are given by
 
lf = ABm Nf = m
m
m
R
f
f
f
c
R
N A N i
H d
d
x
(
)
(
/
)
-
¢
+ 2
0
 
(4.73)
Flux and ﬂux linkages would be zero at 
 
if = (H¢c d/Nf ) 
(4.74)
Substituting Eq. (4.69), we get 
 
W¢f (x) = 
m
m
m
R
f
f
f
c
R
i
N A N i
H d
d
x
f
(
)
(
/
)
-
¢
+
Ú
2
0
0
dif
 
 = 
m
m
m
R
c
R
AH d
d
x
¢
+
2
0
2
2
[
(
/
) ]  
(4.75)
The force on the armature is then given by 
 
Ff = 
dW
x
d x
f¢ ( )
 
 = 
(
)
[
(
/
) ]
m
m
m
m
R
c
R
H
d A
d
x
¢
+
2
2
0
0
2
2
But 
mRH¢c = Br
Therefore, 
Ff = 
AB
x d
r
R
2
0
0
2
1
2
m
m
m
[
(
/
)( / ) ]
+
 
(4.76)
Let us now calculate the magnitude of the force for typical numerical values as below,
 
Br = 0.96 T, H ¢c = 720 kA/m, d = 2 cm, A = 6 cm2 
(i) x = 0 cm (ii) x = 0.5 cm 
Now 
m
m
R
0
 = B
H
r
c
/
¢
m0
 = 
0 96
720
10
10
4
3
7
.
¥
¥
p  = 1.06

Principles of Electromechanical Energy Conversion 
187
Substituting values in force equation (Eq. (4.76))
(i) x = 0 
 
Ff = -
¥
¥
¥
-
-
6
10
0 96
4
10
4
2
7
( .
)
p
 = –440 N 
(ii) x = 0.5 cm 
 
Ff = -
¥
¥
¥
+
¥
¥
-
-
6
10
0 96
4
10
1
2
1 06
0 5 2
4
2
7
2
( .
)
[
.
( . / )]
p
 = –188 N
Note: Negative sign in force is indicative of the fact that the force acts in a direction to reduce x (air-gap). 
Similar treatment could be used for mixed situation where system has both permanent magnets and 
exciting coils. It should be stressed here that an alternative procedure is to use the ﬁnite element method to 
evaluate the coenergy from the vector form of Eq. (4.18a) integrated over the volume, i.e., 
 
W¢f = 


B dHdV
B
V
◊
Ú
Ú
0
0
 
(4.77) 
To calculate force –dW¢f /dx is obtained by numerical differentiation (see Example 4.2). This method is of 
general applicability wherever the magnetic circuit analysis cannot be carried out. 
4.6 
ENERGY CONVERSION VIA ELECTRIC FIELD 
Electromechanical energy conversion via the electric ﬁeld is analogous to the magnetic ﬁeld case studied 
earlier. Charge in the electric ﬁeld is analogous to ﬂux linkages and voltage to current in the magnetic ﬁeld case. 
Electric Field Energy 
Figure 4.18 shows a parallel plate condenser with a ﬁxed and a movable plate. The condenser is fed from 
a current source. The leakage current of the condenser is represented outside by conductance so that the 
condenser’s electric ﬁeld is conservative. Let us assume that the movable plate of the condenser is held ﬁxed 
in position x. The electric energy input to the ideal condenser gets stored in the electric ﬁeld so that 
 
dWe = v dq = dWf 
(4.78)
The total ﬁeld energy is 
 
Wf = 
vdq
q
0Ú
 
(4.79)
Movable plate
Fixed plate
l
q,i
G
v
+
–
Mechanical
system
x
x0
Ft
Fm
Fig. 4.18

188 Electric Machines
In a condenser v and q are linearly related as 
 
C = q/v = capacitance of the device
\ 
Wf = 1
2
2
q
C  
(4.80)
The capacitance C is a function of conﬁguration (position x of the movable plate) and can be expressed as 
 
C = 
e0
0
A
x
x
(
)
-
where A = plate area and e0 = permittivity of free space. Thus Wf, the ﬁeld energy is a function of two 
independent variables q and x, i.e.
 
Wf (q, x) = 1
2
2
q
C x
( )  
(4.81)
The expression of Eq. (4.81) for the ﬁeld energy immediately reveals that the electric ﬁeld energy can be 
changed electrically by changing q or mechanically by changing x, i.e. moving the movable plate.
The ﬁeld energy can also be written as 
 
Wf (v, x) = 1
2 vq = 1
2 C(x)v2 
(4.82)
The energy density in the electric ﬁeld can be expressed as 
 
wf = 
0
DÚ
EdD = 1
2
2
0
D
e
 = 1
2 e0 E2 
(4.83)
where 
E = electric ﬁeld intensity or potential gradient 
 
 = D/e0 
 
D = electric ﬁeld ﬂux density 
Energy Conversion 
Let the movable plate of the device be now permitted to move under the action of the electric ﬁeld force Ff. 
As per the principle of energy conservation: 
Mechanical energy output (work done by the ﬁeld force)
 
 = electric energy input – increase in the ﬁeld energy 
or  
Ff dx = v dq – dWf 
(4.84)
Let us choose (v, x) as independent variables. Then 
 
q = q(v, x)
 
dq = ∂
∂
+ ∂
∂
q
v d
q
x dx
v
 
(4.85)
and 
Wf = Wf (v, x)
 
dWf = ∂
∂
+ ∂
∂
W
v d
W
x dx
f
f
v
 
(4.86)
Substituting Eqs (4.85) and (4.86) in Eq. (4.84) and reorganizing 
 
Ff dx = v q
x
W
x
dx
v q
v
W
v
dv
f
f
∂
∂- ∂
∂
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
+
∂
∂- ∂
∂
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
(4.87)

Principles of Electromechanical Energy Conversion 
189
Since v and x are independent variables, the coefﬁcient of dv in Eq. (4.87) must be zero. Hence 
 
  v q
x
∂
∂
(v, x) – ∂
∂
W
x
f (v, x) = 0
so  
Fdx = ∂
∂x (vq (v, x) – Wf (v, x)) 
(4.88)
Deﬁning coeneregy as 
 
W¢f (v, x) = vq(v, x) – Wf (v, x) 
(4.89)
the electric ﬁeld force Ff can be written as 
 
Ff = ∂
¢
∂
W
v x
x
f ( , )  
(4.90)
If instead (q, x) are taken as independent variables
 
Wf = Wf (q, x) 
 
dWf = 
∂
∂
+ ∂
∂
W
q dq
W
x dx
f
f
 
(4.91)
Substituting in Eq. (4.84)
 
Ff dx = v
W
q
dq
W
x dx
f
f
- ∂
∂
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
- ∂
∂
 
(4.92)
Since v and q are independent variables, the coefﬁcient of dq in Eq. (4.92) must be zero. Hence Eq. (4.92) 
gives 
 
Ff = - ∂
∂
W
q x
x
f ( , )
 
(4.93)
From Eqs (4.89) and (4.79), the coenergy* can be written as 
 
W¢f (v, x) = 
q dv
v
0Ú
 
(4.94) 
For a linear system q = Cv 
 
W¢f (v, x) = 1
2 C(x)v2 
(4.95)
 
*  
W¢f (v, x) = vq – 
vdq
q
0Ú
 
 Integrating the second term by part 
 
  
W¢f (v, x) = vq – vq + 
qdv
v
0Ú
 
  
 = 
qdv
v
0Ú

190 Electric Machines
The coenergy density is given by
 
W ¢f = 1
2 e0E2 
(4.96)
EXAMPLE 4.13 Find an expression for the force per unit area between the plates of a parallel plate 
condenser in terms of the electric ﬁeld intensity. Use both the energy and coenergy methods. Find the value 
of the force per unit area when E = 3 ¥ 106 V/m, the breakdown strength of air. 
SOLUTION 
With reference to Fig. 4.18, the energy in the electric ﬁeld is 
 
Wf (q, x) = 1
2
2
q
C  = 1
2
2
0
0
q
x
x
A
(
)
-
e
From Eq. (4.95)
 
Ff = - ∂
∂
W
q x
x
f ( , )  = 1
2
2
0
q
Ae
But 
q = DA = e0EA
 
Ff = 1
2 e0E2A or Ef /A = 1
2 e0E2
 
 = 1
2  ¥ (3 ¥ 106)2 ¥ 8.85 ¥ 10–12 = 39.8 N/m2
From Eq. (4.95), the ﬁeld coenergy is 
 
W¢f (v, x) = 1
2 Cv2 = 1
2
2
0
0
v
A
x
x
e
(
)
-
Now from Eq. (4.90) 
 
Ef = ∂
¢
∂
W
v x
x
f ( , )  = 1
2
2
0
0
2
v
A
x
x
e
(
)
-
But 
v = E(x0 – x)
\ 
Ff = 1
2 e0E2A or Ff /A = 1
2 e0E2 (as before)
It may be observed here that while the force density on the bounding surface in a magnetic ﬁeld near saturation 
was found to be 1.02 ¥ 106 N/m2, it has a value* of only 39.8 N/m2 in an electric ﬁeld with the electric intensity at its 
breakdown value. This indeed is the reason why all practical energy conversion devices make use of the magnetic ﬁeld as 
the coupling medium rather than the electric ﬁeld. Electric ﬁeld devices are sometimes used as transducers. 
4.7 
DYNAMICAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMECHANICAL SYSTEMS 
Figure 4.19 shows an electromagnetic relay whose armature is loaded with spring K, damper B, mass M and 
a force generator F. Figure 4.20 shows the abstracted diagram of a general electromechanical system. It is 
easily noticed that the electromechanical device has one electrical port and one mechanical port (one terminal 
of the mechanical port being the ground) through which it is connected to the electrical source on one side 
and mechanical load on the other side. In general there can be more than one electrical port (multiply excited 
system). 
 
* Such a low value results from e0 = 8.85 ¥ 10–12 compared to m0 = 4p ¥ 10–7

Principles of Electromechanical Energy Conversion 
191
i
+
v
–
N
A
K
B
M
f
Load
l0
x
Fig. 4.19
i
R
+
v
–
Electro-
mechanical
conversion
device
Mechanical
load
x
Ff
Fig. 4.20 Abstracted electromechanical system diagram 
Let the electromechanical device has an inductance 
 
L = L(x)
The governing electrical equation is 
 
v = iR + d
dt
l  = iR + d
dt [L(x)i]
 
 = iR + 
L x di
dt
i dL x
dx
dx
dt
( )
( )
self-inductance
voltage
speed vol

 

+
◊
tage
 



 
(4.97) 
Now 
W¢f (i, x) = 1
2 L(x)i2
\ 
Ff = ∂
¢
∂
W
x
f  = 1
2
2i dL x
dx
( )  
(4.98)
The mechanical power output is given by 
 
Pm = Ff dx
dt  = 1
2
2i
dL x
dx
dx
dt
¥
¥
( )
 
 = 1
2 i i dL x
dx
dx
dt
( ) ¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  
(4.99a)

192 Electric Machines
 
 = 1
2 current ¥ speed voltage* 
(4.99b)
Mechanical power output results (i.e. electrical power is converted to mechanical form) when the current 
in the device ﬂows in opposition to the speed voltage. When the current in the device is in the same direction 
as the speed voltage, electrical power is output, i.e., mechanical power is converted to electrical form.
The governing differential equation of the mechanical system is
 
Ff = M d x
dt
B dx
dt
2
2 +
+ Kx + f 
(4.100a)
or 
1
2
2i dL x
dx
( )  = M d x
dt
B dx
dt
2
2 +
 + Kx + f 
(4.100b) 
Now for the speciﬁc system of Fig. 4.19, when the armature is in position x, the self-inductance L is found 
below: 
 
P = 
m0
0
2
A
I
x
(
)
-
 
L(x) = N2P = 
m0
2
0
2
AN
I
x
(
)
-
 
dL x
dx
( )  = m0
2
0
2
2
AN
l
x
(
)
-
Substituting in Eqs (4.97) and (4.98), the two differential equations deﬁning the system’s dynamic 
behaviour are obtained as: 
 
v = iR + m
m
0
2
0
2
0
2
0
2
2
2
AN
l
x
di
dt
AN i
l
x
dx
dt
(
)
(
)
-
¥
+
-
¥
 
(4.101)
  
m0
2 2
0
2
4
AN i
l
x
(
)
-
 = M d x
dt
B dx
dt
2
2 +
 + Kx + f 
(4.102)
These are nonlinear differential equations which can be solved numerically on the digital computer. 
However, for small movement around the equilibrium point the following procedure can be adopted. 
Let the equilibrium point be (V0, I0, X0, f0). At equilibrium the system is stationary and all derivatives are 
zero. Thus from Eqs (4.101) and (4.102), the following relationships between equilibrium values are obtained.
 
V0 = I0R 
(4.103)
 
m0
2
0
2
0
0
2
4
AN I
l
x
(
)
-
 = KX0 + f0 
(4.104)
Let the departure (small) from the equilibrium values be
(v1, i1, x1, f1)
 
* Half the electrical input (ei) is stored in the magnetic ﬁeld. This agrees with Eq. (4.38). In continuous energy con-
version devices (electric motors and generators), however, the average energy stored in the magnetic ﬁeld remains 
constant over a cycle of operation, so that the electrical power input (EI for a dc device where E and I are dc speed 
voltage and current input or EI cos f for an ac device where E is the rms speed voltage and I is the rms current 
input while cos f is the power factor) is fully converted to mechanical form or vice versa. 

Principles of Electromechanical Energy Conversion 
193
Then 
V0 + v1 = (I0 + i1)R + 
m
m
0
2
0
0
1
2
1
0
2
0
1
0
0
1
2
1
2
2
AN
l
X
x
di
dt
AN
I
i
l
X
x
dx
dt
(
)
(
)
(
)
-
-
◊
+
+
-
-
 
m0
2
0
1
2
0
0
1
2
4
AN
I
i
l
X
x
(
)
(
)
+
-
-
 = M d x
dt
B dx
dt
2
1
2
1
+
 + K(X0 + x1) + f0 + f1 
Neglecting products of small departures and small departures compared to equilibrium values, and also 
cancelling out equilibrium terms as per Eqs (4.103) and (4.104), 
 
v1 = i1R + m
m
0
2
0
0
1
0
2
0
0
0
2
1
2
2
AN
l
X
di
dt
AN I
l
X
dx
dt
(
)
(
)
-
+
-
 
(4.105)
 
 2
4
0
2
0 1
0
0
2
m AN I i
l
X
(
)
-
 = M dx
dt
B dx
dt
1
2
1
+
 + Kx1 + f1 
(4.106)
Equations (4.105) and (4.106) are linear differential equations governing the system behaviour for small 
incremental values around the equilibrium values (called the operating point). These can be easily solved 
analytically for dynamic or steady-state conditions. 
 
 
 Electromechanical energy conversion takes place via the medium of a magnetic or electric ﬁeld–the 
magnetic ﬁeld being most suited for practical conversion devices.
 
 Energy can be stored or retrieved from magnetic system by means of an exciting coil connected to an 
electric source. The ﬁeld energy can be given by
  
  
Wf = Wf (l, x) or Wf = Wf (i, x) 
 
 l – ﬂux linkage
 
 x – air-gap between the armature and core
 
 i – current 
 
 Mechanical force is given by
 
  
Ff = - ∂
∂
W
x
x
f ( , )
l
 or  Ff = ∂
¢
∂
W
x
x
( , )
l
 
 For doubly excited magnetic ﬁeld system, ﬁeld energy is given by
 
  
Wf = (l1, l2, q) = 
i d
i d
1
1
2
2
0
0
2
1
l
l
l
l
+ Ú
Ú
 
 Electromechanical energy conversion via the electric ﬁeld is analogous to the magnetic ﬁeld, charge in 
the electric ﬁeld is analogous to ﬂux linkages and voltage to current in the magnetic ﬁeld case
 
  
Wf = 1
2
2
q
C
 
 q – charge in Coulombs 
 
 C – capacitance of the device

194 Electric Machines
 4.1 In the electromagnetic relay of Fig. 4.11, 
the exciting coil has 1000 turns. The cross-
sectional area of the core is A = 5 cm ¥ 
5 cm. Reluctance of the magnetic circuit may 
be assumed negligible. Also neglect fringing 
effects. 
 
(a) Find the coil inductance for an air-gap of 
x = 1 cm. What is the ﬁeld energy when 
the coil carries a current of 2.0 A? What 
is the force on the armature under these 
conditions? 
 
(b) Find the mechanical energy output when 
the armature moves from xe = 1 cm to xb 
= 0.5 cm assuming that the coil current is 
maintained constant at 2.0 A. 
 
(c) With constant coil current of 2.0 A, derive 
an expression for force on armature as a 
function of x. Find the work done by the 
magnetic ﬁeld when x changes from xe 
= 1cm to xb = 0.5 cm from 
x
x
e
bÚ
Ff dx. 
Verify the result of part (b). 
 
(d) Find the mechanical energy output in part 
(b) if the ﬂux linkages are maintained 
constant corresponding to a coil current 
of 2.0 A. 
 4.2 In Fig. 4.7(b) if the i-l curve ab is assumed 
to be a straight line, ﬁnd the expression for 
the mechanical energy output. If this ﬁgure 
pertains to the electromagnetic relay of 
Fig. 4.11, ﬁnd the value of the mechanical 
energy output, given that: i1 = 2.0 A, i2 = 1.5 
A, xa = 1 cm and xb = 0.5 cm. 
 4.3 Consider the cylindrical iron-clad solenoid 
magnet of Fig. 4.9. The data for magnetizing 
curve of the iron part of the solenoid are given 
in Ex. 4.1. For g = 0.2 cm, ﬁnd the force on the 
plunger if l is assumed constant corresponding 
to an exciting current of 2.25 A. Why does this 
value differ from that calculated in Ex. 4.2?
 4.4 For the cylindrical iron-clad solenoid magnet 
of Fig. 4.9, assume that the magnetic path 
reluctance remains constant at a value 
corresponding to the linear part of the 
magnetization curve. 
 
(a) Derive an expression for the force in 
terms of g for constant coil current 
2.25 A. Calculate the value of the force 
for g = 1 and 0.2 cm. 
 
(b) What is the electrical energy input to 
the system when g changes from 1 to 
0.2 cm, while the coil current is 
maintained constant at 2.25 A. 
 
(c) Calculate the work done on the plunger 
during the movement speciﬁed in part 
(b).
 
(d) With the coil current maintained constant 
at 2.25 A. What is the direction and 
magnitude of the electrical energy ﬂow if 
the plunger is made to move from g = 0.2 
to 1 cm?
 4.5 Repeat part (c) of Problem 4.4 with the 
nonlinear magnetization curve for the iron 
path. Compare the two results and comment. 
 4.6 For the electromagnetic relay of Fig. 4.11, 
calculate the maximum force on armature if 
saturation ﬂux density in the iron part is 1.8 T. 
Given: cross-sectional area of core = 5 cm ¥ 
5 cm, coil turns = 1000. 
 4.7 For the electromagnetic device shown in 
Fig. P4.7, assume the reluctance of the iron 
part of the magnetic circuit to be negligible. 
Determine the time-average force on the 
movable member at any ﬁxed position of the 
moving member, if
 
(a) i = I cos wt
 
(b) v = V cos wt 
 4.8 Two coils have self- and mutual-inductances 
of 
 
  L11 = L22 = 
2
1
2
(
)
+ x
 
  L12 = (1 – 2x)
 

Principles of Electromechanical Energy Conversion 
195
i
R
v
+
–
Air-gap
negligible
x
Movable member
Cross-sectional
area A
N
Fig. P4.7 
 
 The coil resistances may be neglected. 
 
(a) If the current I1 is maintained constant at 
5 A and I2 at –2 A, ﬁnd the mechanical 
work done when x increases from 0 to 
0.5 m. What is the direction of the force 
developed?
 
(b) During the movement in part (a), what is 
the energy supplied by sources supplying 
I1 and I2?
 4.9 Two coils have self- and mutual-inductances 
of 
 
  
L11 = L22 = 
2
1
2
(
)
+ x
 
  
L12 = 
1
1
2
+ x
 
 Calculate the time-average force and coil 
currents at x = 0.5 m if:
 
(a) both the coils connected in parallel 
across a voltage source of 100 cos 314t,
 
(b) coil 2 is shorted while coil 1 is connected 
across a voltage source of 100 cos 314t, 
and 
 
(c) the two coils are connected in series 
across a voltage source of 100 cos 314t.
 4.10 The doubly-excited magnetic ﬁeld system of 
Fig. 4.15 has coil self- and mutual-inductances 
of 
 
  
L11 = L22 = 2 + cos 2q 
 
  
L12 = cos q
 
 where q  is the angle between the axes of the 
coils. The coils are connected in series and 
carry a current of i = 
2 I sin wt. Derive an 
expression for the time-average torque as a 
function of angle q. 
 4.11 In the rotary device of Fig. 4.15, when the rotor 
is the region of q = 45°, the coil inductances 
can be approximated as 
 
L11 = L12 = 2 + p
q
2 1
45
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
L12 = L21 = p
q
2 1
90
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
 where q is in degrees 
 
 Calculate the torque of ﬁeld origin if the rotor 
is held in position q = 45° with
 
(a) i1 = 5 A, i2 = 0 
 
(b) i1 = 0, i2 = 5 A 
 
(c) i1 = 5 A, i2 = 5 A 
 
(d) i1 = 5 A, i2 = –5 A 
 
(e) Find the time-average torque if coil 1 
carries a current of 5 sin 314t while 
coil 2 is short circuited. 
 4.12 Figure P4.12 shows the cross-sectional view 
of a cylindrical plunger magnet. The position 
i
+
V
–
N
d
D
x
t
h
Plunger of mass M
Spring constant k
Coefficient of friction B
Nonmagnetic sleeve
Cylindrical core
R
Fig. P4.12

196 Electric Machines
of the plunger when the coil is unexcited is 
indicated by the linear dimension D. Write 
the differential equations describing the 
dynamics of the electromagnetic system. 
Determine the equilibrium position of the 
plunger and linearize the describing equation 
for incremental changes about the equilibrium 
point. Assume the iron to be inﬁnitely 
permeable. 
 4.13 For the electromagnet of Fig. P4.13 write 
the dynamical equation. Assume the cross-
sectional area of each limb of the magnet to be 
A and that the coupling between the two coils 
to be tight. Iron is to be taken as inﬁnitely 
permeable.  
i2
R2
i1
R1
v2
v1
N1
N2
A
D
x
+
+
–
–
A
A
K
B
Rest position of
armature
Armature, mass M
Fig. P4.13
 4.14 For the electromechanical system shown 
in Fig. P4.14, the air-gap ﬂux density under 
steady operating condition is 
 
 B(t) = Bm sin wt 
 
 Find 
 (a) the coil voltage, 
 (b) the force of ﬁeld origin as a function of 
time, and
 (c) the motion of armature as a function of 
time.
i
+
–
N
K
B
Rest position of
armature
Armature, mass M
Coil resistance
negligible
A
D
x
v1
Fig. P 4.14 
 
1. Deﬁne ﬁeld energy and co-energy.
 
2. Why do all practical energy conversion 
devices make use of the magnetic ﬁeld as a 
coupling medium rather than an electric ﬁeld?
 
3. What are the special applications where the 
electric ﬁeld is used as a coupling medium 
for electromechanical energy conversion? 
Also explain why electric ﬁeld coupling is 
preferred in such applications.
 
4. Elaborate the statement, “In a round rotor 
machine (uniform air-gap) with exciting coil 
placed in stator slots no reluctance torque is 
developed”.
 

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
197
5.1 
INTRODUCTION
It was seen in Ch. 4 that electromechanical energy conversion takes place 
whenever a change in ﬂux is associated with mechanical motion. Speed voltage is 
generated in a coil when there is relative movement between the coil and magnetic 
ﬁeld. Alternating emf is generated if the change in ﬂux linkage of the coil is 
cyclic. The ﬁeld windings which are the primary source of ﬂux in a machine are, 
therefore, arranged to produce cyclic north-south space distribution of poles. 
A cylindrical structure is a natural choice for such a machine. Coils which are the seats of induced emf’s 
are several in number in practical machines and are suitably connected in series/parallels and in star/delta 
3-phase connection to give the desired voltage and to supply the rated current. This arrangement is called 
the armature winding. When the armature coils carry currents they produce their own magnetic ﬁeld which 
interacting with the magnetic ﬁeld of the ﬁeld winding produces electro-magnetic torque tending to align 
the two magnetic ﬁelds. 
 The ﬁeld winding and armature winding are appropriately positioned on a common magnetic circuit 
composed of two parts—the stator (stationary member) and the rotor (rotating member). The stator is 
the annular portion of a cylinder in which rotates a cylindrical rotor; there being an appropriate clearance 
(air-gap) between the two. The rotor axle is carried on two bearings which are housed in two end-covers 
bolted on the two sides of the stator as shown in Fig. 5.1. The stator and rotor are made of high permeability 
magnetic material—silicon steel. Further, the member in which the ﬂux rotates is built up of thin insulated 
laminations to reduce eddy-current loss. 
 Since electromechanical energy conversion requires relative motion between the ﬁeld and armature 
winding, either of these could be placed on the stator or rotor. Because of practical convenience, ﬁeld 
windings are normally placed on the rotor in the class of machines called the synchronous machines; the 
cross-sectional view of one such machine is shown in Fig. 5.1. The armature winding is housed in suitably 
shaped slots cut out in the stator. The ﬁeld winding is supplied with dc from an external source, called the 
exciter, through a pair of slip-rings as shown in Fig. 5.1. The exciter is generally coupled directly to the 
rotor shaft of the synchronous machine.
 In an induction machine the stator has a 3-phase winding which draws a component of current from the 
mains to set up a cyclic ﬂux pattern in the air-gap which rotates at a speed corresponding to supply frequency 
(synchronous speed ) and the rotor is either properly wound and the winding is short-circuited or is merely 
a set of copper (or aluminium) bars placed in rotor slots short-circuited at each end by means of end-rings.
5

198 Electric Machines
5.2 
ELEMENTARY  MACHINES 
Synchronous Machine
Figure 5.2 shows the simpliﬁed version of an ac synchronous generator with a 2-pole ﬁeld winding on the 
rotor and a single coil aa¢ on the stator. The type of rotor poles are known as salient (projecting) poles; and 
are excited by means of dc fed to the concentrated ﬁeld winding. The current is fed to the rotor via two 
slip-rings and carbon brushes as shown in Fig. 5.1. Figure 5.2 also shows two mean paths of magnetic ﬂux 
(shown dotted). The magnetic neutral regions are located in the interpolar gaps. Without any signiﬁcant loss 
of accuracy, the reluctance of the iron path will be neglected. Assuming that the air-gap over the pole-shoes 
is uniform, the  ﬂux density in the gap over the pole-shoes is constant (as mmf acting along any ﬂux path is 
constant for the concentrated ﬁeld winding); the ﬂux density in air layer along the stator periphery gradually 
falls off to zero in the interpolar region. The result is a ﬂat-topped ﬂux density wave as shown in Fig. 5.3. 
Since the magnetic ﬂux enters the stator normally, the relative movement between the stator conductors (coil-
sides of the stator coil) and the air-gap ﬂux density is mutually perpendicular. This results in the emf being 
induced along the stator conductors as per the Blv rule, with emf direction on being governed by 

v
B
¥
 or 
the Fleming’s right-hand rule. It is to be further observed that the magnetic ﬂux density is constant along the 
axial length; the end effects (fringing) at either end of the cylindrical structure are neglected in this model. 
Stator (laminated)
End cover
Field windings
Bearing
Armature winding
Field pole
Rotor
Pole shoe (laminated)
End Cover
Brushes
Coupled to dc
generator to
supply the field
winding
Insulation
Coupled to prime-
mover (supplying
mechanical power)
Bearing
Slip-rings and
brushes (for feeding
direct current to the
field winding)
Fig. 5.1 AC machine-synchronous type
 In dc machines a most convenient and practical arrangement is to generate alternating voltages and to 
convert these to dc form by means of a rotating mechanical rectiﬁer. Therefore, it is necessary that the 
armature winding in a dc machine is on the rotor and the ﬁeld winding on the stator.
 In this chapter, through suitable approximations, the physical machine will be reduced to a simple 
mathematical model.

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
199
+
e
Magnetic axis of
the field
a
w
w
=
,
= speed in rad elect/s
t
Stator coil
axis
–
a
n
S
a¢
N
Fig. 5.2 Elementary synchronous generator—salient-pole 2-pole rotor
0
B
p
q
2p
Fig. 5.3
In ac machines it is desirable for the induced emfs to 
be sinusoidal in waveform, therefore, ﬂux density wave in 
the machine air-gap must be sinusoidal. This is achieved 
in the salient pole construction (with concentrated ﬁeld 
coils) by providing nonuniform air-gap above pole-
shoes; minimum air-gap in the middle of the pole-shoe 
progressively increasing towards outer edges. Here it 
will be assumed the air-gap ﬂux density wave is perfectly 
sinusoidal as shown in Fig. 5.4. 
Another method of obtaining a sinusoidal B-wave in 
air-gap is the use of the nonsalient pole structure, i.e. a 
cylindrical rotor with uniform air-gap but with a suitably 
B
0
w
B - wave in space
a
a¢
p
2p
Coil-span = 1/2
-wave length
or
rad
B
p
q
Fig. 5.4

200 
Electric Machines
distributed ﬁeld winding along the rotor periphery as shown in Fig. 5.5. In this structure as one moves away 
from the pole-axis, the ﬂux paths link progressively smaller number of ﬁeld ampere-turns. The ampere-turns 
can be so distributed as to give a nearly sinusoidal* B-wave in space as shown in Fig. 5.4. 
The armature coil in the elementary 2-pole machine of Fig. 5.2 is placed in two diametrically opposite slots 
notched out on the inside of the stator. The coil can have many 
turns. Various shapes of coils are employed; Fig. 5.6 shows a 
diamond-shaped coil. Each coil has two sides termed coil sides†. 
The active length of coil-sides equals the magnetic length of 
the stator over which the B-wave acts to induce emf. No emf is 
produced in end connections which are suitably formed so as 
to be neatly accommodated on the stator ends away from the 
rotating parts. 
The two coil-sides of our elementary machine are shown in 
the cross-sectional developed diagram of Fig. 5.6. Since the 
coil-sides are 1/2 B-wave length (p radians) apart, the voltages 
induced‡ in the two coil-sides (Blv, where v is the peripheral 
velocity of the pole-faces) are identical in value but opposite in 
sign so that the total coil voltage is double the coil-side voltage 
and has the same waveform as the B-wave and is shown in 
Fig. 5.7. One cycle of the alternating emf is generated in one 
revolution of the rotor.
Active conductor
length /
End connections
(overhang)
Coil-span (pitch) =
1/2
-wave length
B
(a) Single-turn coil
Stator
length
Coil sides
a
a¢
a
a¢
(b) Multi-turn coil
Fig. 5.6
 
* Actual B-wave in this case will be a stepped wave, whose fundamental is being considered in our model. The high 
frequency harmonics corresponding to the steps are ignored as they do not affect machine performance signiﬁ-
cantly.
 
† A coil-side in a single-turn coil is a conductor and in a multi-turn coil it is a bundle of conductors (equivalently it 
can be considered as one conductor).
 
‡ The direction of induced emf can be established by Fleming’s right-hand rule in which the motion is that  of a 
conductor with respect to the ﬁeld.
Magnetic axis
of the field
N
S
Fig. 5.5 
Nonsalient pole (cylindrical) rotor

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
201
Consider now a machine with a 4-pole structure, as shown in Fig. 5.8, the poles being alternately north 
and south. The ﬂux-density space wave of this structure is drawn in Fig. 5.9. It has two complete cycles in the 
total angle of 2p radians which will now be referred to as the mechanical angle. It is obvious from Figs 5.8 
 
e
0
p
2p
wt
 
N
n
S
N
S
Coil-span = 1/2
-wave length or
rad elect
B
p
a1
a¢2
a2
a¢1
 Fig. 5.7 
Coil emf in the elementary machine of 
Fig. 5.8 
An elementary 4-pole synchronous generator
 
 
Fig. 5.2 (w
and 5.9 that now two coils can be placed symmetrically-one coil under each pair of poles. Each coil has a 
span ( pitch) of 1/2 B-wave length and the axes of the two coils are spaced one full B-wave length apart. It is 
immediately seen that magnetic and electrical conditions existing under one pair of poles are merely repeated 
under every other pole-pair. The emf’s induced in coils a1a¢l and a2a¢2 are both alternating, equal in magnitude 
and in time phase to each other. It is convenient to work in terms of one pole pair of a multi-polar machine 
(number of poles must obviously be even). The total angular span of one pole pair is therefore taken as 2p 
and is referred to as electrical angle as different from the actual mechanical angle. Let 
 
q = electrical angle 
 
q m = mechanical angle 
B
0
Coil-span = 1/2
-wave length =
rad elect
B
p
B-wave
p
a1
a¢1
a¢2
a2
qm (mech rad)
q (elect rad)
Spacing between coil axis
(
- wave length or 2
rad elect)
B
p
2p
4p
2p
p
Fig. 5.9

202 Electric Machines
These angles are both shown in Fig. 5.9 Taking the ratio of total electrical and mechanical angles of a 
P-pole machine,
 
q
qm
 = 2
2
2
2
p
p
¥ ( / )
P
P
=
\ 
q = 
P
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ qm 
(5.1)
The span of the coil, called the coil-pitch or coil-span, which was indicated to be 1/2 B-wavelength, will be 
p rad (180°) in electrical angle and is ﬁxed irrespective of the number of machine poles. Such a coil is called 
full-pitched. For the time being, it will be assumed that all coils are full-pitched. Short-pitched (chorded) 
coils, i.e., coils with angular span less than 180∞ elect. are also employed in practice and will be discussed 
in Sec. 5.3.
In a P-pole machine, one cycle of alternating emf is generated in each coil as one pole-pair of the rotor 
poles glides past the stator. Thus for one complete revolution of the rotor, P/2 cycles of emf are generated in 
the coil. Therefore, the frequency of the voltage wave (it is a time wave) is
 
f = P
n
nP
2
60
120
¥
=
Hz 
(5.2)
where 
n = speed of the rotor in revolution per minute (rpm) 
Differentiating each side of Eq. (5.1) with respect to time 
 
w = 
P
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ wm  
(5.3) 
where 
w = rotor speed in electrical rad/s
 
wm = rotor speed in mechanical rad/s 
Obviously 
w = 2pf  rad (elect.)/s 
(5.4) 
The two coils of the 4-pole generator of Fig. 5.8 are seats 
of identical emfs and can be connected in series or parallel 
as shown in Figs 5.10(a) and (b). The series connection 
gives double the voltage of one coil and can handle the same 
maximum current as any one coil. The parallel connection 
has the same voltage as that of each coil and has twice the 
maximum current-carrying capacity of one of the coils. The 
designer exploits the series-parallel arrangement of coil 
groups to build a machine of desired voltage and current 
rating.
Three-phase Generator (Alternator)
Practical synchronous generators are always of the 3-phase kind because of the well-known advantages* 
of a 3-phase system. If two coils were located at two different space locations in the stator of Fig. 5.2, their 
emf’s will have a time phase difference corresponding to their electrical space displacement. If three coils 
a1
a¢1
a2
(a)
(b)
a
a1
a¢1
a¢2
a2
a¢
a¢2
Fig. 5.10 
 
* All power generation and transmission systems are of 3-phase. Except for fractional-kW and for certain special 
purposes all motors are of 3-phase. 

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
203
are located in the stator of the 2-pole machine of Fig. 5.2 at relative electrical spacing of 120∞ (or 2p/3 rad), 
an elementary 3-phase machine results as is shown in Fig. 5.11(a). The corresponding 4-pole arrangement is 
depicted in Fig. 5.11(b) where each phase has two symmetrically placed coils corresponding to each pair of 
poles. The coils of each phase are series/parallel connected and the three phases of a synchronous generator 
are generally connected in star as shown in Figs 5.12(a) and (b). 
c¢
b
Three-phase, 2-pole synchronous
generator
60°elect
b¢
a
N
c
120°
120°
S
a¢
(a)
60°elect
120°elect
120°
elect
N
Three-phase, 4-pole synchronous
generator
(b)
S
S
N
a1
b¢2
c¢2
c2
a¢2
b2
c¢1
a2
b1
a¢1
c1
b¢1
Fig. 5.11
a¢1
A
a1
a2
a¢2
c¢2
c2
c¢1
c1
C
B
b¢2
a¢2
b¢2
b2 b¢1 b1
(a)
A
a1
a¢1
c¢2
c2
C
B
a2
b¢1
b1
c1
b2
(b)
c¢1
120°
Fig. 5.12 Star connected elementary 3-phase generator.
The process of torque production in a machine will be explained in Sec. 5.5 after gaining some familiarity 
with the rotating magnetic ﬁeld produced by a current-carrying 3-phase winding.
The dc Machine
Figure 5.13 shows a 2-pole elementary dc machine with a single coil rotating armature. It may be seen that 
the ﬁeld winding is stationary with salient poles whose pole-shoes occupy a major part of the pole-pitch. 
An alternating emf is induced in the coil due to rotation of the armature past the stator (ﬁeld) poles. The 
two ends of the armature coil are connected to two conducting (copper) segments which cover slightly less 
than a semicircular arc. These segments are insulated from each other and from the shaft on which they are 

204 Electric Machines
mounted. This arrangement is called the commutator. Current is collected from the commutator segments by 
means of copper-carbon brushes. The connection of the coil to the outside circuit reverse each half cycle in 
such a manner that the polarity of the one brush is always positive and the other negative. This indeed is the 
rectiﬁcation action of the commutator-brush arrangement. As already stated, it is because of this requirement 
of the mechanical rectiﬁcation action, to obtain direct voltage from the alternating induced emf, that the 
armature in a dc machine must always be a rotor and the ﬁeld winding must always be placed on the stator. 
Mean flux paths
dc excitation
Brush
dc output
Commutator
segments
N
n
a
a¢
S
+
–
Armature
Pole-shoe
Pole
Fig. 5.13 A 2-pole elementary dc machine
The air-gap under the poles in a dc machine is almost uniform and further the pole-shoes are wider than in 
a synchronous machine (pole-arc is about 70% of the pole-pitch). As a result, the ﬂux density in air around 
the armature periphery is a ﬂat-topped wave as shown in Fig. 5.14(a). The voltage induced in the coil (full-
pitched) has a similar wave shape. However, at the brushes both half cycles of voltage wave are positive, 
(Fig. 5.14(b)) because of the commutator’s rectiﬁcation action. It is easy to see that such a waveform has a 
 
Bpeak
qm
B
0
a
B-wave
p
1/2
-wave length or
rad elect
B
p
2 /
p P
a¢
4 /
p P
2p
q
 
Brush
voltage
0
p
2p
wt
 
Fig. 5.14(a) 
Fig. 5.14(b)

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
205
higher average value for a given value of Bpeak’ which therefore explains why a dc machine is designed to 
have a ﬂat-topped B-wave.
The actual dc machine armature has several coils placed in slots around the armature which are connected 
in the from of a lap or wave winding. The addition of coil emfs (waveform as in Fig. 5.14(b)) with time phase 
displacement results in almost constant dc voltage at brushes. The reader may add two such waveforms at 90∞ 
elect displacement and ﬁnd that dc (average) voltage becomes double but per cent voltage variations reduce 
and the frequency of variations doubles.
5.3 GENERATED EMF
The quantitative expressions will now be derived for the generated emf in synchronous  and dc machine 
armatures. Some idea of ac windings will be advanced here and certain sweeping statements made, but the 
discussion on dc winding will be postponed to Ch. 7.
Generated Voltage of ac Winding 
The B-wave of a synchronous machine (in general multi-polar) assumed sinusoidal is drawn in Fig. 5.15 and 
a single full-pitched coil (coil-side space separation p rad (180∞) elect.) is shown in cross-sectional from. The 
B-wave moves towards left with a speed of w elect. 
rad/s or wm mech. rad/s. At the origin of time the 
coil-sides are located in the interpolar region where 
the pole ﬂux links the coil. At any time t the coil has 
relatively moved by
 
a = wt elect. rad
to the right of the B-wave. The B-wave can be 
expressed as
 
B = Bp sin q
 
 = Bp sin 
P
m
2 q
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
where Bp = peak ﬂux density 
Since the ﬂux is physically spread over the mechanical angle, the ﬂux f linking the coil can be computed 
by integrating over the mechanical angle. Thus 
 
f = 
B
P
p
m
P
P
sin
/
(
)/
2
2
2
q
a
p
a
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
+
Ú
lr dqm 
(5.5)
where 
l = active coil-side length (axial stator length) and 
 
r = mean radius of the stator at the air-gap. 
Since 
qm = 2
P q
Eq. (5.5) modiﬁes to 
 
f = 
2
P
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
+
Ú
a
p
a
Bp lr sin q dq
B
B-wave
Bp
a
a
a¢
p
p
a
+
2p
qm
q
w w
, m
Fig. 5.15
coil at any time t

206 
Electric Machines
 
 = 
2
P
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ 2B p lr cos a
 
 = 
2
P
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ 2Bp lr cos wt = F  cos wt 
(5.6) 
It is, therefore, seen that the ﬂux linking the coil varies sinusoidally and has a maximum value of
 
F = 4
P Bp lr (ﬂux/pole) 
(5.7)
at a = wt = 0, which indeed is ﬂux/pole. The ﬂux linkages of the coil at any time t are 
 
l = Nf = NF cos wt 
(5.8)
where N = number of turns of the coil. 
Hence the coil induced emf is 
 
e = - d
dt
l  = wNF sin wt 
(5.9)
The negative sign in Eq. (5.9) (e = –dl/dt) accounts for the fact that the assumed positive direction of emf 
and current in the coil aa¢ of Fig. 5.2 produces ﬂux along the coil axis causing positive ﬂux linkages. In case 
of the transformer the positive direction of emf was assumed such as to cause a current which would produce 
negative ﬂux linkages and therefore the induced emf law used was e = +dl/dt. 
It may be observed that the spatial ﬂux density wave upon rotation causes time-varying ﬂux linkages with 
the coil and hence the production of emf, an effect which is produced by a ﬁxed-axis time-varying ﬂux in a 
transformer. The time-variation factor is introduced by rotation causing the phenomenon of electromechanical 
energy conversion which is not possible in a transformer with ﬁxed-axis time-varying ﬂux.
The rms value of emf induced in the coil from Eq. (5.9) is
 
E = 
2 pfNF = 4.44 fNF volts 
(5.10)
which is the same result as in a transformer except for the fact that F here is the 
ﬂux/pole.
It may be observed from Eqs (5.6) and (5.9) that the sinusoidally varying ﬂux 
linking the coil (represented by the phasor F ) leads the sinusoidally varying emf 
(represented by the phasor E ) by 90∞. The phasor relationship is illustrated by the 
phasor diagram of Fig. 5.16. This is in contrast of the transformer case wherein the 
ﬂux phasor lags the emf phasor by 90° (refer Fig. 3.4). This difference is caused 
by the negative sign in the induced emf of Eq. (5.9) while a positive sign was used 
for the transformer.
Distributed Winding
It may be seen from Eq. (5.7) that the ﬂux/pole is limited by the machine dimensions and the peak ﬂux density 
which cannot exceed a speciﬁed value dictated by saturation characteristic of iron. Therefore, for inducing 
an emf of an appropriate value in a practical machine (it may be as high as 11/
3  to 37/
3 kV phase), a 
large number of coil turns are needed  and it is not possible to accommodate all these in a single slot-pair. 
Furthermore, it may be also noticed that with one coil/pole pair/phase, i.e. one slot/pole/phase, the periphery 
E
F
Fig. 5.16

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
207
of the stator is far from being fully utilized. It is, therefore, natural to create more slots/pole/phase (SPP) on 
the stator periphery. In a practical machine with S slot distributed uniformly round the stator periphery,
 
SPP = m = S
qP   q = number of phases (generally q = 3) 
(5.11)
Figure 5.17 illustrates a 2-pole, 3-phase machine with m = 3. The angle between adjacent slots is 
 
g = pP
S  elect. rad 
(5.12)
The winding of phase a in the machine has three coils (11¢, 22¢ and 33¢) which are placed in three slot-
pairs distributed in space with an angular separation of g elect. rad. The total angle s = mg occupied by the 
phase winding along the armature periphery is called the phase spread. Such a winding is referred to as the 
distributed winding. Since the machine is always wound with identical coils, the sinusoidal emfs induced in 
coils 11¢, 22¢ and 33¢ have the same rms value (E ) but have a progressive time phase difference of g  because 
coil are uniformly distributed in space. 
These coils are series connected to yield the phase voltage Ea which is the phasor sum of the coil emf’s 
as shown in Fig. 5.18. It is observed from this ﬁgure that because of distribution, the rms phase voltage 
is less than the algebraic sum of the rms coil voltages. This reduction ratio called the breadth factor (also 
distribution factor) is to be determined now, for the general case of SPP = m. 
 
1
2
3
b¢
c¢
g
n
N
S
c
b
3¢
2¢
1¢
Phase ' ' belt
phase spread
=
= 60°
a
m
s
g
 
Fig. 5.17
Fig. 5.18 
Phasor diagram of coil emf’s to yield
It is easily seen that in Fig. 5.18 the coil emf phasors form sides of a regular polygon, the centre of whose 
circumscribing circle is constructionally located in the diagram. The phase voltage Ea is given by the resultant 
phasor (AD in Fig. 5.18). The breadth factor is then deﬁned as
 
Kb = AD
AB
3
  or 
AD
mAB (in general) 
(5.13)
g
C
E3
Ea
D
mg
g/2g /2
E1
B
g
A
E2
O

208 Electric Machines
From the geometry of Fig. 5.18 
 
AB = 2 OA sin g /2 
 
AD = 2 OA sin g m/2
Hence 
Kb = sin
/
sin
/
m
m
g
g
2
2  < 1 for m > 1 
(5.14) 
It is seen from Eqs (5.11) and (5.12) that
 
mg = p
q  or p
3 ; a ﬁxed value independent of P and S
The induced phase emf for a distributed winding is obtained by multiplying Eq. (5.10) by Kb. Thus
 
E = 4.44 Kb f Nph F 
(5.15)
where 
Nph = total turns (in series) per phase
Harmonic Content in the Distributed Winding
The ﬂux density wave of a synchronous machine is never exactly sine wave. Because of odd symmetry of 
poles (alternately north-south), the space harmonic content of the B-wave comprises odd harmonics only, 
which induce the corresponding harmonic emf’s in the winding. Figure 5.19 shows the fundamental B-wave, 
and its third-harmonic; because of somewhat ﬂat-topped nature of the B-wave, its third-harmonic is of the 
“dipping’’ kind, producing a ﬂux density dip of in the middle of the main pole. It follows from Fig. 5.19 that 
n poles of the nth harmonic occur in the space occupied by one of pole the fundamental. Thus,
 
q (nth harmonic) = nq (fundamental)
Therefore from Eq. (5.14)
 
Kb (nth harmonic) = sin
/
sin
/
mn
m
n
g
g
2
2  
(5.16)  
It can be easily shown (see Ex. 5.1) that Kb (nth harmonic) is less than Kb (fundamental) for important 
harmonics resulting in reduction of harmonic content of the voltage of the distributed winding–an incidental 
advantage.
B
0
p
Third-harmonic
-wave
B
2p
3p
p
2p
6p
Fundamental
-wave
B
Resultant
-wave
B
q (fundamental)
q (3rd-harmonic)
Fig. 5.19
 

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
209
EXAMPLE 5.1 Calculate the fundamental, third and ﬁfth harmonic breadth factors for a stator with 
36 slots wound for 3-phase, 4-poles. 
SOLUTION 
m = 36
3
4
¥
 = 3 and g  = 180
4
36
∞¥
 = 20° elect.  
 
(i)  
Kb (fundamental) = 
sin
sin
3
20
2
3
20
2
¥
∞
∞
 = 0.96
 
(ii)  
Kb (third harmonic) = 
sin
sin
3
3
20
2
3
3
20
2
¥
¥
∞
¥
∞
 = 0.667
 (iii)  
Kb (ﬁfth harmonic) = 
sin
sin
3
5
20
2
3
5
20
2
¥
¥
∞
¥
∞
 = 0.218 
It is noticed that Kb for the third-harmonic is sufﬁciently less than the fundamental and is far less for the ﬁfth-harmonic. 
Short-pitched (Chorded) Coils 
So far it was assumed that the stator coils are full-pitched (a span of p rad elect). Coils may have a span of 
less than the full-pitch. This arrangement offers certain advantages. Consider that the coil-span is less than the 
full-pitch by an elect. angle qsp (short-pitching angle) as shown in Fig. 5.20(a). With reference to Fig. 5.15, 
Eq. (5.5) for the ﬂux linking the coil now modiﬁes as under: 
 
f = 
B
P
p
m
P
P
sp
sin
/
(
)/
2
2
2
q
a
p
a q
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
+
-
Ú
 lr dqm 
Since 
q m = 2
P q 
 
f = 
2
P
sp
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
+
-
Ú
a
p
a q
(
)
Bp sin q lr dq
 
 = 
2
P
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ 2Bp lr cos (a – qsp/2) cos qsp/2
 
 =  F cos (qsp/2) cos (wt – qsp/2) 
(5.17) 
The ﬂux linking the coil and therefore the coil emf reduces by multiplicative factor of 
 
Kp = cos qsp/2 = pitch factor 
(5.18)
The meaning of the pitch factor can be arrived at from another angle. In Fig. 5.20(a) with positive direction 
of coil-side emfs marked in opposite direction, the coil emf is the phasor sum of coil-side emfs, i.e.
 
Ec  = E
E
a
a
+
¢
In the case of a full-pitch coil Ea¢ and Ea are in phase (they are p rad apart but their positive direction are 
marked oppositely) so that
 
Ec = 2 Ea

210 Electric Machines
as shown in Fig. 5.20(b).
Ec
Ea¢
0
qsp
Ea
(c)
qspi2
0
Ea
Ea¢
(b)
Ec
(full-pitch)
a¢
a¢
a
qsp
(a) Short-pitched coil
(
–
)
(short-pitch)
p
qsp
p
Fig. 5.20
In a coil short-pitched by qsp, Ea¢  will lead (or lag) Ea  by the angle qsp depending upon direction of 
rotation as shown in Fig. 5.20(c). From the geometry of the phasor diagram
 
Ec = 2Ea cos qsp/2
Hence the reduction of the coil emf due to short-pitching is governed by the factor 
 
Kp = 2
2
2
E
E
a
sp
a
cos
/
q
 
  = cos qsp/2 (same as Eq. (5.18))
Because of short-pitching the expression of Eq. (5.15) for the phase voltage modiﬁes to 
 
E = 4.44 KbKp f N phF 
(5.19)
Let Kw = KbKp = winding factor; then 
 
E = 4.44 Kw f NphF 
(5.20)
For the nth harmonic the pitch factor would be
 
Kp = cos nqsp/2 
(5.21)
Any particular harmonic can be eliminated by coil short-pitching by making 
 
nqsp /2 = k p
2 ; k = 1, 3, … (odd) 
For example, for elimination of the 13th harmonic
 
13q sp/2 = 90°  or  q sp ª 14°

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
211
Thus short-pitching helps in elimination of any particular harmonic or in reduction of the harmonic content 
of the induced voltage in general. It is easily seen from Fig. 5.20(a) that short-pitched coils have shorter end 
connections. Thus there is a saving in copper per coil but part of this saving is wiped off by the fact that more 
series coils/ phase would now be needed to generate a speciﬁed phase voltage. A designer has to weigh these 
factors in arriving at a decision on the angle of short-pitching. 
Two-layer Winding 
One important and commonly used way of neatly 
arranging the end connection of coils in a winding 
is to place two coil-sides per slot. Each coil then has 
one coil-side in the bottom half of one slot and the 
other coil-side in the top half of another slot (one pole 
pitch away for full-pitched coils). Such a winding 
is known as a two-layer winding. All the coils of a 
two-layer winding are of similar shape so that these 
can be wound separately and then placed in the slots. 
The end connections at each end of such a coil are 
given an involute kink so that the coil-sides can be 
conveniently placed in the bottom of one slot and top 
of the other. A formed two-layer, multi-turn coil is 
shown in Fig. 5.21. 
The winding connections of a two-layer winding are best illustrated by means of a developed winding 
diagram which imagines that the stator has been cut and laid out ﬂat. One phase of a 4-pole, two-layer lap 
winding is shown in Fig. 5.22. The upper layer is indicated by a continuous line and the lower layer by a 
dotted line and both are drawn side-by-side in the diagram. This ﬁgure illustrates the simplest case of 4-poles 
with 1 slot/pole/phase. The four coils could be series connected or various series-parallel connections could 
be employed. In Fig. 5.22 the four coils of one phase are connected in parallel in two series groups of two 
coils each. Obviously the phase current ia and the conductor current ic = are related as ic = ia/2. 
Pole
pitch
a
a¢
ic
ia
Fig. 5.22
Fig. 5.21 

212 Electric Machines
EXAMPLE 5.2 A 3-phase, 16-pole synchronous generator has a star-connected winding with 144 slots 
and 10 conductors per slot. The ﬂux per pole is 0.04 Wb (sinusoidally distributed) and the speed is 375 rpm. 
Find the frequency and phase and line induced emf’s. The total turns/phase may be assumed to be series 
connected.  
SOLUTION 
f = nP
120  = 375
16
¥
120
 50 Hz
 
Total number of conductors = 144 ¥ 10 = 1440
 
Total number of turns = 1440
2
 = 720
 
Number of turns (series)/phase, Nph = 720
3
 = 240
 
Slots angle, g = 180∞P
S
 = 180
16
∞¥
144
 = 20°
 
Slots/pole/phase, m = 144
16
3
¥
 = 3 
 
Breadth factor, Kb = sin
/
sin
/
m
m
g
g
2
2  = 
sin
sin
3
20
2
3
20
2
¥
∞
∞
 = 0.96 
 
Phase emf, Ep = 4.44 Kb f Nph (series) F
 
 = 4.44 ¥ 0.96 ¥ 50 ¥ 240 ¥ 0.04 = 2046 V 
 
Line voltage, EL = 
3 Ep = 3543.6 V
EXAMPLE 5.3 A 3-phase, 50 Hz, star-connected alternator with 2-layer winding is running at 600 rpm. 
It has 12 turns/coil, 4 slots/pole/phase and a coil-pitch of 10 slots. If the ﬂux/pole is 0.035 Wb sinusoidally 
distributed, ﬁnd the phase and line emf’s induced. Assume that the total turns/phase are series connected. 
SOLUTION 
P = 120 f
n
 = 120
50
¥
600
 = 10
 
Total slots, S = 4 ¥ 3 ¥ 10 = 120 
 
N ph = 120
12
3
¥
 = 480
 
SPP, m = 4 
 
Slot angle, g = 180
10
∞¥
120
 = 15°
 
Kb = sin
/
sin
/
m
m
g
g
2
2  = 
sin
sin
4
15
4
15
2
¥
∞
2
∞
 = 0.958 
 
Pole-pitch = 120
10  = 12 slots 
 
Coil-pitch = 10 slots 

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
213
 
Short-pitching angle, qsp = (12 – 10) ¥ 15° = 30°
 
Kp = cos qsp/2 = cos 30
2
∞ = 0.966
 
Phase emf induced, Ep = 4.44 KbKp f Nph (series)F
 
 = 4.44 ¥ 0.958 ¥ 0.966 ¥ 50 ¥ 480 ¥ 0.035 = 3451 V 
Also  
EL = 
3  ¥ 3451 = 5978 V
EXAMPLE 5.4 A 2-pole, 3-phase, 50 Hz, 2300 V synchronous machine has 42 slots. Each slot has two 
conductors in a double layer winding. The coil pitch is 17 slots. Each phase winding has two parallel paths. 
Calculate the ﬂux/pole required to generate a phase voltage of 2300/
3  V.
SOLUTION 
SPP, m = 
42
3
2
¥
 = 7 
 
Slot angle, g = 2
180
42
¥
∞ = 8.57°
 
Kb = sin
/
sin
/
m
m
g
g
2
2  = sin(
.
/
sin .
/
7
8 57
2
7
8 57
2
¥
∞
¥
∞
 = 0.956
 
Coil pitch = 17 slots
 
Pole pitch = 42
2  = 21 slots
 
Short pitching angle, qsp = (21 – 17) ¥ 8.57∞ = 34.28∞
 
Kp = cos 34.28°/2 = 0.956
 
Nph (series) = 
42
2
¥
2 ¥ 3 ¥ 2  = 7
 
Ea = 4.44 KbKp f Nph (series)F
 
2300
3  = 4.44 ¥ 0.952 ¥ 0.956 ¥ 50 ¥ 7 ¥ F
or 
F = 0.94 Wb
The dc Machine
With reference to the single-coil elementary dc machine of Figs 5.13 and 5.14(a) which shows the B-wave of 
the machine relative to the elementary full-pitched coil, let
 
F = ﬂux/pole
Consider that the coil is lying in the interpolar region so that the full/pole (F) links is positively. Let it now 
move through one pole-pitch (p rad (elect.)) in time Dt so that its ﬂux linkages reverse in sign. The change in 
ﬂux linkages during this movement is 
 
Dl = –2NcF
where Nc are the coil turns. For a P-pole machine
 
Dt = 2p
w
P
m
 s 
(5.22)

214 Electric Machines
Hence the average coil-induced emf is
 
Ea = - D
D
l
t  = Fw
p
m
c
N P  
(5.23)
The dc machine armature is always wound with 2-layer winding forming a closed circuit. The coils are 
suitably connected to the commutator segments made of copper, insulated from each other and from the shaft 
and formed into a cylinder. The current from the armature winding is tapped through brushes placed on the 
commutator periphery, 180° elect. apart. The alternate brushes are of opposite polarity and all the brushes of 
one polarity are connected in parallel resulting in two armature terminals. This arrangement causes the closed 
armature winding to form a series-parallel circuit. The dc voltage between the brushes of opposite polarity 
is the sum of the average voltages of series turns between the brushes, each turn having the same average 
voltage. The number of parallel paths depends upon the type of armature winding wave and lap type and are 
 
A = 2; for wave winding 
 
A = P; for lap winding  
(5.24)
Let the machine be wound with Z conductors (a conductor is the active part of the side of a turn). Since 
two conductors form a turn, 
 
Series turns/parallel path, N = Z
A
2
Using Eq. (5.23), the armature emf which equals the parallel path emf is given by 
 
Ea = F
2
w
p
mZ
P
A
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  
(5.25) 
But 
wm = 2
60
pn  rad (mech.)/s 
Hence 
Ea = FnZ
P
A
60
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  V; n = speed in rpm 
(5.26) 
It follows from Eq. (5.24) that 
 
P
A  = P
2  for wave winding 
 
 = 1 for lap winding 
(5.27) 
Since P has a minimum value of 2, the wave winding will have a larger armature emf than a lap winding 
for the same values of F, n and Z. 
The details of the dc machine winding, where the brushes are placed on the commutator and how the 
parallel paths are formed, will be taken up in Ch. 7. 
The circuit schematic (circuit model) of a de generator is drawn in Fig. 5.23. As the current in the ﬁeld and 
armature circuits are dc, the circuit inductances do not play any role. The armature circuit has a voltage Ea 
induced in it by rotation of armature in the ﬂux/pole F as per the relationship of Eq. (5.25). When the armature 
feeds current to the external circuit (the load), there is a voltage drop IaRa in the armature circuit, where Ra 
is the effective resistance of the armature including the voltage drop at brush contacts. The Kirchhoff voltage 
law applied to the armature circuit yields 
 
Ea = Vt + IaRa 
where Vt is the voltage at generator terminals. This equation is usually written as
 
Vt = Ea – Ia Ra 
(5.28)

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
215
EXAMPLE 5.5 A 1500 kW, 600 V, 16-pole, dc generator runs at 200 rpm. What must be the useful ﬂux per 
pole, if there are 2500 lap-connected conductors and full-load copper losses are 25 kW? Also calculate the 
area of the pole-shoe if the average gap ﬂux density is 0.85 T. The generator is feeding full load of 1500 kW 
at the terminal voltage of 600 V.
SOLUTION 
Figure 5.23 shows the circuit schematic of the dc generator
Field
lf
Armature
+
–
wm
la
Vt
Ra
+
–
Load
Ea
Fig. 5.23 Schematic circuit diagram of a dc generator
 
Full-load armature current, Ia = 1500
1000
600
¥
 = 2500A
 
Copper-loss = I 2
aRa = 25 ¥ 1000
where Ra is the effective resistance of the armature circuit,
 
Ra = 
25
1000
2500
2500
¥
¥
 = 4 ¥ 10–3 = W
Kirchhoff’s voltage law equation for the armature circuit is 
 
Ea = Vt + IaRa
 
 = 600 + 2500 ¥ 4 ¥ 10–3 = 610 V
But 
Ea = FnZ
P
A
60
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
where F is the useful ﬂux/pole which links armature coil. Some of the pole ﬂux will complete its circuit bypassing the 
armature—called the leakage ﬂux.
Substituting the values,
 
610 = F ¥
¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
200
2500
60
16
16
or, 
F = 0.0732 Wb
 
Area of pole-shoe = 0 0732
0 85
.
.
 = 861 cm2  
EXAMPLE 5.6 A 4-pole, lap-wound dc machine has 728 armature conductors. Its ﬁeld winding is 
excited from a dc source to create an air-gap ﬂux of 32 mWb/pole. The machine (generator) is run from a 
primemover (diesel engine) at 1600 rpm. It supplies a current of 100 A to an electric load. 
 (a) Calculate the electromagnetic power developed. 
 (b) What is the mechanical power that is fed from the primemover to the generator? 
 (c) What is torque provided by the primemover? 

216 Electric Machines
SOLUTION
 
(a)  
Ea = FnZ
P
A
60
¥ Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
  
 = 32
10
1600
728
60
3
¥
¥
¥
-
 ¥ l = 621.2 V
 
  
Ia = 100 A
 
  
Electromagnetic power developed = EaIa
 
  
 =  621
100
1000
¥
 = 62.12 kW
 
(b) Mechanical power provided by prime mover, Pm
 
  
 = electromagnetic power developed = 62.12 kW
 
 But 
Pm = Twm
 
  
Primemover torque, T = 62 12
100
60
.
¥
2
¥1600
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
p
 = 370.75 Nm 
5.4 
MMF OF DISTRIBUTED AC WINDINGS 
It has been seen earlier that the armature of a practical machine has distributed winding wound for the 
same number of poles as the ﬁeld winding. As the armature carries current, the resultant ﬁeld of its current-
carrying coils has the same number of poles as the ﬁeld winding. Our approach will be to ﬁnd the mmf space 
distribution of the current-carrying armature by superimposing the mmf space waves of individual coils. 
MMF Space Wave of a Single Coil
A cylindrical rotor machine with small air-gap is shown in Fig. 5.24(a). The stator is imagined to be wound 
for two-poles with a single N-turn full-pitch coil carrying current i in the direction indicated. The ﬁgure 
shows some ﬂux lines of the magnetic ﬁeld set up. A north and corresponding south pole are induced on 
the stator periphery. The magnetic axis of the coil is from the stator north to the stator south. Each ﬂux line 
radially crosses the air-gap twice, normal to the stator and rotor iron surfaces and is associated with constant 
mmf Ni. On the assumption that the reluctance of the iron path is negligible, half the mmf (Ni/2) is consumed 
to create ﬂux from the rotor to stator in the air-gap and the other half is used up to establish ﬂux from the 
stator to rotor in the air-gap. Mmf and ﬂux radially outwards from the rotor to the stator (south pole on stator) 
will be assumed to be positive and that from the stator to rotor as negative.
The physical picture is more easily visualized by the developed diagram of Fig. 5.24(b) where the stator 
with the winding is laid down ﬂat with rotor on the top of it. It is seen that the mmf is a rectangular space 
wherein mmf of  + Ni/2 is consumed in setting ﬂux from the rotor to stator and mmf of – Ni/2 is consumed 
in setting up ﬂux from the stator to the rotor. It has been imagined here that the coil-sides occupy a narrow 
space on the stator and the mmf changes abruptly from – Ni/2 to + Ni/2 at one slot and in reverse direction at 
the other slot. The mmf change at any slot is 
 
Ni = ampere-conductors/slot 
and its sign depends upon the current direction. 

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
217
Ni ampere-conductors
N
q
Coil magnetic axis
a
S
a¢
(a)
q
Fa1, Fundamental
MMF
Ni/2
Ni
–
/2
Ni
a
Rotor
Stator
S
N
a¢
South pole
North pole
(b) Developed diagram
0
a¢
S
N
Fig. 5.24
The mmf space wave of a single coil being rectangular, it can be split up into its fundamental and 
harmonics. It easily follows from the Fourier series analysis that the fundamental of the mmf wave as shown 
in Fig. 5.24(b) is 
 
Fa1 = 4
2
p
Ni
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  cos q = F1p cosq 
(5.29) 

218 Electric Machines
where q is the electrical angle measured from the magnetic axis of the coil which coincides with the positive 
peak of the fundamental wave.
From Eq. (5.29) 
 
Fal (peak) = F1p = 4
2
p
Ni
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  
(5.30)
From now onwards only the fundamental mmf wave of a current-carrying coil will be considered, 
neglecting its associated harmonic space waves whose amplitudes are small*. Furthermore, as will soon be 
seen, in a distributed winding, the rectangular mmf waves of individual phase group coils add up to produce 
a mmf wave closer to a sine wave, i.e. the harmonics tend to cancel out.
It may be noted here that with the assumption of the narrow air-gap, the mmf distribution will be the same 
if the coils were located in the rotor slots instead.
MMF Space Wave of One Phase of a Distributed Winding 
Consider now a basic 2-pole structure with a round rotor, with 5 slots/pole/phase (SPP) and a 2-layer winding 
as shown in Fig. 5.25. The corresponding developed diagram is shown in Fig. 5.26(a) along with the mmf 
diagram which now is a stepped wave–obviously 
closer to a sine wave than the rectangular mmf wave of 
a single coil (Fig. 5.24(b)). Here since SPP is odd (5), 
half the ampere-conductors of the middle slot of the 
phase group a and a¢ contribute towards establishment 
of south pole and half towards north pole on the stator. 
At each slot the mmf wave has a step jump of 2Ncic 
ampere-conductors where Nc = coil turns (equal to 
conductors/layer) and ic = conductor current. 
Now F1p, the peak of the fundamental of the mmf 
wave, has to be determined. Rather than directly 
ﬁnding the fundamental of the stepped wave, one can 
proceed by adding the fundamentals of the mmf’s 
of individual slot-pairs (with a span of one pole-
pitch). These fundamentals are progressively out 
of phase (space phase as different from time phase) 
with each other by the angle g. This addition is easily 
accomplished by deﬁning the breadth factor Kb, which 
will be the same as in the case of the generated emf of 
a coil group.
Let 
Nph (series) = series turns per parallel path of a phase
 
A = number of parallel paths of a phase 
 
* For a rectangular wave the normalized peaks of the harmonic waves are: 
 
  
F3p = 4
3p , F5p = 4
5p , F7p = 4
7p , …
 
 It is needless to say that there cannot be any even harmonics. 
60°
c¢
b¢
a
b
c
a¢
Fig. 5.25

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
219
Then  
AT/parallel path = Nph (series) ic 
 
AT/phase = A(Nph (series)ic) = Nph (series) ia 
where ia = phase current = A ic 
It now follows that 
 
AT/pole/phase = 
N
P
ph (
)
series
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ ia
provided the winding is a concentrated one. The fundamental peak of the concentrated winding is then 
 
F1p (concentrated winding) = 4
p
N
P
ph (
)
series
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ ia
Since the actual winding is a distributed one, the fundamental peak will be reduced by the factor Kb. Thus 
 
F1p (distributed winding) = 4
p Kb
N
P
ph (
)
series
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ ia 
(5.31) 
Hence 
Fa1 = 4
p Kb
N
P
ph (
)
series
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ ia cos q 
(5.32)
where the pole axis is taken as the angle reference (Fig. 5.26(b)). 
The effect on the mmf wave of short-pitched coils can be visualized by Fig. 5.27 in which the stator has 
two short-pitched coils (ala¢1, a2a¢2) for phase a of a 2-pole structure*. The mmf of each coil establishes one 
pole. From the developed diagram of Fig. 5.27(b) it is seen that the mmf wave is rectangular but of shorter 
= 5 N ic c
2 N ic c
Fa1
F1p
–
/2
p
p/2
N ic c
2 ¥ 2 (2
) +
(2
)
N i
N i
c c
c c
¥
1
2
a¢
c
b¢
a
North
pole
South pole
(b)
North
pole
(a)
0
Fig. 5.26
 
* The arrangement of coils for 3-phase 2-pole, two-layer winding, with S = 12, m = 2 and coil-pitch = 5 (chorded 
by one slot) is shown in Fig. 5.28. 
 
 It is seen from Fig. 5.28 that the coil-sides in a given slot do not belong to the same phase. This is in contrast to 
Fig. 5.25 depicting a full-pitch winding. 

220 
Electric Machines
space length than a pole-pitch. The amplitude of the fundamental peak gets reduced by a factor Kp, called the 
pitch factor, compared to the full-pitch rectangular mmf wave. It can be shown** by Fourier analysis that 
 
F1p = 4
p Fpole cos qsp/2
Hence 
Kp = cos qsp/2 
(5.33)
Axis of ' ' phase
a
a2
a1
qsp/2
a¢2
a¢1
(a) Stator with short-pitched coil at phase ' ' (single-layer winding)
a
Fa1
Fpole
South pole
F1p
a¢2
a¢1
a1
a2
a¢2
a¢1
North pole
(b) Effect of short-pithced coil on mmf wave
–
/2
p
p/2
3
/2
p
q
0
qsp/2
Fig. 5.27
a
a
c¢
b
b
a¢
a¢
c
c
b¢
a
c¢
b
b
a¢
a¢
c
c
b¢
b¢
b¢
a
c¢
c¢
Fig. 5.28
 
** From the Fourier series
 
  
F1p = 2
2
2
2
2
p
p
q
p
q
-
+
-
Ú
/
/
/
/
sp
sp
Fpole cos q dq
 
  
 = 4
p Fpole cos qsp/2

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
221
It is not surprising that the same result is obtained for Kp for the space mmf wave as for the generated emf 
in a short-pitched coil.
In general when the winding is both distributed and short-pitched, the fundamental space mmf of phase a 
as in Eq. (5.32) generalizes to
 
Fa1 = 4
p Kw
N
P
ph (
)
series
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ ia cosq 
(5.34)
where Kw = KbKp = winding factor
Like in the case of the induced emf, distribution of stator winding and short-pitching both help reducing 
harmonics in the space mmf wave. In the analysis from now onward, it will be assumed that the space mmf 
wave  created by each phase of the stator winding when carrying current is purely sinusoidal. Also Kb and Kp 
are deﬁned in the same manner as for the induced emf. 
When the phase a carries sinusoidal current 
 
ia = 1m cos wt; (Im = maximum value of the phase current) 
(5.35)
the mmf wave is given by
 
Fal = 4
p Kw
N
P
ph (
)
series
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ Im cos wt cosq  
 
 = Fm cos wt cos q 
(5.36)
where 
Fm = 4
p Kw
N
P
ph (
)
series
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ Im = 4 2
p
Kw
N
P
ph (
)
series
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ I  
(5.37) 
where I = Im/
2  = rms value of phase current. 
As per Eq. (5.36), the mmf of one phase is a standing wave (pulsating wave) in space whose peak always 
coincides with the phase axis while the peak amplitude varies sinusoidally with time. This is illustrated in 
Fig. 5.29, where a half-cycle of pulsation is indicated.
Axis of phase ' 'a
MMF
wt = 0
w
p
t =
/3
– /2
p
p/2
3
/2
p
q
w
p
t = 2 /3
w
p
t =
0
Fig. 5.29

222 
Electric Machines
Current-sheet Concept 
It was seen above that a distributed winding gives rise to a stepped mmf wave having a strong fundamental 
component which will be considered in machine modelling while all the harmonic components will be 
neglected ( justiﬁcation for the same has been advanced). Now the kind of space distribution of current on the 
stator (or rotor) has to be found which will produce a purely sinusoidally distributed mmf wave. An intuitive 
answer is that it would be a sinusoidally distributed current.
Figure 5.30 shows a sinusoidally distributed current-sheet with a peak linear density of A A/m length of 
the air-gap periphery. The current ﬂows from one end of the stator (or rotor) to the other end parallel to the 
stator axis. With respect to the angle reference shown, the current distribution is given by
 
i = A cos q 
(5.38a)
p
q
Current-sheet
F ( )
q
MMF wave
A
p/2
da
q
i
A
=
cos q
– p/2
p/2
3 /2
p
p
Cross-sectional view of current-sheet-developed
0
q
a
Fig. 5.30
The mmf at angle q is contributed by the current contained in angular spreads of p/2 on either side of 
it. The current in the differential angle da at angle a is found by converting it to mechanical angle and 
multiplying it by mean radius. Thus the differential current is
 
(A cos a) D d
P
2
2 a
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = AD
P  cos a da 
where D = mean air-gap diameter
The mmf at angle q is then given by 
 
F(q) = 1
2
2
2
2
AD
P
d
AD
d
cos
cos
/
/
a a
a a
p
q
q
q
p
q
-
+
+
Ú
Ú
-
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
 
 = AD
P sin q 
(5.38b)

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
223
whose peak value is 
 
Fpeak = AD
P
As per Eqs (5.38a) and (5.38b), the mmf wave associated with the sinusoidally distributed current-sheet is 
also sinusoidal but displaced 90°(elect.) from the current-sheet. Also the peak value of the mmf wave equals 
half the current contained in one loop of the current-sheet, i.e. 
 
1
2
2
p
p
A
D
P
¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = AD
P  = Fpeak 
(5.39)
EXAMPLE 5.7 Trace out the variations in mmf due to a belt of current-carrying conductor representing 
one phase of a 2-pole, 3-phase winding. The belt may be assumed as a current sheet of uniform current 
density. What is the peak amplitude of the mmf wave and also the rms amplitude of the fundamental wave. 
Given: Total current in the phase belt = A amperes; phase spread s = 60°. 
SOLUTION 
The mmf wave is trapezoidal as sketched in Fig. 5.31(a). Its peak amplitude is A/2 ampere-turns. 
As the current in the phase belt is spread uniformly the phasor diagram of fundamental phasors is arc of 60° as shown 
in Fig. 5.31(b). It follows from this diagram that 
 
Kb = chord
arc
AB
AB
 = sin
/
/
s
s
2
2
where 
s = phase spread in rads = p ¥
∞
180∞
60  = p /3 
 
Kb = sin
/
30
3
∞
p
 = 0.827
RMS amplitude of fundamental mmf wave of one phase = 0.827 A
2  = 0.4135 A
A/2
a
c¢
b
a¢
c
(a)
d
A
B
s/2 s/2
(b)
0
Fig. 5.31
5.5 
ROTATING MAGNETIC FIELD 
It was seen in Sec. 5.4 that the sinusoidal current in any phase of an ac winding produces a pulsating mmf wave 
in space whose amplitude varies sinusoidally with time. The expression for the fundamental component of 
this mmf is given in Eq. (5.36). The harmonics of the mmf wave are rendered inconsequential in a distributed 

224 Electric Machines
winding and are still further reduced in amplitude if short-pitched coils are used. Therefore, the fundamental 
of the mmf wave will only be considered in the machine model given here.
Consider now that the three phases of an ac winding are carrying balanced alternating currents.
 
ia = Im cos wt
 
ib = Im cos (wt – 120°) 
(5.40)
 
ic = Im cos (wt – 240°)
Three pulsating  mmf waves are now set up in the air-gap which have a time phase difference of 120° from 
each other. These mmf’s are oriented in space along the magnetic axes of phases a, b and c as illustrated by 
the concentrated coil in Fig. 5.32. Since the magnetic 
axes are located 120° apart in space from each other, the 
three mmf’s can be expressed mathematically as
 
Fa = Fm cos wt cos q
 
Fb = Fm cos (wt – 120°) cos (q – 120°) 
(5.41)
 
Fc = Fm cos (wt – 240°) cos (q – 240°)
wherein it has been considered that three mmf waves 
differ progressively in time phase by 120°, i.e. 2 p/3 rad 
elect. and are separated in space in space phase by 120°, 
i.e. 2p /3 rad elect. The resulting mmf wave which is the 
sum of the three pulsating mmf waves is
 
F = Fa + Fb + Fc
or 
F(q, t) = Fm [cos wt cos q
 
  + cos(wt – 120°)  cos(q – 120°)
 
  + cos(wt – 240°) cos(q – 240)]
It simpliﬁes trigonometrically to
 F(q, t) = 3
2 Fm cos(q – wt) + 1
2 Fm [cos (q + wt) + cos(q + wt – 240°) + cos(q  + wt – 480°)] 
(5.42)
Recognizing that 
 
cos (q + wt – 480°) = cos (q + wt – 120°) 
it is found that the terms within the capital bracket of Eq. (5.42) represent three unit phasors with a progressive 
phase difference of 120° and therefore add up to zero. Hence, the resultant mmf is 
 
F (q, t) = 3
2 Fm cos (q – wt) 
(5.43) 
It is found from Eq. (5.43) that the resultant mmf is distributed in both space and time. It indeed is a 
travelling wave with sinusoidal space distribution whose space phase angle changes linearly with time as wt. 
It, therefore, rotates in the air-gap at a constant speed of w  rad (elect.)/s. 
The peak value of the resultant mmf is 
 
 Fpeak = 3
2 Fm 
(5.44a) 
a
c¢
b¢
q
120°
120°
120°
Axis of phase a
b
c
a¢
Axis of phase c
Axis of phase b
Fig. 5.32
three phases

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
225
Using the value of Fm from Eq. (5.37)
 
Fpeak = 3 ¥ 2 2
p
K
N
w
ph(
)
series
P
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ I 
(5.44b) 
At  wt = 0, i.e. when the a phase current has maximum positive value, it follows from Eq. (5.43) that
 
F (q, 0) = 3
2 Fm cosq 
It means that the mmf wave has its peak value (at q = 0) lying along the axis of phase a when it carries 
maximum positive current. At wt = 2 p/3, the phase b (assumed lagging) has its positive current maximum, 
so that the peak of the travelling mmf lies along the axis of b phase. By the same argument the peak of the 
mmf will travel and coincide with the axis of c phase at wt = 4 p/3. It is, therefore, seen that the resultant mmf 
travels from the axis of the leading phase to that of the lagging phase, i.e., from phase a towards phase b and 
then phase c when the phase sequence of currents is abc (a leads b leads c). The direction of rotation of the 
resultant mmf can be reversed by simply changing the phase sequence of currents.
The speed of the rotating mmf is 
 
wm = 
2
P
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ w rad (mech.)/s  or  
2
60
pn  = 2
P  ¥ 2p f 
or 
n = 120 f
P
 rpm 
(5.45) 
This indeed is the rotor speed to induce emf of frequency f in the ac winding. Hence this is called the 
synchronous speed and now onwards would be denoted by the symbol ns. 
Conclusion: Whenever a balanced 3-phase winding with phases distributed in space so that the relative 
space angle between them is 2p/3 rad (elect.), is fed with balanced 3-phase currents with relative time phase 
difference of 2p /3 rad (elect.), the resultant mmf rotates in the air-gap at a speed of ws = 2pf elect. rad/s 
where f is the frequency of currents in Hz. The direction of rotation of the mmf is from the leading phase axis 
towards the lagging phase axis.
The above conclusion is easily generalized to q  phases (q > 2), where the relative space-phase angle 
between  the phase winding is 2 p/q rad (elect.) and the relative time phase angle between currents is also 
2 p/q rad (elect.) For a 2-phase winding the time and space phase angles should be p/2 rad or 90° (elect.).
Physical  Picture
Sinusoidally distributed mmf along space angle q can be regarded as a two dimensional space vector oriented 
along its positive peak (towards south pole on the stator) having an amplitude equal to its peak value. For 
example, the mmf of a phase a in Fig. 5.33(a) is represented by the vector 

Fa  along the positive direction of 
the axis of coil aa¢. Sinusoidally distributed mmf’s can be added by the vector method. 
The mmf of  phase a varies in the time and space as (Eq. (5.41))
 
Fa = Fm cos wt cos q 
(5.46a)
It is a pulsating wave with a ﬁxed axis (Fig. 5.29), i.e. the amplitude of the vector 

Fa  oscillates sinusoidally 
with time (the exciting current is ia = Im cos wt with ﬁxed axis (axis of phase a). Trigonometrically, we can 

226 
Electric Machines
a
a¢
w
F +
F –
F –
a¢
w
Fa
q
q
w
(a) Rotating component fields of a pulsating field
a
F +
Fa (pulsating)
w
a
+Im
F +
F –
w
w
a¢
F
F
a
m
(=
)
Field of phase a
Axis of Phase a
Axis of phase b
F +
120°
w
w
– 1/2/m
F
F
b
m
(= 1/2
)
b
Field of phase b
F –
Axis of phase c
F +
w
w
c¢
c
120°
F
F
c
m
(= 1/2
)
Field of phase c
F –
c¢
–1/2/m
c
+/m
F
F
r
m
(=
)
a
b¢
w
b
a¢
Resultant field
Location of component rotating fields of all the
three phases and the resultant field at time   = 0
t
(b)
w
/a
+/m
–
/b
/c
(c)
b¢
– 1
2 Im
– 1
2 Im
3
2
1
2 Im
Fig. 5.33

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
227
write Eq. (5.46a) as 
 
Fa = 1
2 Fm cos (q – wt) + 1
2 Fm cos (q + wt) 
(5.46b)
or 

Fa  = 


F
F
+
-
+
 
(5.46c)
It may be seen from Eq. (5.48b) that a pulsating mmf can be considered as the sum of two (sinusoidally 
distributed) mmf’s of same amplitude (1/2)Fm which rotates at constant speed of w elect. rad/sec. in opposite 
directions; 
F +  of amplitude l/2Fm rotates in the positive direction of q and 

F -  also of amplitude 1/2Fm 
rotates in the negative direction of q. The resolution of a pulsating sinusoidally distributed mmf into two 
sinusoidally distributed rotating mmf’s is illustrated in Fig. 5.33(a). As the two component mmf’s rotate, their 
resultant (

Fa ) oscillates sinusoidally in time with its axis remaining ﬁxed. 
The mmf’s along the axes of coils bb¢ and cc¢ can be similarly resolved into two oppositely rotating mmfs 
of equal amplitude. Consider the instant when the phase a current is maximum positive, i.e. + Im(ia = Im 
cos wt), the phase b current is at that time – 1
2
Im and is becoming less negative (ib = Im cos (wt – 120°)) and 
the phase c current is – 1
2 Im but is becoming more negative (ic = Im cos (wt – 240°)). This is also obvious 
from the phasor diagram of Fig. 5.33(c). Instantaneous locations of the component rotating of all three phases 
are shown in Fig. 5.33(b). It is immediately observed from this ﬁgure that the three 

F +  are coincident and 
are rotating in the positive direction at speed w adding up to a positively rotating ﬁeld of amplitude 3/2 Fm. 
The three 

F -  are location at relative angles of 120° and are rotating in the negative direction at  speed w 
and thereby cancel themselves out (zero resultant ﬁeld). It may be, therefore, concluded that the resultant 
of three pulsating mmf’s of maximum amplitude Fm with 120° time phase difference having axes at relative 
space angles of 120° is a single rotating ﬁeld of strength 3/2Fm rotating at speed w elect. rad/s in the positive 
direction.
If the reluctance of the iron path of ﬂux is neglected, the sinusoidal rotating mmf wave creates a coincident 
sinusoidal rotating B-wave in the air-gap with a peak amplitude of 
 
Bpeak = 3
2
0
m F
g
m
where g is the length of the machine air-gap.
EXAMPLE 5.8 Consider a 3-phase ac machine with star connected  stator (neutral not connected). It is 
excited by 3-phase balanced currents of rms magnitude I. If one phase is disconnected while the other two 
carry the same magnitude current (by adjustment of voltage  across the two lines), determine the relative 
peak magnitude of rotating mmf waves.
SOLUTION 
Let for single-phase rms current I, peak value of oscillating mmf be Fm. With only two phases carrying 
currens, the phase current will be equal and opposite. 
 
Fa1 = Fm cosq cos wt 
 
Fa2 = –Fm cos(q – 120°) cos wt
 
Fnet = Fa1 + Fa2 = Fm[cosq cos wt – cos(q – 120°) cos wt]
 
 = Fm(cos q – cos(q – 120°))cos wt

228 Electric Machines
 
 = 2Fm[sin(q – 60°)sin (–60°)] cos wt
 
 = 
3 Fm cos(q + 30°) cos wt
 
Fnet = 
3
2 Fm cos(q + 30° – wt)
 
  + 
3
2 cos(q + 30° + wt)
 
 = 


F
F
+
-
≠
+
≠
Forward
Backward
 Relative strength of rotating mmf = 
3
2 Fm
Vector diagram The vector diagram is drawn in Fig. 5.34.
EXAMPLE 5.9 A 3-phase, 400 kVA, 50 Hz, star-connected alternator (synchronous generator) running 
at 300 rpm is designed to develop 3300 V between terminals. The armature consists of 180 slots, each slot 
having one coilside with eight conductors. Determine the peak value of the fundamental mmf in AT/pole 
when the machine is delivering full-load current.
SOLUTION 
P = 120 f
ns
 = 120
50
300
¥
 = 20
 
IL = IP = 400
1000
3
3300
¥
¥
 = 70 A
 
Maximum value of the phase current, Im = 70
2 A
 
Slot angle, g  = 180
20
180
∞¥
 = 20°
 
SPP, m = 180
3
20
¥
 = 3
 
Kb = sin
/
sin
/
m
m
g
g
2
2  = 0.96
 
Turns/phase (series) = 180
8
¥
2 ¥ 3  = 240
 
Fm = 4
p K
N
P
b
ph(
)
series
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ Im
 
 = 4
p  ¥ 0.96 ¥ 
240
20
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  ¥ 70
2  = 1452 AT /pole /phase
 
Fpeak = 3
2 Fm = 2178 AT /pole
EXAMPLE 5.10 A 3-phase, 4-pole, 50 Hz synchronous machine has its rotor winding with 364 distributed 
conductors having a winding factor Kb = 0.957. The machine has an air-gap of 0.8 mm. It is desired to have 
a peak air-gap ﬂux density of 1.65 T. Rotor length = 1.02 m, rotor diameter = 41 cm. 
F +
Fm
F –
30°
Fa
F2
Fnet
120°
Fm
Fig. 5.34

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
229
 (a) Calculate the ﬁeld current required and ﬂux/pole.
 (b) The armature has 3 full-pitch 11-turn coils/pole pair per phase. Calculate the open-circuit phase 
voltage and the line voltage of the phases are connected in star.
 (c) It is desired to have an open-circuit rms 3/4th of that found in part (b). What should be the ﬁeld 
current? 
SOLUTION 
As the ﬁeld has a distributed winding we can use the result for armature winding except that the ﬁeld 
current is a ﬁxed value i.e. 
2  will not be there. 
 
(a) For the ﬁeld (on fundamental basis)
 
  
Fpeak = 4
p
K N
I
b
f
field series
(
)
P
È
ÎÍ
˘
˚˙ ; Eq. (5.31) 
(i)
 
  
Hpeak = Fpeak/g 
(ii)
 
  
Bpeak = m0 Hpeak  
(iii)
 
 or 
Bpeak = 4 0
m
pg
K N
I
b
f
field series
(
)
P
È
ÎÍ
˘
˚˙  
(iv)
 
  
1.65 = 4
4
10
0 8
10
0 957
364 2
4
7
2
¥
¥
¥
¥
¥
¥
È
ÎÍ
˘
˚˙
-
-
p
p
.
.
(
/ )
I f
 
  
If = 
1 65
8
10
4
2
4
4
10
0 957
364
3
7
.
.
p
p
¥
¥
¥
¥
¥
¥
¥
¥
-
-
 
  
 = 18.95 A
 
(b)  
Flux/pole, F = 4
P Bpeak lr  (Eq (5.7)) 
(v)
 
 Substituting values
 
  
F = 1.65 ¥ 1.02 ¥ 0.41/2 = 0.345 Wb
 
  
Nph (series) = 3 ¥ 11 ¥ P
2
 = 66
 
  
Slot angle g = 60
3
∞ = 20°, m = 3
 
  
Breadth factor, Kb = sin
sin
3
10
3
10
¥
∞
∞ = 0.96
 
  
Eph = 
2 p Kb f Nph (series) F
 
 Substituting values
 
  
Eph = 
2 p ¥ 0.96 ¥ 50 ¥ 66 ¥ 0.345 = 4855 V
 
  
Eline = 4853
3  = 8409 V
 
(c) Open-circuit voltage required is 3/4th of Eline as above. On linear basis
 
  
If (new) = 0.75 ¥ 18.95 = 14.21 A
EXAMPLE 5.11 A 3-Phase 50 kW, 4-pole, 50 Hz induction motor has a winding (ac) designed for delta 
connection. The winding has 24 conductors per slot arranged in 60 slots. The rms value of the line current 
is 48 A. Find the fundamental of the mmf wave of phase-A when the current is passing through its maximum 
value. What is the speed and peak value of the resultant mmf/pole? 

230 Electric Machines
SOLUTION 
g = 180
4
∞¥
60
 = 12°
 
SPP = 60
4
3
¥
 = 5
 
Kb = 
sin
sin
5
12
2
5
12
2
¥
∞
∞
 = 0.957
 
IP = IL
3  = 48
3 A
 
IP, max = 48 2
3
 = 39.2 A
 
Turns/phase = 60
24
2
3
¥
¥
 = 240
 
Fm (phase a) = 4
p K
N
P
b
ph(
)
series
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ IP, max
 
 = 4
p  ¥ 0.957 ¥ 
240
4
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  ¥ 39.2
 
 = 2866 AT/pole
 
Fpeak = 3
2 Fm = 4299 AT/pole
 
Speed of rotation of the resultant mmf = 120 f
P
 = 120
50
¥
4
 
 = 1500 rpm
5.6 TORQUE IN ROUND ROTOR MACHINE 
When the stator and rotor windings of a machine both carry 
currents, they produce their own magnetic ﬁelds along their 
respective axes which are sinusoidally distributed along the 
air-gap. Torque results from the tendency of these two ﬁelds 
to align themselves. The ﬂux components set up by the stator 
and rotor currents cross the air-gap twice and complete their 
circuits via the stator and rotor iron. These components ﬁelds 
cause the appearance of north and south poles on stator and 
rotor surfaces; the ﬁeld axes being along north-south and out 
of the north pole. This is illustrated in Fig. 5.35(a) for a 2-pole 
structure. The torque tending to align the two ﬁelds is produced 
only if the two ﬁelds have the same number of poles and are 
stationary with respect to each other. Two relatively rotating 
ﬁelds will produce alternating torque as they cross each other 
so that the average torque is zero. All varieties of electric 
machines (synchronous, induction and dc) are therefore 
devised to produce interacting ﬁelds with zero relative velocity. 
a
g
d
a
g
d
F1
Fr
(b) Vector sum of stator and rotor fields
F2
a
T
a
Stator (1)
Rotor (2)
Axis of the stator field
(peak value
)
F1
Axis of the rotor field
(peak value
)
F2
(a) Stator and rotor fields
N
S
S
N
Fig. 5.35

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
231
Certain underlying assumptions are made at this stage: 
 
1. Stator and rotor mmf’s are sinusoidal space waves; this is sufﬁciently ensured by distributed windings.
 
2. Rotor is cylindrical (nonsalient pole) so that the air-gap is uniform throughout. 
 
3. The air-gap is narrow so that ﬂux established in it is radial (negligible tan gential component) and 
further the ﬂux density does not vary signiﬁcantly* along a radial path in the gap. As a result, the ﬁeld 
intensity H along any radial path is constant in the air-gap. The mmf across the air-gap at any space 
point is
 
  
Fair-gap = Hg
 
 where g is the radial air-gap length. 
 
4. Reluctance of the iron path of ﬂux is assumed negligible. As a consequence of assumptions 1–3, 
a sinusoidal space mmf wave produces a sinusoidal ﬂux density wave in space in phase with it.
 
5. Most of the resultant ﬂux is common to both stator and rotor windings, i.e. it is mutual ﬂux. The 
leakage ﬂux** linking either winding produces the leak age inductance as in a transformer. These 
affect only the net voltages applied to the ideal machine.
Let F1 F2 be the peak values of the spatial sinusoidal mmf waves of the stator and rotor respectively as 
shown in Fig. 5.35(a) for a 2-pole machine; the angle between their respective positive peaks being denoted 
by a. As stated earlier, these mmf’s can be represented as space vectors with magnitudes equal to their 
peak values and angles corresponding to their positive peaks. The resultant space mmf (which will also be 
sinusoidal being the sum of sinusoids) can be obtained by the vector summation as shown in Fig. 5.35(b). 
Using trigonometric relations, it easily follows that the peak value of the resultant mmf is 
 
F2
r = F2
1 + F2
2 + 2F1F2 cos a 
(5.47a) 
Since the reluctance of the iron path is negligible, the peak value of the resultant ﬁeld intensity is 
 
Hr = F
g
r  
(5.47b) 
From Eq. 4.18(b) it is known that the coenergy density is 
 
1
2 m0 H2   
The average value of the coenergy density over the air-gap volume is 
 
1
2
m0 (average value of H2) 
For a sinusoidal distribution, 
 
Average value of H2 = 1
2 H2
r 
\ 
Average coenergy density = 1
4 m0H 2
r 
 
Volume of air-gap = p Dlg 
 
* This is so because the cylindrical area presented to gap ﬂux does not vary apprecia bly with radius.
 
** Refer Sec. 5.7. 

232 Electric Machines
where D is the mean diameter at air-gap and l = rotor length = stator length. The total coenergy of the ﬁeld 
is then 
 
W¢f = p
4 m0 H 2
r Dlg = p m
4
0
2
F
g
r
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ Dlg 
 
 = m p
0
4
Dl
g
F2
r  
(5.48) 
Substituting for Fr from Eq. (5.47a),
 
W¢f = m p
0
4
Dl
g
(F 2
1 + F2
2 + 2F1F2 cos a) 
(5.49)
The torque developed is given by 
 
T = + ∂
¢
∂
Wf
a  = - m p
0
2
Dl
g
F1F2 sin a 
(5.50) 
For a P-pole machine 
 
T = -Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
P
Dl
g
2
2
0
m p
F1F2 sin a 
(5.51)
From the torque expression (5.51) it is seen that the torque developed is proportional to the peak values of 
the stator and rotor mmfs and is proportional to the sine of the angle between the axes of the two ﬁelds. The 
negative sign in Eq. (5.52) indicates that the torque acts in a direction to reduce a, i.e. to align the two ﬁelds. 
Obviously, equal and opposite torques will act on the stator and rotor. 
With reference to the geometry of Fig. 5.34(b) it is found that 
 
F1 sin a = Fr sin d 
(5.52)
and 
F2 sin a = Fr sin g  
(5.53)
The torque expression of Eq. (5.51) can therefore be expressed in two more alternative forms,
 
T = -Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
P
Dl
g
2
2
0
m p
F1Fr sin g  
(5.54)
 
T = -Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
P
Dl
g
2
2
0
m p
F2 Fr sin d 
(5.55)
The torque in the expressions of Eqs (5.54) and (5.55) can be immediately imagined to be the result of 
the interaction of the stator and the resultant mmf’s or the rotor and the resultant mmf’s and is proportional 
to the sine of the angle between the interacting mmf’s. The expression of Eq. (5.55) is generally preferred in 
simpliﬁed machine models. 
Since m0Fr/g = Br ; (peak value of resultant (or air-gap) ﬂux density) the expression of Eq. (5.55) can be 
written as 
 
T = -Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
P
Dl
2
2
p
F2Br sin d 
(5.56) 
This expression reveals a design viewpoint; the torque of electromagnetic origin is limited by the saturation 
value of ﬂux density (Br) in the magnetic material and maximum permissible mmf (F2). The maximum value 
of F2 is dictated by the maxi mum allowable winding current without exceeding the speciﬁed temperature rise. 

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
233
An alternative and more useful form of the torque expression is in terms of the resultant ﬂux/pole, Fr, 
rather than the peak ﬂux density Br Now 
 
Fr = Bav (over a pole) ¥ (pole area)
 
 = 
2
p
p
B
Dl
P
r
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = 2B Dl
P
r
; same as Eq. (5.7) 
(5.57) 
 
D = 2r
Substituting for Br from Eq. (5.57) in Eq. (5.55), 
 
T = -
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
p
2
2
2
P
Fr F2 sin d 
(5.58)
where Fr = resultant (i.e. air-gap) ﬂux/pole due to superimposition of the stator and rotor mmf’s
Equation (5.57) can be written as
 
Fr = 2
0
Dl
P
g
¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
m
Fr = P Fr 
(5.59)
where 
P = 2
0
Dl
P
g
¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
m
 = effective permeance per pole
The effective permeance/pole relates the peak value of sinusoidal mmf wave and the ﬂux/pole created by 
it. It is a constant quantity* so long as the permeability of iron is assumed inﬁnite, otherwise it is a function 
of Fr (i.e. P(Fr)) which decreases as Fr increases due to saturation of iron. 
Alternative Derivation 
Figure 5.36(a) shows the stator mmf wave and the corresponding air-gap ﬂux density wave. The rotor mmf 
wave makes an angle of a with the stator mmf wave. The rotor current wave which is the cause of rotor mmf 
leads it by an angle of 90° as shown in Fig. 5.36(b). The force (and torque) is produced by the interaction 
of B1-wave and A2-wave as per the Bli rule. It may be seen that positive B1 and positive A2 produce negative 
force (opposite to the positive direction of q). An angular element dq of the machine located at an angle q 
from the origin produces a torque
Substituting values 
dt = –rBldi
 
dT = - 1
2 D(B1 cos q) l -
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
A
D
P d
di
2 sin (
)
q
a
q





where di = elemental current in differential periphery
 
Differential periphery = P
2 dqm = D
P dq
 
 = 1
2
2
D l
P B1A2 cos q sin (q – a) dq 
 
* So long as the machine has uniform air-gap (round rotor), the permeance/pole offered by it is independent of the 
spatial orientation of the axis of the mmf wave. In the salient-pole construction two different permeances—one 
along the axis of the projecting poles and the other at 90° elect. to it—will be accounted for in Sec 8.11.

234 Electric Machines
B1 cos q
F1
B1
–
/2
p
0
p/2
p
3 /2
p
q
(a) Stator mmf and gap flux density
a
– A2 sin ( –
)
q
a
A2
F2
F2 cos (
–
)
q
a
0
(b) Rotor mmf and current
q
Fig. 5.36
The torque for one pole-pair is obtained by integrating the above equation from q = 0 to q = 2p. It yields 
 
T = - 1
2P p D2lB1A2 sin a 
(5.60) 
Now 
B1 = m0F1/g 
 
A2 = F2P/D  (see Eq. (5.39))
It then follows 
T = - m p
0
2g Dl F1F2 sin a 
(5.61)
a result already established in Eq. (5.50).
5.7 OPERATION OF BASIC MACHINE TYPES 
An elementary explanation of the torque-production process of basic machine types through the general 
torque expression of Eq. (5.58) will be given in this section. 
Synchronous Machine 
Figure 5.37 shows a synchronous machine with a round rotor. The rotor is initially stationary with ﬁxed north-
south poles created by dc excitation. Let the 3-phase winding of the stator be connected to a 3-phase supply 
of ﬁxed voltage V (line) and ﬁxed frequency f (this is known as the inﬁnite bus). As a result, 3-phase currents 
ﬂow in the stator winding creating a rotating magnetic ﬁeld rotating at synchronous speed ns (=120f/P) in 
the counter-clockwise direction (say). Since the rotor is stationary and cannot pick up speed instantaneously 

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
235
(inertia effect), the two ﬁelds move relative to each other resulting in zero average torque. As such the motor 
is non-self-starting. 
Consider now that the rotor is run by auxiliary means to a 
speed close to synchronous in the direction of rotation of the 
stator ﬁeld. The two ﬁelds now have the opportunity of locking 
into each other or, in other words, the rotor pulls into step with 
the stator ﬁeld and then on runs at exactly synchronous speed. 
It is easily seen from Fig. 5.37 that the electromagnetic torque 
developed (T ) acts on the rotor in the direction of rotation of 
rotor and balances the load torque TL. The mechanical power 
therefore ﬂows to the load (motoring action) and, by the principle 
of conservation of energy, an equal amount of electrical power 
(plus losses in the device) are drawn from the electric supply. 
It is also seen from Fig. 5.37 that for a given TL, the rotor ﬁeld 
lags behind the stator ﬁeld by an angle a or behind the resultant 
ﬁeld by an angle d. The torque developed by the synchronous 
motor is given by the expression of Eq. (5.58), i.e. 
 
T = p
2
2
2
P
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ FrF2 sin d 
(5.62)
It may be seen that the negative sign has been deleted from the torque expression with the understanding 
that the torque acts in a direction to align the ﬁelds (it is indicated by an arrow sign in Fig. 5.37). 
If the stator winding resistance and leakage reactance are assumed negligible (a fair assumption), the 
induced emf of the stator winding balances the terminal voltage, i.e. 
 
V ª 
3  ¥ 4.44 Kw fFr Nph (series) 
(5.63)
For a ﬁxed terminal voltage, therefore, the resultant ﬂux/pole is almost constant, independent of the shaft 
load. F2, the peak of rotor mmf wave being dependent upon the rotor current (dc), is constant for ﬁxed 
excitation. Equation (5.62) under conditions of constant terminal voltage and constant rotor excitation can 
therefore be written as 
 
T = K sin d 
(5.64) 
where d is positive when the rotor ﬁeld lags behind the resultant ﬁeld and would be negative otherwise. The 
angle d is known as the torque angle or power angle. 
The plot of electromagnetic torque developed by the synchronous machine is shown in Fig. 5.38. The 
machine operates at ﬁxed d for a given mechanical load torque (say d1 for TL1) and runs at synchronous speed. 
As the load torque is increased to TL2 > TL1, the rotor decelerates and the angle d increases to a new steady 
value d2 > d1 as shown in Fig. 5.38. Of course, the machine settles at the new operating angle in an oscillatory 
manner and its steady speed is once again synchronous. The ﬁeld coupling of the stator-rotor acts like a spring 
coupling and combined with rotor inertia, the system is oscillatory in nature. However, these oscillations die 
out after every disturbance because of the damping contributed by the mechanical and electrical dissipative 
effects that are present in the machine.
It is also observed from Fig. 5.38 that the maximum torque developed by the motoring machine is at 
d = 90° and is called the pull-out torque (or pull-out power); power being proportional to torque as the 
N
S
T
N
S
ns
TL
ns
d
F2 (Rotor)
Fr (resultant)
F1 (Stator)
a
ns
3 phase supply (V, f)
(infinite bus)
Fig. 5.37 
Torque production in synchronous 
machine (motoring)

236 Electric Machines
machine speed is synchronous, independent of load. If the 
motor is loaded with torque (power) more than Tpull-out’ the 
developed torque reduces (Fig. 5.38) the rotor lag angle 
increases monotonically till the rotor-stator ﬁeld-bond 
snaps, i.e. the rotor falls out of step. The machine will ﬁnally 
come to a stop and must, as a precautionary measure, be 
disconnected from the supply much before that. It is easily 
seen from the expression of Eq. (5.62) that the pull-out 
torque can be increased by increasing the stator terminal 
voltage, Fr increases with terminal voltage (Eq. (5.63)) and/
or rotor ﬁeld excitation.
With negative d, i.e. rotor ﬁeld leading the resultant ﬁeld 
in the direction of rotation of the rotor, the electromagnetic 
torque as seen from Fig. 5.39 is now developed in a 
direction opposite to that of the rotor rotation and must be 
balanced by an external mechanical torque TPM (provided 
by a prime-mover) for the rotor to run at synchronous speed 
maintaining the locking of the rotor and stator ﬁelds. The 
mechanical power now ﬂows into the rotor and the electrical 
power ﬂows out of the stator to the inﬁnite bus. The rotor 
readjusts its angle of lead such that the electrical output 
equals the mechanical input minus losses. If the mechanical 
input is more than the maximum electrical power developed 
(corresponding to generator pull-out torque, d = 90°), the 
rotor accelerates and falls out of step, i.e. the synchronism 
between the rotor and stator ﬁelds is lost.
To summarize, a synchronous machine has a synchronous locking between the stator and rotor ﬁelds 
with the rotor ﬁeld lagging the resultant air-gap ﬁeld in motoring operation and leading the resultant ﬁeld in 
generating operation. The electromagnetic torque developed is a sine function of angle d, between the rotor 
ﬁeld and the resultant ﬁeld; as a result the machine falls out of step and loses synchronism if conditions are 
created for d to increase beyond ±90°. Within this range the machine operates at synchronous speed under 
varying load conditions. Further, the machine is non-self-starting as a motor.
EXAMPLE 5.12 In a certain electric machine F2 = 850 AT, F1 = 400 AT, a = 123.6° and P (permeance/
pole) = 1.408 ¥ 10–4 Wb/ AT. Calculate the value of the resultant air-gap ﬂux/pole. 
SOLUTION 
Fr = (F2
1 + F2
2 + 2F1F2 cos a)1/2
 
 = [(400)2 + (850)2 + 2 ¥ 400 ¥ 850 cos 123.6°]1/2 = 711.5 AT
 
Fr = PFr = 1.408 ¥ 10–4 ¥  711.5 
 
 = 0.1 Wb
EXAMPLE 5.13 A 50 Hz, 400 V, 4-pole cylindrical synchronous generator has 36 slots, two-layer winding 
with full-pitch coils of 8 turns each. The mean air-gap diameter is 0.16 m, axial length 0.12 m and a uniform 
air-gap of 2 mm. Calculate the value of the resultant AT/pole and the peak air-gap ﬂux density. The machine 
TL2
Torque (power)
Motoring
–180°
–90°
180°
90°
d
Generating
TL1
d1
d2
Tpull-out
Tpull-out
Fig. 5.38 
Torque-angle (T – d) characteristic of 
synchronous machine 
ns
V f
,
d
T
TPM
F2 (Rotor)
Fr (resultant)
F1 (Stator)
Fig. 5.39 
Torque production in synchronous 
machine (generating)

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
237
is developing an electromagnetic torque of 60 Nm as a generator at a torque angle 26°. What should be 
the rotor AT/pole? What is the stator AT and the angle it makes with the resultant AT? Also ﬁnd the stator 
current. 
SOLUTION 
Nph(series) = 36
8
2
2
3
¥
¥
¥
 = 96
 
g = 4
180
36
¥
∞ = 20°  
 
m = 36
4
3
¥
 = 3
 
Kb = sin(
/ )
sin(
/ )
3
20
2
3
20
2
¥
∞
¥
∞
 = 0.96
 
V ª E = 4.44 Kd f Fr Nph
 
400
3
 = 4.44 ¥ 0.96 ¥ 50 ¥ Fr ¥ 96
 
Fr = 0.0113 Wb/pole
 
D = 0.16 m, l = 0.12 m
 
Pole area = p ¥
¥
0 16
0 12
4
.
.
 = 0.0151m2
 
Br (av) = 0 0113
0 0151
.
.
 = 0.749 T
 
Br (peak) = p
2  ¥ 0.749 = 1.18 T
 
Fr = g Br(
)
peak
m0
 = 2
10
1 18
4
10
3
7
¥
¥
¥
-
-
.
p
 
 = 1878 AT/pole (peak)
 
Torque developed, T = p
2
2
P
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ Fr F2 sin d 
 
60 = p
2
4
2
2
¥ Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  ¥ 0.0113 F2 sin 26°
or 
F2 = 1928 AT/pole (peak)
Mmf phasor diagram is drawn in Fig. 5.40 with 
F2  leading 

Fr  by d = 26°. This is the case in a generating machine. 
From the phasor diagram we ﬁnd
 
F2
1 = (1928)2 + (1878)2 – 2 ¥ 1928 ¥ 1878 sin 26° 
or 
F1 = 858 AT/pole (peak)
 
cos y = (
)
(
)
(
)
858
1878
1928
2
858
1878
2
2
2
+
-
¥
¥
or 
y = 80∞
 

F1  lags 
Fr  by 80°
 
F1 = 3
2
4
2
¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
p
k
N
P
w
ph(
)
series
Ia 
26°
y
F2
F1
Fr
(1928)
(1878)
Fig. 5.40

238 Electric Machines
 
Kw = Kb = 0.96; Nph (series) = 96
 
858 = 3
2
4
2
¥
p
 ¥ 0.96 ¥ 96
4
 ¥ Ia
or 
Ia = 13.8 A
EXAMPLE 5.14 A 3f, 4-pole, 50 Hz synchronous machine has the data as given below. 
 
Kw (rotor) = 0.976 
 
Air-gap = 1.5 mm (cylindrical rotor) 
 
Mean air-gap diameter = 29 cm 
 
Axial length = 35 cm 
 
Rotor winding turns = 746 
 
Stator winding SPP = 4; conductor/slot = 20
 
Field current = 20 A 
 (a) The machine is being used in motoring mode with Br = 1.6 T. Determine 
 
(i) F2, peak rotor AT 
 
(ii) Maximum torque 
 
(iii) Electrical input at maximum torque
 (b) If the machine is used as generator with same ﬁeld current, determine its open-circuit (no-load) 
voltage. 
SOLUTION 
Motoring mode 
 
(a)  
F2 = 4
p Kw (rotor)
N
P
pole series
(
)
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ If
 
  
 = 4
p  ¥ 0.976 ¥ 746
4
 ¥ 20
 
  
 = 4635 AT 
 
(b)  
Br = 1.6 T (given)
 
 Then 
Tmax = 
P
DL
2
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
p
F2 Br 
 
  
 = 4
2
0 29
0 35
2
¥
¥
¥
p
.
.
 ¥ 4635 ¥ 1.6
 
  
 = 2364
 
 Synchronous speed (motor speed)
 
  
wm = 2w
P  = 4p f
P
= 4
50
4
p ¥
 
  
 = 50 p rad (mech)/sec
 
  
Electrical power input, Pin = Tmax ¥ wm 
 
  
 = 2632 ¥ 50p  W
 
  
 = 371 kW 
 
 The machine is assumed loss-less, so
 
  
Pin = Pin, max = 371 kW

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
239
Generating Mode
Open Circuit Voltage The armature is not carrying any current, i.e. F1 = 0, F2 = 4630 AT as calculated above.
 
SPP = S
P
3
 = 4
 
g = 180∞P
S
 = 180
12  = 15°
 
Kw = Kb = 
sin
sin
/
30
3
15
2
∞
∞
 = 0.958
 
Fr = 
2
0
Dl
P
g
¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
m
F2 
 
 = 2
0 29
0 35
4
10
4
1 5
10
7
3
¥
¥
¥
¥
¥
¥
-
-
.
.
.
p
 ¥ 4635
 
 = 0.197 Wb
 
Nph = 20
4
4
2
¥
¥
 = 160
 
Eph = 4.44 Kb f Nph F
 
 = 4.44 ¥ 0.958 ¥ 50 ¥ 160 ¥ 0.197
 
 = 6704 V
 
Eline = 11610 V or 11.61 kV
Induction Machine
This machine has not been introduced so far. Consider a cylindrical rotor machine with both the stator and 
rotor wound for three phases and identical number of poles as shown in Fig. 5.41. Assume initially the 
rotor winding to be open-circuited and let the stator be 
connected to an inﬁnite bus (V, f ). The stator currents 
set up a rotating magnetic ﬁeld in the air-gap which 
runs at synchronous speed inducing emf in the stator 
winding which balances the terminal voltage under 
the assumption that the stator resistance and leakage 
reactance are negligible. Also the rotating ﬁeld induces 
emf in the rotor winding but no rotor current ﬂows 
because the rotor is open-circuited. The frequency of 
rotor emf is of course f. Since the rotor mmf F2 = 0, 
no torque is developed and the rotor continues to be 
stationary. The machine acts merely as a transformer 
where the stator (primary) and rotor (secondary) have 
emfs of the same frequency induced in them by the 
rotating magnetic ﬂux rather than by a stationary time-
varying ﬂux as in an ordinary transformer.
Let the rotor be now held stationary (blocked from rotation) and the rotor winding be short-circuited. 
The rotor now carries 3-phase currents creating the mmf F2 rotating in the same direction and with the same 
speed as the stator ﬁeld. F2 causes reaction currents to ﬂow into the stator from the busbar ( just as in an 
ns
ns
TL
(
–
) wrt rotor or
wrt stator
n
n
n
s
s
F2
a
B
T
A
d
n
C
c
b
V  f
,
F1
Fr
Fig. 5.41 
Illustrating the principle of induction machine

240 Electric Machines
ordinary transformer) such that the ﬂux/pole Fr of the resultant ﬂux density wave (rotating in the air-gap at 
synchronous speed) induces a stator emf to just balance the terminal voltage. Obviously Fr must be the same 
as when the rotor was open-circuited. In fact, Fr will remain constant independent of the operating conditions 
created by load on the motor. The interaction of Fr and F2, which are stationary with respect to each other, 
creates the torque tending to move the rotor in the direction of Fr or the stator ﬁeld F1. The induction motor 
is therefore a self-starting device as different from the synchronous motor. 
Let the short-circuited rotor be now permitted to rotate. It runs in the direction of the stator ﬁeld and 
acquires a steady speed of n. Obviously n < ns, because if n = ns, the relative speed between the stator ﬁeld 
and rotor winding will be zero and therefore the induced emfs and rotor currents will be zero and hence no 
torque is developed. The rotor thus cannot reach the synchronous speed ns and hence cannot exceed ns. With 
the rotor running at n, the relative speed of the stator ﬁeld with respect to rotor conductors is (ns – n) in the 
direction of ns. The frequency of induced emfs (and currents) in the rotor is therefore 
 
f2 = (
)
n
n P
s -
120
 = 
n
n
n
n P
s
s
s
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
120
 
 = sf  
(5.65)
where 
s = n
n
n
s
s
-
 = slip of the rotor 
(5.66) 
The slip s is the per unit speed (with respect to synchronous speed) at which the rotor slips behind the 
stator ﬁeld. The rotor frequency f2 = sf is called the slip frequency. From Eq. (5.66), the rotor speed is 
 
n =  (l – s)ns 
(5.67) 
The slip frequency currents in the rotor winding produces a rotor ﬁeld rotating with respect to rotor in the 
same direction as the stator ﬁeld at a speed of 
 
120sf
P
 = 120(
)
n
n f
n P
s
s
-
 = (ns – n) 
(5.68)
Since the rotor is running at a speed n and the rotor ﬁeld at (ns – n ) with respect to the rotor in the same 
direction, the net speed of the rotor ﬁeld as seen from the stator (ground reference) is 
 
n + (ns – n) = ns 
i.e., the same as the stator ﬁeld. Thus the reaction ﬁeld F2 of the rotor is always stationary with respect to the 
stator ﬁeld F1 or the resultant ﬁeld Fr (with ﬂux Fr per pole). Since the rotor mmf F2 is proportional to the 
rotor current I2 and the resultant ﬂux/pole Fr is ﬁxed by terminal voltage independent of operating conditions, 
the induction motor torque is given by (see Eq. (5.58)) 
 
T = KI2 sin d 
(5.69) 
It is observed here that the torque is produced by the induction motor at any mechanical speed other than 
synchronous; such a torque is called the asynchronous torque. 
The angle d by which F2 lags behind Fr’ the resultant mmf needs to be known. Before proceeding to 
determine d, it must be observed that shorting the rotor winding is equivalent to shorting all the winding 
conductors individually. As a result the rotor does not necessarily have to be properly wound; it may be 
constructed of conducting bars placed in the rotor slots slightly skewed and shorted by conducting end-rings 
on each side of the rotor. Such a rotor is called the squirrel-cage rotor; the conducting cage is separately 

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
241
illustrated in Fig. 5.42 The squirrel-cage rotor has a 
cheap and rugged construction and is adopted in a 
vast majority of induction motor applications. The 
machine with a properly wound rotor is called the 
wound-rotor induction motor and is provided with 
three slip-rings which provide the facility of adding 
external resistance in the rotor winding before 
shorting these. Such motors are used in on-load 
starting situations (see Ch. 9).
Normally the full-load slip of a squirrel-cage 
induction motor is small 3-10%. Consequently the 
rotor impedance is mainly resistive, the rotor leakage reactance being proportional to f2 = sf is negligible. 
Furthermore, the rotor induced emf is proportional to the rotor-slip as Fr is ﬁxed and rotates at speed ns – n 
= sns with respect to rotor. This results in the rotor current being very nearly in phase with the rotor emf and 
proportional to the rotor slip. This conclusion would obviously apply to individual rotor conductors as well. 
Figure 5.43 shows the resultant ﬂux density wave Br gliding past the rotor conductors at speed (ns – n)
= sns in a developed diagram. The induced currents in the shorted rotor conductors are sinusoidally distributed–
the distribution moves at speed (ns – n) with respect to the rotor in synchronism with the Br-wave. Further, 
because the rotor conductors are assumed resistive, i.e. currents in them are in phase with their respective 
emf’s, the rotor current distribution is therefore in space phase with Br - wave. The sinusoidal rotor current 
distribution produces a sinusoidal rotor mmf wave F2 which lags 90° behind rotor current distribution or 90° 
behind Br - wave. It is, therefore, concluded that for small values of slip, the angle d in the induction motor 
is 90°. Hence,
 
T = kI2 (for small slip) 
(5.70) 
F2 (rotor mmf wave)
Br (resultant flux density wave)
(
–
)
n
ns
(
–
)
n
ns
d = 90°
Fig. 5.43
Since rotor emf is linearly proportional to slip*, so is the rotor current for mainly a resistive rotor at small 
values of slip. Hence, the torque developed in the induction motor is a linearly increasing function of slip for 
small value of slip, being zero for s = 0, i.e. at synchronous speed. 
End ring
End ring
Rotor bars
(slightly skewed)
Fig. 5.42 Squirrel-cage rotor
 
* Since Fr, is practically constant, independent of operating conditions, the rotor emf is proportional to the relative 
speed between the resultant ﬁeld and the rotor. i.e.
 
  
(ns – n) = sns

242 Electric Machines
As slip increases further, the leakage reactance of the rotor can no longer be neglected. Its value at slip s 
is sX2, where X2 is the rotor leakage reactance per phase at frequency f, i.e. when the rotor is at a stand-still. 
The rotor current now lags the rotor induced emf by
 
q = tan–1 sX
R
2
2
where R2 is the rotor resistance per phase. 
Since the currents in the rotor conductors lag the induced emf’s by angle q, the rotor conductor current 
distribution and therefore the rotor mmf F2 shifts to the left in Fig. 5.41 by an angle q, so that 
 
d = 90° + q 
(5.71) 
It means sin d < 1. Further, since the rotor impedance 
is increasing with s, rotor current is less than proportional 
to slip. These two factors cause the motor torque to pass 
through a maximum value and then begin to decrease 
gradually as s is continuously increased. 
The nature of the complete torque-slip characteristic of 
the induction motor is exhibited in Fig. 5.44. The maximum 
torque is known as the break-down torque. The motor would 
come to rest if loaded for short time with torque load larger 
than the breakedown value.
As already mentioned, the slip of an induction motor is 
3-10% at full-load. Therefore, it is substantially a constant 
speed drive unlike the synchronous motor which runs at 
constant speed independent of load. 
Generating action results if an induction machine is 
run at negative slip or at speed n > ns, i.e. at a speed above 
synchronous. 
EXAMPLE 5.15 A 4-pole synchronous generator driven at 1500 rpm feeds a 6-pole induction motor 
which is loaded to run at a slip of 5%. What is the motor speed? 
SOLUTION 
Frequency of the synchronous generator, 
 
f = 4
1500
120
¥
 = 50 Hz 
Synchronous speed of the induction motor, 
 
ns = 120
50
6
¥
 = 1000 rpm 
 
Motor slip, s = 0.05 
 
Motor speed = (1 – s)ns 
 
 = 0.95 ¥ 1000 = 950 rpm
EXAMPLE 5.16 A 6-pole, 50-Hz wound-rotor induction motor when supplied at the rated voltage and 
frequency with slip-rings open-circuited, developed a voltage of 100 V between any two rings. Under the 
same conditions its rotor is now driven by external means at 
Break-down torque
Torque (in % full-load torque)
250
200
150
100
50
0
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Slip
Fig. 5.44 
Torque-slip characteristic of induction 
motor 

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
243
 (a) 1000 rpm opposite to the direction of rotation of stator ﬁeld, and
 (b) 1500 rpm in the direction of rotation of stator ﬁeld. 
Find the voltage available between slip-rings and its frequency in each of these cases. 
SOLUTION 
Synchronous speed, 
ns = 120
50
6
¥
 = 1000 rpm 
 
(a)  
n = –1000 rpm
 
  
s = n
n
n
s
s
-
 = 1000
1000
1000
- -
(
)  = 2
 
  
Slip frequency, sf = 2 ¥ 50 = 100 Hz
 
  The given open-circuited voltage v2 = 100 V corresponds to a slip of s = 1, the motor being stationary with the 
rotor open-circuited. Since the induced emf in ac winding is proportional to frequency, the rotor induced emf at 
slip s (frequency sf ) is sv2. Therefore,
 
  
Slip-ring voltage = sv2 = 2 ¥ 100 = 200 V
 
(b)  
n = 1500 rpm
 
  
s = 1000
1500
1000
-
 = –0.5
 
  
Slip frequency = 0.5 ¥ 50 = 25 Hz
 
  It may be seen that the negative sign has been dropped, which merely implies a reversal in the phase angle of 
the voltage.
 
  
Slip-ring voltage = 0.5 ¥ 100 = 50 V
 
  It is found that the induction machine can be regarded as a generalized transformer with rotor voltage and 
frequency both being proportional to slip.
EXAMPLE 5.17 The stator of the induction motor of Ex. 5.16 is fed at the rated voltage and frequency 
while its slip-rings are connected to a 25-Hz supply. 
 (a) Will there be a starting torque?
 (b) At what speed will steady operation result?
 (c) At what speed will steady operation result if the rotor is also fed with a 50-Hz supply? 
SOLUTION
 
(a) Under stationary conditions of the rotor, no torque will be developed as stator and rotor ﬁelds will rotate relative 
to each other, i.e. no starting torque. 
 
(b) For steady operation, the stator and rotor ﬁelds must be stationary relative to each other.
 
 Speed of the stator ﬁeld (with respect to the stator surface)
 
  
 = 120
50
¥
6
 = 1000 rpm 
 
 Speed of the rotor ﬁeld (with respect to the rotor surface)
 
  
 = 120
25
¥
6
 = 500 rpm
 
 Steady synchronous operation will result when the rotor is run at 500 rpm in the same direction as the stator ﬁeld.

244 Electric Machines
 
(c) Speed of the rotor ﬁeld (with respect to the rotor surface)
 
  
 = 1000 rpm
 
(i) If the rotor ﬁeld rotates in the same direction as the stator, steady (syn chronous) operation is only possible at 
zero speed. At any other speed of the two ﬁelds will have relative motion and will produce zero torque.
 
(ii) If the rotor ﬁeld rotates opposite to the stator ﬁeld, the steady (synchro nous) operation will result when the 
rotor moves at 2000 rpm in the direction of the stator ﬁeld; it is only at this speed of the rotor that the two 
ﬁelds are relatively stationary. 
Note: The induction motor fed as above from both stator and rotor sides operates in the synchronous mode as different 
from the induction mode.
EXAMPLE 5.18 A 3-phase, 50 Hz induction motor runs at a speed of 576 rpm at full load. 
 (a) How many poles does the motor have? 
 (b) What is its slip and frequency of rotor currents at full load? Also ﬁnd rotor speed with respect to the 
rotating ﬁeld.
 (c) What is the motor speed at twice full-load slip?
 (d) By what factor should the rotor resistance be increased for the motor to run at a speed of 528 rpm at 
full-load torque? 
SOLUTION
 
(a) Nearest synchronous speed, 
ns = 600 rpm
 
  
P = 120
50
00
¥
6
 =10
 
  
s = 600
576
600
-
 = 0. 04
 
  
f2 = 0.04 ¥ 50 = 2 Hz
 
 Rotor speed with respect to the rotating ﬁeld = 0.04 ¥ 600 = 24 rpm
 
(c)  
s = 2 ¥ 0.04 = 0.08
 
  
n = (1 – s)ns = (l – 0.08) ¥ 600 = 552 rpm
 
(d)  
s (new) = 600
528
600
-
 = 0.12
 
  
s
s
(
)
(
)
new
old
 = 0 12
0 04
.
.
 = 3
 
  For the same motor torques, the rotor current must remain constant. As the rotor slip becomes 3 times, the rotor 
induced emf increases by the same factor. Therefore, for rotor current to remain the same, its resistance must be 
increased 3 times.
The dc Machine 
Figure 5.13 showed the essential constructional features of an elementary 2-pole dc machine. The stator has 
a ﬁxed pole structure with dc excitation which means that the stator-created ﬂux density wave acting on the 
rotor periphery remains ﬁxed in space. For torque to be created, the armature (rotor) when carrying currents 
must produce an mmf pattern that remains ﬁxed in space while the armature moves. After the study of the 
dc winding in Ch. 7 and how it is connected to commutator segments, it will be seen that the armature mmf 

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
245
in a dc machine is indeed ﬁxed in space and makes an angle of 90° with the main ﬁeld. As the dc machine 
structure is necessarily of the salient pole type, the main pole ﬂux density wave is far from sinusoidal* (see 
Fig. 5.14) and the armature mmf is stepped triangular (to be shown in Ch. 7). Equation (5.58) will not be used 
in ﬁnding the torque expression for the dc machine as this result applies to sinusoidally distributed ﬁelds. 
5.8 
LINEAR MACHINES 
So far we have dealt with rotary machines which ﬁnd universal use. Each of these machines can have their 
linear motion version. The developed diagrams that we have used extensively are linear versions of the 
corresponding machine which are employed for speciﬁc purposes where linear motion is the requirement 
like in transportation and reciprocation, machine tools, and also in limited range linear motion in robotics. 
In these applications, linear induction motors are used because of constructional convenience and low cost.
In rail transportation, the ‘rotor’ of the normal induction motor is the conducting stationary rail, which 
acts as short circuited conductor. The wound stator is on the moving vehicle. The details and performance 
characteristics of the linear induction motor shall be taken up in Ch. 9. Here we shall present the basic 
analysis of a linearly moving ﬁeld. The mmf diagram for one phase of linear concentrated winding is the 
same as the developed diagram of Fig. 5.24(b) and is redrawn in Fig. 5.45 where the linear dimension is z in 
place of angle q. Of course, torque would now be force.
Ni
Nil2
MMF
Fa1,fundamental
b
b/2
–Nil2
b
wave length
3
2 b
0
Stationary
Movable
S
a
N
a¢
South pole
North pole
Z
b/2
a¢
Fig. 5.45
 
* In fact it is desired to make the B-wave as ﬂat-topped as possible to yield high value of ﬂux/pole for given physical 
dimensions.

246 Electric Machines
It is seen from Fig. 5.45 that the wavelength of the fundamental of the mmf wave is b, which corresponds 
to 2 poles with electrical angle 2p. The fundamental mmf can be expressed as 
 
Fa1 = 4
2
2
p
p
b
Ni
z
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
cos
 
(5.72)
For a distributed winding,
 
Fa1 = 4
2
p
p
b
K
N
P
z
w
ph(
) cos
series
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
or 
Fa1 = 4 2
p
K
N
P
w
ph(
)
series
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ I cos wt cos
2p
b z
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ ;  I = rms current 
(5.73)
For a 3-phase winding carrying 3-phase balanced currents at frequency w = 2pf, it can be shown (on the 
lines of rotating magnetic ﬁeld) that
 
F (z, t) = 3
2 Fm cos
2p b
w
z
t
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  
(5.74)
where 
Fm = 
4 2
p
K
N
P
w
ph(
)
series
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ I  
(5.75)
It is observed from Eq. (5.76) that the resultant ﬁeld is a travelling wave, whose speed (linear) is found as 
 
2p
b
z – wt = K (any constant value)
 
2p
b
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
dz
dt
 – w = 0
or 
v = dz
dt  = wb
p
2
 = f b 
(5.76)
The ﬁeld thus travels at speed v.
EXAMPLE 5.19 The data of a 3-phase ac linear motor is as under:
 
Wave length, b = 0.5 m; gap = 1 cm
Distributed 3-phase winding spread over 2m length 
 
Nph(series) = 48; Kw = 0.925 
Supply frequency, 25 Hz, 3-phase balanced currents, I = 750/
2  A (rms) 
Calculate: 
 (a) Amplitude of travelling mmf wave
 (b) Peak value of air-gap ﬂux density 
 (c) Velocity of the travelling mmf wave
 (d) Current, frequency if the desired velocity is 72 km/h 
SOLUTION
 
(a)  
Peak amplitude = 3
2
4
2
◊
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
p
K
N
P
w
ph(
)
series
I

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
247
 
  
Winding length = 2 m or 2
0 5.
 =  4 wavelength
 
  
One wavelength = 2 pole
 
  
P = 2 ¥ 4 = 8
 
  
Fpeak = 3
2
4
2
◊
p
 ¥ 0.925 ¥ 48
8
750
2
¥
 ¥ = 7.95 ¥ 103 A/m
 
 Observe the units.
 
(b)  
Bpeak = m0F
g
peak  = 4
10
7 95
10
1
10
7
3
2
p ¥
¥
¥
¥
-
-
.
 = 0.999 or 1 T
 
(c)  
v = wb
p
2
 = 25 ¥ 0.5 = 12.5 m/s
 
(d)  
v = 72
103
¥
3600
 = 20
 
  
20 =  f ¥ 0.5 or f  = 40 Hz 
5.9 
MAGNETIC LEAKAGE IN ROTATING MACHINES
The leakage ﬂux in rotating machines is that ﬂux which links only the stator or only the rotor windings. 
Because of the presence of air-gap in the magnetic circuit of machines, the leakage in these is quite signiﬁcant 
and cannot be neglected in analysis as could be done in the case of transformers. The leakage in machines 
falls into the following two broad categories:
 
1. Leakage in main poles, and 
 
2. Leakage in armature. 
Leakage in Main Poles 
The main poles of a dc machine and that of a synchronous machine are excited by means of dc to produce a 
steady properly distributed ﬂux density; the chief difference between the two being that while the poles of a 
dc machine form the stator and that of a synchronous machine are located on rotor. The useful ﬂux is that ﬂux 
which coming from the main poles crosses the air-gap and enters the armature. Some of the ﬂux leaks through 
via two typical paths indicated in Fig. 5.46(a) without entering the armature. This then constitutes the leakage 
ﬂux whose only effect is to increase the ﬂux density in the roots of the poles without contributing to useful 
ﬂux and therefore must be accounted for in the magnetic circuit design of the machine. Similar leakage takes 
place in the poles of a synchronous machine as shown in Fig. 5.46(b).
Leakage in Armature
The complexity of identifying the leakage paths in the wound armature arises from the fact that the winding is 
distributed and the armature surface slotted. The total leakage ﬂux of the armature can be divided into several 
components identiﬁed in the following. 
Slot leakage This is the ﬂux which follows the path from tooth to tooth across the slots as shown in Fig. 5.47 
and in the process links stator/rotor windings only. It is observed that the path of the slot-leakage ﬂux is 
perpendicular to that of the main ﬂux, which passes radially down the teeth, and a very small part of it straight 

248 Electric Machines
 
Fm
Useful (mutual) flux
N
S
S
N
Useful (mutual)
flux
Leakage flux
(a) dc machine
Leakage
flux
(b) Synchronous machine
Stator
Rotor
Leakage flux
(front and back of poles)
 
Fig. 5.46 Leakage in main poles 
Fig. 5.47 Slot leakage 
down the slots. It is further to be noticed that a smaller amount of leakage ﬂux links the bottom conductors in 
slots than the top conductors. The slot leakage is very much dependent upon the shape of slots. It is larger in 
semi-closed slots (Fig. 5.48(a)) used in induction machines, because of narrow (low reluctance) slot opening, 
compared to open slots (Fig. 5.48(b)) used in synchronous and dc machines.
(a) Semiclosed slots
(b) Open slots
Fig. 5.48 
Tooth-tip leakage This ﬂux follows the path from the tip of one tooth to the adjoining one enclosing all 
the conductors in the slot as shown in Fig. 5.49. This type of leakage ﬂux is larger for larger stator to rotor 

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
249
air-gap as more area for the leakage ﬂux is available. Therefore, the tooth-tip leakage is smaller in induction 
machines with a narrow air-gap than in synchronous machines which use much larger air-gaps.
Over-hang leakage This is the leakage ﬂux which surrounds the end conductors of the winding (stator/ 
rotor) as shown in Fig. 5.50. Its path mainly lies through air but a part of it may be located in the core-iron 
or the iron of end shields. The amount of this leakage depends upon the proximity of conductors and their 
relative location with respect to both core and end-shields. This leakage is generally small because of the 
large air paths involved. It is particularly insigniﬁcant in the squirrel-cage induction machine rotor which has 
no over-hang.
 
 
Over-hang
Core
 
Fig. 5.49 Tooth-tip leakage  
Fig. 5.50
Zig-zag leakage In the case of induction machines both the stator and rotor are slotted so that some of the 
ﬂux follows the path alternating between stator and rotor teeth as shown in Fig. 5.51. This ﬂux therefore 
alternately links conductors in stator and rotor slots and is known as zig-zag leakage. Because of its nature 
it cannot be clearly assigned to either the stator or rotor windings. It  is usually considered empirically that 
half of this ﬂux links the stator winding while the other half links the rotor winding. This type of leakage is 
an exclusive feature of the induction machine and its value is a function of the percentage of the slot-pitch 
occupied by tooth in the rotor and stator and upon the length of the air-gap.
Fig. 5.51 Zig-zag leakage

250 Electric Machines
Harmonic leakage This kind of leakage results when the winding distribution on the stator and rotor are 
dissimilar. The main ﬂux then has a harmonic component not corresponding to either winding and this excess 
ﬂux has the effect of leakage ﬂux. The detailed treatment of this kind of leakage is beyond the scope of this 
book. 
Leakage reactance The leakage ﬂux of various kinds as enumerated above, linking one of the windings, 
causes that winding to possess leakage reactance which can be considered as a lumped parameter in series 
in the circuit model of the machine whose effect is to cause a voltage drop in the machine. Since the ﬁeld 
windings of dc and synchronous machines carry direct current, the leakage ﬂux linking them in no way 
affects the machine steady-state performance. 
5.10 
LOSSES AND EFFICIENCY 
The losses and efﬁciency of a transformer have been studied in Sec. 3.6. As in the case of transformers, it is 
more accurate to determine the efﬁciency of a rotating machine by determination of its losses rather than by 
the direct load test in which the input and output are required to be measured. Furthermore, in large and even 
in medium-size machines, it is not practically possible to arrange for the actual loading of the machine. Once 
the losses have been determined, the machine efﬁciency (h) can be computed from the relationships: 
 
h = 
Output
Output + losses =
Losses
Output + losses
1-
; (for generators)
 
h = Input
losses
Input
=
Losses
Input
-
-
1
; (for motors)
The efﬁciency thus determined is more accurate because the error involved is only in losses, whereas in 
the direct method there is error in measurement of both the input and output. 
The study of losses is essential for design purposes because (i) losses directly inﬂuence the economy of 
operation of the machine; and (ii) the rating of a machine depends on the maximum temperature that the 
insulation can withstand, which in turn is dictated by the heat developed in the core and conductors by the 
losses. Of course, the rating of a machine for a given frame size and losses can be raised by proper design of 
the ventilation system. 
The process of energy conversion in rotating machines involves currents, ﬂuxes and rotation which cause 
losses in conductors and ferromagnetic materials, and mechanical losses of rotation. Various losses can be 
classiﬁed conveniently by the tree-diagram shown in Fig. 5.52. 
Constant Losses 
A machine is normally designed to run at constant voltage mains and at a substantially constant speed 
(variable speeds are also required for certain applications). As a result, some of the losses remain nearly 
constant in the working range of the machine and are, therefore, named constant losses. The constant losses 
can be further classiﬁed as no-load core-loss and mechanical-loss.
No-load Core (lron)-Loss
This loss consists of hysteresis and eddy-current loss caused by changing ﬂux densities in the iron core of 
the machine when only the main winding is excited. The core-loss is largely conﬁned to the armature of a 

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
251
dc machine, the armature of a synchronous machine and the stator of an induction machine. The frequency 
of ﬂux density variation in the rotor core of the induction machine is so low (sf ) under normal operating 
conditions that it has negligible core-loss. 
While in the case of transformers the core-loss arises because of time-variation of the ﬂux density with 
the axis of ﬂux remaining ﬁxed; in the case of rotating machines, this loss results from both time-variation of 
the ﬂux density and rotation of its axis. As a consequence the speciﬁc core-loss is larger in rotating machines 
than that in transformers.
The time- and axis-variation of the ﬂux density in a rotating 
machine is illustrated by means of the cross-sectional view of 
a dc machine as shown in Fig. 5.53. It is easily seen from this 
ﬁgure that as the machine armature rotates, the ﬂux density in 
the elemental volume of the core shown shaded varies cyclically 
in magnitude as well as in direction. 
Additional 
hysteresis 
and 
eddy-current 
loss 
called 
pulsation loss also occurs in rotating machines on account 
of high-frequency ﬂux density variations caused by slotting 
of the stator/rotor or both. In the case of dc and synchronous 
machines, the relative movement between the slotted armature 
and the poles causes high-frequency ﬂux density variation 
in the pole-shoes because of the difference in reluctance of 
the ﬂux paths corresponding to the teeth and slots. In case of 
induction machines where both the stator and rotor are slotted, 
the pulsation frequency is different in the two. In order to reduce 
the pulsation loss, it is a common practice to use laminated 
Losses
Constant losses
Mechanical
loss
No-load core
(iron) loss
Hysteresis
loss
Eddy-
currnet
loss
Stator
copper loss
Rotor
copper loss
Brush-
contact loss
Copper(
)
loss
l R
2
Variable losses
Windage loss
(including ventilation)
Friction loss
Brush friction
loss
Bearing friction
loss
Copper
stray-load
loss
Stray-load
loss
Core
stray-load
loss
Fig. 5.52
Main pole
Pole-shoe
Armature
N
S
Fig. 5.53
machine

252 Electric Machines
pole-shoes for dc and synchronous machines; also for small machines of this type, the main pole itself may be 
built-up of laminations. Ofcourse, much thicker laminations are used in pole-shoe than in the machine core. 
Hysteresis and eddy current losses in the core cause the ﬂux density wave to somewhat lag behind the mmf 
wave producing a torque which acts as a drag on the rotating member. In this regard the core-loss appears as 
if it is mechanical loss as the hysteresis and eddy-current torque absorb mechanical power from the shaft. The 
torque caused by these losses is relatively small. Practical use is made of this torque in small motors known 
as hysteresis motors (Sec. 10.3). 
Mechanical Loss
This comprises brush friction, bearing friction, windage and ventilation system losses, all of which are self-
explanatory. Mechanical loss may be relatively large in a machine of large diameter or high speed.
The no-load core-loss and mechanical loss together are represented in literature by the term no-load 
rotational loss.
Variable Losses 
These losses vary with the load supplied by the machine and are hence called “variable losses”. These can be 
split into copper loss (I2R) and stray-load loss.
Copper-loss (I2R) All windings have some resistance (though small) and hence there are copper-losses 
associated with current ﬂow in them. The copper-loss can again be subdivided into the stator copper-loss, 
rotor copper-loss and brush-contact loss. The stator and rotor copper-losses are proportional to the current 
squared and are computed with the dc resistance of windings at 75°C. 
The conduction of current between the brushes (made of carbon) and the commutator of a dc machine is 
via short arcs in the air-gaps which are bound to exist in such a contact. As a consequence, the voltage drop 
at the brush contact remains practically constant with load; its value for positive and negative brushes put 
together is of the order of 1 to 2 V. The brush-contact loss in a dc machine is therefore directly proportional 
to current. The contact losses between the brushes (made of copper-carbon) and slip-rings of a synchronous 
machine are negligible for all practical purposes.
Copper-losses are also present in ﬁeld windings of synchronous and dc machines and in regulating the 
rheostat. However, only losses in the  ﬁeld winding are charged against the machine, the other being charged 
against the system.
Stray-load loss Apart from the variable losses mentioned above, there are some additional losses that vary 
with load but cannot be related to current in a simple manner. These losses are known as “stray-load loss” and 
occur both in the windings and the core. 
 
(i) Copper stray-load loss Additional copper-loss occurs in the conductors due to nonuniform 
distribution of alternating currents which increase the effective resistance of conductors and is known 
as skin-effect. Further, when the conductors carry load current, the teeth of the core get saturated and as 
a consequence more ﬂux passes down the slots through the copper conductors setting up eddy-current 
losses in them. Eddy-current losses are also present in the winding overhang. 
 (ii) Core stray-load loss Due to the ﬂow of load current in a machine, the ﬂux pattern in teeth and core 
gets distorted. The ﬂux density decreases at one end of the ﬂux density wave and increases at the 
other. Since the core-loss is almost proportional to the square of the ﬂux density, its reduction due to 
a reduction in the ﬂux density is less than the increase due to an increase in the ﬂux density and as a 

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
253
consequence there is a net increase in the core-loss, predominantly in the teeth, which is known as the 
stray-load loss in the core. 
Under loaded conditions, the teeth are highly saturated and as a result more ﬂux leaks through the stator 
frame and end-shields causing eddy-current loss in them which, indeed, is another component of the core 
stray-load loss. 
The stray-load loss is difﬁcult to calculate accurately and therefore it is taken as 1 % of the output for a dc 
machine and 0.5% of the output for both synchronous and induction machines. 
Because of the presence of ﬁxed and variable losses in a machine, the machine efﬁciency continuously 
increases with the load acquiring a maximum value at a particular load related to the design of the machine. 
Further, the full-load efﬁciency varies with the rating of a machine and is considerably higher for large-size 
machines; for example, the efﬁciency is close to 75% for 1 kW machine, 90% for 35 kW, 93% for 350 kW 
size and as high as 97% for 3500 kW. Efﬁciency of low-speed machines is usually lower than that of high-
speed machines, the spread being 3 to 4%. 
For a machine operating at a substantially constant voltage and speed, the various losses as enumerated 
earlier are: 
 (1) Constant losses*,
 
  
Pk = Pi0 + Pwf 
(5.77)
 
 where 
Pi0 = no-load core (iron)-loss (constant)
 
  
Pwf = windage and friction loss (constant)
 (2) Variable losses,
 
  
Pv = Pc +  Pst + Pb 
(5.78)
 
 where 
Pc = 3I2R, the copper-loss (factor 3 will not be present in a dc machine);
 
  
 R is the resistance parameter of the machine.
 
  
Pst = stray-load loss (copper + iron) = a I2 
(Here the stray-load loss is assumed proportional the square of the load current)
 
Pb = VbI = brush-contact loss (in dc machines); Vb being the brush-contact voltage drop 
Hence 
Pv = 3I2 R + a I2 + VbI = (3R + a) I2 + VbI = Kv I2 + VI 
(5.79)
Thus total machine losses can be expressed as a function of the current as 
 
PL = Pk + Kv I2 + VbI 
(5.80)
Generating machine
 
Power output, Pout = CVI
 
C = constant (
3  ¥ pf for 3-phase ac machine)
 
V = machine voltage (line)
 
Efﬁciency, h = 
P
P
PL
out
out +
 
* Field copper-loss for a dc and synchronous machine is constant and can be lumped with constant losses.

254 Electric Machines
 
 = 
CVI
CVI
P
K I
V I
k
v
b
+
+
+
2
 
(5.81a)
 
 = 
CV
CV
V
P
I
K I
b
k
v
(
)
+
+
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
(5.81b)
The maximum efﬁciency is obtained at (minimum denominator in Eq. (5.81))
 
P
I
k  = KvI
or 
Pk = Kv I2 
(5.82)
Thus the maximum efﬁciency is reached at a load when the losses proportional to the square of current 
equal the constant losses. This is the same conclusion as arrived at for a transformer (Eq. (3.59(a))).
Motoring machine 
 
Power input, Pin = CVI
 
Efﬁciency, h = P
P
P
L
in
in
-
 
 = CVI
P
K I
V I
CVI
k
v
b
-
-
-
2
 
(5.83a)
 
 = 
(
)
CV
V
P
I
K I
CV
b
k
v
-
-
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
(5.83b)
This also reaches the maximum value when 
 
Pk = Kv I2 
(5.84) 
i.e. 
Constant losses = losses proportional to the square of current
As per the condition of Eq. (5.82) or (5.84) for maximum efﬁciency, the constant losses and variable 
losses (proportionality constant Kv) are so proportioned by the choice of machine dimensions as to yield 
maximum efﬁciency near about the full-load. The constant losses are mainly determined by the choice of 
ﬂux density and the volume of iron used and the variable losses are governed by the choice of current density 
and the volume of copper used. Further, the ﬂux density used is limited to slightly saturated values and 
the current density is limited by the allowable temperature rise (depending upon the class of insulation). 
Therefore, adjusting the machine efﬁciency to yield the maximum value at a particular load is an exercise in 
proportioning iron and copper to be used in the machine. 
Maximum Output 
Consider for example the motoring machine. The power output is expressed as 
 
Pout = CVI – Pk – KvI2–VbI
It is a fairly good assumption to neglect Vb; in fact this term is not present in ac machines. Then 
 
Pout = CVI – Pk – Kv I2 

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
255
For maximum power output 
 
dP
dI
out  = CV – 2KvI = 0
or 
I = CV
Kv
2
The maximum power output is then given by
 
Pout (max) = CV
CV
Kv
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  – PK – Kv
CV
Kv
2
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
 = (
)
CV
Kv
2
4
 – Pk 
The power input is 
 
Pin = CVI = (
)
CV
Kv
2
2
The efﬁciency at maximum power output is given by 
 
h = (
) /
(
) /
CV
K
P
CV
K
v
k
v
2
2
4
2
-
Obviously this will be slightly less than 50%. This is too low a value to be acceptable for a power-
delivering device. Further, under maximum output operation, the losses being almost half the input, it would 
be impossible to limit the temperature rise to the allowable value. Thus the electromechanical power devices 
are never operated to deliver maximum output. In fact these are operated at a load (nearly full-load) at 
which the efﬁciency is maximum. This is in contrast to electronic devices (low power) which are usually 
operated to deliver maximum power output as the total power being very small, the efﬁciency is of secondary 
consideration. Further, the problem of heat (caused by losses) dissipation is not so intense as in large power 
rotating machines. 
5.11 
RATING AND LOSS DISSIPATION 
Rating
The rating of a synchronous generator is its operating voltage, frequency, speed and kVA/MVA output at a 
speciﬁed power factor*. In case of motors the output rating is given in kW (older practice was to specify the 
rated output in horse-power (1 hp = 746 W)). The dc machines are rated in terms of voltage and power output 
in kW. The frequency speciﬁcation of ac machines is normally the standard supply frequency, i.e. 50 Hz—it 
is 60 Hz on the American continent. The rated voltage is speciﬁed as a standard value, viz 230 V/ 400 V/
3.3 kV/6.6 kV/11 kV. Most manufacturers build small and medium sized motors in standard kW sizes (consult 
ISI: 325–1970). 
Insulation which is used in intricate forms is the most vulnerable part of a machine being highly susceptible 
to temperature which is the major factor** in determining its lifetime and therefore that of the machine. As 
 
* kVA/MVA rating and speciﬁed pf determine the mechanical power rating of the prime mover to which it is 
coupled. It can of course be operated at other power factors. 
 
** Other factors affecting the life of insulation are oxidation and ingress of dirt and moisture. 

256 Electric Machines
a rule of thumb the lifetime of a machine is reduced to one-half for every 8–10 °C rise in temperature. 
Acceptable life expectancy of electric power equipment being 10–30 years, the highest temperature of 
insulation anywhere in the machine has to be limited to a value depending upon the class of insulation 
employed. The maximum output that a machine can supply without exceeding a speciﬁed temperature rise 
above the ambient (40°C as per ISI), is known as the continuous rating of the machine. The continuous 
rating, as determined by temperature rise, limits the machine losses generally assuring an acceptable value of 
machine efﬁciency. Any other speciﬁc performance ﬁgure(s) (say the breakdown torque of induction motor) 
must be independently met by the machine designer. 
Both iron and copper being the seats of losses in a machine, the temperature distribution in the machine 
is quite complex. This problem is greatly simpliﬁed by assigning a single temperature to deﬁne the thermal 
state of the machine. The single temperature is determined by the rise in resistance of windings as measured 
from the machine terminals. In super-size synchronous generators, thermocouples are embedded during 
manufacture to track temperature of hot-spots predetermined by the designer through heat transfer studies. 
ISI speciﬁcations classify insulation for industrial machines as Class B, Class F and Class H. Class B 
insulation includes mica, glass ﬁbre, asbestos, and other similar materials with suitable binding substances. 
The highest temperature rise (40°C above ambient) allowed for this class of insulation is 130°C. Class F 
insulation also includes mica, glass ﬁbre, and synthetic substances, but it must be able to withstand a higher 
temperature of 155°C. Class H can withstand a still higher temperature of 180°C and may consist of materials 
like silicone elastomer and combinations in various forms of mica, glass ﬁbre, asbestos, etc. with silicone 
resins for bonding. 
A continuous-rated motor must operate successfully ±10% variation of the rated voltage and ±5% variation 
of the rated frequency. The combined variation of voltage and frequency in a direction to adversely affect 
losses (V increases, f reduces) must not exceed 10%. It is further expected that the continuous-rated motors 
are built with ample safety margin so as be capable of withstanding short-time overloads of 25% with 10% 
reduction in voltage without excessive temperature rise. 
In industrial applications certain situations require the motor to be loaded for short time periods followed 
by long cooling intervals. Such motors are short-time rated for standard periods of 5, 15, 20, 30 and 
60 min. These motors are specially designed with higher ﬂux densities in iron and higher current densities in 
copper. As a result they have better torque producing capability but lower thermal capacity when compared 
to continuous-rated motors. 
Short-time rating of a continuous-rated motor is much more than its continuous rating because of the 
heat storage in thermal capacity of the machine during the heat transient under short-time loading. This is 
illustrated in Fig. 5.54. The thermal transient* has an exponential growth (a single time constant) with a 
steady temperature rise of (PLRT) where PL represents the motor loss in heat units at a particular load and RT 
is the overall thermal resistance of the cooling system. It is evident from Fig. 5.54 that Pst
L (short-time loading 
loss) allowed for a speciﬁed loading period is more than Pc
L (continued loading loss) without the machine 
 
* Figure 5.55 gives the simpliﬁed, lumped, analogous circuit model of the machine for heat transfer. The tempera-
ture (single temperature representing the overall thermal state of the machine) is measured with respect to ground 
reference (ambient). Here 
 
  
PL = motor loss in heat units 
 
  
RT = overall thermal resistance of the cooling system 
 
  
CT = thermal capacity of the machine 
(Contd. on next page)

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
257
exceeding the allowable temperature rise. Hence as the loading period is reduced, the motor short-time rating 
increases. 
In industrial applications of motors a typical problem is the determination of the size of a continuous-rated 
motor for a given duty cycle—the duty cycle of a “planer” may be visualized as a simple example; during the 
forward stroke the motor is on full-load while it is practically unloaded during the return stroke. A crude yet 
reliable method of motor selection is to assume that the motor losses are proportional to the square of loading 
(this overemphasises I2R loss as compared to the constant core loss). The average loss during a duty cycle is 
proportional to 
S
S
(
)
kW
time
time
2 ¥
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
Temp. rise
Short-time rating
Continuous rating
Loading period
P
R
L
T
st
T
P R
max
L
=
c
T
Time
Fig. 5.54 Continuous and short-time rating
The differential governing the thermal transient is 
 
  
CT
dT
dt
T
RT
+
 = PL 
 
 whose solution for initial temperature rise of 0 °C (machine starting from cold conditions) is
 
  
T(t) = T, (1 – e–t/t) 
 
 where 
t = RTCT, the thermal time-constant 
 
  
Ts = PLRT the steady-state temperature rise
T
g
PL
CT
RT
Fig. 5.55
(Contd. from previous  page)

258 Electric Machines
where kW = motor loading in a period of duty cycle. The continuous-rated motor which has the same loss is 
given by 
 
(kW)2
continuous-rating = S
S
(
)
kW
time
time
2 ¥
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
or 
(kW)continuous-rating = 
S
S
(
)
kW
time
time
2 ¥
 = (kW)rms (of the duty cycle)
If stand-still period(s) are involved as part of the duty cycle (as in a crane) the above relationship must be 
modiﬁed as under 
 
(kW)rms = 
S(
)
(
)
kW
time
running time
stand-still time/k
2 ¥
+
 
(5.85)
where the constant (k > 1) accounts for poor ventilation (cooling) during the stand-still period(s) where there 
is no forced cooling. For open-type motors, k = 4. It is tacitly assumed in Eq. (5.85) that the duty cycle period 
is sufﬁciently less than the time for the motor to reach almost its steady temperature rise when continuously 
loaded to its continuous-rating. 
The errors involved in the (kW)rms-method are swamped out when the nearest higher standard rating, e.g. 
90 kW motor is selected for (kW)rms = 85. 
A duty cycle requiring high torque peaks cannot be satisﬁed by (kW)rms choice which has a thermal basis. 
Short-time rated motors as already mentioned are better suited for such applications because of their better 
torque-producing capabilities. 
Loss Dissipation (Cooling) 
To prolong insulation life-time to an acceptable value, the heat generated owing to loss in a machine must be 
dissipated fast enough so that the temperature rise does not exceed the allowable limit for a speciﬁed ambient 
temperature. In fact it is the improvement in heat transfer technology that has helped in a major reduction in 
machine sizes for given ratings, in particular for large-size machines. 
Combined conduction and forced convective cooling are the practical means of removing heat of losses 
from all electric machinery. Because of limited allowable temperature rise, radiation does not make any 
signiﬁcant contribution to loss dissipation. 
Radial ventilation Radial ventilation is commonly employed wherein the natural centrifugal action of the 
rotor may be supplemented by the rotor fan. Figure 5.56 shows the radial ventilation scheme suitable for 
machines up to 20 kW. 
Axial ventilation Axial ventilation scheme of Fig. 5.57 is suitable for machines of moderate outputs and 
high speeds.
Combined radial and axial ventilation This is employed for large machines as shown in Fig. 5.58 for an 
induction motor. 
Totally-enclosed Totally enclosed machine presents a special ventilation problem as the inside of the 
machine has  no air-connection with outside. In such machines heat is transferred to the enclosure (called 

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
259
carcass) by an internal fan and from where it is removed to the ambient by an external fan mounted on the 
shaft. The cooling in a totally enclosed machine cannot be as efﬁcient as in an open-type machine. 
Losses being roughly proportional to the volume of material increase as the cube of the linear dimensions, 
while the cooling surface increases as the square of the same. Therefore, the loss dissipation problem becomes 
more intense in large turbo-generators. 
For large machines, which may require several tonnes of cooling air/hour, forced ventilation is used 
wherein air is passed through a cleaning ﬁlter before being forced into the machine for cooling purposes. 
A more compact scheme of securing clean cooling air is the closed-circuit system as employed for turbo-
generators of small rating. In this system hot air is cooled by a water-cooled heat exchanger. 
Hydrogen Cooling 
For large turbo-generators, hydrogen is commonly used as a cooling medium in a closed circuit. The following 
properties of hydrogen make it most suited for this purpose. 
 
1. Hydrogen has a density of 1/14 of that of air at the same temperature and pressure, reducing thereby 
windage losses and noise. 
 
2. On an equal weight basis, the speciﬁc heat of hydrogen is 14 times that of air. Therefore, for the same 
temperature and pressure, the heat-storing capacity/ unit volume of hydrogen is the same as that of air.
 
3. The heat-transfer capability of hydrogen by forced convection over a hot surface is 1.5 times that of air.
 
4. The thermal conductivity of hydrogen is seven times that of air.
 
Shaft
 
Shaft
 
Fig. 5.56
Fig. 5.57
Fig. 5.58

260 Electric Machines
 
5. By use of hydrogen environment, the life of insulation is prolonged and the maintenance cost goes 
down because of the absence of dirt, moisture and oxygen.
 
6. The hydrogen-air mixture does not explode so long as air content is less than 30%. 
To avoid air leaking into the hydrogen circuit, hydrogen pressure is maintained above 1 atm. Hydrogen 
cooling at 1, 2 and 3 atm can raise the rating of a machine by 15%, 30% and 40% respectively. Hydrogen 
cooling reduces the temperature and resistance of windings and hence the losses to be dissipated. This fact 
marginally raises the full-load efﬁciency of the machine (by about 0.5%). 
The machine and its water-cooled heat exchanger for cooling hydrogen are enclosed in a gas-tight 
envelope; the most intricate problem being that of sealing the bearings. Oil-ﬁlled gas-seals are used for this 
purpose. Further, the envelope must be explosion-proof. 
Direct Gas cooling 
For a machine of 100 MW or more, the temperature gradient over the conductor insulation is high enough 
to call for direct contact between the coolant and conductor. For this purpose, the rotor conductor comprises 
hollow tubes as shown in Fig. 5.59 through which hydrogen is circulated by means of ﬂexible connections.
Direct Water Cooling 
Turbo-generators of the highest rating have a hydrogen-cooled stator core and a direct water-cooled stator 
and rotor windings. The speed of circulating  water must be limited to 2.5 m/s to avoid erosion and cavitation. 
Figure 5.60 shows the arrangement for direct water-cooling of the rotor winding which is most desirable 
 
 
 
Fig. 5.59 Direct gas cooling 
Fig. 5.60

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
261
because of high electric loading of rotor and is mechanically most difﬁcult. Direct water-cooling of the 
stator winding requires ﬂexible water-tube connections with insulation against high voltages and low water 
conductivity. 
5.12 
MATCHING CHARACTERISTICS OF ELECTRIC MACHINE AND LOAD
The machine and the load are the two components of an electro-mechanical energy-conversion system, and 
the machine characteristics, generally, play a predominant part in the operating behaviour of the complete 
system.
In choosing an electric motor its speed-torque characteristic 
is needed to be known to a fair degree  of accuracy and further 
it has to be properly matched to the speed-torque characteristic 
of the mechanical load. Figure 5.61 shows the speed-torque 
characteristic* of an induction motor with a fan-type load 
(load torque roughly proportional to square of speed). The 
steady operating point is the intersection point P of the two 
characteristics. As can be seen from Fig. 5.61, it is a stable 
operating point and the machine-load system returns to it when 
subjected to a short-duration disturbance. 
The characteristics of mechanical loads can be classiﬁed as 
below:
1. Constant-speed loads These can be of two kinds. Certain loads require approximately constant speed as 
the load torque varies, e.g. machine tools, hydraulic pumps, fans, etc. Certain special loads like paper mill 
drives require exactly a constant speed independent of the load torque. 
2. Variable-speed (or constant kW) loads Certain loads, such as cranes, hoists and other traction-type 
drives, demand high torque at low speeds and low torque at high speed so that the kW demanded from the 
mains remains substantially constant. This nature is imparted to the load wherever heavy inertias are to be 
accelerated. 
3. Adjustable-speed loads These are of a constant adjustable speed kind as in certain machine tool 
applications or of a variable adjustable speed kind as in cranes. The range of speed adjustment in certain 
drives can be highly demanding. 
The motor characteristics can be classiﬁed as: 
1. Constant-speed type The speed remains exactly constant independent of torque as in Fig. 5.62(a). This 
characteristic is possessed by the synchronous motor. 
2. Shunt-type Here the motor speed drops by a few per cent from no-load to full-load as in Fig. 5.62(b). The 
ac induction motor (over the operating region) and dc shunt motor both possess this characteristic.
3. Series-type Here the speed rises sharply as the load torque reduces as in Fig. 5.62(c). This type of 
characteristic is possessed by a dc series motor ideally suitable for traction-type loads.
Adjustable speed drives require the adjustment (raising/lowering) of the three motor characteristic types. 
It will be seen in later Chapters (7, 8 and 9) that this is much more easily accomplished in dc motors than in 
ac motors. Solid-state power control (Ch. 12) has contributed a lot to adjustable speed drives. 
 
* This is the same characteristic as in Fig. 5.43 except with the ordinates reversed. 
Speed
Load
Motor
P
0
Torque
ns
Fig. 5.61 
Steady operating point of a motor-
load system 

262 Electric Machines
The accelerating (starting) and decelerating (braking) characteristics of motor -load systems are also of 
equal importance in their industrial applications. The system should be capable of coming to full speed from 
rest and be able to be stopped in an acceptable time period. These requirements are stringent in starting on-
load and in fast braking and reversal in certain special applications (rolling mill drives). A motor has three 
regions of operation—generating, motoring and braking. In generating region it returns the decelerating 
intertial energy back to electric main preventing the system from acquiring dangerously high speeds—as in 
lowering a hoist or down- the-gradient traction. In braking region the machine absorbs mechanical energy (as 
well as some electric energy) in form of losses in it appearing as heat. A dc motor offers excellent starting and 
braking characteristics, much superior to those of an ac induction motor. 
Similar to the case of motors, the operating point of a generator-load system is determined by the 
characteristics of the two as shown in Fig. 5.63 for a dc 
shunt generator (Sec. 7.11). Similar is the case with ac 
(synchronous) generators. In modern systems, generators 
operating in parallel feed loads spread over geographically 
wide areas through transmission lines. The system must 
meet the requirement of a substantially constant voltage as 
load varies over a wide range. A captive generator feeding 
a single motor is used in certain speed-control schemes in 
which the terminal voltage may be required to vary in a 
peculiar fashion.
It is therefore seen that among the features of great 
importance are the torque-speed characteristic of a motor 
and the V-I characteristic of a generator. Equally important 
can be the limits through which these characteristics can 
be varied. Other relevant important economic features of 
n
0
ns
T
n0
n
0
T
(a) Synchronous-type characteristic
Shunt characteristic (
=
for
induction motor)
n
n
0
s
(b)
n
0
T
(c) Series characteristic
Fig. 5.62 Types of motor characteristic
Voltage
P
Load
Generator
Current
0
Fig. 5.63 
Steady operating point of a generator-
load system

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
263
an electric machine are efﬁciency, power factor, comparative cost and effect of losses on heating and rating 
(already discussed in Sec. 5.10). Apart from machine modelling, it is these performances that form the subject 
matter of a major part of the chapters that follow. 
Other than the steady-state operation, which will be discussed in depth in this book, the electrical transient 
response and dynamic response of the machine-load system are of outstanding importance in power systems 
and in automatic control systems. The in-depth study of these topics forms a separate study and will only be 
touched upon here and there in this book. 
5.13 
RESUME 
In this chapter the following common features of rotating machines have been studied—ac windings 
(elementary treatment), emf and mmf of ac winding, concepts of rotating magnetic ﬁeld and process of torque 
production by two interacting ﬁelds. Differences have also been discovered, particularly in a dc machine 
which has a commutator, the study of whose action has been postponed to Ch. 7. Through expressions of 
emf and torque, it was seen that the machine capability for a given frame size is limited by (i) the saturation 
ﬂux density in iron parts of the machine, and (ii) the current-carrying capability of windings which is limited 
by temperature rise. Improvement in machine performance and the cost per unit power have over the years 
resulted mainly from improvement in quality and characteristics of magnetic, conducting and insulating 
materials. Another important thrust forward has been in the direction of heat removal from the seats of 
heat generation (because of inherent power loss) so as to limit the temperature rise to that permitted in the 
insulating material which in fact is the most vulnerable part of a machine. 
A theoretical level has now been reached at which simple mathematical models of various types of rotating 
machines can be built and their performance characteristics studied through these models.
 
 Constructional Feature – Electric Machines
 
 Rotating electric machines have two ﬂux carrying parts which are made of laminated silicon steel. 
These two are the following:
 
 Stator: It is a stationary annular cylinder
 
 Rotor: It rotates within the stator supported by a shaft, ball bearings and end rings bolted to the stator. 
There is a narrow air-gap between the stator and rotor.
 
 Windings: There are two windings made of copper. These are placed in stator and rotor slots or in one 
of these wound on projecting poles. In synchronous and dc machines the main ﬁeld is created by the 
ﬁeld poles (even in number) and dc excited. The other winding which interchanges electric power with 
the external circuit and so carries the load current is called the armature winding and in the seat of 
induced emf.
 
  In a synchronous machine, the ﬁeld poles are on the rotor and armature winding on the stator. It 
is the preferred construction and  universally adopted. Excitation current is passed to the ﬁeld poles 
through slip-ring brush arrangement. In a dc machine it is a must that the ﬁeld poles are on the 
stator and the armature on the rotor. The rotor also carries a commutator whose segments are suitably 
connected to the armature windings and act to convert the alternating armature current to dc for the 
external connection.

264 Electric Machines
 
  In an induction machine both stator and rotor are slotted and carry armature windings; rotor may 
carry just slot conductors shorted by end rings.
 
 Thus the electric machines are of two types:
 
 - ac Machines: Synchronous and induction 
 
 - dc Machines
 
 Field-pole types
 
 Salient projecting poles, non-salient cylindrical poles
 
 Synchronous machine can have both types, dc machine has only salient poles 
 
 Induced dc emf in rotating machines. It is the speed rmf. The relative motion between B-wave and 
coils, which causes change in ﬂux linkage and emf induction
 
 Mechanical and electrical angles
 
  
q
q
e
m
 = 2
P ; P = number of poles
 
 Speed-Poles-Frequency
 
  
n = 120 f
P
, synchronous speed in rpm
 
 Or 
f = np
120  Hz
 
 Armature Coils Could be single-turn or multi-turn with two end connections.
 
 Coil-side – each active side of a coil
 
 Coil span ( pitch) – full-pitched, angle between coil sides is p rad or 180° electrical
 
  
– short-pitched; angle between coil sides is less than p in terms of number of slots
 
 Two-layer windings–two coil sides per slot
 
 Induced emf (ac) of a single N turn full-pitch coil 
 
  
E(rms) = 
2 p f NF = 4.44 f NF
 
  
F = ﬂux/pole
 
 Induced emf phasor lags the ﬂux phasor by 90°
 
 Distributed winding More than one coil/phase
 
  
Slots/pole/phase, SPP = m = S
qP ; S = slot, q = number of phases, generally three
 
  
Slot angle, g = pP
S rad (elect.)
 
  
Phase spread, s = mg
 
 Breadth factor, kb Because of distributed winding the phase emf is less than the algebraic sum of 
series turns/phase by the breadth factor
 
  
kb = sin
/
sin /
m
m
g
g
2
2  < 1
 
 Generally  kb (harmonics) < kb (fundamental)
 
 Therefore, distributed winding incidentally reduces the harmonic content of emf induced.

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
265
 
 Short-pitched (corded) coils The emf of a short-pitched coils is less than that for a full-pitched coil 
by the pitch factor
 
  
Kp cos qsp
2  < 1; qsp = short-pitching angle in rad elect.
 
 Chording of coil saves in overhang copper by proper choice of qsp any particular harmonic can be 
eliminated
 
 Winding factor
 
  
Kw = Kb Kp < 1
 
 General formula for induced emf phase
 
  
Ep = 
2 p Kw f Nph (series) F V
 
  It is applicable for synchronous machine (stator) and induction machine stator and rotor. For 3-phase 
synchronous and induction machine the windings of the three phase are laid 120° elect. apart from 
each other.
 
 MMF of AC Winding A single coil produces rectangular mmf wave (with north and south poles, 
strength (Ni/2)
 
 Fundamental emf wave
 
  
Fa1 = 4
p (Ni/2) cos q,  q = space angle elect. 
 
  
For sinusoidal current (ia = 
2 I cos wt) 
 
  
Fa1 = 
2 K¢ I cos wt cos q
 
  
 = Fm cos wt cos q
 
 It is a standing pulsating wave
 
 For a distributed winding 
 
  
Fa1 = 4 2
p
K
N
P
w
ph(
)
series
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ I cos w t cos q
 
  
 = Fm cos w t cos q
 
 Rotating Magnetic Field A 3-phase winding with their axis located at 120° elect space phase 
difference from each other and fed with 3-phase balanced currents with a time phase difference of 120° 
elect. The mmf-wave rotates at synchronous speed ws = 2p f rad (elect.)/s (or ns = 120 f /P rpm). The 
direction of rotation of mmf wave is from the leading phase to the lagging phase axis. The number of 
poles of the mmf wave is same as for which the winding is wound. 
 
 Torque in Round Rotor Machine Necessary conditions for production of steady torque by two 
interacting magnetic ﬁelds. 
 
1. The two ﬁelds must be relatively stationary 
 
2. The two ﬁelds must have the same number of poles
 
 Torque expression F1, F2 are peak values of sinusoidally distributed ﬁelds rotating at synchronous 
speed and Fr is the resultant ﬁeld.

266 Electric Machines
 
  
Torque, T = k F1 F2 sin a,  a = angle between F1 and F2 
 
  
 = k Fr F2 sin d ;  d = angle between Fr and F2 
 
 It is Fr that produces the air-gap ﬂux, Fr/pole
 
 Synchronous Machine
 
 Generating F2 leads Fr by angle d. Electromagnetic torque T = TPM in opposite direction to 
synchronous
 
 Motoring F2 lags Fr by angle d. Electromagnetic torque T = TL (load torque) in opposite direction to 
synchronous speed. Non-self starting
 
 Terminal voltage (equal to induced emf )
 
  
V(line) = 
3  ¥ 4.44 Kw f Fr Nph (series)
 
 For ﬁxed terminal voltage Fr is constant; same as in a transformer. Therefore
 
  
T = KT sin d 
 
  
Pullout torque, Tmax = KT, d  = 90°
 
 Higher torque load causes loss of synchronism or the machine pullout.
 
 Induction Machine Two types: 1. wound rotor, terminals shorted externally 2. squirrel cage rotor, 
copper or aluminum bars in slots shorted by conducting end rings. 
 
 Operation When the stator is excited from 3-phase mains (V, f  ), the rotating ﬁeld induces currents 
in shorted windings and their interaction produces torque. The machine is therefore self-starting. The 
steady rotor speed n must be less than ns, the synchronous speed for induction currents in rotor and 
torque production. The induction motor is therefore asynchronous motor. 
 
  
Slip, s = n
n
n
s
s
-
 
  
Rotor frequency, f2 = s f 
 
  The air-gap ﬂux Fr is determined by the applied voltage. The torque-slip (T – s) characteristic is 
non-linear and slip at full-load is 2-5%. So speed less than synchronous is nearly constant (shunt 
characteristic). 
 
 Maximum torque is the break-down above which the motor stalls.
 
 5.1 Determine the breadth and pitch factors for 
a 3-phase winding with 2 slots per pole per 
phase. The coil span is 5 slot-pitches.
 
 If the ﬂux density wave in the air-gap consists 
of the fundamental and a 24% third-harmonic, 
calculate the percentage increase in the rms 
value of the phase voltage due to the harmonic.
 5.2 A 50-Hz, 6-pole synchronous generator 
has 36 slots. It has two-layer winding with 
full-pitch coils of 8 turns each. The ﬂux per 
pole is 0.015 Wb (sinusoidally distributed). 
Determine the induced emf (line-to-line) if 
the coils are connected to form (a) 2-phase 
winding (b) star-connected 3-phase winding.
 5.3 The air-gap ﬂux density distribution of a 
6-pole, 50-Hz synchronous generator is
 
 B(q) = B1 (sin q + 0.3 sin 2q + 0.15 sin 5q)
 
 The total ﬂux/pole is 0.015 Wb. Find the fun-
damental, third-harmonic and ﬁfth harmonic 
ﬂux/pole.

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
267
 5.4 Show that the limiting value of the breadth 
factor for the fundamental is
 
  
Kb = 
sin 1
2
1
2
s
s
 
 where s = mg = phase spread
 
 and m, the slots pole per phase, tend to be 
large.
 5.5 A 50-Hz synchronous salient pole generator 
is driven by a hydro-electric turbine at a speed 
of 125 rpm. There are 576 stator slots with 
two conductors per slot. The air-gap diameter 
is 6.1 m and the stator length is 1.2 m. The 
sinusoidally distributed ﬂux density has a peak 
value of 1.1 T. (a) Calculate the maximum rms 
single-phase voltage that can be produced by 
suitably connecting all the conductors. (b) 
Find the per phase emf if the conductors are 
connected in a balanced 3-phase winding.
 5.6 Find the number of series turns required 
for each phase of a 3-phses, 50-Hz, 10-pole 
alternator with 90 slots. The winding is to be 
star-connected to give a line voltage of 11 kV. 
The ﬂux/pole is 0.2 Wb.
 5.7 A dc armature is built up of laminations having 
an external diameter of 80 cm and the internal 
diameter of 42 cm. The length of the armature 
is 32 cm. The ﬂux density in the armature core 
is 0.85 T. The armature is wave connected with 
72 slots and 3 conductors/slot. If the number 
of poles is 6, ﬁnd the emf induced when the 
armature is rotated at a speed of 600 rpm.
 
 (Hint: Flux passing through armature core is 
half the ﬂux/pole. See Fig. 5.13.)
 5.8 A 6-pole, wave-connected dc armature has 
300 conductors and runs at 1200 rpm.
 
 The emf generated is 600 V. Find the useful 
ﬂux/pole.
 5.9 A 4-pole, dc machine has a lap-connected 
armature having 60 slots and eight conductors 
per slot. The ﬂux per pole is 30 mWb. If the 
armature is rotated at 1000 rpm, ﬁnd the emf 
available across the armature terminals. Also 
calculate the frequency of emf in the armature 
coils.
 5.10 Trace out the variations in mmf due to a belt 
of current-carrying conductors representing 
one phase of a 2-pole, 3-phase winding. The 
belt may be assumed to be a current-sheet 
with uniform current density. What is the peak 
amplitude of the mmf wave if the total current 
in the belt is A amperes?
 
 (Hint: The mmf wave is trapezoidal.)
 5.11 Each phase belt of a 2-pole, 3-phase winding 
carrying balanced 3-phase currents can be 
assumed to be a current-sheet with uniform 
density (as in Prob. 5.10). Sketch the resultant 
mmf wave at wt1 = 0, wt2 = p /3 and  wt3, = 
2p/3.
 5.12 Phase a of a 3-phase stator at the instant of 
carrying maximum current has 60 amperes-
conductors in the phase belt. Sketch the mmf 
wave of the phase when the slots/pole/phase 
are 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 respectively. Comment 
upon the change in shape of mmf wave with 
the number of slots/pole/phase.
 5.13 A 2-pole, 3-phase ac winding is housed in 
18 slots, each slot having 12 conductors. 
Consider the time instant at which the current 
in phase a has its maximum value of 10 A.
 
(a) Sketch all the 18 slots on a horizontal 
axis. Mark the direction of currents in the 
conductors occupying the slots relevant to 
phase a. Make a proportional sketch of the 
mmf wave of phase a only.
 
(b) Mark the maximum value of the mmf 
wave on the sketch.
 
(c) Calculate the peak value of the fundamen-
tal of the mmf wave. 
 5.14 A 4-pole, 50-Hz induction motor has 24 stator 
slots with 2-layer winding. It has 16-turn 
coils chorded (short-pitched) by one slot. The 
machine is delta-connected and connected to a 
440 V, 3-phase supply. If the stator resistance 
and leakage reactance are assumed negligible, 
ﬁnd the ﬂux/pole of the rotating ﬂux density 
wave. 

268 Electric Machines
 5.15 The induction machine of Prob. 5.14 has a 
stator length of 28 cm and a mean air-gap 
diameter of 18 cm. The machine air-gap is 
1 mm. What line current will it draw when 
running at no-load? Assume the iron to be 
inﬁnitely permeable. 
 
 (Hint: At no-load the machine draws only the 
magnetizing current to establish the ﬂux/pole 
as calculated in Prob. 5.14.) 
 5.16 In Ex. 5.6 what will be the peak value of 
resultant mmf/pole, if the winding is 3-phase 
and is chorded by one slot. 
 5.17 A 3-phase induction motor runs at a speed of 
1485 rpm at no-load and at 1350 rpm at full-
load when supplied from a 50-Hz, 3-phase 
line.
 
(a) How many poles does the motor have?
 
(b) What is the % slip at no-load and at full-
load?
 
(c) What is the frequency of rotor voltages at 
no-load and at full-load? 
 
(d) What is the speed at both no-load and full-
load of: (i) the rotor ﬁeld with respect to 
rotor conductors, (ii) the rotor ﬁeld with 
respect to the stator, and (iii) the rotor ﬁeld 
with respect to the stator ﬁeld.
 5.18 A 4-pole, 3-phase synchronous motor fed 
from 50-Hz mains is mechanically coupled 
to a 24-pole, 3-phase synchronous generator. 
At what speed will the set rotate? What is the 
frequency of the emf induced in the generator? 
 5.19 A 20-pole synchronous generator running at 
300 rpm feeds a 6-pole induction motor which 
is loaded to run at a slip of 5%. Find the speed 
at which the induction motor runs and the 
frequency of the currents induced in its rotor.
 5.20 A slip-ring induction motor runs at 285 rpm 
on full-load when connected to 50-Hz supply. 
Calculate: (a) the number of poles; (b) the 
slip; and (c) the slip for full-load torque if 
the total resistance of the rotor circuit is 
doubled. Assume the rotor leakage reactance 
to be negligible in the range of slips being 
considered. 
 5.21 Consider the synchronous machine with 
dimensional and other data. The  machine is 
excited with same ﬁeld current If = 20 A.
 
 Calculate the air gap (resultant) ﬂux density 
needed to generate a terminal voltage of 3 kV 
(line). What is the  corresponding maximum 
torque it can develop as a motor? What would 
be the mechanical load for a torque angle of 
25°?
 5.22 Consider a synchronous machine which 
is used in motor mode. Its mechanical 
dimensions and winding particulars are:
 
 Mechanical dimension
 
  
Air-gap length = 1.3 mm
 
  
Mean air-gap diameter = 22 cm
 
  
Axial length = 41 cm
 
 Rotor winding 
 
  
Total ﬁeld series turns = 880
 
  
Kw (rotor) = 0.965
 
 Stator winding 
 
  
SSP = 3
 
  
Conductors/slot = 12
 
 Operating conditions
 
  
Field current, If = 4 A
 
  Peak air-gap ﬂux density, Br = 1.35 T
 
(a) Find peak rotor ampere-turns F2
 
(b) Find open-circuit voltage.
 5.23. A three-phase ac linear motor has armature 
winding wavelength of 30 cm. The supply 
currents have a frequency of 75 Hz. 
 
(a) Calculate the linear velocity of mmf wave. 
 
(b) The vehicle velocity of the motor is 
synchronous type. 
 
(c) The vehicle velocity of the motor is 
induction type with a slip of 0.05. 
 
 Ans. (a) 358.1 m/s (b) 358.1 m/s 
 
 (c) 340.2 m/s 
 
 Solution
 
(a) v = wb
p
2
 = 75
23
¥
2p
 = 358.1 m/s
 
(b) Synchronous velocity = vs = 358.1 m/s 

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
269
 
(c) Induction motor 
 
  
s = v
v
v
s
s
-
 = 1 – v
vs
 
  
v
vs
 = 1 – s
 
  
v = (1 – 0.05)vs = 340.2 m/s
 5.24 The armature of three-phase linear motor has 
a winding wavelength of 25 cm and winding 
length of six wavelength. The 3-phase winding 
has 240 turns/phase with a winding factor of 
0.92. For an air-gap 0.95 cm it is desired to 
have peak fundamental air-gap ﬂux density of 
1.25 T. Calculate the rms value of armature 
currents needed. 
 
 
Ans. 190 A
 
  Bpeak = 4
10 7
p ¥
0.95 ¥ 10
-
-2  = 3
2
4 2
◊
p
 ¥ 0.92 240
12
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
  
I = 1.25
 5.25 The dimensions, stator and rotor windings of 
a synchronous motor are: 
 
 Phases = 3, Frequency = f, No. of poles = P 
 
  
Rotor length (m) = l1 
 
  
Axial length (m) = l 
 
  
Air-gap length (mm) = lg
 
  Rotor winding turns (series) = N1 
 
  
Rotor winding factor = Kw1 
 
  
Field current (A) = If 
 
  
Peak air-gap ﬂux density = Br
 
  
Peak rotor mmf = F2 
 
  Stator winding turns (series) = N2
 
  Stator short pitching angle = qsp 
 
  
Peak stator mmf = F1 
 
  
Torque angle = d 
 
 Write METLAB script to calculate 
 
(i) Open-circuit voltage, Voc
 
(ii) Developed torque Tdev 
 
(iii) Developed power Pdev 
 5.26 For the synchronous motor of Problem 5.22, 
determine
 
(a) developed torque Tdev as a function of d
 
(b) power developed Pdev as a function of d
 
(c) maximum Tdev and Pdev.
 5.27 The outside diameter of the rotor of an 
alternation is 0.74 and the axial length is 
1.52 m. The machine has four poles and the 
ﬂux density at the rotor surface is given by 
1.12 cos qe where qe = elect. angle.
 
 (a) Find the ﬂux/pole (b) If the peak value 
of  Fr, is 18000 AT, calculate the permeance/
pole. 
 5.28 A synchronous generator of 50 Hz with 
6 poles has a ﬂux/pole of 0.15 Wb. Each stator 
coil has two turns and a coil pitch of 150° 
elect. Calculate the coil voltage (rms).  
 5.29 Calculate 
the 
short-pitching 
angle 
to 
eliminate the ﬁfth harmonic in the induced 
emf of a synchronous generator. What is the 
corresponding reduction in the fundamental 
and the thirteenth harmonic?
 5.30 A 50 Hz, 8-pole, pole 3-phase synchronous 
generator has 48 slots. Calculate the % 
reduction in the fundamental, third and ﬁfth 
harmonic strengths on account of distributed 
windings. 
 5.31 A synchronous generator has 12 poles and 
3-phase winding placed in 144 slots; the coil 
span is 10 slots. Determine the distribution 
factor, pitch factor and winding factor.
 5.32 The phase voltage of a 50 Hz synchronous 
generator is 3.3 kV at a ﬁeld current of 10 A. 
Determine the open-circuit voltage at 50 Hz 
with a ﬁeld current of 8 A. Neglect saturation. 
 5.33 A 50 Hz, 3-phase hydroelectric generator has 
a rated speed of 100 rpm. There are 540 stator 
slots with two conductors per slot. The air-gap 
dimensions are: D = 6.25 m, L = 1.16 m. The 
maximum ﬂux density Bm = 1.2 T. Calculate 
the generated voltage/phase.
 5.34 Calculate the voltage induced in the armature 
of a 4-pole lap-wound dc machine having  
728 conductors and running at 1600 rpm. The 
ﬂux/pole is 32 mWb.

270 
Electric Machines
 
 If this armature carries a current of 100 A, 
what is the electromagnetic power and torque 
developed? 
 5.35 A 240 V dc motor takes 25 A when running at 
945 rpm. The armature resistance is 0.24 W. 
Determine the no-load speed assuming 
negligible losses. Flux/pole is constant. 
 5.36 A 4-pole dc motor has a lap-connected 
armature with 60 slots and 8 conductors/ slot. 
The armature has an applied voltage of 240 
V. It draws a current of 50 A when running at  
960 rpm. The resistance of the armature is 0.1 
W. Find the ﬂux/pole that would be necessary 
for this operation.
 5.37 In a given machine F2 (rotor mmf ) 850 AT 
and F1 (stator mmf )  400 AT, a (included 
angle) = 123.6° and P ( permeance/pole) 1.408 
¥ 10–4 Wb/AT. Find the value of the resultant 
air-gap ﬂux/pole.
 5.38 A P-pole machine has a sinusoidal ﬁeld dis-
tribution as shown in Fig. P5.38. The arma-
ture carries a uniform current sheet of value 
J A/m causing a triangular mmf distribution as 
shown in the ﬁgure. 
0
J
2p
q
p
F
Bp sin q
d
Fig. P 38
 
 The machine has an axial length of l and a 
mean air-gap diameter of D. 
 
(a) Find the peak value of the armature mmf. 
 
(b) Derive an expression for the electromag-
netic torque developed.
 5.39 A 3-phase, 50 Hz, 4-pole, 400 V wound 
rotor induction motor has a stator winding 
D-connected and a rotor winding Y-connected. 
Assume effective turn ratio stator/rotor = 2/1 
( phase basis). For a rotor speed of 1440 rpm, 
calculate:
 
(a) the slip
 
(b) the standstill rotor induced emf/phase
 
(c) the rotor induced emf/phase at this speed
 
(d) the rotor frequency in (b) and (c)
 5.40 A 50 Hz induction motor runs at 576 rpm at 
full load. Determine: 
 
(a) the synchronous speed and the number of 
poles 
 
(b) the frequency of rotor currents 
 
(c) the rotor speed relative to the revolving 
ﬁeld 
 5.41 A 3-phase induction motor runs at a speed 
of 940 rpm at full-load when supplied with 
power at 50 Hz, 3-phase. 
 
(a) How many poles does the motor have?
 
(b) What is its slip at full-load? 
 
(c) What is the corresponding speed of: 
 
(i) the rotor ﬁeld wrt the rotor surface 
 
(ii) the rotor ﬁeld wrt the stator 
 
(iii) what is the rotor speed at twice full-
load slip? 
 
 
1. What measures are adopted to make the 
B-wave in a synchronous machine nearly 
sinusoidal? Why should the B-wave be 
sinusoidal? 
 
2. A synchronous machine has P poles and 
generate voltage of frequency f Hz. Write the 
expressions for its speed in rad (elect.)/s, rad 
(mech)/s and rpm
 
3. Explain the terms, coil span, coil pitch, short-
pitching and cording of coils.
 
4. What is SPP? Write the expressions for a 
stator having S slots and P poles.

Basic Concepts in Rotating Machines 
271
 
5. In a distributed winding why is the phase emf 
less than the algebraic sum of phase current in 
series? 
 
6. Derive the expression for the breadth factor by 
means of a phasor diagram. 
 
7. Repeat Question 6 for the pitch factor. 
 
8. What is the purpose of using short-pitched 
coils in ac windings?
 
9. Write the expression for phasor emf in a 
synchronous machine. Use standard symbols 
and explain what each symbol stands for. 
 10. Taking the B-wave to be sinusoidal, derive the 
expression for ﬂux/pole.
 11. Write the expression for ﬂux linkages of an 
N-turn coil if the B-wave is sinusoidal and 
rotating at synchronous speed w rad/s.
 12. Draw the phasor diagram relating  emf phasor 
to ﬂux phasor. 
 13. Sketch the mmf wave of an N-turn coil 
carrying current i. Write the expression for its 
fundamental if i is sinusoidal. What kind of 
wave is this? 
 14. Write the expression for standing pulsating 
space wave and sketch it at wt = 0, p
p
3
2
3
,
 
and p rad.
 15. Rotate the peak value of a rotating magnetic 
ﬁeld and the maximum value of the 
fundamental of the mmf space wave of one 
phase. 
 16. State the conditions or a 3-phase winding of 
a stator to create a rotating magnetic ﬁeld and 
its speed and direction of rotation.
 17. State the conditions for two interacting 
rotating ﬁelds to create steady torque.
 18. Two interacting ﬁelds 

F1  and 

F2  have a 
resultant ﬁeld 

Fr. Write the expression for 
torque developed in terms of 

F2 and 

Fr. 
Explain the signiﬁcance of the angle between 
them. 
 19. Write the expression for stator line voltage 
of a synchronous machine and show that 
it determines the air-gap ﬂux/pole of the 
machine. 
 20. What is the pull-out torque of a synchronous 
machine and the meaning of loss of 
synchronism? 
 21. Advance the reason why a synchronous motor 
is not self-starting. 
 22. Explain the process of how an induction motor 
develops torque when ac supply is connected 
to its stator. Why it cannot develop torque at 
synchronous speed?
 23. Deﬁne slip of an induction motor. At full-load 
what is the range of the value of slip.
 24. What is the frequency of the rotor currents of 
an induction motor? 
 25. Why 
an 
induction 
motor 
is 
called 
asynchronous motor? 
 26. List the type of losses in electric machine. 
What is the nature of each loss? 
 27. What is the relative speed between stator and 
rotor rotating ﬁelds in an induction motor? 
 28. Sketch the torque-slip characteristic of an 
induction motor. Explain the nature of the low 
slip part of the characteristic. Locate on the 
characteristic the full-load torque operating 
point. 
 29. Explain how an induction motor can self-start 
but cannot run at synchronous speed.
 30. Explain why rotor induced emf is proportional 
to slip.
 31. Distinguish between time phase difference 
and space phase difference. 
 32. State the condition of maximum efﬁciency of 
an electric machine. Compare it with that of a 
transformer.
 33. When a conducting coil is moving past 
a sinusoidal B-wave, what is the relative 
position of the coil axis when the induced emf 
in it is (1) maximum, and (ii) zero?

272 Electric Machines
 5.1 A full-pitched coil in a 6-pole machine has a 
mechanical angle span of 
 
(a) 30° 
(b) 60°
 
(c) 90° 
(d) 180°
 5.2 To eliminate the ﬁfth harmonic a short pitched 
coil should have a short-pitching angle of 
 
(a) 36° 
(b) 18°
 
(c) 15° 
(d) 12°
 5.3 Armature winding of a synchronous generator 
can be connected (i) single-phase and (ii) 
3-phase. Compare the kVA rating of the 
generator in the two cases:
 
(a) both will have the same kVA
 
(b) kVA (single-phase) > kVA (3-phase) 
 
(c) kVA (3-phase) > kVA (single-phase)
 
(d) armature winding cannot be connected in 
both the ways stated 
 5.4 Phase relationship between mmf phasor F  
and emf phasor E  in a synchronous machine 
is 
 
(a) F  leads E  by 90°
 
(b) F  lags E  by 90°  
 
(c) F  and E  are in phase
 
(d) this angle depends upon the pf of the load 
 5.5 A full-pitched coil of Ni ampere-turns placed 
in stator slots causes a fundamental mmf wave 
of peak amplitude: 
 
(a) 4
p (Ni) 
(b) p
4
(Ni)
 
(c) 4
2
p
Ni
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  
(d) p
4
2
Ni
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 5.6 In a dc machine the angle between the stator 
and rotor ﬁelds is
 
(a) dependent upon the load
 
(b) 45° 
 
(c) 90°
 
(d) 180°
 5.7 A 4-pole 50 Hz induction motor runs at a 
speed of 950 rpm. The frequency of rotor 
currents is 
 
(a) 47.5 Hz  
(b) 50 Hz
 
(c) 5 Hz  
(d) 2.5 Hz 
 5.8 If the rotor of an induction motor is assumed 
to be purely resistive, the angle between the 
resultant ﬂux density wave and rotor mmf 
wave is
 
(a) dependent upon the load
 
(b) 180°
 
(c) 90°
 
(d) 45°
 5.9 In a non-salient pole synchronous machine 
the distribution of ﬁeld mmf around the air-
gap is a
 
(a) sinusoidal wave
 
(b) rectangular wave
 
(c) stepped triangular wave 
 
(d) ﬂat topped stepped wave
 5.10 For a cyclic load variation of a motor the 
rating is determined by
 
(a) average load
 
(b) the peak load
 
(c) the rms load
 
(d) 3/4th of the peak load
 

AC Armature Windings 
273
6.1 
INTRODUCTION
Chapters 4 and 5 emphasized that ﬁeld and armature windings are the essential 
features of electric machines. The ﬁeld windings are simple arrangements with 
concentrated coils (i.e coils in which all the turns have the same magnetic axis). 
Armature windings on the other hand comprise a set of coils (single or multiturn) 
embedded in the slots, uniformly spaced round the armature periphery. The emfs 
are induced in armature coils due to relative motion between them and the B-wave in the air-gap established 
by the ﬁeld windings. In an ac machine (3-phase) the armature coils are symmetrically connected to form 
a set of three balanced phases (equal emf magnitudes with a relative phase displacement of 2p/3 rad). In 
a dc machine the armature coils are connected via commutator segments which are tapped by stationary 
brushes so as to give a constant (dc) voltage between brushes. It was also seen in Chapter 5 that when the 
armature winding carries current, it establishes the same number of alternating (north -south) poles for 
which it is wound. 
 A coil may be of single-turn having two conductors with end connections or multiturn with two coil-
sides each composed of several conductors. The active coil side (or conductor) length in which the emf is 
induced equals the armature length (over which the ﬂux density is established). The pitch of a coil is the 
space angle (electrical) between its two sides and must equal an integral number of slots. The coil pitch 
may be full (equal to one pole pitch or 180° elect.) or short-pitch (chorded ) coils may be used. The pitch of 
a coil could be expressed in terms of its angular span or in terms of slots. The slots/pole must be an integral 
number for a full-pitch coil. 
 Practically there are two types of windings, viz. single-layer and two-layer (or double-layer). In a single-
layer winding each coil—side of a coil occupies the whole slot as shown in Fig. 6.1(a). In a double-layer 
winding one coil-side of a coil occupies the upper position in one slot and the second coil-side occupies 
the lower position in a slot displaced from the ﬁrst coil-side by the coil-span as shown in Fig. 6.1(b). In a 
double-layer winding each slot is occupied by two coil-sides, one placed on top of the other, referred to as 
top and bottom coil-sides. It easily follows from Fig. 6.1 that 
 
U = 2 coil-sides/slot 
(6.1a) 
 
C = S/2 (single-layer winding) 
(6.1b)
 
C = S (double-layer winding) 
(6.1c)
where 
C = number of armature coils 
 
S = number of armature slots 
 The primary difference in single-and double-layer windings is in the arrangement of the overhang. In 
single-layer the coils are arranged in groups and the overhang of one group of coils is made to cross the 
6

274 Electric Machines
other appropriately by adjusting the size (corresponding to axial length of armature) and shape of individual 
coil groups. This means a variety of coils differing both in size and shape resulting in inconvenience and 
higher cost in production. Single-layer windings are, therefore, rarely used in modern machine practice 
except in small sizes. Machines are of course still found in use with single-layer windings. 
Overhang
Coil-span
6 slots (say)
1
2
7
8
Bottom coil-
side
Coil-span
6 slots (say)
1
2
7
8
Overhang
Top coil-side
(a) Single-layer coil
(b) Double-layer coil (bottom coilside is
shown dotted)
Fig. 6.1
 In a double-layer winding all the coils are identical in shape and size (diamond shape as shown in 
Fig. 5.21 is employed) with two coil-sides lying in two different planes. Each slot has one coil-side entering 
its bottom half from one side and the other coil-side leaving its top half on the other side. A special kink 
at each end of the diamond shape allows neat symmetrical packing of coil overhangs and the problem 
of overhang crossing as in a single-layer winding is avoided. Because of identical coils, production is 
facilitated and results in a reduction of cost. 
DC machine windings are invariably double-layered.
Nomenclature 
 
S = number of slots (must be divisible by 3 in a 3-phase ac machine) 
 
C = number of coils
 
2C = number of coil-sides 
 
Nc = number of turns/coil
 
S/P = slots/pole, i.e. pole pitch in terms of slots (is noninteger for fractional slot winding) 
 
g = 180∞P
S
 slot angle (electrical) or slot-pitch (angular displacement between midpoints of adjacent 
slots)
 
q = number of phases (generally q = 3) 
 
b = 2p/q, time phase displacement between emfs of successive phases (generally b = 2p/3) 
 
m = number of slots/pole/phase (SPP)
 
A = number of parallel paths 
 In ac machines it is possible to have only one path or more paths in parallel-phase (each phase is an 
open-circuit); but dc machine windings are always of closed-circuit type with two or more (even) number 
of parallel paths. 

AC Armature Windings 
275
6.2 AC WINDINGS 
Ac windings are generally of a 3-phase kind because of the inherent advantages of a 3-phase machine. The 
armature coils must be connected to yield balanced (equal in magnitude and successive phase difference of 
2p/3 rad) 3-phase emfs. To begin with the slots around the armature periphery must be divided into phase-
bands. 
Phase Grouping 
Initially a simple case will be assumed where SPP is an integral number; such winding is referred to as 
integral-slot winding. For illustrative purposes, let m = 2 which means 12 slots per pole pair for a 3-phase 
armature. Slot angle is 360°/12 = 30°. Further let the coil-pitch be full six slots. Figure 6.2(a) shows the 
12 slots numbered from left to right; six slots are under the inﬂuence of one pole with a particular direction 
of emfs in coil-sides and the remaining six slots are under opposite pole with opposite direction of emfs as 
indicated. 
In Fig. 6.2(a) the 12 armature slots are divided into six phase-bands of two (= m) slots each having an 
angular spread of s = 60°; in fact each pole is divided into three band (as many as the number of phases). 
If coil-sides in slots (1, 2) belong to phase band A, those in slots (5, 6) which are 120° (or four slots) away 
belong to phase band B and those in slots (3, 4) are 60° (or two slots) away from A which when reverse-
connected would belong to phase C. (See phasor diagram of Fig. 6.2(b).) Therefore coil-sides in slots-(3, 
4) are said to belong to phase band C¢. As a result of this arrangement the phase-band sequence is AC¢ BA¢ 
CB¢ which will repeat for each pair of poles. This arrangement of phase-band is called 60° phase grouping. 
The four coil-sides of each pair of coils of a phase can be connected additively in any order. For example, 
the order of the coil-side connection for phase A could be (1–8–2–7) as used in a single-layer winding with 
concentrated coils or it could be (1–7–2–8) in a two-layer lap winding (these are explained soon after). The 
phasor diagrams of all the three phases for the former kind of connection is given in Fig. 6.2(c).
The 60° phase grouping discussed above can be used for single-layer or double-layer windings. It is also 
possible to use a 120° phase grouping where the slots under a pole pair are divided into three phase-bands 
 In large dc machines windings may be arranged with more than one coil-side in top and bottom halves 
of the slots. Nomenclature speciﬁc to dc machine winding is: 
 
U = 2C/S, number of coil-sides/slot (even)
 
Zs = UNc , number of conductors/slot 
 
Z = 2CNc , total number of armature conductors 
Remark 
The arrangement of coils round the armature periphery and their interconnections is best illustrated in 
form of a winding diagram. For the purpose of drawing a winding diagram, it is convenient to imagine 
the armature to be laid out ﬂat in a developed form with slots parallel to each other. Slots under the 
inﬂuence of each pole can then be marked out; all coil-sides under one pole will have emfs induced in the 
same direction with a progressive time phase difference corresponding to the slot angle, Cross-sectional 
developed view is also handy in illustrating the underlying ideas of ac windings. In a developed form of dc 
winding, the ﬁeld poles are also indicated. 

276 Electric Machines
as in Fig. 6.2(d). For the example in hand there are four slots per phase-band. It is obvious that slots for 
return coil-side for this phase-grouping will not be available in single-layer winding. It can only be used for 
a double-layer winding. A phase-grouping of 120° is rarely adopted and will not be discussed any further.
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
+
+
+
+
+
+
1
A
B
C
120° phase grouping
(a) Phase-bands 60° phase grouping
Pole
Pole
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
+
+
+
+
+
+
A
C¢
B
A¢
C
B¢
1
s = 60°
C
B
A
–8
–7
–12
–11
10
–3
6
5
1
2
–4
60° phase grouping
120°
60°
120°
A
C¢
B
C = –C¢
C¢ reverse connected
(b)
(c)
9
Fig. 6.2
Single-layer Windings
Single-layer windings are not commonly used in practice except for machines of a few kW because of the 
disadvantages mentioned earlier. Single-layer winding may be concentric, lap or wave type. Here only the 
concentric type winding will be illustrated while the lap type will be explained in two-layer winding. Wave 
winding because of certain problems in end connections is not used in ac machines. 
Concentric Windings
Concentric windings may be classiﬁed into two main categories, viz. unbifurcated (or half-coiled) and 
bifurcated (whole-coiled). In the former type the coils comprising a phase group in adjacent pole pitches are 
concentric as indicated in Fig. 6.3(a). The individual coils may have a span greater or less than a pole pitch 
but the average coil-span equals one pole-pitch. This kind of arrangement is provided to avoid crossing of two 
coils under one phase-group. In bifurcated winding, each coil group is split into two sets of concentric coils 
and the return coil-sides are shared with those of another group as shown in Fig. 6.3(b). It is clearly evident 
from the ﬁgure that this kind of arrangement is only possible when SPP is even. 

AC Armature Windings 
277
It is easily seen from Figs 6.3(a) and (b) that for accommodating the windings for all the three phases, the 
overhang must be arranged in two or three planes. Figure 6.4(a) which corresponds to unbifurcated winding 
(Fig. 6.3(a)), the overhang is arranged in a continuous chain with sequence (if seen from a ﬁxed reference) 
A ≠ B Ø C ≠ A Ø B  …, where upward and downward arrows indicate the upper and lower planes. The three 
plane overhang arrangement of a bifurcated winding is depicted in Fig. 6.4(b). 
 
Concentric coils
Pole
pitch
(a) Unbifurcated winding for one phase; S/P = 6,
= 2
m
Pole
pitch
(b) Bifurcated winding for one phase; S/P = 6,
= 2
m
 
(a) Unbifurcated winding with two-plane overhang (continuous chain)
(b) Bifurcated winding with three-plane overhang
A
B
C
Core
Core
A
B
C
Pole
pitch
 Fig. 6.3 
Single-layer winding with concentric coils 
Fig. 6.4 
Arrangement of overhang in single-layer
 
 
 
 
concentric winding
Single-layer coils can be arranged in semi-closed slots (the coil is opened and pushed in slots from one 
side, the coil then being reformed and reconnected by buff-welding). 
Chording and the use of fractional SPP is not possible in a single-layer winding. As will be seen in the next 
section, it is a serious drawback. 
Double-layer Windings
Double-layer windings are the most widely used class of windings. Though both lap and wave types are 
possible, because of inherent problems of a wave winding*, it is now an accepted practice to use the lap type 
 
* Figure 6.5 shows a double-layer wave winding with single-turn coils. 
In this type of winding, after traversing the armature once the wind-
ing closes on to the start of the ﬁrst coil (i.e. after connecting P/2 
coils in series). To overcome this difﬁculty, the connection is made to 
the second coil-side of the ﬁrst phase group and a similar procedure 
is continued until all the coils are exhausted. However, in the case 
of fractional slot windings this problem is even more complicated 
because, after all the turns around the armature are completed, some 
coils remain unconnected.
Lower
Upper
Coil
span
Front
pitch
2 pole
pitches
Fig. 6.5

278 Electric Machines
for double-layer ac winding. Double-layer windings fall into two main classes depending upon the value 
of SPP-integral slot winding when SPP is an integer and fractional slot winding when SPP is a fractional 
number. To meet the requirement of symmetry among phases, the number of slots/phase (S/3) must be a 
whole number.
Integral Slot Winding 
Here SPP is an integer. This type of winding has already been illustrated in Fig. 5.22. The winding arrangement 
is further illustrated through an example. Let 
 
m = 2 slots  and  S/P = 6 slots 
 
Coil-pitch = 6 slots (full-pitch coils) 
 
Phase spread, s = 60° elect.
The winding diagram for one phase is shown in Fig. 6.6. The ﬁrst set of phase-group coils (coil-group 1) 
lying under one pole-pair (NS) are connected in series (ﬁnish end of the ﬁrst coil is connected to the start of 
the next coil lying to the right of the ﬁrst). The second coil-group of the phase lies under SN poles and must 
therefore be connected in reverse to the ﬁrst coil-group for additive emf. It may be noticed that alternate coil-
groups are reverse connected. It is observed that the winding appears like a bifurcated one. It is also observed 
that coil-sides lying in any given slots pertain to the same phase. All the coil-groups of the phase could be 
connected in series or in series-parallel.
 
1
2
3
4
A1
A2
Fig. 6.6 Double-layer lap winding; 4 poles, m = 2, s = 60° coil-pitch = 6 slots ( full-pitch)
In  practice, however, it is common to use chorded or short-pitched coil. As already mentioned in 
Ch. 5, this type of arrangement offers certain inherent advantages such as reduction in copper needed for 
end connections. Further, certain harmonics present in the emf wave are greatly suppressed. However, coil 
chording lead to a reduction in the emf generated (refer Eqs (5.18) and (5.20). This type of winding is best 
illustrated by means of a cross-sectional developed diagram. Here letters (a, b, c) refer to the coil-sides of the 
corresponding phase. For the example considered,
 
S/P = 9 slots  and  m = 3
 
Coil-span = 8 slots (chorded by one slot)
 
 = 60° electrical

AC Armature Windings 
279
The cross-sectional view of winding for one pole-pair is drawn in Fig. 6.7. Certain observations can be 
made from this ﬁgure. The top bottom coil-side phase grouping is merely displaced by one slot (equal to 
chording). Further, in each-group of three slots, the coil-side of two different phases are placed in one of the 
slots.
a
Top
Bottom
Coil-sides of different phases in same slot
a
a
c¢ c¢ c¢
b
b
b a¢ a¢ a¢
c
c
c
b¢ b¢ b¢
a¢ a¢
c
c
c
b¢
b¢ b¢
a
a¢
b
b
b
c¢
c¢
c¢
a¢
a¢
Pole pitch
Pole pitch
Fig. 6.7 Cross-sectional view of two-layer winding: m = 3; s = 60°, coil-pitch = 8 slots (chorded by one slot) 
Fractional Slot Windings
So far these types of windings have been studied in which SPP is an integer. Windings, wherein SPP is a 
fractional number, are known as fractional slot windings. Fractional slot winding is easily adopted with a 
double-layer arrangement. 
While m = S/3P is a noninteger in a fractional slot winding, S, the number of slots, must be divisible by 
3, i.e. slots per phase must be integral in order to obtain a symmetrical 3-phase winding. The pole pitch, S/P, 
is also fractional, so that the coil-span cannot be of full-pitch. For example if S/P = 10.5, then the coil-span 
can be either 11 or 10 slots. The coil-span chosen is of course less than the full-pitch because of the inherent 
advantages of chording elaborated earlier. 
In the previous discussion it has been learnt that winding constituting a basic unit under a pole-pair 
(N and S ) is repeated for any number of pole pairs when m is integral. In order to obtain the “basic unit” for 
fractional slot winding, S/3P is reduced to the irreducible fraction by cancelling out the highest common 
factor in S and P. Thus
 
m = S
P
3
 = S
P
¢
¢
3
 
(6.2)
Coil-sides under P¢ poles constitute the basic unit whose connections will be repeated P/P¢ times in the 
complete winding. It will soon be evident that P cannot be a multiple of three in a 3-phase winding. 
In a double-layer winding, the phase-grouping of coil-sides for the top layer is repeated in the bottom layer 
with corresponding coil-sides being located one coil-span away. Therefore, all that is needed is to establish 
the phase-grouping of top layer of coil-sides.
Fractional slot winding is easily understood by means of an example Let
 
S = 108,  P = 10
then 
m = S
P
3
 = 108
3
10
¥
 = 3 3
5  slots
Now 
S
P
3
 = 108
3
10
¥
 = 54
3
5
¥
 = S
P
¢
¢
3
Thus the basic unit in the winding has 5 poles (note that this need not be even) covering 54 slots.
A coil-group table (Table 6.1) is now perpared on the following lines. 

280 Electric Machines
Table 6.1
 Slot No. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11
 Angle 
0 
16 2
3  
33 1
3  
50 
66 2
3  
83 1
3  
100 
116 2
3  
133 1
3  
150 
166 2
3
 Phase 
[a] 
a 
a 
a 
c¢ 
c¢ 
c¢ 
c¢ 
b 
b 
b
 Pole-ptich 1 
 Slot No. 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
 Angle 
3 1
3  
20 
36 1
3  
53 1
3  
70 
86 2
3  
103 1
3  
120 
136 2
3  
153 1
3  
170
 Phase 
a¢ 
a¢ 
a¢ 
a¢ 
c 
c 
c 
[b¢] 
b¢ 
b¢ 
b¢ 
 Pole-Pitch 2 
 Slot No. 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33
 Angle 
6 2
3  
23 1
3  
40 
56 2
3  
73 1
3  
90 
106 2
3  
123 1
3  
140 
156 2
3  
173 2
3
 Phase 
a 
a 
a 
a 
c¢  
c¢  
c¢  
b 
b 
b 
b 
 Pole-pitch 3 
 Slot No. 
34 
35 
36 
37 
38 
39 
40 
41 
42 
43 
44
 Angle 
10 
26 2
3  
43 1
3  
60 
76 2
3  
93 1
3  
110 
126 2
3  
143 1
3  
160 
176 2
3
 Phase 
a¢ 
a¢ 
a¢ 
[c] 
c 
c 
c 
b¢ 
b¢ 
b¢ 
b¢  
 Pole-ptcih 4 
 Slot No. 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52 
53 
54 
 Angle 
13 1
3  
30 
46 2
3  
63 1
3  
80 
96 2
3  
113 1
3  
130 
146 2
3  
163 1
3
 Phase 
a 
a 
a 
c¢ 
c¢ 
c¢  
c¢ 
b 
b 
b 
 Pole-pitch 5 
 
1. Calculate the slot angle, 
 
  
g = 10
180
¥
∞
108
 = 50
3  = 16 2
3
∞ (Keep in fractional form)
 
2. Beginning with 0°, calculate the angle for serially arranged slots in a table. Every time the angle 
exceeds 180°, subtract 180°, the angle of one pole-pitch. This takes care of the fact that the positive 
direction of emfs under adjacent poles are in opposite direction.
 
3.  Phase-group A is located corresponding to:
 
  
0 £ angle < 60°
 
 Phase-group C: 
60° £ angle < 120°
 
 Phase-group B: 
120° £  angle < 180°
 
 Phase-group ordering is AC¢ BA¢ CB¢ º

AC Armature Windings 
281
 
4. The starting points of phases are located at 0°, 60° and 120°. While 0° is the start, the other two angles 
are located at S¢/3 = 18 and 2S¢/3 = 36 slots away.
 
  
Angle S¢/3 slots away = g S¢
3
 = 180
3
P
S
S
¢
¢
¥
¢  = 60 P¢
 
  
Angle 2S¢/3 slots away = 2
3
g S¢  = 180
2
3
P
S
S
¢
¢
¥
¢  = 120 P¢
These angles are 60°, 120° or their multiples for any P¢ except when P¢ is multiple of 3 (= number of 
phase). Thus if P¢ (or P) is multiple of 3, balanced winding is not possible. 
It is immediately seen from the last rows of Table 6.1 that there are three cycles of (4, 4, 3, 4, 3) slot 
distribution starting at slot no. 1(0°, phase A), slot no. (l + S¢/3) = 19 (120°, phase B) and slot no. (1 + 2S¢/3) 
= 37 (60°, phase C ). So this pattern results in a balanced winding. 
Figure 6.8 shows the layout of the winding for the basic unit of ﬁve poles indicating the number of coils 
and their phase-groups. The dashed phase-groups are reverse connected. The start of all the three phases 
is made at the start of an undashed coil-group. This winding pattern would repeat for every 5-pole unit. It, 
therefore, represents the winding diagram for 10, 20, º pole armature.
4(a) 4(c )¢
3(b) 4(a )¢
3(c) 4(b )¢
4(a) 3(c )¢
4(b)
3(a )¢
4(c) 4(b )¢
3(a) 3(c )¢
3(b)
A
B
C
Fig. 6.8
Though the fractional slot winding may appear to be somewhat complicated, it has certain technical 
advantages and can be easily manufactured. The number of armature slots chosen need not necessarily be an 
integral multiple of the number of poles. Consequently one may choose a particular number of slots for which 
the notching gear is available. This results in saving in machine tools. This ﬂexibility can be effectively used 
where the number of poles (machine speed) varies over a wide range as in the case of synchronous machines.
Furthermore, the high-frequency harmonics caused by slotting are considerably reduced by the use of 
fractional slot winding. As the poles move past a slotted armature, the ﬂux/pole ﬂuctuates (does not move) as 
the slot-teeth pattern facing a pole repeats. This causes induction (static) of emf harmonics of high frequency. 
If S/P is integral, the disposition of armature slots relative to pole simultaneously repeats (in time phase) at 
every pole so that the harmonics in phase-groups of a given phase are in phase. Nonintegral S/P causes the 
harmonics in phase-group to become out-of-phase thereby reducing their strength in the phase voltage.
The generation of harmonics of slot origin is explained in detail below for the interested reader.
Tooth Ripple
Because of lower reluctance of the magnetic path corresponding to the teeth as compared to the slots, the ﬂux 
density wave in the air-gap is rippled as shown in Fig. 6.9. Unlike the space harmonics of the B-wave which 
move at the same peripheral speed as the fundamental, the tufts of ﬂux embracing the teeth move back and 

282 Electric Machines
forth as the teeth move relatively past the pole-shoes. Since there is no net movement of B-wave ripples, no 
space harmonic is produced by these. However, due to cyclic variation in reluctance of the magnetic path 
offered to the ﬁeld poles by the toothed armature, the total ﬂux/pole contains a space stationary but time-
varying component. This effect is most pronounced when the pole-arc covers an integral plus one-half slot-
pitches as illustrated in Figs 6.10(a) and (b). The relative position of the armature and poles in Fig. 6.10(a) 
corresponds to low reluctance and maximum ﬂux/pole and Fig. 6.10(b) corresponds to high reluctance and 
minimum ﬂux. It is thus seen that the ﬂux has a stationary time-varying component. A complete cycle of 
ﬂux variation occurs when the pole moves through one slot-pitch, while one cycle of the fundamental wave 
is generated when the poles move through two pole-pitches. Therefore, the tooth ripple frequency in ﬂux is
 
fs = f ¥ slots/pole-pair = 2S
P
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ f
where 
f = fundamental frequency 
 
fs = frequency of ﬂux variation due to slotting 
 
 
3 1
2 slot-pitches
(a) Four teeth opposite field pole (low reluctance, maximum flux)
(b) Three teeth opposite field pole (high reluctance, minimum flux)
 
Fig. 6.9 Tooth ripple in B-wave 
Fig. 6.10
Flux linking an armature coil can be expressed as 
 
f = (F + fs sin 2pfst) cos 2pft
and the emf due to this ﬂux is 
 
e = –N d
dt
f  = 2p fNF sin 2p ft 
 
  – 1
2
Nfs [2p ( fs – f ) cos 2p ( fs – f  )
 
  + 2p(  fs + f ) cos 2p ( fs + f )] 
(6.3)
Thus, apart from the fundamental, the two frequencies present in the emf wave owing to armature slotting 
are
 
( fs ± f ) = f 2
1
S
P ±
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  
(6.4) 
Pole
Tufting of flux
Armature
Ripple

AC Armature Windings 
283
If S/P = 9, then
 
( fs ± f ) = 50(18 ± 1) = 950, 850 Hz
These frequencies are high enough to cause interference in telecommunication in the neighbourhood of 
power lines.
If S/P is fractional, the space relation between the slotted armature and a given ﬁeld pole is not the same 
as in succeeding poles as a result of which the emfs of ripple frequencies ( fs ± 1) in various armature coils 
become out-of-phase and tend to cancel out in an interconnected set of phase coils.
 
 The pitch of a coil is the space angle (electrical) between its two sides and must equal an integral 
number of slots.
 
 Two types of winding 
 
 - Single layer: each coil side of a coil occupies the whole slot
 
 - Double layer: each slot is occupied by two coil sides
 
 Winding diagram is used to illustrate the arrangement of coils round the armature periphery and their 
interconnections.
 
 Fractional slot winding is used to reduce the high frequency harmonics caused by slotting.
 
 In lap winding the ﬁnish of one coil is connected to the start of the adjoining coil.
 
 Wave winding the ﬁnish end of one coil under one pole pair is connected to the start of a coil under the 
next pole pair.
 
 6.1 Draw a single-layer unbifuracated winding for 
a 3-phase, 4-pole machine having 24 armature 
slots. Assume one coil-side. Cleary show the 
end connection of a continuous chain arrange-
ment is used.
 6.2 For the same number of slot and poles as 
in Problem 6.1, draw a bifurcated type of 
winding. If the number of slots are changed 
from 24 to 36, is it possible to have bifurcated 
winding? If not, why?
 6.3 Give a developed view of double-layer ar-
mature winding for a 3-phase machine with 
6 poles and 36 slot, If full-pitched coils are 
used. Indicate all end connection and the start 
and ﬁnish of each phase.
 6.4 A 3-phase machine has 4 poles and 48 armature 
slots. If the coils are chorded by one slot, draw 
the double-layer winding diagram for all three 
phases. Why is it that chording more than 
1/3 pole-pitch is not used in practice?
 6.5 The armature of a 3-phase machine with 
16 poles and 180 slots is wound with fractional 
slot windings. Construct the winding table 
for one basic unit of poles. Indicate the start 
of each phase. For the basic unit determine 
the distribution of coil groups and the phase 
sequence.
 6.6 A 3-phase, 10-pole machine has 72 slots. 
Consturct the winding table for fractional slot 
winding. Draw the winding diagram with a 
coil-span of seven slots.
 6.7 A 3-phase, 50-Hz, 10-pole machine has 
120 
armature 
slots. 
What 
harmonic 
frequencies will be present in the generated 
emf on account of slotting ? How do these 
affect the operation of the machine?

284 Electric Machines
 
1. What is the signiﬁcance of a winding diagram?
 
2. When do you use concentric winding?
 
3. What are the advantages of fractional slot 
winding over integral slot winding?
 
4. Compare lap and wave winding. Where each 
type is used and why?
 
5. Why double layer winding is preferred?
 
6. Explain how fractional winding reduce the 
emfs of ripple frequencies.
 

DC Machines 
285
7.1 
INTRODUCTION
A dc machine is constructed in many forms and for a variety of purposes, from 
the 3 mm stepper drawing a few mA at 1.5 V in a quartz crystal watch to the 
giant 75000 kW or more rolling mill motor. It is a highly versatile and ﬂexible 
machine. It can satisfy the demands of load requiring high starting, accelerating 
and retarding torques. A dc machine is also easily adaptable for drives with a wide 
range of speed control and fast reversals. 
 DC motors are used in rolling mills, in traction and in overhead cranes. They are also employed in many 
control applications as actuators and as speed or position sensors. With ac being universally adopted for 
generation, transmission and distribution, there are almost no practical uses now of the dc machine as a 
power generator. Its use as a motor-generator (ac motor-dc generator) for feeding dc drives has also been 
replaced in modern practice by rectiﬁer units. In certain applications dc motors act as generators for brief 
time periods in the “regenerative” or “dynamic braking” mode, especially in electric traction systems. 
 The basic principles underlying the operation and constructional features of a dc machine were discussed 
in Sec. 5.2 (refer to Fig. 5.13) while the emf equation was given in Eq. (5.26). It was stated there that the 
ﬁeld winding (concentrated type) is mounted on salient-poles on the stator and the armature winding 
(distributed type) is wound in slots on a cylindrical rotor. Constructional features of a practical machine 
are brought out by half cross-sectional views of Figs 7.1 and 7.2 wherein all important machine parts are 
named. Both small and large industrial machines have generally the conventional heteropolar cylindrical 
rotor structure, although some unconventional homopolar machines have also been devised. 
 The magnetic circuit of a dc machine consists of the armature magnetic material (core), the air-gap, ﬁeld 
poles and yoke as shown in Figs 5.13 and 7.2. The yoke of a dc machine is an annular ring on the inside 
of which are bolted ﬁeld poles and the interpoles. The interpoles or commutation poles are narrow poles 
ﬁxed to the yoke, midway between the main ﬁeld poles. Interpoles and compensating windings, which 
will be described later in this chapter in connection with commutation problems, are required to be excited 
suitably. 
 The use of an electric ﬁeld winding, which supplies electric energy to establish a magnetic ﬁeld in the 
magnetic circuit, results in the great diversity and a variety of performance characteristics. The armature 
winding is connected to the external power source through a commutator-brush system (see Fig. 7.1 
item 6), which is a mechanical rectifying (switching) device for converting the alternating currents and 
induced emfs of the armature to dc form. Figure 7.4(a) shows a single commutator segment and Fig. 7.4(b) 
is the cross-sectional view of a built-up commutator. The longitudinal and perpendicular to the machine 
axis cross-sectional view of a dc machine, indicating the location and nomenclature of machine parts are 
presented in Figs 7.1 and 7.2.
7

286 Electric Machines
9
5
2
4
8
7
3
6
1
DC Machines
Fig. 7.1 
Sectional view of a dc machine
 
1. Armature Core 
4. Main Pole Winding 
7. Brush and Brush Holder
 
2. Main Field Pole 
5. Interpole Winding 
8. Armature Winding Overhang
 
3. Interpole 
6. Commutator 
9. Fan 
Main pole
Pole shoe
Armature
slots
Armature
Interpole coil
Main field
coil
Commutator
Yoke
Interpole
Inter pole
Fig. 7.2 Cross section of a dc machine

DC Machines 
287
7.2 ARMATURE WINDING AND COMMUTATOR 
A dc machine is a heteropolar structure with stationary 
poles and the rotating armature (Fig. 5.13). An alternating 
emf of the same wave shape as that of B-wave is induced in 
every coil. As the armature rotates, the emfs induced in the 
belt of coil-sides under a given pole is unidirectional and 
the pattern alternates from pole to pole as shown in Fig. 7.3 
for a 4-pole machine.
The coil side current pattern is the same as the emf 
pattern. The only difference is that while the coil-side emf 
reduces towards the outer side of poles, the current remains 
the same in all the coil-sides except for alternations from 
pole to pole, while the coil-side current reverses, the current 
exchanged with external circuit must be unidirectional and 
voltage must be constant and of same polarity (d.c.). This is 
the rectiﬁcation process which is carried out by mechanical 
rectiﬁer comprising commutator-brush assembly.
Commutator-Brush Assembly
The commutator is a cylindrical assembly of wedge-shaped copper segments (Fig. 7.4(a)) insulated from one 
another and the shaft by thin mica or micanite sheets. In high-speed machines the segments are so shaped 
that they can be clamped by two cast-iron V-shaped rings as shown in Fig. 7.4(b). Each commutator segment 
forms the junction between two armature coils (“ﬁnish” of one coil and “start” of the other). In large machines 
ﬂat copper strips known as risers are used forming clip connections to armature bar conductors (Fig. 7.4(b)).
A double-layer winding is universally adopted in dc machines. The coils are continuously connected 
“ﬁnish” to “start” to form a closed (re-entrant) winding. Depending upon the type of connection (lap or 
wave), pairs (one or more) of parallel paths exist.
 The cylindrical-rotor or armature of a dc machine is mounted on a shaft which is supported on the 
bearings. One or both ends of the shaft act as input/output terminal of the machine and would be coupled 
mechanically to a load (motoring machine) or to a prime-mover (generating machine). Usually parallel-
sided axial slots (evenly spaced normally) are used on the rotor surface. In these slots armature coils 
are laid as per winding rules. The magnetic material between slots are the teeth. The teeth cross-section 
inﬂuences signiﬁcantly the performance characteristics of the machine and parameters such as armature coil 
inductance, magnetic saturation in teeth, eddy-current loss in the stator poles and the cost and complexity 
of laying armature winding. 
 The design of electrical machines has become a very interesting and challenging topic and is continuously 
changing with new and improved magnetic, electrical and insulating materials, the use of improved heat-
transfer techniques, development of new manufacturing processes and the use of computers. There are 
full-ﬂedged excellent texts [9, 46] dealing with the design aspects. The objective of this chapter is to 
analyse the behaviour of the dc machine in detail and present the physical concepts regarding its steady-
state performance.
N
S
S
N
EMF
Total current
of both layers
Fig. 7.3 
4-pole dc machine

288 Electric Machines
 
Commutator segment
Locking
ring
V-ring
V-ring
Riser
Mica
(a) Commutator assembly
                     
Riser
(b) Commutator segment
Fig. 7.4
Stationary carbon brushes are placed in contact with the commutator under spring pressure; see item 7 of 
Fig. 7.1. The brushes are electrically placed in the magnetic neutral regions where the armature coils have 
almost zero induced emf. Because of the diamond shape of coils, the brushes are physically placed opposite 
midpoles. With this placement of brushes, the commutator segment contacted is either fed current from both 
coil-sides connected to it or it feeds current to both the coil-sides. Thus, at one brush the current constantly 
ﬂows out and at the next brush the current ﬂows in. This occurs at all brush pairs. The adjoining brushes are 
at constant dc voltage and the coils in series between the two constitute one parallel path. As the armature 
rotates, the number of coils in series tapped by the brush pairs remains constant and also their disposition 
relative to the poles is the same. As a result constant (dc) voltage appears across brush pairs. As a coil crosses 
the brush position, the current in it must reverse which is the commutation process.
Armature Winding Commutator Connections*
For elementary explanation, cross-sectional view of armature winding and commutator may be employed. 
As only conductor cross-sections appear in the diagram, clarity does not emerge with out lengthy detailed 
account and general winding rules get left out.
We shall adopt the alternate powerful method of drawing the developed diagrams of windings by the use 
the general winding rules.
 
* These who do not want to study winding rules may skip these and follow the study as under
 
 Lap winding diagram Fig. 7.8; trace out parallel paths
 
 Ring diagram Fig. 7.9; commutation
 
 Wave winding diagram Fig. 7.12. Go to Fig. 7.13 the coils in the two parallel paths at an instant. Trace out the 
parallel paths
 
 Then go to section 7.3

DC Machines 
289
Developed diagram Imagine that the machine (dc) is cut out axially and laid out on a plane. The poles will 
appear underneath the armature winding with coil ends suitably connected to the commutator segments. This 
is not a scaled version of the machine but a schematic representation of the poles, armature winding and 
commutator segments; see Fig. 7.8.
Coil-side Numbering Scheme
Coil-sides are numbered continuously—top, bottom, top, …. The ﬁrst top coil-side is numbered 1 so that 
all top ones are odd and all bottom ones even. Figure 7.5 shows the coil-side numbering scheme for U = 
4 coil-sides/slot.
1
1
3
2
5
7
3
9 11
4
13 15
5
17 19
4
2
6
8
10 12
14 16
18 20
Ycs = 4 slots
Fig. 7.5
Coil-pitch/Back-pitch
In Fig. 7.5 the coil-span Ycs is assumed 4 slots (or the 
coil spans 4 teeth). Therefore, coil-side 1 will form a 
coil with coil-side 18 and 3 with 20, and so on. This 
is depicted in Fig. 7.6. The coil-span in terms of coil-
sides is ycs = 18 – 1 = 17 or 20 – 3 = 17. This indeed 
is the distance measured in coil-sides between two 
coil-sides connected at the back end of armature (end 
away from commutator) to form a coil. It is known 
as back-pitch denoted as yb. Obviously coil-span 
 
Ycs = yb = 17 (odd)
which is odd in this case and must always be so. It indeed equals
 
yb = 4 ¥ 4 + 1 = 17
or in general 
yb = UYcs + 1 (odd because U is even) 
(7.1)
where Ycs = coil-span in slots 
Commutator-pitch
The junction of two coils (“ﬁnish” - “start”) is connected to one commutator segment. Therefore,
 
Number of commutator segments = C (number of armature coils) 
(7.2)
The number of commutator segments spanned by the two ends of a coil is called commutator-pitch, yc. In 
Fig. 7.7(a), yc = 2 – 1 = +1. 
'Finish'
Front end
(commutator end)
Back end
2
3
4
17
18
19
20
y
y
cs
b
=
'Start'
Fig. 7.6

290 Electric Machines
Coil-span
The coil-span in terms of slots is always nearly full-pitch. This ensures that coil-side voltages around the coil 
are additive most of the time (except when coil-sides lie near the magnetic neutral region). Thus 
 
Ycs = S
P  (nearest lower integer) 
(7.3)
which means that for nonintegral S/P, the coils are short-pitched.
Lap Winding
In a lap winding (as in case of ac) the “ﬁnish” of one coil (coming from the bottom coil-side) is connected 
to (lapped on) the “start” of the adjoining coil as illustrated for single-turn coils in Fig. 7.7. The coil-side 
displacement of the front end connection is called the front-pitch, yf . In a lap winding the resultant-pitch 
 
yr = yb ~ yf = 2 
(7.4)
The direction in which the winding progresses depends upon which is more, yb or yf . Thus
 
yb > yf 
(Progressive winding, Fig. 7.7(a) 
(7.5(a))
 
yb < yf 
(Retrogressive winding, Fig. 7.7(b) 
 (7.5(b))
There is not much to choose between progressive or retrogressive winding; either could be adopted.
(1 + Yr)
Yc = +1
1
2
3
4
Back end
Front end
Winding progresses
Yb
Yf
Yr
(1 + Yb)
1
2
3
Commutator
C
1
2
C
–1
(1 – Y )r
Yc = –1
(1 + Y )
b
Winding retrogresses
0
Yr
1
2
Yb
Yr
(a)
(b)
Fig. 7.7

DC Machines 
291
As shown in Figs 7.7(a) and (b), the two ends of a coil are connected across adjacent commutator segments. 
Thus commutator-pitch, 
 
yc = ±1 (+1 for progressive, –1 for retrogressive) 
(7.6) 
Coils in lap winding are continuously connected as per the above rule and in the end it closes onto itself 
(as it must). In the process all coils have been connected.
To learn certain further aspects of lap winding—location of brushes, etc., an example is worked out.
EXAMPLE 7.1 Draw the lap-winding diagram in the developed form for a 4-pole, 12-slot armature with 
two coil-sides/slot. Assume single-turn coils. 
Indicate the number and position of brushes on the commutator. What is the number of parallel paths? 
SOLUTION 
C = S = number of commutator segments = 12
 
Ycs = 12
4
 = 3 slots
 
Yb = 2Ycs + 1 = 7
 
yf = 7 – 2 = 5 (we choose progressive winding) 
This information is sufﬁcient to draw the developed winding diagram of Fig. 7.8. The ends of coil formed by coil-
sides (1-8) are connected to commutator segments 1, 2, and so on. The four poles are shown on the developed diagram. 
All coil-sides under one pole have emf induced in the same direction and the pattern alternates. The arrows on the coil 
sides indicate the direction of current ﬂow. If the armature moves left to right, the emfs in coil sides are induced in the 
same direction as currents, the machine is generating, supplying power to the external circuit. On the other hand, if the 
armature moves right to left, the induced emfs are in opposite direction to currents, the machine is motoring; receiving 
power from the supply. 
To 21
To 23
To 4
To 6
To 2
From 20
From 21
From 23
From 2
From 4
Ia/2
Ia
A1
A2
Ia/2
B1
B2
B3
B4
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
1
1
2
2
11
12
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Equalizer
Parallel path
–
+
–
Ic =
Ia
4
Ia/2
Ia/2
Fig. 7.8 Lap winding for 4-poles, 12-slot armature (single-turn coils, 2 coil-sides/slot)

292 Electric Machines
Parallel Paths/Brushes 
It is easily found from the winding diagram that three coils (C/P = 12/4) are located under one pole-pair 
(N1S1) and are series connected so that their emfs add up. This constitutes one parallel path. The complete 
winding can be divided into four such parallel paths lying under four different pole-pairs (N1S1, S1N2, N2S2, 
S2N1). It is, therefore, concluded that the number of parallel paths (A) in a lap-wound machine in general 
equal the number of poles (P), i.e. 
 
A = P 
(7.7)
The four parallel paths in the winding 
of Fig. 7.8 electrically form a close ring 
as shown in Fig. 7.9 in which the parallel 
path emfs and currents around the loop 
alternate. 
The ends of parallel paths meet at 
commutator segments 1, 4, 7 and 10 at 
the instant shown. These are the locations 
of the brushes (equal to the number of 
poles) and are alternately positive and 
negative. It is also found that the brushes 
are physically located opposite the pole 
centres and the electrical angle between 
them is, therefore, 180°. The spacing between adjacent brushes in terms of the commutator segment is
 
C
P  = 12
4  = 3 
(7.8) 
It may also be noted that C/P need not necessarily be an integer. It is further noticed that because of the 
diamond shape of coils, the brushes which are physically opposite the pole centres are electrically connected 
to coil-sides lying close to the interpolar region. Thus electrically the brushes are displaced 90° elect. from 
the axes of the main poles. 
The two positive and two negative brushes are respectively connected in parallel for feeding the external 
circuit. 
From the ring diagram of Fig. 7.9, which corresponds to the winding diagram of Fig. 7.8, it immediately 
follows that the current in armature conductors is
 
Ic = I
A
a  
(7.9)
Commutation
Consider any parallel path, say the one tapped at commutator segments 1 and 4. As the armature rotates, one 
coil moves out of this parallel path at one brush and another coil enters the parallel path at the other brush. The 
brush pair now taps commutator segments 2 and 5. This process happens simultaneously at all the brushes 
and can be more easily imagined from the ring diagram of Fig. 7.9 wherein the coils can be considered to 
rotate in a circular fashion. In this way a brush pair always taps C/P coils (in series) and as a consequence the 
voltage available at each brush pair is maintained constant (dc). This indeed is the commutation action. As 
a matter of fact the voltage tapped varies slightly for a brief period when the changeover of coils in parallel 
paths takes place. However, this voltage variation is negligible in practical machines which have a large 
number of coils. 
E
S N
4
2
1
(
)
E
N S
1
1 1
(
)
E
N S
3
2 2
(
)
E
S N
2
1
2
(
)
B2
B4
B1
I I
a 2
I I
a 2
A2(–)
A1(+)
B3
I
I
c
a 4
= ( / )
–
–
+
+
Ia
I I
a 2
Fig. 7.9 
Equivalent ring diagram of 4-pole, lap-wound armature

DC Machines 
293
It easily follows from the winding diagram of Fig. 7.8 and from the equivalent ring diagram of Fig. 7.9 that 
as a coil moves out of one parallel path into another, the current in it must reverse. In Fig. 7.8 as the armature 
moves by one commutator segment, currents in four coils—(l, 8), (7, 14), (13, 20) and (19, 2)—must reverse. 
These coils are said to undergo current commutation. It is also observed that during the brief period in which 
a coil undergoes commutation, its coil-sides are passing through the interpolar region so that negligible emf 
is induced in the commutating coil. At the same time, in this period the coil remains short-circuited by the 
brush, bridging the adjoining commutator segments to which the coil ends are connected. Ideal commutation 
in which the conductor current change from +Ic to –Ic is sketched in Fig. 7.10(a). If the current in a coil 
does not reverse fully at the end of commutation period, there will be sparking at the brush contact. This 
phenomenon and its remedy will be discussed in a Section 7.8
+Ic
–Ic
Commutation
Time
Time to
travel one
pole
Commutation
time
Fig. 7.10(a) 
Ideal Commutation 
Symmetry Requirement
To avoid no-load circulating currents and certain consequential commutation problems, all the parallel paths 
must be identical so as to have the same number of coil-sides. Symmetry therefore requires that 
 
2C
P  = US
P  = integer 
(7.10)
Remark
To practically wind a dc armature the above winding rules are 
not needed except that the coils of the double-layer winding are 
to be continuously connected from “ﬁnish” to “start” till the 
winding closes onto itself. Further the “ﬁnish-start” junction is 
connected to the commutator segment physically opposite the 
midpoint of the coil; the ends of each coil being connected to the 
adjacent commutator segment. This is illustrated in Fig. 7.10(b). 
Of course the winding rules given above help in providing an 
insight to the reader into the winding and commutator action to 
produce dc at the brushes.
Equalizer Rings
The poles in a dc machine cannot be made identical so as to have the same value of ﬂux/pole. Any dissymmetry 
among poles leads to inequality in parallel path emfs e.g. in Fig. 7.9, E1(N1S1), E2(S1N2), E3(N2S2) and 
Fig. 7.10(b)

294 Electric Machines
E4(S2N1) will not be identical. As a result the potential of the positive and negative brush sets are no longer 
equal so that circulating current will ﬂow in the armature via the brushes to equalize the brush voltage even 
when the armature is not feeding current to the external circuit. Apart from causing unbalanced loading 
around the armature periphery when the armature feeds current, the circulating currents also interfere with 
“commutation” resulting in serious sparking at the brushes. 
The circulating currents even out pole dissymmetry by strengthening the weak poles and by weakening 
the strong poles. The remedy is therefore to allow the circulating currents to ﬂow at the back end of the 
armature via low resistance paths inhibiting thereby the ﬂow of these currents through carbon brushes which 
in comparison have considerably higher resistance. This remedy is applied by connecting several sets of 
points which would be “equipotential” but for the imbalance of ﬁeld poles via equalizer rings. Currents 
ﬂowing in the rings would of course be ac as only ac voltage exists between points on coil back ends. 
Equipotential points are 360° (elect.) apart and would be found only if 
 
S
P
( / )
2  = integer
i.e. winding exactly repeats for each pair of poles. The distance between equipotential points in terms of 
number of commutator segments is C/(P/2), i.e. 12/2 = 6 in the example. It is too expensive to use equalizer 
rings equal to the number of equipotential point-pairs; a much smaller number is employed in actual practice. 
Two equalizer rings are shown properly connected in Fig. 7.8 for the example. 
While equalizer rings inhibit the ﬂow of circulating currents via brushes, they are not a prevention for the 
circulating currents which do cause additional copper losses. 
It will soon be seen that wave winding scheme does not have the need of equalizer rings and would 
naturally be preferred except in large heavy current machines. 
EXAMPLE 7.2 Give the relevant details for drawing lap winding for a dc machine with 4 poles, 22 slots 
and 6 coil-sides/slot. What should be the spacing between brushes?
SOLUTION 
Coil span, Ycs = 22
4  ª 5 slots 
 
Back pitch = 6 ¥ 5 + 1 = 31 
 
Front pitch = 31 – 2 = 29 (progressive winding) 
These data are sufﬁcient to draw the winding diagram.
 
Number of commutator segments = 1
2 US = 3 ¥ 22 = 66 
 
P = A = 4
 
Number of brushes = 4 
 
Spacing between adjacent brushes = 66
4  = 16 1
2  segments
Wave Winding
In wave winding the “ﬁnish” end of one coil under one pole-pair is connected to the start of a coil under the 
next pole-pair as shown in Fig. 7.11. The process is continued till all the armature coils are connected and 
the winding closes onto itself. Certain conditions must be fulﬁlled for this to happen. The winding has the 
appearance of a wave and hence the name. The ends of each coil spread outwards and span yc (commutator 
pitch) segments. As the number of coil-sides is double the number of segments, the top coil-side of the second 
coil will be numbered (1 + 2yc). The numbering of other coil-sides is clear from the ﬁgure. It follows that

DC Machines 
295
 
1 + 2yc – yf = 1 + yb
or  
yf  + yb = 2yc = yr 
(7.11)
Starting at segment 1 and after going through P/2 
coils or yc (P/2) segments, the winding should end up in 
segment 2 for progressive winding or segment (C ) for 
retrogressive winding. This means that for the winding 
to continue and cover all the coils before closing onto 
itself, i.e. 
 
yc
P
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = (C ± 1)
or 
yc = 2
1
(
)
C
P
±
 (must be integer) 
(7.12)
In Eq. (7.12) the winding is progressive if + sign is used and is retrogressive otherwise.
Once yb is known from the coil-span and yc is determined from Eq. (7.12), the back-pitch yf is calculated 
from Eq. (7.11). The winding diagram can now be drawn. 
In wave winding the coils are divided into two groups—all coils with clockwise current are series connected 
and so are all coils with counter-clockwise current–and these two groups are in parallel because the winding 
is closed. Thus a wave winding has always two parallel paths irrespective of the number of poles; also only 
two brushes are required, i.e. 
 
A = 2 
(7.13) 
These statements are corroborated by an illustrative example below: 
EXAMPLE 7.3 For a 6-pole dc armature with 16 slots having two coil-sides per slot and single-turn coils, 
calculate the relevant pitches for a wave winding and draw the developed winding diagram. 
SOLUTION 
Ycs = 16
6  ª 2 slots (nearest lower integral value) 
 
yb = 2 ¥ 2 + 1 = 5 
 
C = 16
 
yc = 2 16
1
6
(
)
±
 = 5 segments 
 
yf = 2yc – yb = 5
As per the above values of various pitches, the developed diagram of the winding is drawn in Fig. 7.12. It is 
observed that the armature winding has two parallel paths; in Fig. 7.29)—current is going in at segment 6 and 
is coming out at segment 14 (coil-side 27 has negligible emf and the direction of current in it is determined 
by the next coil-side in series with it, i.e. 32). Only two brushes are, therefore required—one brush is opposite 
a north pole and the other opposite the diametrically opposite south pole. The spacing between brushes is 
 
C
A  = C
2  = 8 segments 
(7.14)
The coils are continuously numbered at top ends in Fig. 7.12. Between the two brushes there are two 
parallel paths each comprising 8 coils any time as shown in Fig. 7.13 where coil of each parallel path are 
numbered at the instant corresponding to Fig. 7.12.
1+ 2
–
Y
Y
c
f
1+ 4
–
Y
Y
c
f
1+ 2Yc
1+ Yc
1+ 2Yc
(
+ 2)
C
C
1
2
Yc
Yc
Yf
Yr
Yb
Fig. 7.11

296 Electric Machines
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
1
2
3
28
30
32
29
31
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
A2
–
A1
+
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32
1
3
5
Fig. 7.12 Wave winding for 6-pole, 16-slot armature (single-turn coil-sides/slot)

DC Machines 
297
We thus conclude that number parallel path in a wave winding is A = 2, irrespective of number of poles.
Therefore conductor current in a wave would machine is
 
Ic = Ia
2  
(7.15)
Spacing between the two brushes is 
 
C
A  = 16
2  = 8 segments
 
Electrical spacing = 180° 
6
11
16
5
10
15
4
9
1
12
7
2
13
8
3
14
A1
A2
Ia
–
+
Ia
Fig. 7.13 
Parallel paths of wave winding
In practical wave-wound machines as many brushes as number of poles are used with spacing between 
adjacent brushes being C/P commutator segments and the brushes are alternatively positive and negative. 
All positive and all negative brushes are respectively connected in parallel to feed the external circuit. This 
reduces the current to be carried by each brush to a value. 
 
IBrush = 
I
P
a
( / )
2  
(7.16)
For a given commutator segment width this reduces the segment length required for maximum allowable 
brush current density. In small machines, however, economy—cost of brush gear relative to commutator—
dictates in favour of two brushes only, which are placed opposite two adjoining poles. 
Equalizer rings not needed The armature coils forming each of the two parallel paths are under the inﬂuence 
of all pole-pairs so that the effect of the magnetic circuit asymmetry is equally present in both the parallel 
paths resulting in equal parallel-path voltages. Thus equalizer rings are not needed in a wave winding. 
Dummy coils In a lap winding yc = ±1 irrespective of the number of armature coils so that coils can always 
be chosen to completely ﬁll all the slots (C = 1
2 US). 
In a wave winding from Eq. (7.12), the number of coils must fulﬁl the condition
 
C = P
2 yc ± 1 
(7.17) 
while at the same time C must also be governed by
 
C = 1
2 US 
(7.18)
For a certain-design value of P and the choice of S restricted by manufacturing considerations (availability 
of a certain notching gear for armature stamping), the values of C as obtained from Eqs (7.17) and (7.18) may 

298 Electric Machines
not be the same. In such a situation the number of coils C ¢ is dictated by 
  
C¢ = 1
2 US
in such a manner that 
 
C¢ > C
and yc is so selected that (C¢– C ) is the least possible. Electrically only C coils (Eq. (7.17)) are needed, but 
C¢ coils are accommodated in the armature slots to ensure dynamic (mechanical) balancing of the armature. 
The difference (C¢ – C ) are called dummy coils and are placed in appropriate slots with their ends electrically 
insulated. 
As an example, if P = 4n (multiple of four), C can only be odd (Eq. (7.17)), while C¢ may be even if an 
even number of slots are used. In this case then at least one dummy coil would be needed. 
EXAMPLE 7.4 For a 4-pole dc armature with 28 slots and 8 coil-sides per slot, ﬁnd the winding pitches 
and the commutator pitch for a wave winding. What is the distance between brushes in terms of commutator 
segments? 
SOLUTION 
The number of coils that can be accommodated in slots, 
 
C = 28
8
¥
2
 = 112
 
yc = 2
P (C ± 1)
 
 = 2
4 (112 ± 1) = 55 1
2  or 56 1
2
Since no integral value of yc is possible for C = 112, dummy coil would be present. 
Now  
C¢ = 112 
 
C = P
2 yc ± 1
Choosing 
yc = 55
 
C = 111 (number of coils needed electrically
 
 = number of commutator segments)
Therefore 
(112 – 111) = 1 dummy coil will be placed on the armature
 
Ycs = 28
4  = 7
 
yb = 8 ¥ 7 + 1 = 57 
 
yf = 2yc – yb = 2 ¥ 55 – 57 = 53
Distance between brushes if four brushes are used = 111/4 
 
 = 27 3
4  segments
Remark 
As per Fig. 7.11, to wind a wave armature, the coils are prepared as per yb (= UYcs + 1). Once the coils are 
ready only yc is needed to connect the coils. Practical winders may prefer coil numbering instead of coil-side 
numbering–a coil beginning with a top coil-side numbered (l + 2yc) in Fig. 7.11 is indeed a coil numbered 
(1 + yc). 

DC Machines 
299
Comparative Summary of Lap and Wave Winding 
Table 7.1
Lap Winding
Wave Winding
1. Coil-span, Ycs = S
P  (lower integer)
2. Back-pitch, yb = UYcs + 1
3. Commutator pitch, yc = ±1
   (+ for progressive, – for retrogressive)
4. Front-pitch, yf = yb ± 2
   (+ for progressive, – for retrogressive)
5. Parallel paths, A = P
   Conductor current, Ic = la/A
6. Number of brushes A = P
7. No dummy coil needed
8. Equalizer rings needed
Ycs = S
P (lower integer)
yb = UYcs + 1
yc = 2
1
(
)
C
P
±
 (must be integral)
(+ for progressive, – for retrogressive)
yf = 2yc – yb
A = 2
Ic = Ia/2
Number of brushes = 2 (Large machine use P brushes)
Dummy coil may be needed
Equalizer rings not needed
Choice between Lap and Wave Windings
Wave winding’s greatest attraction is that it does not require equalizer rings* which means a less expensive 
machine compared to lap winding. Lap winding has the advantage of a larger number of parallel paths and 
lower conductor current (Ic = Ia/A) and is therefore adopted for low-voltage high-current machines. The 
use of wave winding is prohibited for armature currents exceeding 300 A because of certain commutation 
difﬁculties. 
Steps for Designing Armature Winding Using MATLAB 
Designing steps of a lap connected dc winding are given below: 
 
1. Coil span Ycs = S
P
 
2. Back-pitch, yb = UYcs + 1 
 
3. Commutator pitch, yc = ±1 
(+ for progressive – for retrogressive)
 
4. Front-pitch, Yf = Yb ± 2  
(+ for progressive – for retrogressive)
 
5. Parallel paths, A = P
 
6. Conductor current, Ic = I
A
a
 
7. A loop program to construct winding table.
 
 Given in a DC machine: 
 
  
No of slots (S ) = 18
 
  
Poles (P ) = 6
 
  
Coil sides/slot (U ) = 2
 
  
Armature current (Ia ) = 25 A
 
* A duplex wave winding not discussed here would require equalizer rings.

300 Electric Machines
MATLAB PROGRAM 
 
S = 18; 
 
% Winding Parameters
 
P = 6; 
 
Ycs =S./P 
 
U = 2; 
 
Yb = U.*Ycs + 1 
 
Yc_progressive = 1
 
Yc_retrogressive=–1 
 
Yf_progressive = Yb + 2 
 
Yf_retrogressive = Yb–2
 
A = P
 
Ia = 25;
 
Ic = Ia./A 
 
for i = 1: 2 : 2 (2*S –Yb) 
% Winding Table
 
[i i + Yb] 
 
end 
 
Ycs = 
 
  
3 
 
Yb = 
 
 
7
 
Yc_progressive = 
 
 
1 
 
Yc_retrogressive = 
 
 
- 1 
 
Yf_progressive = 
 
 
9 
 
Yf_retrogressive = 
 
 
5 
 
A = 
 
 
6 
 
Ic = 
 
 
4.1667 
 
ans = 
 
 
1 
8 
 
ans =
 
 
3 
10 
 
ans = 
 
 
5 
12 
 
ans = 
 
 
7 
14 
 
ans =
 
 
9 
16 
 
ans = 
 
 
11 
18 
 
ans =
 
 
13 
20 

DC Machines 
301
 
ans =
 
 
15 
22 
 
ans =
 
 
17 
24 
 
ans =
 
 
19 
26 
 
ans =
 
 
21 
28 
 
ans =
 
 
23 
30 
 
ans = 
 
 
25 
32
 
ans =
 
 
27 
34 
 
ans = 
 
 
29 
36
7.3 CERTAIN OBSERVATIONS
From this discussion in sections 7.1 and 7.2, certain observations about the dc machine are summarized as 
follows. These will help in visualizing the machine behaviour in this chapter.
 
1. Brushes in a dc machine are normally placed electrically in the interpolar regions and therefore make 
an angle of 90° elect. with the axes of the adjoining ﬁeld poles.
 
2. A lap winding has A = P parallel paths such that the armature current Ia divides out into A paths giving 
a conductor current of Ic = Ia/A. In the case of wave winding, A = 2, independent of P.
 
3. The brushes are alternately positive and negative (elect. angle between adjacent pair being 180° elect). 
Only two brushes are needed in wave winding though P brushes are commonly provided for heavy-
current armatures. 
 
4. The armature periphery is divided into “belts” (P in number) each under inﬂuence of a pole. Emfs 
and currents in all the conductors of a belt are unidirectional–conductors that go out of a belt due to 
rotation are simultaneously replaced by an equal number coming into the belt. Magnitude of conductor 
emfs in a belt follows the pattern (wave) of ﬂux density in the air gap while the current in all these 
conductors (Ic) is the same in all the belts except that the current pattern in the belts alternate in space 
but remain ﬁxed in time. This basically results from the action of the commutator. 
 
5. If the conductor current ﬂows in the same direction as the conductor emf, the machine outputs electrical 
power (and absorbs mechanical power), i.e. the machine is operating in generating mode. On the other 
hand, when the conductor current and emf oppose each other, the machine absorbs electrical power 
and outputs mechanical power, i.e. it operates in the motoring mode. 
 
6. Barring irrecoverable losses (of both electric and magnetic origin), there is a balance between 
electrical and mechanical powers of the machine; the average energy stored in the magnetic ﬁeld 
remains constant independent of the armature rotation. 
7.4 
EMF AND TORQUE 
It was shown in Sec. 5.2 (Fig. 5.14(a) that in a dc machine the magnetic structure is such that the ﬂux density 
wave in the air-gap is ﬂat-topped with quarter-wave symmetry so long as the armature is not carrying any 

302 Electric Machines
current. It will be seen in Sec. 7.7 that the ﬂux density wave gets distorted when the armature carries current 
(armature reaction effect destroys quarter-wave symmetry). However, this fact does not affect the constancy 
of emf (between brushes) and torque developed by the machine with magnitudes of each of these being 
determined by the ﬂux/pole independent of the shape of the B-wave. 
EMF Equation 
As per Eq. (5.23), the average coil emf is 
 
E c
a = Fwm N P
c
p
 
(7.19) 
where 
F = ﬂux/pole
 
wm = armature speed in rad/s
 
Nc = number of coil turns
 
P = number of poles 
Let  
Cp = coils/parallel path 
This number is ﬁxed independent of the armature rotation; as one coil moves out of the parallel path 
another comes in and takes its place. Thus, the parallel path emf which equals the armature emf is given by 
 
Ea = Fw
p
m
p
c
C N
P
(
)
 = Fw
p
m
P
N P  
(7.20)
Here 
Np = turns/parallel path = Z
A
2
where 
Z = total armature conductors 
 
A = number of parallel paths
Hence 
Ea = Fw
p
mZ
P
A
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = KaFwm  
(7.21)
where 
Ka = ZP
A
2p
or 
Ea = FnZ
P
A
60
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ ; wm = 2
60
pn  
(7.22)
where 
n = armature speed in rpm 
Ea remains constant (dc) by virtue of ﬁxed coils per parallel path independent of rotation of armature 
(commutation action). It is also observed that Ea depends upon the ﬂux/pole and not upon the shape of the 
ﬂux density wave.
Torque Equation
Figure 7.14 shows the ﬂux density wave in the air-gap and the conductor current distribution in the developed 
armature for one pole-pair. It is immediately seen that the force on conductors is unidirectional. Each 
conductor as it moves around with the armature experiences a force whose time variation is a replica of the 
B-wave. 
Therefore, the average conductor force
 
fc,av = Bav lIc 
(7.23)

DC Machines 
303
where 
Bav = average ﬂux density over pole 
 
l = active conductor length
Total force 
F = Zfc,av = BavIclZ
This force (and therefore torque) is constant (independent of time) because both the ﬂux density wave and 
current distribution are ﬁxed in space at all times. Now the torque developed
 
T = Bav IclZr 
(7.24)
where 
r = mean air-gap radius
The ﬂux/pole* can be expressed as
 
F = Bav tpl
where 
tp = pole-pitch (Fig. 7.14) = 2pr
P
\ 
F = Bav
2pr
P
l
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
or 
Bav = FP
rl
2
1
p ¥
 
(7.25)
Substituting for Bav in Eq. 7.24,
 
T = 1
2p F IcZP
 
 = 1
2p F IaZ
P
A
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  Nm 
(7.26)
 
 = KaF Ia Nm 
(7.27)
It is, therefore, seen that the machine torque is uniform for given ﬂux/pole and armature current. Further, 
it is independent of the shape of the B-wave, which in fact gets distorted by the armature mmf when it carries 
current.
It is convenient to use force on each conductor in deriving the expression for armature torque. However, 
the mechanism of torque production is different in an actual machine in which conductors are placed in 
Conductor current ( )
Ic
Flux density B
Force on conductors
tp
Fig. 7.14 Torque production in dc machine
 
* It is to be noted that the ﬂux/pole F is not dependent on the actual shape of ﬂux density distribution in the airgap. 
The ﬂux density distribution in fact gets distorted by the armature current.

304 Electric Machines
armature slots. The force is produced by the interaction of the main ﬂux and the ﬂux produced by current 
carrying conductors placed in armature slots. Due to the large reluctance of the air-path of slots, the main ﬂux 
passing through the conductors is negligible and so is the force acting on the conductor. Force is produced 
mainly by the distortion of the ﬂux lines passing through the teeth, and this force acts on the teeth of the 
armature as shown in Fig. 7.15. It is rather fortunate that there is very little force acting on conductors. If all 
the force were to act on conductors, it would crush the insulation between conductors and slots. 
(a) Main flux (solid) and flux (dotted) produced
by armature current-carring conductors
Tangential component of force
(b) Resultant flux
N
Fig. 7.15
Power Balance
Mechanical power
 
Twm = Ka FwmIa
 
 = EaIa W 
 (7.28) 
This is nothing but a statement of energy conservation, i.e. electrical and mechanical powers must balance 
in a machine.
EaIa is referred to as electromagnetic power. From Eq. (7.28) we get the electromagnetic torque as
 
T = (EaIa)/wm
Sum-up
 
Armature emf, Ea = Ka F wm 
(7.29)
 
Electromagnetic torque, T = Ka F Ia  
(7.30)
where 
Ka = ZP
A
2p
; machine constant
 
wm = 2
60
pn  rad/s
 
n = speed in rpm
Power balance 
Twm = EaIa = Electromagnetic power 
(7.31)
In frequent use we may drop the sufﬁx m in wm, i.e., write w in place of wm.
Linear Magnetization
If the magnetic circuit of the machine is assumed linear*
 
F = Kf If
 
* Presence of air-gap justiﬁes this approximation so long as iron is lightly in saturated state.

DC Machines 
305
where 
If = ﬁeld current
 
Kf = ﬁeld constant
Then 
Ea = KaKf Iwm = Ke If n V 
 (7.32)
and 
T = KaKf If Ia = Kt If Ia Nm  
(7.33)
where 
Ke = 2
60
p (KaKf) 
(7.34)
 
Kt = KaKf 
(7.35)
The derivation of torque developed (Eq. 7.26) using magnetic ﬁeld interaction is carried out in Sec. 7.6 
after armature reaction ampere turns are determined.
EXAMPLE 7.5 A 4-pole dc motor is lap-wound with 400 conductors. The pole shoe is 20 cm long and 
average ﬂux density over one-pole-pitch is 0.4 T, the armature diameter being 30 cm. Find the torque and 
gross mechanical power developed when the motor is drawing 25 A and running at 1500 rpm.
SOLUTION 
Flux/pole = p ¥
¥
-
30
10
4
2
 ¥ 20 ¥ 10–2 ¥ 0.4 = 0.0188 Wb
 
Induced emf = FnZ
P
A
60
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
 = 0 0188
1500
400
60
4
4
.
¥
¥
¥ Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = 188 V
 
Gross mechanical power developed = EaIa
 
 = 188
25
¥
1000
 = 4.7 kW
 
Torque developed = 
4 7
1000
2
1500
60
. ¥
¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
p
 = 29.9 Nm
7.5 CIRCUIT MODEL
The parallel paths of dc machine armature are 
symmetrical and each has an induced emf Ea and a 
resistance Rp. as shown in Fig. 7.16 below for A = 4. Its 
Thevenin equivalent is drawn by the side in which
 
Voc = Ea, RTH = Rp/A = Ra 
(7.36)
The armature can therefore be represented by the 
symbol as shown in Fig. 7.16 with Ea within circle and 
the series resistance Ra written by its side. We may later 
on skip writing Ra with the understanding that it present 
within.
The armature resistance is quite small so as to limit 
the copper- loss to an acceptable value. Figure 7.16 also 
shows the ﬁeld circuit of the machine and the ﬁeld coil 
Rp
Rp
Rp
Rp
Ea
Ea
Ea
Ea
+
+
+
+
Ea
+
Ra
=
Rp
A
Ia
Rf
If
Vf
Ra
+
–
–
+
Ea
Va
∫
F
Fig. 7.16 Circuit model of dc machine 

306 Electric Machines
axis is placed at 90° to the brush axis as per the actual arrangement in the machine*. From circuit point of 
view it is not necessary to rigidly follow this scheme. Since most of the time steady-state dc behaviour of the 
machine will be considered, the inductances of ﬁeld and of armature (this is negligible any way) circuits are 
of no consequence and are not shown in the circuit model. The armature induced emf and machine torque are 
governed by the relationships of Eqs (7.29) and (7.30).
The voltage drop at brush-commutator contact is ﬁxed (1–2 V), independent of armature current as the 
conduction process is mainly through numerous short arcs. However, this voltage being small is modelled 
as linear resistance and lumped with Ra. From now onwards it will be assumed that Ra includes the effect of 
brush voltage drop. 
Generating Mode 
The machine operates in generating mode (puts out electrical power) when Ia is in the direction of induced 
emf Ea as in Fig. 7.17(a). For the armature circuit 
 
Vt (armature terminal voltage) = Ea – IaRa; Ea > Vt  
(7.37)
Thus a dc machine is generating if its armature induced emf (Ea) is more than its terminal voltage (Vt)
The electromagnetic power converted from mechanical to electrical from is
 
EaIa = Pmech(in)|net = Pelect(out)|gross 
(7.38) 
The net electrical power output is  
 
P0 = Vt Ia 
(7.39)
Also 
EaIa – Vt Ia = I2
a Ra = armature copper-loss (inclusive of brush loss) 
(7.40)
and 
P mech(in)|gross = shaft power = Pmech(in)|net + rotational loss 
(7.41)
In this mode torque (T) of electromagnetic origin is opposite to the direction of rotation of armature, i.e., 
mechanical power is absorbed and a prime-mover is needed to run the machine. 
The conductor emf and current are also in the same direction for generating mode as shown in the cross-
sectional view of Fig. 7.17(c).
Motoring Mode
In this mode, Ia ﬂows in opposition to induced emf Ea as in Fig. 7.17(b). Ea is now known as the back emf to 
stress the fact that it opposes the armature emf. For the armature circuit
 
Vt (armature terminal voltage) = Ea + IaRa; Vt > Ea 
(7.42)
Thus a d.c. machine is motoring if armature terminal voltage (Va) is more than its induced emf (Ea).
The electromagnetic power converted from mechanical to electrical from is 
 
EaIa = Pelect (in)|net = Pmech (out)|gross 
(7.43)
The electrical power input is 
 
Pi = Vt Ia 
(7.44)
Also 
Vt Ia – EaIa = I2
aRa = armature copper-loss (inclusive of brush loss) 
(7.45)
and  
Pmech (out)|net = shaft power = P mech (out)|gross – rotational loss 
(7.46) 
 
* In actual machine this angle is 90° elect.

DC Machines 
307
In this mode torque (T) of electromagnetic origin is in the direction of armature rotation, i.e., mechanical 
power is put out and is and absorbed by load (mechanical).
Conductor emf and current are also in opposite directions for motoring mode as shown in Fig. 7.17(c).
EXAMPLE 7.6 A 220 V dc generator supplies 4 kW at a terminal voltage of 220 V, the armature resistance 
being 0.4 W. If the machine is now operated as a motor at the same terminal voltage with the same armature 
current, calculate the ratio of generator speed to motor speed. Assume that the ﬂux/pole is made to increase 
by 10% as the operation is changed over from generator to motor. 
SOLUTION 
From Eq. (7.22)
 
n μ Ea
F  
(i)
As a generator 
Ia = 4
1000
220
¥
 = 18.18 A
 
Eag = 220 + 0.4 ¥ 18.18 = 227.3 V 
(ii) 
As a motor 
Eam = 220 – 0.4 ¥ 18.18 = 212.7 V 
(iii)
Also 
Fm = 1.1 Fg 
(iv) 
Substituting in Eq. (i) 
n
n
g
m
 = 227 3
212 7
.
.
¥ F
F
m
g
 = 227 3
212 7
.
.
 ¥ 1.1
 
 = 1.176
Ia
If
Vf
Ra
+
–
–
+
Ea
Va
Pmech
T
n
F
+
–
(a) Generating mode
Ia
If
Vf
Ra
+
–
–
+
Ea
Va
Pmech
T
n
F
+
–
(b) Motoring mode
Current gen
emf
+
Current mot
N
S
If
(c) Generating/motoring modes
n
Fig. 7.17

308 Electric Machines
EXAMPLE 7.7 A dc shunt generator driven by a belt from an engine runs at 750 rpm while feeding 
100 kW of electric power into 230 V mains. When the belt breaks it continues to run as a motor drawing 9 
kW from the mains. At what speed would it run?
Given armature resistance 0.08 W and ﬁeld resistance 115 W.
Note: In a shunt machine the ﬁeld is connected across the armature and is also connected directly to the 
230 V mains. The ﬁeld excitation therefore remains constant as the machine operation changes as described 
above.
SOLUTION 
The operation of a dc shunt generator/motor is indicated in the circuit models of Figs 7.18(a) and (b).
115 W
If
IL
+
–
PM
n = 750 rpm
(a) Generating
0.08 W
(b) Motoring (prime-mover disconnected)
n(?)
230 V
Ea(g)
Ia
115 W
If
IL
+
–
0.08 W
230 V
Ea(m)
Ia
Fig. 7.18
Field current If = 230
115  = 2 A; remains constant in operation change-over. 
Running as generator (feeding power to mains)
 
IL (line current) = 100
1000
230
¥
 = 434.8 A
 
If = 2 A 
 
Ia = IL + If = 434.8 + 436.8 A
 
Ea(g) = 230 + 0.08 ¥ 436.8 = 264.9 V
 
n(g) = 750 rpm
Running as motor (drawing power from mains)
 
IL = 9
1000
230
¥
 = 39.13 A
 
If = 2 A
 
Ia = IL – If = 39.13 – 2 = 37.13 A
 
Ea(m) = 230 – 0.08 ¥ 37.13 = 227 V
As ﬁeld current (and so ﬂux/pole) do not change during the two kinds of operation, the induced imf (Ea) is proportional 
to armature speed. Hence
 
n
n
(
)
(
)
motor
generator  = n(
)
motor
750
 = 227
264 9.
 
n (motor) = 642.7 rpm.

DC Machines 
309
Lap Versus Wave Winding
Consider a P pole machine having ﬂux/pole F and rotating at wm rad/s. It has a total of Z conductors and 
maximum permissible conductor current is Ic. Let us derive the expression for power converted and torque 
developed.
 
Ea = 
ZP
A
2p
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ Fwm
 
Ia (permitted) = A Ic
 
Power converted = EaIa = 
ZP
2p
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ FwmIc 
(i)
Torque developed, 
T = 
ZP
A
2p
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ FIa
or 
T = ZP
2p
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ FIc 
(ii)
We ﬁnd that the power converted and torque developed are independent if the number of parallel paths. It 
means that these values are that same whether the conductors are lap connected or wave. These in fact depend 
on number of conductors and permissible conductor current.
EXAMPLE 7.8 Consider a dc machine whose circuit model is drawn below. It is a separately excited 
machine as its ﬁeld coil (winding) is excited from a voltage source independent of the armature circuit.
 A 25 kW, 250 V dc machine is separately excited. The ﬁeld current is held constant at a speed of 3000 rpm. 
The open circuit voltage is 250 V. Calculate the terminal power, electromagnetic power and torque at 
terminal voltage of (a) 255 V, and (b) 248 V. The armature resistance is 0.05 W. Speed is held constant at 
3000 rpm.
SOLUTION 
Open circuit (Ia = 0), Then
 
Vt = Ea = 250 V at 3000 rpm 
Ea remains constant
 
(a)  
Vt = 255 V
 
 As Vt > Ea, the machine is acting as a motor
 
  
Ia = V
E
R
t
a
a
-
 = 255
250
0 05
-
.
 = 100 A
 
 The current ﬂowing into the positive terminal in opposition to 
Ea. Therefore
 
  
Electromagnetic power (in) = Ea Ia = 250 ¥ 100 = 25 kW = mechanical power output
 
  
Speed = 3000 rpm or 3000
2
60
¥ p  = 314.16 rad/s
 
 Electromagnetic torque, 
T = E I
a a
m
w
 = 25
10
314 16
3
¥
.
 = 79.58 Nm
 
 The torque is in the direction of rotation driving the mechanical load which absorbs the mechanical power 
produced by the motor.
If
Vf
Ea
n
Vt
Ia(m)
Ia (g)
+
+
–
–
Fig. 7.8(P)

310 Electric Machines
 
(b) Vt = 248 V, Ea >Vt, the machine is acting as generator
 
  
Ia = 250
248
0 05
-
.
 = 40 A
 
 Ia ﬂows out of positive terminal and is in same direction as Ea.
 
  
Electromagnetic power (out) = EaIa = 248 ¥ 40 = 9.92 kW = mechanical power in 
 
 Electromagnetic Torque, 
T = 9 92
10
314 16
3
.
.
¥
 = 31.58 Nm
 
 The torque is opposite direction to direction of rotation. The mechanical is absorbed by the machine. It is supplied 
by the prime mover.
EXAMPLE 7.9 In the machine of Example 7.8 the ﬁeld is held constant with a terminal voltage of 250 V, 
the armature speed is found to be 2900 rpm. Is the machine motoring or generating? Calculate terminal 
current, terminal power and electromagnetic power.
SOLUTION 
As 
Ea = Ka Fw
With F constant, at 2950 rpm
 
Ea = 250 ¥ 2950
3000  = 245.8 V
 
Vt = 250 V
As Vt > Ea, the machine is motoring
Terminal quantities
 
Ia = 250
245 8
0 05
-
.
.
 = 84 A (in)
 
Power, P in = 250 ¥ 84 = 21 kW
 
Electromagnetic power = EaIa = 245.8 ¥ 84 = 20.65 kW
Note: The speed reduces as the motor shaft carries the load.
7.6 ARMATURE REACTION 
When the armature of a dc machine carries current, the distributed armature winding produces its own 
mmf (distributed) known as armature reaction. The machine air gap is now acted upon by the resultant mmf 
distribution caused by simultaneous action of the ﬁeld ampere-turns (ATf) and armature ampere-turns (ATa). 
As a result the air-gap ﬂux density gets distorted as compared to the ﬂat-topped (trapezoidal) wave with 
quarter-wave symmetry when the armature did not carry any current. 
Figure 7.19 shows the cross-sectional view of a 2-pole machine with single equivalent conductor in each 
slot (current/conductor = UNcIc where U = coil-sides/slot, Nc = conductors/coil-side (turns/coil) and Ic = 
conductor current). Two axes can be recognized—the axes of main poles called the direct axis (d-axis) and 
the axis at 90° to it called the quadrature axis (q-axis). Obviously the q-axis is the geometric neutral axis 
(GNA) of the machine. The brushes in a dc machine are normally located along the q-axis. 
Because of commutator action, armature current distribution is as shown in Fig. 7.19 for a 2-pole machine 
(or Fig. 7.3 for a 4-pole machine). All the conductors on the armature periphery between adjacent brushes 
carry currents (of constant value, UNcIc) in one direction and the current distribution alternates along the 
periphery. This current pattern remains ﬁxed in space independent of armature rotation. Since the brushes are 

DC Machines 
311
placed along GNA, the stationary armature current pattern is congruent with the main poles. Also, the current 
pattern can be shifted by moving all the brushes simultaneously to either side; this is not a normal operation 
in a dc machine. 
It is easy to see from Fig. 7.19 that the axis of ATa lies along the q-axis at 90° elect. to the of main poles 
which lies along the d-axis (ATa lags behind ATf with respect to the direction of armature rotation for the 
motoring mode and vice versa for the generating mode). It may be noticed that ATa and ATf as shown by 
arrows are not vectors as their space-angle distribution is non-sinusoidal (though periodic). Armature reaction 
with axis at 90° to the main ﬁeld axis is known as cross-magnetizing mmf. Figure 7.19 also shows the ﬂux 
pattern, in dotted lines, caused by armature reaction acting alone. It is immediately observed that the armature 
reaction ﬂux strengthens each main pole at one end and weakens it at the other end (cross magnetizing effect). If 
the iron in the magnetic circuit is assumed unsaturated (therefore linear), the net ﬂux/pole remains unaffected 
by armature reaction though the air-gap ﬂux density distribution gets distorted. If the main pole excitation is 
Mot
A
B
Gen
ATa
ATf
Electric machines
Current = UN I
c c A
GNA
q-axis
N
a
b
1¢
2¢
3¢
4¢
1
2
3
4
d-axix
S
Ia
Fig. 7.19

312 Electric Machines
such that iron is in the saturated region of magnetization (this is the case in a practical machine), the increase 
in ﬂux density at one end of the poles caused by armature reaction is less than the decrease at the other end, 
so that there is a net reduction in the ﬂux/pole, a demagnetizing effect; the decrement being dependent upon 
the state of magnetization of iron and the amount of ATa (i.e. the armature current).
It may be summarized here that the nature of armature reaction in a dc machine is cross-magnetizing 
with its axis (stationary) along the q-axis (at 90° elect. to the main pole axis). It causes no change in ﬂux/
pole if the iron is unsaturated but causes reduction in ﬂux/pole (demagnetizing effect) in presence of iron 
saturation.
Graphical Picture of Flux Density Distribution
For a better understanding of the interaction between the ﬁeld and the armature magnetic ﬁeld, consider the 
developed diagram of Fig. 7.20(a) for one pole-pair with brushes placed in geometrical neutral axis (GNA), 
which is also magnetic neutral axis (MNA) when armature is not carrying current. Using the principles 
evolved in Sec. 5.4, the armature mmf distribution is drawn in Fig. 7.20(b) which is a stepped wave with axis 
shift of 90° elect. from the main pole axis (d-axis), i.e. it is cross-mangnetizing. Each step of the wave has a 
height of UNcIc, where U = coil-sides/slot, Nc = conductors/coil-side (turns/coil) and Ic = conductor current. 
The stepped-wave of mmf can be well approximated as a triangular wave as shown in Fig. 7.20(b). The peak 
value of armature ampere-turns is obtained as follows:
 
Ampere-conductors/pole = Zl
P
c  = Zl
AP
a
 
Ampere-turns/pole = Zl
AP
a
2
 = ATa (peak) 
(7.47)
Also 
ATa (peak) = AT
total
a
P
(
)
The exact way to ﬁnd the ﬂux density owing to the simultaneous action of ﬁeld and armature ampere-turns 
is to ﬁnd the resultant ampere-turn distribution 
 
ATresultant(q) = ATf (q) + ATa(q) 
where q is electrical space angle. 
A simpler procedure, however, will be adopted by assuming linearity of the magnetic circuit making 
possible the superposition of individual ﬂux density waves to obtain the resultant ﬂux density as illustrated 
in Fig. 7.20(c). 
The ﬂux density of ATa(q) is shown in Fig. 7.20(b) which, because of large air-gap in the interpolar region, 
has a strong dip along the q-axis even though ATa(peak) is oriented along it. The ﬂux density of the main ﬁeld 
alone (trapezoidal wave) and the resultant ﬂux density are both drawn in Fig. 7.20(c). It is found from this 
ﬁgure that the armature reaction mmf causes the ﬂux density wave to get distored so as to be depressed in one 
half of the pole and causes it to be strengthened equally (linearity effect) in the other half (cross-magnetizing 
effect) because of the odd symmetry with respect to the d-axis of the ﬂux density wave of the armature mmf. 
It is, therefore, seen that while the resultant ﬂux density wave is distorted, the ﬂux/pole remains unchanged 
at its value in the absence of the armature current. Figure 7.20(c) also reveals that apart from distortion 
of the resultant ﬂux density wave, its MNA also gets shifted from its GNA by a small angle a so that the 

DC Machines 
313
brushes placed in GNA are no longer in MNA as is the case in the absence of armature current. This effect is 
countered by interpoles placed in GNA (Sec. 7.8). 
The effect of iron saturation can now be brought into picture. At angle q on either side of the d-axis, 
ampere-turn acting on elemental magnetic path are (ATf ± ATa). It is found from the magnetization curve 
(a)
d-axis
q-axis
GNA
Current UN I
c c
Generating
UN I
c c
(b)
(c)
A
A¢
a
GNA
B
90°
elect
Brush
S
N
Armature mmf
distribution
Flux density distribution
(armature mmf only)
Saturation effect
Resultant flux density
distribution
MNA
Shift in magnetic
neutral axis, a
Flux density distribution
(main field only)
AT (peak)
a
Motoring
B¢
 
Fig. 7.20
a

314 Electric Machines
of Fig. 7.21 that the increase in ﬂux density on one side of the d-axis caused by additive ATa is less than the 
decrease in ﬂux density on the other side by subtractive ATa. As a consequence in presence of saturation, 
armature reaction apart from being cross-
magnetizing also causes a net reduction in ﬂux/
pole, a demagnetizing effect. However, no simple 
quantitative relationship can be established 
between demagnetization and ATf and ATa. The 
reduction in the resultant ﬂux density caused by 
saturation of iron is shown by the cross-hatched 
areas in Fig. 7.20(c). 
To summarize, the armature reaction in a dc 
machine is cross-magnetizing causing distortion 
in the ﬂux density wave shape and a slight 
shift in MNA. It also causes demagnetization 
because a machine is normally designed with 
iron slightly saturated.
(i) Increase in iron loss Increase if ﬂux density under one half of the pole and decrease on the other causes 
iron loss in armature teeth to increase as the loss is proportional to square of ﬂux density.
(ii) Commutation Shift of MNA causes induced emf in coils undergoing commutation to oppose the current 
reversal. It is seen from Fig. 7.20 that for generating case the coil-side to the right of the brush will have ≈ 
emf while it should be – emf. The same holds for the motoring case. The details will be discussed in Sec. 7.8 
on commutation.
(iii) Possibility of commutator sparking Under heavy load (large armature current) and so deep distortion 
both coil sides of the coil passing the maximum ﬂux density region will have much larger induced emf than 
the average coil emf. If the emf value exceeds 30-40 V, there may be sparkover of the commutator segment 
connected to the coil to the adjacent segment. The result may be ﬂash-over of the complete commutator.
Remedies
The cross-magnetizing effect of the armature reaction can be reduced by making the main ﬁeld ampere-turns 
larger compared to the armature ampere-turns such that the main ﬁeld mmf exerts predominant control over 
the air-gap ﬂux. This is achieved by:
 
(i) Introducing saturation in the teeth and pole-shoe. 
 (ii) By chamfering the pole-shoes which increases the air-gap at the pole tips. This method increases the 
reluctance to the path of main ﬂux but its inﬂuence on the cross-ﬂux is much greater. This is because 
the cross ﬂux has to cross the air-gap twice: see Fig. 7.19.
 (iii) The best yet the most expensive method is to compensate the armature reaction mmf by a compensating 
winding located in the pole-shoes and carrying a suitable current. This method is discussed in detail in 
Sec. 7.7.
Brush Shift
To counter the effect of shift in MNA due to armature reaction , the brushes could be shifted. A small brush 
shift in appropriate direction, in the direction of rotation for generator and in opposite direction for motor, also 
B +AT
(
)
a
B AT =
(
0 )
a
B
AT
(–
)
a
ATa
ATa
ATf
(AT – AT )
f
a
(AT + AT )
f
a
B
AT
Fig. 7.21 
Magnetisation curve

DC Machines 
315
helps in commutation; Sec. 7.8. The effect of brush shift by angle b is illustrated in Fig. 7.22. The armature 
conductor current pattern changes accordingly. It is seen from the ﬁgure that the current belt of angle 2b has 
direct demagnetizing action. The remaining current belt of angle (180° – 2b ) is cross-magnetizing. This is 
illustrated by the following example.
N
2b
b
b
Brush axis (shifted)
S
Fig. 7.22
EXAMPLE 7.10 A 250 kW, 400 V, 6-pole dc generator has 720 lap wound conductors. It is given a brush 
lead of 2.5 angular degrees (mech). from the geometric neutral. Calculate the cross and demagnetizing 
turns per pole. Neglect the shunt ﬁeld current.
SOLUTION 
Armature current, Ia = 25
10
400
3
¥
 = 625 A 
 
Number of parallel paths = 6
 
Conductor current, Ic = 625
6
 = 104.2 A
 
Total armature ampere-turns, ATa = 1
2
720
104 2
6
¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
.
 
 = 6252 AT/pole
With reference to Fig. 7.22, it is easily observed that in 180° elect., conductors in that belt of 2b elect. degrees are 
demagnetizing where b is the brush shift in electrical degrees.
 
b = 2.5 (6/2) = 7.5° elect.
Hence, 
cross-magnetizing ampere-turns = 6250 1
2
7 5
180
-
¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
.
 
 = 5731 AT/pole
 
Demagnetizing ampere-turns = 6250 ¥ 2
7 5
180
¥ .
 = 521 AT/pole
Torque Equation (Based on magnetic ﬁeld interaction)
The magnetic ﬁeld interaction torque given by Eq. (7.48) is reproduced below
 
T = (p/2) (P/2)2 FrF2 sin d 
(7.48)

316 Electric Machines
It has been shown above that the resultant ﬂux/pole F in a dc machine is always oriented at 90° to the armature 
reaction AT (i.e.F2). Thus
 
d = 90°(ﬁxed)
This indeed is best value of d for torque production 
As per Eq. 7.46
 
F2 (triangular peak) = ATa (peak)
 
 = ZI
AP
a
2
 per pole
It can be shown that for a triangular periodic wave, the fundamental is 8/p2 of the peak value. Thus
 
F2 (fundamental peak) = 8
2
2
p
ZI
AP
a
Substituting in torque equation 
 
T = p
p
2
2
8
2
2
2
P
ZI
AP
a
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ F
or 
T = 1
2p F
P
A
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ ZIa; same as Eq. (7.26)
7.7 COMPENSATING WINDING
It was seen in Sec. 7.6, Fig. 7.20(c) that armature reaction causes the ﬂux density wave to be so badly 
distorted that when a coil is passing through the region of peak ﬂux densities, the emf induced in it far 
exceeds the average coil voltage. If this emf is higher than the breakdown voltage across adjacent segments, 
a sparkover could result which can easily spread over and envelop the whole commutator as the environment 
near the commutator is always somewhat ionized and conditions are favourable for ﬂashover. The result 
is complete short circuit of armature. The maximum allowable voltage between adjacent segments is 30– 
40 V, limiting the average voltage between them to much less than this ﬁgure. The choice of the average coil 
voltage determines the minimum number of commutator segments for its design. 
In spite of the above safe design of the commutator there is another factor which can cause severe 
overvoltages to appear between commutator segments. This is the time variation of the armature reaction and 
its associated ﬂux owing to sudden changes in machine load. Consider coil aa¢ of Fig. 7.23 located midway 
Brush
Current
N
S
Ba
Gen
Mot
Dynamical emf gen
Statically induced emf
generator (load dropped)
Dynamical emf motor
Statically induced emf
motor (load added)
a¢
F
¢)
a(flux linking coil aa
a
Fig. 7.23

DC Machines 
317
between the main poles so that the full armature ﬂux/pole, Fa (shaded area), links the coil. If the load on the 
machine undergoes a fast change, Ia and Fa change accordingly resulting in statically induced emf in the 
coil proportional to dFa/dt. The voltage is over and above the dynamically induced emf in the coil. Worst 
conditions occur when these two emfs are additive. This happens when load is dropped from a generator or 
added to a motor. (The reader should verify by application of the right-hand rule and Lenz’s law to coil aa¢ 
of Fig. 7.23.) The only way to remedy this situation is to neutralize the armature reaction ampere-turns by a 
compensating winding placed in slots cut out in pole faces such that the axis of this winding coincides with the 
brush axis (along which lies the axis of ATa). For automatic neutralization of ATa at any current, it is necessary 
that the compensating winding be series excited with armature current in such a direction as to oppose ATa. 
The compensating winding appropriately connected is shown schematically in Figs 7.24(a) and (b). 
q-axis
(a)
la
d-axis
q-axis
la
d-axis
Compensating
winding
(b)
If
Fig. 7.24 
Compensating Winding
It is found from Fig. 7.24(a) that complete neutralization of the armature mmf is not possible with this 
arrangement, since the distributions of armature and compensating mmfs are not identical. It is customary 
to compensate part of the armature mmf directly under the pole shoes. The number of ampere-turns required 
for this purpose is 
 
AT cw /pole = ATa (peak) ¥ 
pole arc
pole pitch
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
 = I Z
AP
a
2
¥ pole arc
pole pitch  
(7.49)
The compensating winding neutralizes the armature mmf directly under the pole while in the interpolar 
region, there is incomplete neutralization. Further, the effect of the resultant armature mmf in interpolar region 
is rendered insigniﬁcant because of large interpolar gap. The compensating winding, therefore, practically 
eliminates the air-gap ﬂux density distortion. The small ﬂux density remaining unneutralized in GNA will be 
appropriately modiﬁed by the interpole windings discussed in Sec. 7.8. 
Compensating windings, though expensive, must be provided in machines where heavy overloads are 
expected or the load ﬂuctuates rapidly, e.g. motors driving steel-mills are subjected to severe duty cycles with 
rapid changes.

318 Electric Machines
EXAMPLE 7.11 Calculate the number of conductors on each pole piece required in a compensating 
winding for a 6-pole lap-wound dc armature containing 286 conductors. The compensating winding carries 
full armature current. Assume ratio of pole arc/ pole pitch = 0.7. 
SOLUTION 
As per Eq. (7.48) 
 
ATcw/pole = 
I Z
AP
a
2
pole arc
pole pitch
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
\ 
Ncw/pole = 
Z
AP
2
pole arc
pole pitch
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = 
286
2
6
6
¥
¥
 ¥ 0.7 = 2.78
 
Compensating conductors/pole = 2 ¥ 2.78 = 6 (nearest integer).
7.8 COMMUTATION 
One coil each under an adjoining pole-pair is connected between adjacent commutator segments in a lap-
wound dc armature, while in a wave-wound armature the only difference is that P/2 coils under the inﬂuence 
of P/2 pole-pairs are connected between adjacent segments. Coil(s) current is constant and unidirectional 
so long as the coil is under the inﬂuence of given pole-pair(s), while it reverses (commutates) when the coil 
passes onto the next pole-pair as the armature rotates. The process of current reversal called commutation 
takes place when the coil is passing through the interpolar region (q-axis) and during this period the coil is 
shorted via the commutator segments by the brush located (electrically) in the interpolar region. Commutation 
takes place simultaneously for P coils in a lap-wound machine (it has P brushes) and two coil sets of P/2 coils 
each in a wave-wound machine (electrically it has two brushes independent of P). 
Figure 7.25 shows the schematic diagram of commutator segments in developed form connected to 
armature coils. Attention will now be focussed on coil Cc as it undergoes commutation. Various symbols used 
in the ﬁgure are: 
 
Ic = coil current 
 
Ib = 2Ic = brush current 
 
wc = width of one commutator segment 
 
wm = width of mica insulation between segments 
 
wb = brush width 
 
 = (wc + wm) for the case illustrated; in practice, however, wb = 1.5 wc 
 
vc = peripheral speed of commutator 
At the instant the commutation of the coil Cc begins, the leading tip of the brush is making full contact with 
the segment x and is just going to make contact with segment y as shown in Fig. 7.25(a). At this instant all 
coils to the right of segment x carry current Ic ﬂowing from left to right and those on the left current Ic in the 
opposite direction. During the period of commutation as the coil passes from right to the left of the brush, the 
coil current must reverse. During this period the brush short- circuits the coil via segments x and y as shown 
in Fig. 7.25(b). The contact width, xc, between brush and segment x reduces linearly while the contact width, 
yc, between brush and segment y increases. The coil current ic(t) during this period is changing. If at the end 
of the commutation period, when the trailing tip of the brush is going to break contact with segment x as 
shown in Fig. 7.25(c), the coil current has not reversed and acquired full value Ic but as Ic¢ < Ic, the breaking 

DC Machines 
319
of current (Ic – Ic¢) at the trailing brush tip takes place causing sparking. This is known as under-commutation 
(or  delayed-commutation). It is easy to see from Fig. 7.25, that the period of commutation is given by 
 
tc = w
w
v
b
m
c
-
 
(7.49)
even when wb > (wc + wm) in which case more than one coil undergoes commutation simultaneously.
vc
wc
y
x
Cc
lc
lc
lc
lc
wb
l
l
b
c
= 2
Leading tip
wm
(a) Beginning of commutation period
Trailing tip
lc
xc
2lc
yc
vc
Cc
lc
i t
c( )
(b)
l¢c
lc
lc
lc
vc
2lc
x
y
(
–
)
l
I¢c
c
(
+
)
l
I¢c
c
(c) End of commutation period
Sparking
Fig. 7.25 Commutation process
Before the causes underlying under-commutation and consequent sparking are explained, the deleterious 
effects of sparking and why it cannot be tolerated to any large degree may now be studied. Sparking leads 
to destructive blackening, pitting and wear and eventual burning of commutator copper and brush carbon. 
It must, therefore, be limited to a tolerable intensity to prolong life of commutator-brush assembly to an 

320 Electric Machines
acceptable value. As completely sparkless commutation is not possible practically (for reasons advanced 
below), the carbon brushes must be replaced after some time and less frequently commutator “turned” to a 
slightly smaller diameter to prepare a fresh clean surface.
Ideal Commutation (also called straight-line commutation) is that in which the current of the commutating 
coils changes linearly from + Ic to – Ic in the commutation period as shown in Fig. 7.26. The ﬁgure also shows 
delayed commutation and the current (Ic – I¢c) in the spark. In a machine without commutation aids (described 
later in this section) the commutation is delayed for the following reasons:
 
1. The leakage inductance Lc of the coil (see Sec. 5.7) undergoing commutation has induced in it 
reactance voltage Lc (dic/dt) which opposes the change in current thereby delaying commutation. 
Also, usually more than one coil undergo commutation simultaneously, the induced voltage due to 
mutual inductance among them also tends to prevent current reversal.
 
2. The effect of armature reaction causes 
shift in MNA as shown in Fig. 7.20(c) 
from A, B to A¢, B¢. Since the brushes are 
located at A, B(GNA’s), a small voltage 
is induced in the commutating coil. It 
opposes current commutation (both for 
generating/motoring machine) as the 
commutating coil is cutting the ﬂux which 
has the same sign as that of the pole being 
left behind. It could be partially remedied 
by shifting the brushes towards MNA but 
that causes direct demagnetization and is 
therefore not employed in practice.
There are two ways of achieving good commutation–close to straight-line commutation. These are 
resistance commutation and voltage commutation. The former is always used to give marginal support to the 
latter. 
Resistance Commutation
High contact resistance between commutator segments and brushes, achieved by using carbon brushes, adds 
resistance to the circuit of the commutating coil thereby reducing the time-constant (L/R) of the current 
transient (ic(t)), helping it to change faster in the desired direction. Carbon brushes are invariably used in dc 
machines. They also help reduce commutator wear and are themselves easily replaceable. 
Voltage Commutation 
To speed up the commutation process, the reactance voltage must be neutralized by injecting a suitable polarity 
dynamical (speed) voltage into the commutating coil. In order that this injection is restricted to commutating 
coils, narrow interpoles (also called commutating poles or compoles) are provided in the interpolar region. 
These apply a local correction to the air-gap ﬂux density wave such that a pip of appropriate ﬂux density 
exists over the commutating coil to induce in it a voltage of the same sign as that of coil current after 
commutation. For neutralization of reactance voltage at all loads, the interpoles must be excited by armature 
current by connecting them in series with armature. Arrangement of interpoles, their polarity relative to the 
t
tc
0
+lc
Delayed (under)-commutation
–l¢c
Current in spark
Ldeal commutation
–lc
Fig. 7.26 Straight-line commutation 

DC Machines 
321
main poles, ﬂux pattern of both sets of poles and one commutating coil are shown in Fig. 7.27. It is easy to 
observe from this ﬁgure that polarity of an interpole is that of the main pole ahead in the direction of armature 
rotation for the generating mode and that of the main pole left behind with respect to the direction of rotation 
for motoring mode. The interpolar air-gap is kept larger than that of the main pole so that their magnetic 
circuit is linear resulting in cancellation of the reactance voltage (a linear derivative term) at all loads. Large 
air-gap results in greater amount of leakage ﬂux which is accommodated by tapering the interpoles with a 
wider base as shown in Fig. 7.27.
b
a
Gen
N
Interpole flux
Main flux
Commutating
emf (gen)
Current
Leakage flux
S
Mot
s
n
Fig. 7.27
For cancellation of reactance voltage on an average basis
 
2[Bi(av)liva] Nc = Lc
di
dt
c  = Lc
2l
t
c
c
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  
(7.50)
where 
Bi(av) = average ﬂux density in interpolar air-gap
 
li = iron length of interpoles (it is less than that of main poles)
 
va = armature peripheral speed
 
Nc = number of turns of commutating coil. 
With Bi determined from Eq. (7.50), the ampere-turns needed to cancel the armature reaction ampere-turns 
and then to create the necessary ﬂux density are given by 
 
ATi = ATa (peak) + Bi
m0
lgi 
(7.51)
where 
lgi = air-gap of interpoles. 
As relationships of Eqs (7.50) and (7.51) are based on sweeping approximation and also accurate estimate 
of the coil leakage inductance Lc cannot be obtained, the attainment of good commutation is more an 

322 Electric Machines
empirical art than an analytical science. Furthermore, only good commutation can be achieved but not perfect 
commutation. One can always observe some sparking at the brushes of a dc machine in operation. 
It is not necessary to have interpoles equal to the number of main poles and to reduce cost, especially in 
low-power dc machines, interpoles of the same polarity are often ﬁtted in alternate interpolar spaces only.
EXAMPLE 7.12 A 440 V, 4-pole, 25 kW, dc generator has a wave-connected armature winding with 
846 conductors. The mean ﬂux density in the air-gap under the interpoles is 0.5 Wb/m2 on full load and the 
radial gap length is 0.3 cm. Calculate the number of turns required on each interpole. 
SOLUTION 
As per Eq. (7.51)
 
ATi = ATa(peak) + Bi
m0
lgi = I Z
AP
B
a
i
2
0
+ m lgi
Assuming Ia = Iline 
Ia = 25
10
440
3
¥
 = 56.82 A
\ 
ATi = 56 82
846
2
2
4
0 5
4
10 7
.
.
¥
¥
¥
+
¥
-
p
 ¥ 0.3 ¥ 10–2 = 4198
\ 
Ni = ATi
aI
 = 4198
56 82
.
 = 73.88 
 
= 74
7.9 
METHODS OF EXCITATION 
The performance characteristics of a dc machine are greatly inﬂuenced by the way in which the ﬁeld winding 
is excited with direct current. There are two basic ways of exciting a dc machine. 
 
 Here the ﬁeld winding is provided with a large number (hundreds or even thousands) 
of turns of thin wire and is excited from a voltage source. The ﬁeld winding, therefore, has a high 
resistance and carries a small current. It is usually excited in parallel with armature circuit and hence 
the name shunt ﬁeld winding. Since the armature voltage of a dc machine remains substantially 
constant, the shunt ﬁeld could be regulated by placing an external series resistance in its circuit.
 
 Here the ﬁeld winding has a few turns of thick wire and is excited from armature current 
by placing it in series with armature, and therefore it is known as series ﬁeld winding. For a given ﬁeld 
current, control of this ﬁeld is achieved by means of a diverter, a low resistance connected in parallel 
to series winding. A more practical way of a series ﬁeld control is changing the number of turns of the 
winding by suitable tappings which are brought out for control purpose.
 
  Figure 7.28 shows the physical arrangement of shunt 
and series ﬁeld windings on one pole of a machine.
Excellent and versatile ways of controlling the shunt and 
series excitations are now possible by use of solid-state devices 
and associated control circuitry.
The dc machine excitation is classiﬁed in two ways—separate 
excitation and self-excitation explained below.
Note: In drawing the excitation diagrams of a dc machine, the 
ﬁeld winding will be drawn at 90° to the armature circuit. As 
Series field winding
Shunt field winding
Fig. 7.28 

DC Machines 
323
pointed out earlier the actual spatial orientation of the magnetic ﬁelds produced by the ﬁeld and armature 
circuits is 90° elect.
Where the excitation diagrams are to be drawn repeatedly, we may not necessarily use this convention.
Separate excitation The ﬁeld is excited from a source independent of the armature circuit as shown in 
Fig. 7.29(a). Permanent magnet excitation fall into this category.
Shunt excitation The shunt ﬁeld is excited from the armature voltage as shown in Fig. 7.29(b).
Series excitation The series ﬁeld is excited from the armature current as in Fig. 7.29(c).
Armature
A1
A2
Field
F1
F2
(a) Separate excitation
F1
F2
A1
A2
(b) Shunt self excitation
S1
S2
A1
A2
(c) Series self excitation
A2
F2
Shunt
S1
Series
A1
(d) Compound excitation (cumulative compound)
F1
F2 S2
S1
A1
A2
(e) Compound excitation (differential compound)
F1
F2
Rf
S1
S2
Rse
Ea
Ra
A2
(f) Compound excitation long shunt
Va
A1
+
–
Vt
+
–
A2
S2
S1
F1
F2
(g) Compound excitation; short shunt
S2
A1
F1
Rf
Rse
Fig. 7.29 
Methods of excitation of dc machine

324 Electric Machines
Remark
As in a dc generator there is no initial voltage or current the shunt ﬁeld resistance or total circuit resistance 
in series excitation and the generator speed must meet certain condition for the generation to excite and build 
up voltage; to be discussed in Section 7.10.
Compound Excitation
In compound excitation both shunt and series ﬁeld are excited. If the two ﬁeld aid each other (their ampere-
turn are additive), the excited is called cumulative compound as shown in Fig. 7.29(d). The shunt ﬁeld is 
much stronger than the series ﬁeld. The air gap ﬂux increases with armature current.
If the two ﬁelds oppose each other, the excitation is called differential compound as in Fig. 7.29(e). The air 
gap ﬂux/pole decreases with armature current. 
The series ﬁeld is so designed that the increase or decrease in ﬂux/pole is to a limited extent.
There are two type of compounding connections. In long shunt compound of Fig. 7.29(f ) the shunt ﬁeld 
is connected across terminals. In short shunt compound, the shunt ﬁeld is connected directly across the 
armature as shown in Fig. 7.29(g). There is no signiﬁcant difference in machine performance for the two 
types of connections. The choice between them depends upon mechanical consideration or the reversing 
switches.
Important Note
If a dc compound machine connected as a generator is run as a motor, the series ﬁeld connections must 
be reversed as the armature current reverses. The motoring action as cumulative/differential would then be 
preserved (same as in the generator). This equally applies vice versa – motor to generator.
Self–excitation It means that its shunt ﬁeld winding is excited by its own voltage and series ﬁeld winding.
Steady-state Circuit Equations In steady-state operation of a dc machine the ﬁeld winding inductances do 
not play any role. The schematic diagrams of long and short compound machine are shown in Figs 7.30(a) 
and (b). Applying Kirchhoff’s voltage and current laws, the circuit equation.
Vt
+
–
Rse
Rf
Ia
Va
If
IL
Ia
Rse
Va
If
IL
Vt
+
–
Rf
(b) Shot-shunt compound generating
(a) Long-shunt compound motoring
Ea
Ra
Ea
Ra
Va
Fig. 7.30
Long-shunt compound (Fig. 7.30(a)) motoring
 
Vt = Ea + Ia (Ra + Rse) 
(7.52a)
 
Va = Ea + IaRa  
(7.52b)

DC Machines 
325
 
If =Vt/Rf 
(7.52c)
 
IL = Ia +If  
(7.52d)
Generating 
Directions of Ia and IL reverse while If direction does not changes. Correspondingly, in Eqs. (7.52)(a) and (b) 
+ sign changes to – sign.
Short-shunt compound (Fig. 7.30(b)) Though the ﬁgure is drawn for generating the equations for both 
operations can be directly written down
 
Vt = Ea ∓ IaRa ∓ ILRse 
(7.53a)
 
Va = Ea ∓ IaRa  
(7.53b)
 
If = Va/Rf 
(7.53c)
 
IL = Ia ∓ If  
(7.53d)
where – sign is for generating and + sign for motoring.
General Connection Diagram of a Compound DC Machine
The connection diagram of a compound d.c. machine with commuting winding and compensating windings 
is drawn in Fig. 7.31. Total resistance in series with armature is (Ra + Ri + Rc); Ri = interpole (compole) 
winding resistance, Rc = compensating winding resistance.
Tapped series
field
(alternative)
Regulating
registance
Shunt field
Diverter
Series
field
Commutating
winding
Armature
Compensating
winding
Fig. 7.31 Compound d.c machine, long shunt
Control of Excitation 
Shunt ﬁeld: by a series regulating resistance
Series ﬁeld: For small armature by a diverter resistance connected in parallel with series ﬁeld. For large 
armature by tapped ﬁeld winding so the winding turns can be changed.
Nomenclature
The dc machines are named according to the method of excitation. Thus, we have 
 
dc shunt generator/motor
 
dc series generator/motor
 
dc compound generator/motor

326 Electric Machines
As we have seen in section 7.2 a dc machine can operate as a generator or motor; but the machine designed 
speciﬁcally as generator/motor has certain distinguishing features.
Net Excitation 
For a machine on load, the next AT excitation is
 
AT (net) = AT (shunt) ± AT (series) – ATd
 
 = Nf If ± Nse Ise – ATd 
where 
Nf = shunt ﬁeld turns
 
Nse = series ﬁeld current can be reduced by tapping
 
Ise = Series winding Current Ia or IL; can be reduced by a diverter (a resistance in parallel to the 
series winding)
 
ATd = demagnetizing ampere-turn caused by armature reaction
Usually the net excitation is stated in terms of equivalent shunt ﬁeld current
 
If, eq = If (net) = AT (net)/Nf
If, eq determines the ﬂux/pole F whose measure is the induced emf Ea at speciﬁed speed (Ea = Ka Fwm). It 
will be discussed in section 7.10. 
7.10 OPERATING CHARACTERISTICS OF DC GENERATOR
In the operation of a dc generator, the four basic variable of concern are terminal voltage Vt, armature current 
Ia, ﬁeld current If and the speed n. To investigate their interrelationship the generator is run (by a prime 
mover) at rated speed (n constant) of the remaining three variables one is held constant at a certain value 
and of the last two one is varied to study its relationship with the other. The relationship has to be presented 
graphically because of the magnetic saturation effect. Four characteristics of importance are the following:
No-load Characteristic
With Ia = 0 (no load) at constant n, it is the presentation of Vt (=Ea) vs If. This is the most important 
characteristic as it reveals the nature of the magnetization of the machine. It is easy to determine as the 
generator is on no load and so only low rated prime mover will serve the purpose. It is commonly called the 
open–circuit/magnetization characteristic.
Load Characteristic
If the plot of Vt vs If  with Ia with held is constant at rated value and constant speed, it is indeed the magnetization 
characteristic on load.
External Characteristic 
With If and n constant at present, the variation of Vt vs Ia is indeed the characteristic when the generator feeds 
a load (load is normally variable)
Armature Characteristic
It is the presentation of Ia vs If with Vt held constant (at rated value) and generator run at constant n and load 
varied. It reveals the armature reaction affect on the ﬂux/pole. It is also called regulation characteristic.
The characteristics 2, 3 and 4 are to be determined by on load tests which cannot be easily conducted on 
a large size machine as both prime mover and load are to be fully rated.

DC Machines 
327
Experimental Set-up for Determining Characteristics
The experimental set-up for determining the dc generator characteristics is shown in Fig. 7.32. The generator 
is run by a prime mover at rated speed. The ﬁeld current can be varied form a low value to full value by a 
potentiometer arrangement. The load can be switched ‘ON’ or ‘OFF’ and when ‘ON’ can be varied.
If only no load test is to be conducted, a small motor (usually an induction motor) is used as a prime motor.
A
If
DC Source
Coupled
to
Prime
mover
V
+
A
Ia
S
Load
Ea
–
Fig. 7.32
No Load Test–Open Circuit Test
The switch S in Fig. 7.32 is kept open. The open circuit voltage
 
VOC = Ea μ F at n = constant
Thus, VOC is a measure of F. Therefore, the plot, of VOC vs If is the magnetization characteristic of the 
machine. It is rightly called the Open Circuit Characteristic (OCC).
In conducting the OCC test, If must be raised gradually only in the forward direction otherwise the curve 
would exhibit local hysteresis loops. Further, as the machine would have been previously subjected to 
magnetization, a small residual voltage would be present with ﬁeld unexcited. As will be seen presently, this 
is necessary for generator self-excitation.
A typical magnetization characteristic is 
shown in Fig. 7.33. It is known as open-circuit 
characteristic (OCC) because of the method by 
which it is determined. It exhibits all the important 
characteristic of the magnetization curve of 
iron, modiﬁed by the presence of air-gap in the 
magnetic circuit.
The extension of the liner portion of the 
magnetization curve, shown dotted in Fig. 7.33, is 
known as the air-gap line as it represents mainly 
the magnetic behaviour of the machine’s air-gap, 
the iron being unsaturated in this region consumes 
negligible ampere-turns; in any case the effect of 
iron is also linear here.
Residual
voltage
Voc = Ea
Air-gap line
n = nrated
n
n
n
=
<
1
rated
If
Fig. 7.33 Open-Circuit Characteristic (OCC)

328 Electric Machines
The open-circuit characteristic at a speed other than the one at which the test is conducted is a mere 
proportional translation of the characteristic as shown in Fig. 7.33. This is because of the direct proportionality 
between Ea and n.
Under load conditions Ea cannot be determined from the OCC for If in the saturation region because of 
the demagnetizing effect of armature reaction. We must therefore determine experimentally the equivalent 
demagnetizing ampere-turns ATd due to armature reaction under actual load conditions. The induced emf Ea 
can then be found from
 
AT net = ATf + AT se – ATd  
(7.54)
Indeed Ea is Ea (If, Ia), non-linear function of If and Ia. To determine ATd there is no choice but to conduct 
a load test.
Load Characteristic
 In Fig. 7.32, the switch S is closed. At every value of If the load current Ia is adjusted to the rated value and 
the corresponding terminal voltage Vt is read. The load characteristic V vs If |Ia constant and the OCC V vs
If | Ia = 0 are both plotted in Fig. 7.34.
Ia = 0 (OCC)
F
A
C
If
E , V
a
D
B
Ea
Ifd
I R
a
a
Load
characteristic
Ia(rated)
O
Fig. 7.34 OCC and load characteristic
To the load characteristic we add IaRa drop to get Ea induced emf with load. At If = OA, Ea = AD + DC, 
DC = IaRa. Therefore, the voltage drop caused by armature reaction is BC. In the low If region the magnetic 
circuit is unsaturated and armature reaction drop is almost zero and so OCC and Ea vs If merge.
At If = OA, the voltage induced with load is AC. With no load the same voltage is induced at If = OF. 
Therefore AF = Ifd, the demagnetizing ﬁeld current equivalent of armature reaction. Thus
 
ATd = Ifd Nf

DC Machines 
329
We need only one point (D) on the load characterization. Further, it is sufﬁciently accurate to assume that
 
ATd μ Ia 
(7.55)
Another type of load characterization is described below:
Armature Characteristic
With switch S open in Fig. 7.32, If is adjusted to give VOC = V (rated). The switch is then closed the load 
current Ia is increased and also If is increased so as to keep the terminal voltage constant at rated value. The 
plot of If vs Ia sketched in Fig. 7.35 is the armature characteristic. 
D
B
O
A
If
F
Ia (rated)
Ia
Fig. 7.35
It is seen from the ﬁgure that at low values of Ia, the increase in If is very small to provide for increasing 
Ia Ra drop. At large values of Ia there is a sharp increase in If to compensate for voltage drop caused by 
armature reaction. Thus at Ia (rated) DIf = AF provides for IaRa drop plus armature reaction drop.
Let us examine this data on the OCC plotted in Fig. 7.36. 
The voltage drop IaRa + Vd is indicated on 
the ﬁgure. By subtracting IaRa, we can then 
calculate the constant
 
K = 
V
I
d
a(
)
rated  
(7.56)
The proportionality constant can be used as 
an approximation for other values of Ia. From 
the DIf we can compute the Nse needed for a 
cumulative compound generator as 
 
Nse = Nf 
DI
I
f
a
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  
(7.57)
The external characteristics of various types of dc generators will be taken up in Section 7.12. 
EXAMPLE 7.13 A 240-V compound (cumulative) dc motor has the following open-circuit magnetization 
characteristic at normal full-load speed of 850 rev/min:
V(rated)
(full load)
O
A
If
(
+
)
I R
V
a
a
d
F
OCC
Fig. 7.36

330 Electric Machines
 
Excitation, AT/pole 
1200 
2400 
3600 
4800 
6000
 
Generated emf, V; 
76 
135 
180  
215 
240
 The resistance voltage drop in the armature circuit at full-load is 25 V. At full-load the shunt and the 
series winding provide equal ampere-turn excitation.
 Calculate the mmf per pole on no load. Estimate the value to which the speed will rise when full-load 
is removed, the resistance voltage drop in the armature circuit under that condition being 3 V. Ignore 
armature-reaction and brush-contact effects. Assume long-shunt cumulative compounding.
SOLUTION 
At full load, from Fig. 7.37,
 
Ea (full-load) = V – Ia(Ra + Rse) = 240 – 25 = 215 V
Corresponding ATnet from magnetizing of Fig. 7.38,
 
 
240
215
200
160
148
120
80
40
0
0
E
v
a( )
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
4800
2688
Excitation AT/pole
At 850 rpm
 
Fig. 7.37 Long-shunt compound dc motor 
Fig. 7.38
 
ATnet (full-load) = 4800
Then 
ATsh = ATse (full-load) = 2400
Now 
Ia (no-load) = 3
25 Ia (full-load); Ia (no-load) = If (shunt ﬁeld)
 
ATse (no-load) = 3
25  ¥ 2400 = 288
 
ATsh = 2400 (no change)
 
ATnet (no-load) = 2400 + 288 = 2688
 
Ea (from the magnetizing curve) = 148 V at 850 rpm, at ATnet (no-load)
 
Ea (no-load) = 240 – 3 = 237 V
Now  
Ea μ n at given ATnet
Hence, 
n(no-load) = 850 ¥ 237
148  = 1361 rpm
Vt
Shunt field
Ea
Ra
la
Rsa
Series field
+
IL
If
–

DC Machines 
331
It will be seen that in a cumulatively compound dc motor, full-load speed is much less than no-load speed.
EXAMPLE 7.14 The following OC test data was recorded for a separately dc generator:
 If (A) 
0.0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
1.2 
1.4 
 Voc(V) 
10 
52 
124 
184 
220 
244 
264 
276
Its load test data is as under
 
Ia ( fl) = 50 A, V = 240 V and If = 1.4 A
The armature resistance inclusive of the brush voltage drop is Ra = 0.3 W
Estimate at full load
 (a) The internal induced emf 
 (b) The voltage drop caused by armature reaction
 (c) The ﬁeld current equivalent of armature reaction demagnetization
SOLUTION 
The OCC is plotted in Fig. 7.39. The load test point (V = 240 V, If = 1.4 A) for Ia = 50 A is located at A.
Armature voltage drop, 
IaRa = 50 ¥ 0.3 = 15 V
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.4
1.6
2.0
OCC
D
C
B
A
0.36 A
80
160
240
320
V
If (A)
Fig. 7.39
 
(a) Adding 15 V to 240 V located the point B which is the internal induced emf,
 
  
Ea = 240 + 15 = 255 V
 
(b) At If = 1.4 A VOC = 276 at point C. Therefore armature reaction voltage drop,
 
  
Vd = BC = 276 – 255 = 21 V

332 Electric Machines
 
(c) To induce Ea = 255 V (point B) the ﬁeld current corresponds to point D on OCC. The ﬁeld current equivalent of 
the armature reaction demagnetization is
 
  
If = BD = 0.36 A
 
 Assuming linear relationship 
Kar = 
I
I
fl
fd
a(
)  = 0 36
50
.
 = 7.2 ¥ 10–3
Rather than arranging a separate dc source for excitation purposes, practical generators are always excited 
from their own armature terminals, this method of excitation being known as self-excitation. A self-excited 
generator with connection as shown in Fig. 7.40 is known as a shunt generator by virtue of the parallel 
connection of the ﬁeld winding with the armature. 
Assume that the ﬁeld is introduced into the 
circuit after the armature has been brought to 
rated speed. At the instant of switching on the 
ﬁeld, the armature voltage corresponds to a small 
residual value which causes a small ﬁeld current 
to ﬂow. If the ﬁeld is connected such that this 
current increases the ﬁeld mmf and therefore the 
induced emf, the machine will continuously build-
up. This indeed is a positive feedback connection 
and the machine builds up to a ﬁnal steady value 
only because of the saturation characteristic of 
the machine’s magnetic circuit. Analytical study 
of voltage build-up is presented in Section 7.21.
Since the generator is assumed to be on no-load during the build-up process, the following circuit 
relationships apply (Fig. 7.40).
 
Ia = If  
(7.56(a)) 
 
V = Ea – IfRa  
(7.56(b)) 
The ﬁeld current in a shunt generator being very small, the voltage drop IfRa can be neglected so that 
 
V ª Ea(If) (magnetization characteristic) 
(7.57)
For the ﬁeld circuit
 
V = If Rf 
(7.58)
which is a straight line relationship, called the Rf -line, in V-If plot of Fig. 7.41.
The no-load terminal voltage is the solution of Eqs (7.58b) and (7.59). Thus the intersection point P of the
Rf -line with the magnetization characteristic as shown in Fig. 7.41 gives the no-load terminal voltage (V0) 
and the corresponding ﬁeld current. Further, it is easy to visualize from Fig. 7.41 that the no-load voltage can 
be adjusted to a desired value by changing the ﬁeld resistance. It can also be seen with reference to Fig. 7.42 
that as the ﬁeld resistance is increased the no-load voltage decreases. The no-load voltage is undeﬁned for a 
ﬁeld resistance (Rf3 = Rfc) whose line coincides with the linear portion of the magnetization curve. With ﬁeld 
resistance even slightly more than this value, the machine does not excite to any appreciable value and would 
give no-load voltage close to the residual value. The machine with this much resistance in the ﬁeld fails to 
excite and the corresponding resistance is known as the critical resistance (Rfc).
V0 (no-load)
Rf
lf
la
Ea
nrated(constant)
+
–
lL = 0
Fig. 7.40 

DC Machines 
333
 V
V0
Air-gap line
Rf – line
P
Ea
V (magnetization curve)
ª
Field current
lf
0
 
R
R
R
f
f
f
3
2
1
>
>
V
R
R
f
fc
3 =
(critical resistance)
V01
V02
Rf 2
Rf1
0
lf
 
Fig. 7.41
Fig. 7.42
 
resistance
Consider now the operation with ﬁxed Rf and variable armature speed. It is observed from Fig. 7.43 that 
as the speed is reduced the OCC proportionally slides downwards so that the no-load voltage reduces. At a 
particular speed, called the critical speed, the OCC is tangential to the Rf-line and as a result the generator 
would fail to excite.
Rf –line
n1
n2
n = n =
3
critical speed
c
n
n
n
3
2
1
<
<
V
V01
V02
0
lf
Fig. 7.43
To summarize, a dc shunt generator may fail to self-excite for any of the three reasons mentioned below:
 
1. Residual magnetism is absent. 
 
2. The ﬁeld connection to the armature is such that the induced emf due to the residual magnetism tends 
to destroy the residual magnetism (i.e. the feedback is negative). 
 
3. The ﬁeld circuit resistance is more than the critical value. 

334 Electric Machines
Condition (2) can be remedied simply by reversing the ﬁeld connection to the armature or reversing the 
direction of rotation. In large dc generators with permanent connections and a ﬁxed direction of rotation, the 
problem is overcome by temporarily exciting the ﬁeld from a battery source. (This is known as ﬂashing.)
EXAMPLE 7.15 The following ﬁgures give the open-circuit characteristics of a dc shunt generator at 
300 rpm: 
 If (A) 
0 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
0.6 
0.7 
 Voc (V) 
7.5 
93 
135 
165 
186 
202 
215
The ﬁeld resistance of the machine is adjusted to 354.5 W and the speed is 300 rpm.
 
(i) Determine graphically the no-load voltage.
 (ii) Determine the critical ﬁeld resistance.
 (iii) Determine the critical speed for the given ﬁeld resistance.
 (iv) What additional resistance must be inserted in the ﬁeld circuit to reduce the no-load voltage to 175 V. 
SOLUTION 
From the magnetization characteristic drawn in Fig. 7.44
 
(i)  
V (no-load)|Rf =354.5W = 195 V 
 
(ii)  
Rf (critical) = 90
0 2.
 = 450 W 
 (iii)  
n (critical) = 300 ¥ 71
90  = 236.7 rpm
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
V
V
OC ( ) h
195 V
Rf = 354.5 W
Rf 2
l
A
f ( )
0.6
90
0.44
71
Fig. 7.44

DC Machines 
335
 (iv)  
V (no-load) = 175 V
 
  
Rf 2 = 175
0 44
.
 397.7 W
 
 Additional resistance to be inserted in ﬁeld circuit 
 
  
 = 397.7 – 354.5 = 43.2 W
7.12 CHARACTERISTICS OF DC GENERATORS
With the advent of silicon-controlled rectiﬁers, the importance of the dc machine as a generator has 
considerably reduced as SCRs can be employed to draw ac power from standard ac supply and convert it to 
dc; also the dc voltage can also be varied with ease. For the sake of completeness the characteristics of dc 
generators will be brieﬂy discussed here, which are still found in older installations in industry (as a motor-
generator set for speed control of dc motors; see Sec. 7.14).
The load characteristic of a dc generator at a particular speed is the relationship between its terminal voltage 
and load current (line current) and is also termed as the external characteristic. The internal characteristic is 
the plot between the generated emf and load current.
Separately-excited dc Generator
Figure 7.45 is that of a separately-excited dc generator. The 
operation considered here assumes that the armature is driven at 
constant speed (by means of prime mover) and the ﬁeld excitation 
(If) is adjusted to give rated voltage at no-load and is then held 
constant at this value throughout the operation considered. The 
armature circuit is governed by the equation 
 
V = Ea – IaRa ; Ia = IL 
(7.59)
In spite of ﬁxed excitation, Ea drops off with load owing to 
the demagnetizing effect of the armature reaction (see Sec. 7.5). As the voltage drop is caused by magnetic 
saturation effect, it increases with load nonlinearity. The internal characteristic (Ea – IL) is shown dotted in 
Fig. 7.46. The external characteristic differs from the internal by the armature voltage drop la Ra which is also 
shown in Fig. 7.46. 
V
V0
0
l R
a
a
l R
a
a drop
ln
V,external characteristic
l R
a
a drop
Armature reaction drop
Ea, Internal characteristic
IL = Ia
Fig. 7.46
V
Vf
lf
Rf
Ea
n(constant)
+
–
Ra
I
I
L
a
=
Fig. 7.45

336 Electric Machines
Voltage Regulation
The voltage regulation of a generator (independent of the kind of excitation employed) is deﬁned as
 
% regulation = V
V
V
V
fl
0 - (
)
=
rated
rated
 
(7.60) 
where 
Vf l = full-load voltage = Vrated
 
V0 = no-load voltage corresponding to rated voltage at full-load excitation remaining unchanged* 
Shunt Generator
A dc shunt generator is a self-excited generator. 
The phenomenon of voltage build up on no-load 
and the conditions necessary for the same have 
already been discussed in Sec. 7.11. Figure 7.47 
shows a shunt-connected generator. With ﬁeld 
resistance adjusted to a certain value by means 
of the regulating resistance, the desired no-load 
voltage can be obtained (refer to Fig. 7.41). The 
external characteristic of the generator can then be 
obtained by a load test with total ﬁeld resistance 
remaining ﬁxed in the process. The terminal 
voltage drops off much more rapidly with load 
in a shunt generator than in a separately-excited 
generator because of fall in ﬁeld current with 
terminal voltage. The external characteristic is 
a double-valued curve with a certain IL (max) 
as shown in solid line in Fig. 7.48. As indicated 
in Fig. 7.48, the useful parts of the external 
characteristic is much before the turning point.
Internal characteristic is obtained from the 
external characteristic by adding IaRa. At any 
point P (V1, IL1) we ﬁnd 
 
Ia1 = IL1 + (V1/Rf)
This locates the corresponding point on the 
internal characteristic shown by dotted curve in 
Fig. 7.48. 
Compound Generator
The causes of voltage drop in the terminal voltage from no-load to full-load in a shunt generator can be 
partially/fully/over-compensated by use of an aiding series ﬁeld (cumulative compound), which can be 
connected in a long- or short-shunt (long- shunt shown in Fig. 7.49). The aiding ampere-turns of the series 
 
* In case a shunt ﬁeld winding is provided, it would mean that the total resistance in a ﬁled circuit remains
unchanged in the operation.
V
+
–
lL
lf
la
+
Ra
Ea
Rf = Total field resistance
Shunt field regulator
n = constant
–
Fig. 7.47 
DC shunt generator on load
V0
V
V1
I R
a
a
Internal characteristic
External characteristic
IL
IL2 (max)
I 1
L
Short
circuit
Fig. 7.48 
External Characteristic of dc shunt generator

DC Machines 
337
ﬁeld automatically increase with the load, compensating the armature voltage drop. In level-compound 
generator full-load voltage equals no-load voltage. Steady-state volt-ampere (V-I) characteristics of a 
compound generator are shown in Fig. 7.50. Differential compounding is not used in practice as the terminal 
voltage falls off steeply with load. Long or short-shunt connection of series winding makes only a marginal 
difference in the V-I characteristic of a compound generator. Compounding level can be adjusted by a diverter 
in parallel to the series ﬁeld; see Section 7.9, Fig. 7.31.
Rf
If
IL
Ia
ATsh
ATse
Rse
Ea
Ra
n(constant)
V
–
+
Fig. 7.49 Compound generator (long-shunt)
0
IL(rated)
IL
Differential-compound
Under-compound
Level-compound
Over-compound
V0
V
Fig. 7.50
Series Generator
A series generator is employed in series with a dc line to compensate for the line voltage drop which is 
proportional to line current. 

338 Electric Machines
Connection Diagram
A series self-excited dc generator connection has been given in Fig. 7.29(c). It is drawn in Fig. 7.51 along 
with a load which can be switched on. The terminal voltage is given by
 
V = Ea – Ia (Ra + Rse) 
(7.61)
+
–
V
Series field
I
I
L
a
=
n
Load
R
Ea
Ra
Rse
Fig. 7.51
As the load current incurrent increase the excitation Nsc Ia increase and Ea rises sharply but levels off with 
saturation and begins to drop due to armature reaction.
Characteristics
No load test is conducted by exciting the series 
ﬁeld separately from a low voltage source. It is the 
saturation curve VOC vs If = Ia drawn in Fig. 7.52 
curve 1. Internal characteristic.
It is the induced emf Ea which is less than VOC by 
the armature reaction voltage drop. The voltage drop 
sharply increases with saturation and Ea beings to 
reduce; curve 2. External characteristic lies below lies 
below curve 2 by Ia (Ra + Rse) voltage drop, curve 3. 
Condition for Self-excitation
The total resistance (Ra + Rse + RL) should be less 
than the critical resistance RC as determined from the 
saturation characteristic; curve 1. 
It is observed from the external characteristic, 
curve 3, that the maximum line boost is limited.
Comparison of Volt Ampere (V-I ) Characteristics of 
dc Generators
The VI characteristic (steady state) of various types of 
dc generators is shown in Fig. 7.53. These and drawn 
with rated terminal voltage at full-load.
V
I
I
L
a
=
I
R
R
a
a
se
(
+
)
No-load (1)
Armature reaction drop
External (3)
Internal (2)
Fig. 7.52
Separately excited
Series
Shunt
Compound (cum)
IL
V
Vrated
Fig. 7.53 V-I characteristics of dc generators

DC Machines 
339
The external characteristic of a shunt generator can be predetermined from a knowledge of the OCC and 
armature and ﬁeld resistances (which can be determined by simple dc test), without actually performing 
the load test which in fact is not feasible for a large generator. Assume for the time being that the armature 
reaction voltage drop is negligible. With reference to Fig. 7.47.
 
Ia = IL + If
 
 ª IL (shunt ﬁeld current can be neglected in comparison to load current) 
(7.62)
 
Ea = V + Ia Ra 
(7.63)
 
V = If Rf , (Rf – line) 
(7.64)
 
Ea = Ea (If), the OCC 
(7.65)
Because of the nonlinearity (saturation in the OCC), the solution of Eqs (7.62)-(7.65) to determine the 
terminal voltage for given Rf and IaRa can be carried out graphically as shown in Fig. 7.54.
O
D
C
If
Vr
V2
V1
V
S
S¢
Q
Q¢
R
R¢
P
(
)
I R
a
a max
I R
a
a (Constant)
No-load point
(
+
(Constant)
V
I R
a
a)
Rf-line
E
I
a f
( ), the OCC
 Predetermination of external characteristic of dc shunt generator 
For given IaRa, Eq. (7.64) is represented by a straight line parallel to the Rf line and above it by vertical 
intercept of IaRa. The intersection of this line with OCC gives two solution points R and S for the induced emf. 
For these solution points the two terminal voltage values V1 and V2 can be read from the Rf line corresponding 
to points R¢ and S¢. Maximum possible armature current corresponds to point Q at which a line parallel to 
the Rf line is tangent to the OCC. Corresponding to each solution point, values of V and If can be read and 
IL = Ia – If , can be calculated and subsequently the external characteristic plotted as shown in Fig. 7.48. The 
short-circuit point on the external characteristic corresponds to IaRa = Vr, the residual voltage. 

340 Electric Machines
It has been shown in Section 7.10 that the demagnetization caused by armature reaction can be quantiﬁed by 
equivalent ﬁeld current Ifd which can be taken as proportional to the armature current Ia. There are two ways 
in which we can account for Ifd in predetermining the external characteristic of a shunt generator starting from 
its OCC. With reference to Fig. 7.55
 
 Shift the origin by Ifd to left along the If –axis. This is equivalent to shifting the OCC to right parallel 
to the If –axis by Ifd from the new origin.
We shall use the ﬁrst approach and illustrate the second through an example. A typical OCC is sketched in 
Fig. 7.55 and the Rf line is drawn from the origin. Their intersection point P determines the no load voltage V0.
Constructional Steps Method 
 
ﬁ Located D to the left of origin such that OD = Ifd
 
ﬁ Locate A vertically above D such that AD = IaRa for an assumed value of Ia (about the rated value)
I R
a
a
Ifd
D
A
O
V2
VQ
V1
V0
V
If
S¢
S
Q¢
Q
D¢
R
R¢¢
Rf -line
P
No-load
OCC
Fig. 7.55

DC Machines 
341
 
ﬁ From A draw a line parallel to the Rf line intersecting OCC at R and S
 
ﬁ Shift DODA at R and S as shown in Fig. 7.55. This step locates R¢ and S¢ on the Rf line which yield the 
two terminal voltages V1 and V2 for the assumed value of Ia. 
 
ﬁ For V1, V2 calculate If1 = V1/Rf and If 2 = V2 /Rf
 
ﬁ Calculate the corresponding line currents IL1 = Ia – If 1 and IL2 = Ia – If 2 
 
ﬁ Plot V1 vs IL1 and V2 vs IL2 on the V–IL coordinate plane
 
ﬁ Repeat the above steps for different values of Ia 
 
ﬁ The complete plot is the external characteristic of double-valued shape as sketched in Fig. 7.48
 
ﬁ To ﬁnd Ia (max), draw a tangent to OCC parallel to the Rf line giving the point Q (corresponding 
to Ia (max)). Draw now QQ¢ parallel to OA and the DQ¢D¢Q similar to DODA. QD¢ then gives max 
IaRa. This construction is made possible by the fact the IaRa and Ifd are both proportional to Ia. It then 
follows that
 
  
Ia(max) = QD
Ra
¢
 
 The corresponding terminal voltage is VQ. The line current is 
 
  
ILQ¢ = Ia(max) – (VQ/Rf)
 
 This may be not be the exact IL(max)
For plotting the internal characteristic plot Ea1 = (V1 + Ia Ra) vs IL1 and Ea2 = (V2 + IaRa) vs IL1; similarly 
for other assumed values of Ia. The internal characteristic is also plotted in Fig. 7.48 in dotted line.
EXAMPLE 7.16 A 100 kW, 200 V, long-shunt commutative compound generator has equivalent armature 
resistance of 0.03 W and a series ﬁeld resistance of 0.004 W. There are 1200 shunt turns per pole and 
5 series turn per pole. The data of its magnetization characteristic at 1000 rpm is given below:
 If (A) 
0 
1 
2.2 
3.3 
4.2 
5.3 
7.1
 Ea(V) 
11 
33 
105 
150 
175 
200 
225
 (a) Calculate the terminal voltage and rated output current for shunt ﬁeld current of 5 A and a speed of 
950 rpm. Neglect armature reaction effect.
 (b) Calculate the number of series turns per pole for the generator to level compound with same 
shunt ﬁeld current, series ﬁeld resistance and generation speed to be the same as in part (a). The 
demagnetization due to armature reaction in equivalent shunt ﬁeld current is 0.001875 Ia where Ia is 
the armature current.
SOLUTION 
The schematic diagram of long-shunt compound generator is drawn in Fig. 7.56(a)
 
Line current, IL = 100
10
200
3
¥
 = 500 A 
 
Shunt ﬁeld current, If = 5 A (given)
From Fig. 7.56(a) 
 
Ia = 500 + 5 = 505 A
 
If, eq = If + N
N
se
f
Ise
 
 = 5 + 
5
1200  ¥ 505 = 7.1 A 

342 Electric Machines
From the magnetization characteristic of Fig. 7.56(b) (as per data given)
 
(a)  
Ea = 225 V at 1000 rpm
 
  
Ea (950 rpm) = 225 ¥ 950
1000  = 213. 75 V
 
 From Fig. 7.56(a)
 
  
Vt = Ea – Ia (Ra + Rse)
 
  
 = 213.75 –505 (0.03 + 0.004)
 
 The generator is under – compounded (armature 
reaction ignored)
 
(b)  
Ifd = 0.001875 ¥ 505
 
  
 = 0.95 A (demag)
 
 For level compound
 
  
Vt = 200 V
 
  
Ea = 200 + 505 (0.03 + 0.04)
 
  
 = 217 .17 (950 rpm)
 
  
Ea (1000 rpm) = 217.17 ¥ 1000
950  = 228.6 V
 
 From the magnetization characteristic
 
  
If (net) = 7.5 A
 
 Excitation balance equation
 
  
If + N
N
se
f
Ia – Ifd = If (net)
 
  
5 + 505
Nse
1000
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  – 0.95 = 7.5
 
 which gives 
Nse = 6.87 or 7 turns
EXAMPLE 7.17 The data for magnetization characteristic of a dc shunt generator is as under:
 If (A) 
0 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
0.6 
0.7
 VOC(V) 
7.5 
62.5 
120 
152.5 
175 
192.5 
205 
215
Rf
If
IL
Rse
Ia
Vt
Ra
Ea
–
+
Fig. 7.56(a)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
50
100
150
200
E
V
a( )
250
If (A)
Fig. 7.56(b)

DC Machines 
343
The shunt ﬁeld has a resistance of 354.5 W and the armature resistance is 0.5 W.
Determine
 (a) the no-load voltage
 (b) the terminal voltage at an armature current of 40 A 
 (c) the maximum possible armature current and the corresponding terminal voltage 
 (d) the short circuit armature current 
SOLUTION 
The magnetization characteristic (OCC) is drawn in Fig. 7.57.
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
R¢
R
P¢
P
Q
Q¢
OCC
Rf = 354.5 W
I
A
f ( )
VOC(V)
Fig. 7.57
 
(a) Rf = 354.5 W line is drawn from the origin. Its intersection with OCC gives no-load voltage V0 = 200 V
 
(b) Ia = 40 A, IaRa = 40 ¥ 0.5 = 20 V
 
 We have drawn a line parallel to the Rf line and 20 V (vertically) above it. It intersects the OCC at Q and R. The 
points Q¢ and R¢ vertically below on the Rf line give the voltages at Ia = 40 A, 170 V, 25 V
 
 The generation will be operated at 170 V.
 
(c) Draw a line tangent to the OCC. It locates the point P from which we locate P¢ vertically below it on the Rf line. 
It is found that
 
  
IaRa (max) = PP¢ = 50 V
 
 or 
Ia (max) = 50/0.5 = 100 A
 
(d) Short circuit current 
 
  
Ia(sc) = V
R
r
a
 = 7 5
0 5
.
.
 = 15 A

344 Electric Machines
EXAMPLE 7.18 A 100 kW, 200  V, 1000-rpm dc shunt generator has Ra = 0.03 W. The generator is driven 
at rated speed and excitation is such that it gives a rated voltage of 200 V at no-load. The data for the 
magnetization characteristic of the generator are as follows:
 
I*
f (A) 
0 
1 
2.2 
3.3 
4.5 
7.1
 
EMF(V) 
10 
32.5 
100 
167.5 
200 
225
Determine the voltage appearing across the generator terminals when Ia = 500 A 
 A series ﬁeld of 5 turns per pole having a total resistance of 0.005 W is to be added in a long-shunt 
compound. There are 1200 turns per pole in the shunt ﬁeld. The generator is to be level-compounded so that 
the full-load voltage is 200 V when the resistance in the shut ﬁeld circuit is adjusted to give a no load voltage 
of 200 V. Find the value of the series ﬁeld diverter resistance to obtain the desired performance.
Assume that the armature reaction AT has been compensated for.
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
R -line
f
R
P¢
Q
Q¢
17.5 V
I
A
f ( )
VOC(V)
15 V
If se
,
98 = 1.7 A
4.5 A
P
Fig. 7.58 
SOLUTION 
The magnetization characteristic is drawn in Fig. 7.58. Drawing the Rf -line corresponding to 200 V.
 
Rf = 200
4 5.
 = 44.4 W 
 
Ia = 500 A
 
IaRa = 500 ¥ 0.03 = 15 V
Drawing a line parallel to the Rf -line at 15 V (= QQ¢) 
 
V(terminal) = 165 V (corresponding to Q¢)

DC Machines 
345
With series winding added in the long-shunt compound (cumulative):
 
Armature circuit resistance = 0.03 + 0.005 = 0.035 W
 
Armature circuit voltage drop = 500 ¥ 0.035 = 17.5 V
To compensate for this voltage drop, the operating point on OCC must lie at R, i.e. (200 + 17.5) = 217.5 V. Both full-
load and no-load voltage will now be 200 V. From Fig. 7.58 the series ﬁeld current measured in terms of shunt of ﬁeld 
current is 
 
If, se = 1.75 A
 
ATse = If, se ¥ 1200 = 1.75 ¥ 1200 = 2100
 
Ise = 2100
5
 = 420 A
 
Idiverter = 500 – 420 = 80 A
 
Rdiverter = 0.005 ¥ 420
80  = 0.0265 W
EXAMPLE 7.19 The open-circuit characteristic of a shunt generator at speed is
 If (A) 
1 
2.5 
5 
7 
9 
12 
15 
18
 VOC(V) 
22 
231 
400 
479 
539 
605 
642 
671
The ﬁeld and armature resistances are 46 W and 0.12 W respectively. Estimate the terminal voltage when 
the armature current is 360 A in two cases (a) Armature reaction ignored (b) 1 A, ﬁeld current is needed to 
counteract the effect of armature reaction.
SOLUTION 
OCC is plotted in Fig. 7.59 Rf -line is also drawn thereon.
4
8
12
16
20
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
1A
OCC (shifted by 1A)
OCC
C
A
B
556 V
520
Rf = 46 W
43.2 V
If = 10.8 A
If = 12 A
If (A)
VOC(V)
D
Fig. 7.59

346 Electric Machines
 
(a) Ia = 360 A
 
  
Armature voltage drop = 360 ¥ 0.12 = 43.2 V
 
 Drawing line parallel to Rf -line 43.2 V above it along the V axis, the terminal voltage and corresponding ﬁeld 
current are at point B on the Rf -line. These values are 
 
  
Vt = 566 V, If = 12 A
 
(b) Field current equivalent of armature reaction caused demagnetization = 1 A. To account for this the OCC shifted 
to right by 1 A. The shifted OCC intersects Rf-line at C. The corresponding point D on the Rf -line yields the 
terminal voltage and ﬁeld currents as 
 
  
Vt = 520 V, If = 10.8 A
Remark The empirical procedure to shift OCC to right by a certain amount of ﬁeld current applies in the 
region around full load current which as is seen from Fig. 7.59 is the region of interest.
EXAMPLE 7.20 The OCC and Rf = 167 W line are drawn to scale in Fig. 7.60 for a dc shunt generator 
with armature resistance of 0.5 W. The generator is driven at constant speed. It is estimated that at armature 
50
100
150
200
250
300
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.4
1.6
Rf = 167W
occ
P
Parallel to OCC
R
R¢
A
D
D¢
1.5 A
If
V
Fig. 7.60

DC Machines 
347
current of 40 A, the armature reaction demagnetization has ﬁeld current equivalent of 0.14 A.
Estimate thee acceptable terminal voltage when the armature is delivering 50 A. Also ﬁnd the line current.
SOLUTION 
Using proportionality
 
Ifd|at Ia = 50 A = 0.14 ¥ 50
40  = 0.175 A
 
IaRa = 50 ¥ 0.5 = 25 V 
Choose an arbitrary point D¢ on the Rf line. Draw a right angle triangle D¢AD with D¢A = 0.175 A (horizontal) –D¢AD 
= 90°, AD = 25 (vertical). Through D draw a line parallel to the Rf line interacting the OCC at R (higher voltage point) 
Now draw RR¢ parallel to DD¢ locating R¢ on the Rf line. Reading from R¢
 
V (terminal) = 232.5 V
 
If = 1.5 A
Then 
IL = Ia – If = 50 – 1.5 A = 48.5 A
EXAMPLE 7.21 A 20 kW, 240 V shunt generator is driven by a prime mover whose speed drops uniformly 
from 1190 rpm at no-load to 1150 rpm at full-load. By adding a series winding it is converted to a short 
shunt compound such that its voltage rises from 230 V at no-load to 240 V at Ia = 83.3 A. The resistance 
of the series winding is estimated to be 0.045 W. The armature resistance including brush voltage drop is 
found to be 0.12 W. The shunt ﬁeld turns are 550/pole.
The generator is separately excited and the following tests are conducted.
No-load Test (1190 rpm)
 VOC(V) 
220 
230 
240 
250 
260 
270
 If (A) 
1.0 
1.15 
1.35 
1.50 
1.69 
2.02
Load Test (1150 rpm) 
 
Armature terminal voltage = 240 V
 
Armature current = 83.3 A
 
Field current = 2.1 A
Determine 
 (a) the demagnetizing AT/pole at armature current of 83.3 A
 (b) the number of series turns required
SOLUTION 
The no-load test data is plotted in Fig. 7.61(b)
 
(a) Load Test – 1150 rpm
 
  
Ea = 240 + 83.3 ¥ 0.12 = 250 V
 
 Looking up mag. curve we ﬁnd Ea at 1190 rpm (OCC prime mover speed)
 
  
Ea (1190 rpm) = 250 ¥ 1190
1150  = 258.7 V
 
  
If = 2.1 A (given)
 
 The ﬁeld current needed to induce 258.7 V on no-load 
 
  
If (net) = 1.65 A
 
 Demagnetization in terms of ﬁeld current 
 
  
Ifd = 2.1 – 1.65 = 0.45 A
 
 Then 
ATd = 550 ¥ 0.45 = 247.5

348 Electric Machines
 
(b) Series turns added – compound generator – short shunt. The connection diagram is drawn in Fig. 7.61(a). The 
performance required:
 
 No-load (1190 rpm)
 
  
Vt = 230 V
 
 We can assume 
Ea ª 230 V 
 
 Consulting mag. curve, we ﬁnd
 
  
If = 1.43 ; ATf = 1.43 ¥ 550 = 786.5
 
 Then 
Rf = 230
1 43
.
 = 161 W remains constant
 
 Load (1150 rpm)
 
  
Vt = 240 V, Ia = 83.3 A
 
  
IL = Ia – If = 83.3 – V
R
a
f
; Va = armature voltage 
 
  
Va = 240 + 0.045 IL = 240 + 83 3
161
. -
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
Va
 ¥ 0.045
 
  
Va 1
0 045
161
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
.
 = 240 + 83.3 ¥ 0.045 = 243.7
If
Rse
+
–
Rf
Ia
Vt
Ea
IL
Va
Fig. 7.61(a)
210
220
230
240
260
280
1.5
I (A)
f
200
1.0
2.0
1190 rpm
Voc
Fig. 7.61(b)

DC Machines 
349
 
 or 
Va = 243.7 V
 
 Then 
Ea = 243.7 + 83.3 ¥ 0.12 = 253.3 V
 
 To consult mag. curve
 
  
Ea (1190 rpm) = 253.3 ¥ 1190
1150  = 262.1 A
 
  
If (needed) = 1.675 A
 
  
AT (needed) = 550 ¥ 1.675 = 921.25
 
  
If = V
R
a
f
 = 243 7
161
.
 = 1.51 A
 
  
ATf = 550 ¥ 1.51 = 830
 
 AT balance equation 
 
  
ATf + ATse – ATd  = AT (needed)
 
  
830 + ATse – ATd  = 925.25 
 
 or 
AT se = 343
 
  
IL = 83.3 – 1.51 ª 81.0 A
 
  
Nse = 343
81 8.
 ª 4 turns /pole
EXAMPLE 7.22 A 50 kW, 250 V, 200 A long shunt cumulative compound dc generator has the following 
data:
 
Ra (inclusive of brush voltage drop) = 0.05 W
 
Series ﬁeld resistance Rse = 0.01 W
The magnetization characteristic at 1200 rpm is drawn in Fig. 7.62(b)
 
Shunt ﬁeld turns, Nf = 1000 
 
Series ﬁeld turns, Nse = 3
The generator is run at 1150 rpm and its shunt ﬁeld current is adjusted to 5.6 A.
compute the terminal voltage at rated voltage current. 
SOLUTION 
The connection diagram of long shunt compound generator is drawn in Fig. 7.62(a). 
 
Load current, IL = 200 A
 
Ia = 200 + 5.6 = 205.6 A
 Excitation ampere-turns 1000 ¥ 5.6 + 205.6 ¥ 3 = 6217 
 
Equivalent shunt ﬁeld current, If,eq = 6217
1000  ª 6.22 A
From the mag. characteristic 
 
Ea = 282 V at 1200 rpm
At 
1150 rpm, Ea = 282 ¥ 1150
1200  = 270 V
Terminal voltage 
Vt = 270 – 205.6 ¥ (0.05 + 0.01)
 
 = 257.7 V
If
IL
Rse
+
–
Rf
I a
Vt
Ea
Fig. 7.62(a)

350 
Electric Machines
EXAMPLE 7.23 Consider the dc generator of Example 7.22. What should be the number of series for a 
terminal voltage or 250 A at IL = 200 A. The demagnetizing ampere-turns of armature reaction at Ia = 200 A 
are 400. Shunt ﬁeld current is adjusted to 5.6 A.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
n = 1200
Nf = 1000
Voc
If
Fig. 7.62(b)

DC Machines 
351
SOLUTION 
ATf = 5.6 ¥ 1000 = 5600
 
Ia = 205.6 A
 
ATd = 400 ¥ 205 6
200
.
 = 411.2
 
Ea = 250 + 205.6 ¥ 0.06 = 262.3 V at 1150 rpm
At 
1200 rpm, Ea = 262.3 ¥ 1200
1150  = 273.7 V 
From the mag. characteristic 
 
If (net) = 6.2 A
 
AT (net) = 1000 ¥ 6.2 = 6200 
AT balance equation 
AT (net) = ATf + ATse – ATd 
 
6200 = 5600 + ATse – 411.2 
or 
ATse = 1011.2
 
Nse = 1011 2
205 6
.
.
 = 4.9 or 5 turns
We conclude that 2 additional series turns are needed are to counter armature reaction effect.
EXAMPLE 7.24 A 20 kW, 250 V separately excited dc generator is run at constant speed of 1000 rpm has 
an armature resistance of 0.16 W. The magnetization characteristic is presented in Fig. 7.63.
 (a) At rated armature current ﬁnd the generator output at constant ﬁeld current of (i) 1 A, (ii) 2 A, and 
(iii) 2.5 A.
 (b) Repeat part (a) if the generator speed is decreased to 800 rpm.
Note: Neglect armature reaction.
SOLUTION 
Rated armature current = 20
10
250
3
¥
 = 80 A
 (a) (i)  If = 1 A From the mag. characteristic Ea = 150 V
 
 
  
Ia = 80 A  Ra = 0.16
 
 
  
Internal voltage drop = 80 ¥ 0.16 = 12.81
 
 
  
Vt = 150 – 12.8 = 137.2 V
 
 
  
Generator output, P0 = 137.2 ¥ 80 = 10.976 kW
 
 (ii)  
If = 2 A  Ea = 257.5 V
 
 
  
Vt = 257.5 – 12.8 = 238.2
 
 
  
P0 = 238.2 ¥ 80 = 19 kW
 
 (iii)  
If = 2.5 A  Ea = 297.5 V
 
 
  
Vt = 297.5 – 12.8 = 284.7 V
 
 
  
P0 = 284.7 ¥ 80 = 22.8 kW
 
(b) Generator speed increases to 1200 rpm
 
 The magnetization characteristic at each point shifts downwards by a factor of 800/1000 = 0.8
 
(i)  
Ea = 150 ¥ 0.8 = 120 V
 
  
Vt = 120 – 12.8 = 107.2 V
 
  
P0 = 107.2 ¥ 80 = 8.576 kW
 
(ii)  
Ea = 257.5 ¥ 0.8 = 206 V
 
  
P0 = 206 ¥ 80 = 16.5 kW

352 Electric Machines
 
(iii)  
Ea = 295 ¥ 0.8 = 236 V
 
  
Vt = 236 – 12.8 = 223.2 V
 
  
P0 = 223.2 ¥ 80 = 17.856 kW 
EXAMPLE 7.25 The separately excited generator of Example 7.24 feeds a load resistance of 3 W. Find 
the power fed to the load at ﬁeld current 1 A, 2 A and 25 A. Neglect armature reaction. 
SOLUTION 
Load resistance = 3 W
 
If = 1 A  Ea = 150 V
 
Ia = 
150
0 16
3
.
+
 = 47.67 A
 
Power fed load, P0 = (47.67)2 ¥ 3 = 6.808 kW
 
If = 2 A  Ea = 240 V
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
occ
Vt
Ia =
0 A
8
Ia
12.8 V
Ra =
V (V)
o
Ea (1)
I (A)
f
Fig. 7.63

DC Machines 
353
 
Ia = 257 5
0 16
3
.
.
+
 = 81.5 A
 
P0 = (81.5)2 ¥ 3 = 19.93 kW
 
If = 2.5 A  Ea = 297.5 V
 
Ia = 297 5
0 16
3
.
.
+
 = 94.15 A
 
P0 = (94.15)2 ¥ 3 = 26.56 kW
EXAMPLE 7.26 The separately excited dc generator of Example 7.24 is run at 1000 rpm and the load 
test is conducted. At each ﬁeld current. the load current is adjusted to 80 A and the readings of the terminal 
voltage taken. The data recorded is as under:
 If (A) 
2.5 
2.0 
1.0
 Vt (V) 
240 
200 
120
Find the armature reaction demagnetization in terms of ﬁeld current (Ifd) at each data point.
SOLUTION 
On Fig. 7.63 the magnetization characteristic Vt – If is now plotted on it. To this plot, we add IaRa = 80 ¥ 
0.16 = 12.8 V (vertically). This gives us the internal characteristic Ea(i) – If ; shown dotted.
Ifd is the ﬁeld current difference between Ea(i) and Ea(open circuit) at given ﬁeld current. Ifd at the three values of If 
are shown by horizontal lines between magnetization characteristic (Ea(open circuit)) and internal characteristic (Ea(i)). 
The data is recorded below:
 If (A) 
1 
2 
2.5
 Ifd (A) 
0.2 
0.75 
1
It is observed that Ifd increases as the magnetic circuit gets into saturation region.
EXAMPLE 7.27 The OCC of a dc shunt generator is drawn to scale in Fig. 7.64. The generator has an 
armature resistance of 0.5 W. The generator is run at constant speed. 
 (a) Find the ﬁeld resistance for a no-load voltage of 230 V and the ﬁeld current.
 (b) At an armature current of 80 A ﬁnd the terminal voltage, ﬁeld current and load power.
 (c) It is required that the armature current be 80 A. What would be the terminal voltage accounting for 
5% ﬂux reduction ? Also calculate load power.
SOLUTION 
Locate 230 V, point P on the OCC. Draw the Rf line from the origin to P. We ﬁnd
 
(a) 
If = 1.3 A  \ Rf = 230/1.3 = 176. 9 W
 
(b)  
Ia = 80 A, Ra = 0.5, IaRa = 40 V
 
 Draw a line parallel to Rf line 40 V above it, It intersects OCC at P.
 
 The point S below it on Rf line in the terminal voltage
 
  
Vt = 202 V
 
 Corresponding ﬁeld current is 
 
 
 
If = 202/176.9 = 1.14 A 

354 Electric Machines
 
(b) Given 
Ia = 80 A,
 
  
Ra = 0.5 W
 
  
IaRa = 80 ¥ 0.5 = 40 V
 
 Between OCC and Rf line locate (by scale) vertical line RS = 40 V. The point given the terminal voltage
 
  
Vt = 200 V
 
 Corresponding 
If = 1.07 A
 
  
Line current, IL = 80 – 1.07 = 78.93 A
 
  
Load power = 200 ¥ 78.93 = 15.786 kW
40
60
80
100
140
180
200
220
260
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
If(A)
Ea(V)
Rf line
OCC
R
P
S
S¢
R¢
Fig. 7.64

DC Machines 
355
 
(c) Induced emf curre with 5% reduction (Corresponding to 5% reduction in ﬂux/pole) is drawn in dotted line in 
Fig. 7.64. Its intersection with line parallel to Rf line 20 V above it is R¢. The corresponding point S on Rf line gives
 
  
Vt = 182 V
 
  
If = 182/176.9 = 103 A
 
  
IL = 40 – 1.03 = 38.97 A
 
  
Load power = 182 ¥ 38.397 = 7.09 kW 
EXAMPLE 7.28 A 75 kW, 250 V compound dc generator has the following data:
 
Ra = 0.04 W, Rse = 0.004 W Rf = 100 W
 
Brush contact drop, Vb = 2 V (1 volt each brush)
Compare the generator induced emf when fully loaded in (i) long shunt compound, and (ii) short shunt 
compound 
SOLUTION 
Long shunt and short shunt connection are drawn in Figs 7.65(a) and (b).
If
IL
Ia
Rse
1 V
1 V
Rf
Vt
Ea
If
IL
Ia
Rse
1 V
Rf
Vt
Ea
1 V
Vb
+
–
(a) Long shunt
(b) Short shunt
Ra
Ra
Fig. 7.65
At full load
 
Vt = 250 V, IL = 75
10
250
3
¥
 = 300 A
Long Shunt (LS) 
 
If = 250/100 = 2.5 A, Ia = 300 + 2.5 = 302.5 A
 
Ea = 250 + (0.04 + 0.004) ¥ 302.5 + 2 = 265.31 A
Short Shunt (SS)
 
Vb = 250 + 0.004 ¥ 300 = 251.2 V
 
If = 251.2 /100 = 2.512 A
 
Ia = 300 + 2.512 = 302. 512 A
 
Ea = 250 + 0.04 ¥ 302.512 + 2 = 264.1 V

356 Electric Machines
 
Ea (LS) – Ea (SS) = 265.31 – 264.1 = 1.21 V
 
Difference as percentage of Vt = 1 21
100
250
.
¥
 = 0.484% 
Conclusion: There is no signiﬁcant difference in LS and SS.
EXAMPLE 7.29 A 25 kW, 220 V, 1600 rpm dc shunt generator with Ra = 0.1 W has magnetization 
characteristic data given below:
 
If (A) 
0.0 
0.25 
0.50 
0.75 
0.1 
1.25 
1.5
 
Ea (V) 
10 
90 
150 
190 
220 
243 
250
 (a) what would be the current and ﬁeld resistance at terminal voltage of 220 V?
 (b) At rated current and rated terminal voltage, ﬁnd the value of ﬁeld current and ﬁeld resistance. Ignore 
the effect of armature reaction.
 (c) Find the value of electromagnetic power and torque in part (b).
 (d) Under load conditions in part (b), the ﬁeld current is If = 1.25 A. Find the ﬁeld current needed to 
counter the effect of armature reaction.
SOLUTION 
The magnetization characteristic drawn in Fig. 7.66.
40
80
120
160
200
220
240
260
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1.0
1.25
1.5
1.75
2.0
Fig. 7.66

DC Machines 
357
 
(a) No-load voltage, 
V0 = 250 V
 
 Corresponding, 
If = 1.5 A 
 
  
Rf = 250/1.5 = 167 W
 
(b)  
Vt = 220 V
 
  
IL = 25
10
220
3
¥
 = 113.6 A
 
 As If is small, we can assume 
 
  
Ia ª IL = 113.6 A 
 
  
Ea = 220 + 113.6 ¥ 0.1 = 231.4 V
 
 Ignoring armature reaction, we ﬁnd from magnetization characteristic 
 
  
If = 1.1 A (about 1% of IL)
 
  
Rf = 220/1.11 = 198.2 W
 
(c) Electromagnetic power = EaIa = 231.4 ¥ (113.6 – 1.1)
 
  
= 231.4 ¥ 112.5 = 26.033 kW
 
 Electromagnetic torque = 26 033
10
1600
2
60
3
.
¥
¥
p
 = 155.37 Nm 
 
(d) Under load condition as in part (b) 
 
  
If = 1.1 A, armature reaction ignored
 
  
Actual If  = 1.25 A
 
 If needed to counter effect of armature reaction = 1.25 – 1.1 = 0.15 A 
7.14 
PARALLEL OPERATION OF DC GENERATORS
For supplying a large dc load it is desirable to use more than one generator in parallel. This arrangement 
provides the security that if one generator gives way, the other(s) can feed part load.
Desirable Conditions for dc Generators in Parallel
 
ﬁ Same voltage rating
 
ﬁ Same percentage voltage regulation
 
ﬁ Same percentage speed regulation of the prime movers
As the generator voltage is easily adjustable (in a range) so the above conditions are not a must.
Paralleling a dc Generator to Busbars (Mains)
We will consider the case of dc shunt generators.
A dc shunt generator (G1) is connected to the busbars (switches S, S1 closed) and feeding the load as shown in 
Fig. 7.67(a). I1 = IL. Another shunt generator G2 is to be connected to the busbars to share part load relieving 
the load on G1. The stepwise procedure for this operation is described below:
 
1. The generator G2 is driven by its prime mover and brought to rated speed
 
2. The switch S of G2 is closed. The centre-zero voltmeter across the switch S2 reads the voltage difference 
between busbars and voltage of G2

358 Electric Machines
 
3. The voltage of G2 is adjusted by its shunt ﬁeld regulator till the voltage across S2 is nearby zero. The 
switch S2 is then closed. G2 now ﬂoats on the busbars without exchanging any current.
 
4. The regulator resistance of G2 is now reduced (increasing its ﬁeld current) so that it feeds current I2 
to busbars. The regulating resistance of G1 is now increased (reducing its ﬁeld current) so that it feeds 
smaller current to the busbar. The adjustment process ﬁnally results in proper current sharing between 
the two generators such that I1 + I2 = IL 
 
5. In the above adjustment the bus bar voltage is maintained constant
Determination of Load Sharing
The load sharing between the generators is determined by their external characteristics. Shown in Fig. 7.67(b) 
are the external characteristics of the two generators with their ﬁeld currents adjusted for the same no-load 
voltage. The combined characteristic of the system is also drawn. At busbar voltage Vbus the total load current 
is supplied by the two operators such that 
 
I1 + I2 = IL
The adjustments of the ﬁeld currents modiﬁes the external characteristic changing the load sharing.
V
G1
G2
S
S
S2
S1
I1
I2
IL
+
–
Load
Fig. 7.67(a)
Parallel Operation of Compound Generators 
Two compound generators in parallel feeding a load are sketched in Fig. 7.68. With switches S1 and S2 
closed they are sharing the load. This system is found to be unstable because of the positive voltage feedback 
through series windings. We will present the qualitative arguments.
If because of any reason the emf of G1 increases, it causes its load current I1 to increase and correspondingly 
I2 to decrease. The series excitation of G1 increases and that of G2 decreases and so the internal voltage of G1 
increases further and that of G2 decreases. Consequently current I1 fed by G1 to load sharply increases and 
that of G2 sharply decreases. Finally all the load shifts to G1 from G2. In fact G2 may begin to act as a motor. 
All this leads to heavy overloading of G1, an unacceptable operation.

DC Machines 
359
Combined
I1
I2
IL
V0
V(bus)
1
2
Load sharing:
=
+ I2
I
I
L
1
Load current
Fig. 7.67(b)
Remedy
A low-resistance equalizer connection is made directly between the two armatures before the series ﬁelds as 
shown in Fig. 7.68. Any emf variations of the armatures causes equalizing circulating current which do not 
affect the current through the series windings. Thereby the parallel operation is stabilized.
G1
G2
S2
S1
I1
I2
IL
+
–
Load
Equalizer
Fig. 7.68 Compound generators in parallel S1 and S2 closed

360 Electric Machines
EXAMPLE 7.30 Two dc shunt generators are rated 230 kW and 150 kW, 400 V. Their full load voltage 
drops are 3% and 6% respectively. They are excited to no load voltages of 410 V and 420 V respectively. 
How will they share a load of 1000 A and the corresponding bus voltage?
SOLUTION
 
G1 If1 = 250
10
400
3
¥
 = 625 A; Full load voltage drop = 400 ¥ 3
100  = 12 V
 
G2 If2 = 150
10
400
3
¥
 = 375 A; Full load voltage drop = 400 ¥ 6
100  = 24 V 
Voltage of G1 at load current I1
 
V1 = 410 – 
12
625
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ I1 
(i)
Voltage of G2 at load current I2
 
V2 = 420 – 
24
375
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ I2 
(ii)
Load on generation in parallel, IL = I1 + I2 = 1000 A, Bus voltage = V (?)
In parallel operation 
V1 = V2 = V 
(iii)
From Eqs (i) and (ii)
 
410 – 
12
625
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ I1 = 420 – 
24
375
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ I2
 
0.064 I2 – 0.0192 I1 = 10 
(iv)
 
I1 + I2 = 1000 
(v)
Solving Eqs (iv) and (v), we get
 
I1 = 649 A, I2 = 351 A
 
Bus voltage, V = 410 – 
12
625
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  ¥ 649 = 397.5 V
 
Load = 103 ¥ 397.5 = 397.5 kW
EXAMPLE 7.31 In Example 7.30, the two generators are excited to equal no-load voltages. What should 
be the percentage voltage drop of 150 kW generator in order that the share load is in the ratio of their 
ratings? What is the no load voltage for a bus voltage of 400 V and load current of 1000 A?
SOLUTION 
Let the full load voltage drop of G2 be x volts. Then
 
V1 = V0 – 
12
625
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ I1 
(i)
 
V2 = V0 – 
x
375
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ I2 
(ii)
For parallel operation
 
V1 = V2 = V
So from Eqs (i) and (ii)
 
x
375
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ I2 = 
12
625
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ I1 
(iii)

DC Machines 
361
We want 
I
I
1
2
 = 250
150  = 5
3  
(iv)
Solving (iii) and (iv)
 
I
I
1
2
 = 
625
12
375
x
¥
 = 5
3
or 
x = 12 V
 
Percentage voltage drop of G2 = 12
400  ¥ 100 = 3% 
Hence the percentage voltage drop of the two generators must be equal
 
I1 + I2 = 1000
 
I
I
1
2
 = 5
3
which give 
I1 = 625 A, I2 = 375 A
 
VBus = V0 – 
12
625
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  ¥ 625 = 400 V
or 
V0 = 412 V
7.15 CHARACTERISTICS OF DC MOTORS 
The power of the dc motor lies in its versatility and ease with which a variety of speed-torque characteristics 
can be obtained, and the wide range of speed control which is possible without the need of elaborate control 
schemes while a high level of operating efﬁciency is maintained. In a dc generator the speed is ﬁxed by the 
prime mover and remains nearly constant throughout the operating part of the characteristics,
While the ﬁeld excitation is adjusted to yield the desired terminal voltage at a given load. In a motor, on the 
other hand, the need is to match the speed-torque characteristic of the load and to run the load at a speciﬁed 
speed or speed by adjustment of the ﬁeld and the armature voltage in case the speed control over a wide range 
is required. 
The fundamental emf and torque relationships of Eqs. (7.29) and (7.30) are reproduced below:
 
Induced emf, Ea = FnZ
P
A
60
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = Ka Fw V 
(7.66)
 
Electromagnetic torque, T = 1
2p FIa Z
P
A
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = KaFIa Nm 
(7.67)
where 
Ka = ZP
2p A
and  
w = 2
60
p
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ n = speed in rad (mech)/s and n = speed in rpm 
(7.68)
In place of electromagnetic torque may also use the term developed torque with symbol T. For repeated 
use we may use the term torque only.
In motoring operation it is convenient to express armature speed in rpm. So we write the above relationships 
as

362 Electric Machines
 
n = 1
¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
K
E
a
a
F
; K¢a = 2
60
p
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ Ka 
(7.69)
 
T = KaF Ia  
(7.70)
The induced emf Ea in a motor is known as back emf as it opposes the applied terminal voltage Vt. It is 
related to the terminal voltage by the armature circuit equation. For the short-compound motor (given in 
Fig. 7.30(b); Eq. 7.53(a))
 
Ea = Vt – Ia(Ra + Rse) 
(7.71)
The ﬂux/pole F is found from the magnetization characteristic against the equivalent excitation 
 
If,eq = If ± 
N
N
se
f
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ Ia 
(7.72)
corrected for the demagnetizing effect of armature reaction. 
As in the case of dc generators depending on the type of excitation there are three types of dc motors – 
shunt motor, series motor and compound motor. Self-excitation has no meaning for a dc motor.
Three important operating characteristic of dc motor are
In this section, we shall examine the nature of the three characteristics mentioned above on quantitative-
qualitative basic because of magnetic saturation and armature reaction caused demagnetization.
Shunt Motor
The connection diagram of dc shunt motor is shown in Fig. 7.69. Its operation with ﬁxed terminal voltage and 
constant ﬁeld current (ﬁxed ﬁeld resistance) will now be considered.
+
–
Ia
Ra
Ea
If
IL
+
–
Vt
Shunt field
winding
Rf
Fig. 7.69 Shunt motor 
Speed-current characteristic The armature circuit equation is
 
Ea = Vt – Ia Ra = K¢aF n 
(7.73)
which gives
 
n = V
I R
K
t
a
a
a
-
¢F
 
(7.74)

DC Machines 
363
which indeed is the speed-current characteristic. At no load the armature current Iao is quite small (2 – 5% of 
Ia ( f l )), we will, therefore, assume Iao = 0 for sketching the characteristic. The no load speed is then 
 
n0 = 
V
K
t
a¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
F
 
(7.75)
n T
,
n0
Ia
0
Torque, armature reaction neglected
Torque
Speed, armature
reaction neglected
Speed
(a)
versus
and
versus
n
T
Ia
Ia
n
n0
T
0
Speed AR
neglected
(b)
versus
n
T
Fig. 7.70 Shunt motor characteristics (Vt, If constant) 
Armature reaction effect ignored. 
F remains constant. It is seen from Eq. (7.74) that speed drops linearly due to IaRa drop. The characteristic 
is drawn in dotted line in Fig. 7.70(a).
Effect of armature reaction caused demagnetization.
F reduces with increasing Ia. It then follows from Eq. (7.74) that the speed at any Ia is higher than in the 
armature reaction neglected case. However, the effect of IaRa drop predominates and the speed drop with Ia. 
Of course, the no load speed is the same as given by Eq. (7.77a). The characteristic is drawn in solid line in 
Fig. 7.70(a) which lies above the characteristic with armature reaction effect ignored.
Torque-current characteristic As per Eq. (7.70), motor torque is
 
T = Ka FIa 
(7.76)
The characteristic is linear if armature reaction effect is ignored as in shown Fig. 7.70(a) by dotted line. 
Otherwise reduction in F causes the characteristic to bend downwards as shown by solid line in Fig. 7.70(a).
Speed-torque characteristic Eliminating Ia from Eqs (7.74) and (7.76), the speed-torque characteristic is 
obtained as 
 
n = 
V
K
R
K K
t
a
a
a
a
¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ -
¢
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
F
F2 T 
(7.77)
If the armature reaction is ignored F remains constant. Therefore the speed drops linearly as per Eq. (7.77). 
The no load speed is
 
n0 = 
V
K
t
a¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
F
 
(7.77a)
The characteristic is drawn in dotted line in Fig. 7.70(b).

364 Electric Machines
Armature reaction effect causes F to reduce with increasing torque (and so increasing current). The speed 
drops more sharply with torque than in the linear case because of F2 in the denominator of the second them 
in Eq. (7.77). The characterstic is skeeched in solid line in Fig. 7.70(b).
Sum-up The speed drops from no load to full load by a few per cent; in fact the speed remains substantially 
constant. Such a characteristic is known as “shunt characteristic”.
EXAMPLE 7.32 An 8 kW, 230 V, 1200 rpm dc shunt motor has Ra = 0.7 W. The ﬁeld current is adjusted 
until, on no load with a supply of 250 V, the motor runs at 1250 rpm and draws armature current of 1.6 A. 
A load torque is then applied to the motor shaft, which causes the Ia to rise to 40 A and the speed falls to 
1150 rpm. Determine the reduction in the ﬂux per pole due to the armature reaction. 
SOLUTION 
Equation (7.73) gives 
 
n = K¢a
Ea
F
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = K¢a
V
I R
a
a
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
F
or 
F = K¢a
V
I R
n
a
a
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
F(no-load) = K¢a
250
1 6
0 7
1250
-
¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
.
.
 = 0.2 K¢a
 
F(load) = K¢a
250
40
0 7
1150
-
¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
.
 = 0.193 K¢a
Reduction in F due to the armature reaction 
 
 = 0 2
0 193
0 2
.
.
.
-
 ¥ 100 = 3.5%
EXAMPLE 7.33 A 20 kW, 250 V dc shunt motor has a full-load armature current of 85 A at 1100 rpm. 
The armature resistance is 0.18 W. 
Determine: 
 (a) the internal electromagnetic torque developed; 
 (b) the internal torque if the ﬁeld current is suddenly reduced to 80% of its original value; 
 (c) The steady motor speed in part (b) assuming the load torque to have re mained constant. 
Assume: magnetic circuit to be linear.
SOLUTION 
 
(a)  
Ea = 250 – 0.18 ¥ 85 = 234.7 V
 
  
EaIa = Tw 
 
  
234.7 ¥ 85 = T ¥ 2
1100
60
p ¥
 
 or 
T = 173.2 Nm
 
(b) Magnetic circuit linearity is assumed i.e. F μ If. Field suddenly reduced to 0.8 of original value. Ia is assumed to 
remain constant for that instant. Then
 
  
T1 = 0.8 ¥ 173.2 = 138.6 Nm

DC Machines 
365
 
(c) Under steady condition for the motor internal torque to build to the original value, new values of armature current 
and speed are established. These are obtained below:
 
  
T = Ka¢Kf If ¥ 85 = Ka¢Kf ¥ 0.8 If ¥ Ia1 = 173.2 Nm
 
 or 
Ia1 = 106.25 A
 
  
Ea1 = 250 – 0.18 ¥ 106.25 = 230.9 V
 
 and 
234.7 = Ka ¢Kf If ¥ 1100 
 
  
230.9 = Ka¢ Kf¢ 0.8 If n1
 
 Dividing we get 
230 9
234 7
.
.
 = 0 8
1100
1
. n
 
 or 
n1 = 1353 rpm.
 
 Observe that both motor speed and armature current increase by reducing ﬁeld current with constant load torque.
EXAMPLE 7.34 A dc shunt motor runs at 1200 rpm on no-load drawing 5 A from 220 V mains. Its 
armature and ﬁeld resistances are 0.25 W and 110 W respectively. When loaded (at motor shaft), the motor 
draws 62 A from the mains. What would be its speed? Assume that the armature reaction demagnetizes the 
ﬁeld to the extent of 5%.
Also calculate the internal torque developed at no-load and on load. What is the motor shaft torque at 
load (this torque drives the mechanical load). 
SOLUTION 
In a dc shunt motor
 
IL = Ia + If 
Shunt ﬁeld current, 
If = 220
110  = 2 A (constant)
At no load
 
Ia0 = 5 – 2 = 3 A
 
Ea0 = 220 – 0.25 ¥ 3 = 219.25 V 
(i) 
 
n0 = 1200 rpm
 
Ea0 = K¢a F n0
or 
219.25 = K¢a F ¥ 1200 
 
T0w0 = Ea0 Ia0 
 
2
1200
60
p ¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ T0 = 219.25 ¥ 3
or 
T0 = 5.23 Nm
This torque is absorbed in iron loss, and windage and friction losses of the motor (the shaft being at no load).
On load
 
Ia1 = 62 – 2 = 60 A
 
Ea1 = 220 – 0.25 ¥ 60 = 205 V 
(ii)
 
ﬂux/pole F1 = 0.95 F
 
Ea1 = K¢a F1 n1
 
205 = K¢a ¥ 0.95 F n1 
(iii)
Dividing Eq. (ii) by Eq. (i) 
 
0 95
1200
1
.
n  = 
205
219 25
.

366 Electric Machines
or 
n1 = 1181 rpm 
Drop in motor speed is only 1.6% on being loaded. This because the reduction in ﬂux/pole due to armature reaction 
counters the drop in speed caused by armature resistance drop.
 
T1 w1 = Ea1 Ia1 
 
2
1181
60
p ¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ T1 = 205 ¥ 60 
or 
T1 = 99.45 Nm
 
T1 (shaft) = 99.45 – 5.23 
 
 = 94.22 Nm
Series Motor
The connection diagram of a series motor is drawn in 
Fig. 7.71. From the armature circuit equation 
 
Ea = Vt – Ia (Ra + Rse) = K¢aF n 
(7.78)
Speed-current characteristic From Eq. (7.78), we can 
express motor speed as 
 
n = 
V
K
R
R
K
t
a
a
se
a
¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ -
+
¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
F
F
Ia 
(7.79)
This is the exact speed-current equation.
In a series motor F – Ia is the magnetization characteristic, which as we know has an initial linear region 
beyond which saturation sets in. In the linear region 
 
F = Kf Ia; Kf is constant 
(7.80) 
Substituting in Eq. (7.79), the speed can be expressed as 
 
n = 
1
¢
-
+
È
ÎÍ
˘
˚˙
K K
V
I
R
R
a
f
t
a
a
se
(
)
(
)  
(7.81)
This is a shifted rectangular hyperbola sketched in Fig. 7.72(a) in solid line. As the armature current 
increases rate of increase of F reduces. It means 
 
F < Kf Ia
As a result, the actual speed found from Eq. (7.79) is higher than based on linear assumption. The actual 
speed-current characteristic lies above the characteristic based on linear magnetization; the characteristic is 
sketched in dotted line in Fig. 7.72(a). 
Some observations 
 
1. As the armature current increases with load the speed comes down sharply
 
2. At no load 
 
  
Ia Æ 0, F Æ 0, n 
 
 
 as shown from Eq. (7.79); the second term is very small because of (Ro + Rse)
This is a dangerous situation and the centrifugal forces will destroy the armature and may harm the 
personnel. Hence, a series motor must never be allowed to run at no load even accidently.
Ea
n
Ra
+
–
Vt
IL = Ia
Series field
winding
Rse
+
–
Fig. 7.71 Series Motor

DC Machines 
367
n
O
(a)
Ia  IL
Actual
Linear magnetic
T
(b)
Ia
IL

Actual
Linear
magnetic
Fig. 7.72 Series Motor Characteristics
Torque-current characteristic
 
T = KaFIa 
(7.82)
For linear magnetization 
 
T = KaKf I 2
a : a parabola 
(7.83)
The characteristic is sketched in Fig. 7.72(b) in solid line. 
Because of saturation and demagnetization caused by armature reaction, the torque tends to level off in the 
actual characteristic shown in dotted line in Fig. 7.72(b).
Speed-torque characteristic From Eq. (7.82)
 
Ia = 1
K
T
a
F
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
Substituting in Eq. (7.79) and organizing 
 
n = 
V
K
R
R
K K
t
a
a
se
a
a
¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ -
+
¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
F
F 2
T 
(7.84)
For linear magnetization
Eliminating Ia between Eqs (7.81) and (7.83) we get 
 
n = 
1
¢
-
+
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
K K
V
K K
T
R
R
a
f
t
a
f
a
se
(
)  
(7.85) 
The speed-torque characteristic as per Eq. (7.85) based on linear magnetization is sketched in Fig. 7.73 
in solid line. Due to saturation and demagnetize the rate of increase of F reduces with increasing torque. At 
large torque, F would be less than that based on linear assumption and so the speed would be higher. This is 
because in Eq. (7.84) the contribution of the negative term is small as there is F2 in the its denominator and 
so the ﬁrst term predominates. The actual speed is almost constant at large torque.
Remark It is observed from the series motor speed-torque characteristic that as the load torque increases 
the speed drops heavily relieving thereby the few load (n ¥ T) on the motor. This type of characteristic is 
known as “series” characteristic and is ideally suited for traction, cranes etc—applications where in large 
n
T
Actual
Linear magnetic
Fig. 7.73 Speed-Torque characteristics of series motor

368 Electric Machines
accelerating is demanded by the load at starting, while when running a small torque is needed to maintain 
steady speed. In the two applications cited the load is always there so there is no danger of under-loading or 
no-loading.
EXAMPLE 7.35 The magnetization characteristic of a 4-pole de series motor may be taken as proportional 
to current over a part of the working range; on this basis the ﬂux per pole is 4.5 mWb/A. The load requires a 
gross torque proportional to the square of the speed equal to 30 Nm at 1000 rev/min. The armature is wave-
wound and has 492 active conductors. Determine the speed at which the motor will run and the current it 
will draw when connected to a 220 V supply, the total armature resistance of the motor being 2.0 W. 
SOLUTION 
Referring to Eq. (7.22) 
 
Ea = FnZ
P
A
60
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = ( .
)
4 5
10
492
60
4
2
3
¥
¥
¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
-
I
n
a
 
 = 0.0738 nIa 
(i) 
Recalling Eq. (7.26), the torque developed
 
T = 1
2p
FIa Z
P
A
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = 1
2p (4.5 ¥ 10–3 Ia) Ia ¥ 492
4
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
 = 0.705 I 2
a 
(ii)
Further 
Ea = Vt – Ia (Ra + Rse) = 220 – 2Ia  
(iii)
Substituting Eq. (i) in (iii),
 
0.0738 nIa = 220 – 2Ia
or 
Ia = 
220
2
0 0738
+ .
n  
(iv)
Substituting this expression for Ia in Eq. (ii),
 
T = 0.705
220
2
0 0738
2
+
È
ÎÍ
˘
˚˙
.
n
Given: 
Load Torque TL = KLn2 
From the given data KL can be evaluated as 
 
KL = 
30
1000 2
(
)
 = 3 ¥ 10–5 Nm /rpm 
Under steady operation conditions, TL = T (developed)
or 
3 ¥ 10–5 n2 = 0.705
220
2
0 0738
2
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
.
n
Solving, 
n = 662.6 rpm
Substituting for n in Eq. (iv)
 
Ia = 
220
2
0 0738
663 2
+
¥
.
.
 
 = 4.32 A
EXAMPLE 7.36 A 250-V dc series motor with compensating winding has a total armature circuit 
resistance of (Ra + Rse) = 0.08 W. It is run at 1200 rpm by means of a primemover with armature circuit 
open and series ﬁeld separately excited. This test yielded the following magnetisation data: 

DC Machines 
369
 Ise(A)  
40 
80 
120 
160 
200 
240 
280 
320 
360 
400
 VOC (V) 
62 
130 
180 
222 
250 
270 
280 
288 
290 
292
Sketch the speed-torque characteristic of the series motor connected to 250 V main by calculating the 
speed and torque values at armature currents of 75, 100, 200, 300, 400 A. 
SOLUTION 
Rather than drawing the magnetisation curve, we shall usee the above data by linear interpolation between 
the data point given.
Sample Calculation 
 
Ia = Ise = 75 A
 
Ea = 250 – 0.08 ¥ 75 = 244 V
Using linear interpolation, at Ise = 75 A
 
Ea (1200 rpm) = 130 – 130
62
40
-
 ¥ 5 = 121.5 V
 
n = 1200
121 5.
 ¥ 244 = 2410 rpm
 
Tw = Ea Ia 
or 
T = 
60
2
2410
p ¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  ¥ 244 ¥ 75 = 72.5 Nm 
Computations can be carried in tabular from below:
Ia = Ise (A)
Ea (V)
Ea (V) at 1200 rpm
n (rpm)
T (Nm)
75
244
121.5
2410
72.5
100
242
155
1874
123
200
234
250
1123
398
300
226
283
958
676
400
218
292
902
923
The speed-torque (n – T ) characteristic is drawn in Fig. 7.74.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
T(Nm)
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
n(rpm)
Fig. 7.74

370 Electric Machines
EXAMPLE 7.37 A 220 V, 7.5 kW series motor is mechanically coupled to a fan. When running at 
400 rpm the motor draws 30 A from the mains (220 V). The torque required by the fan is proportional to the 
square of speed. Ra = 0.6 W, Rse. = 0.4 W. Neglect armature reaction and rotational loss. Also assume the 
magnetisation characteristic of the motor to be linear.
 (a) Determine the power delivered to the fan and torque developed by the motor.
 (b) Calculate the external resistance to be added in series to the armature circuit to reduce the fan speed 
to 200 rpm. Calculate also the power delivered to the fan at this speed.
SOLUTION 
Pfan = Pdev = P; no rotational loss
 
P = Ea Ia  
(i)
 
Tdev = Ka¢Kf IseIa = Ka¢Kf I 2
a; Ise = Ia; linear magnetization
 
Tfan = KFn2 
But 
Tdev = Tfan = T 
\ 
Ia μ n 
(ii)
 
(a) Operation at 400 rpm (Rext = 0)
 
  
Ea = 220 – (0.6 + 0.4) ¥ 30 = 190 V
 
  
Ia = 30 A
 
  
P = 190 ¥ 30 = 5.7 kW
 
  
Tw = EaIa 
 
 or 
T = 
5700
2
400
60
p ¥
 = 136 Nm
 
(b) Operation at 200 rpm (Rext = ?)
 
  
T = 136 ¥ 
200
400
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = 34 Nm
 
  
Ia = 30 ¥ 
200
400
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = 15 A
 
  
Tw = EaIa 
 
  
34 ¥ 
2
200
60
p ¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = [220 – (0.6 + 0.4 + Rext) ¥ 15] ¥15
 
 Solving we get 
 
  
Rext = 10.5 W
 
  
P = Tw = 34 ¥ 
2
200
60
p ¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
  
 = 0.721 kW
EXAMPLE 7.38 A 180 kW, 600 V dc series motor runs at 600 rpm at full load current of 300 A. The total 
resistance of its armature circuit 0.105 W. The magnetization curve data at 500 rpm is as below. The series 
ﬁeld excitation is provided separately. 
VOC = Ea (V) 
440 
470 
500 
530 
560 
590
Series ﬁeld 
250 
277 
312 
356 
406 
466
current (A)

DC Machines 
371
Determine the starting torque developed when the starting current is limited to 500 A. Assume that the 
armature reaction mmf is proportional to the square of armature current. 
SOLUTION 
The magnetization curve at 500 rpm is drawn in Fig. 7.75.
 
Full load current, Ia = 180
103
¥
600
 = 300 A, Speed, n = 600 rpm
Back emf 
 
Ea = 600 – 300 ¥ 0.105 = 568.5 V
To look up magnetization curve, we should ﬁnd the emf at 500 rpm
 
Ea (500 rpm) = 568.5 ¥ 500
600  = 473 V
From the magnetization curve to induce 473 V, the series ﬁeld current needed is 
 
Ise = Ia = 282 A; we will write Ia
Therefore the series ﬁeld equivalent demagnetizing current is 
 
Iad = 300 – 282 = 18 A
As Iad is proportional to the square of armature current,
 
Iad /ampere of armature current = 
18
300 2
(
)
 = 0.2 ¥ 10–3A/A
At start 
Ia = 500 A
 
Effective Ia = 500 – Iad = 500 – (500)2 ¥ 0.2 ¥ 10–3
 
 = 450 A
From the magnetization curve, the corresponding induced emf is 
220
300
400
500
If (A)
200
400
500
600
Ea(V)
Fig. 7.75

372 
Electric Machines
 
Ea = 590 V at n = 500 rpm
Power balance equation
 
Tw = EaIa 
(i)
Therefore 
Tstart = E I
a a
w
 
(ii)
Substituting values 
 
Tstart = 590
500
500
2
60
¥
¥
p  = 5634 Nm 
Compound Motor 
It has been said earlier that there is no signiﬁcant difference in the performance of long and short shunt 
connection. We shall proceed on the basis of long shunt whose circuit diagram is given in Fig. 7.30(a). 
Further as differential compound motor is not used in practice, for which we will advance the reason later, we 
will consider only cumulative compound motor. 
Speed equation 
 
n = V
I
R
R
K
t
a
a
se
a
-
+
¢
(
)
F
 
(7.84)
Torque equation 
 
T = KaF Ia 
(7.85)
In a compound motor F is determined from the magnetization characteristic for the combined (additive) 
net excitation 
 
If (net) = If + 
N
N
se
f
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ Ia, If = constant
It will help matters if we could separate out the ﬂux created by shunt and series ﬁelds but the superposition 
cannot be applied. To overcome this problem we consider the magnetization characteristic (F vs If) sketched 
in Fig. 7.76 it is found from this ﬁgure that F = Fsh + Fse 
where 
Fsh = ﬂux of shunt excitation
 
Fse = ﬂux of series excitation
Further Fse can be taken to be proportional to Ia corresponding to slope of the magnetization characteristic 
in the region beyond Fsh.
It may be noted that the above method accounts for saturation but not demagnetizing effect of armature 
reaction.
Speed-current characteristic 
 
n = 1
¢
-
+
+
È
ÎÍ
˘
˚˙
K
V
I
R
R
a
t
a
a
se
sh
se
(
)
F
F
 
(7.86)

DC Machines 
373
As Ia increases, numerator decreases and Fse in the denominator increases and as a result the motor speed 
falls much more sharply than in shunt motor. At large values of current the characteristic is similar to that of a 
series motor. The characteristic lies in between those of shunt and series motors, closer to one whose ﬁeld is 
stronger near full load. The compound motor has a great advantage over series motor because it has a deﬁnite 
no load speed given by
 
n0 = 1
¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
K
V
a
t
sh
F
; shunt motor no load speed 
(7.87)
Yet its characteristic can made closer to the relieving characteristic of series motor.
A differentially compound motor has ﬂux/pole F = (Fsh – Fse). It is seen from Eq. (7.84) that on over-load 
F reduces sharply and so the motor acts like a series motor on no load. This is why the differential compound 
motor is not used in practice.
Comparison of compound motor speed-current characteristic with shunt at the same full load speed and 
also the series motor is depicted in Figs. 7.77(a) and (b) in which the conclusions made above are borne out. 
Certain observations are made below:
 
1. Compound and shunt motors (Fig. 7.77(a)) Because of Fse increasing with Ia, the speed of the 
compound motor falls much more sharply than the shunt motor. Therefore, the n – Ia characteristic of 
the compound motor lies above that of the shunt motor for Ia < Ia (f l) and lies below for Ia >Ia ( f l)
 
2. Compound and series motors (Fig. 7.77(b)) Because the constant shunt ﬂux Fsh, n – Ia characteristic 
of compound motor starts at deﬁnite speed n0 and drop gradually, while that series motor drop steeply. 
Therefore, the compound motor characteristic lies below that of the series motor for Ia < Ia (f l) and 
lies above that of the series motor for Ia >Ia (f l)
Torque –current characteristic From Eq. (7.85) 
 
T = Ka(Fsh + Fse) Ia  
(7.88)
Fse
Fsh
F
If
It (net)
If
N
N
se
f
Ia
Fig. 7.76

374 Electric Machines
 
 = KaFsh Ia + KaFse Ia 
 
Fse ª Kse Ia 
Thus 
T = KaFsh Ia + KaKse I 2
a  
(7.89)
 
  shunt type + series type 
Due to saturation and demagnetization both torque components level off. The torque-current characteristic 
of the compound motor as sum of shunt and series components is sketched in Fig. 7.78. This approach 
of dividing of F into Fsh and Fse is heuristic and so reveals the nature of characteristic; can not to used 
quantitatively. Quantitative approach (graphical) will be illustrated in examples that follow.
T
Commutative
compound
Series
Shunt
I fl
a( )
Ia
T fl
( )
Fig. 7.78 Torque-current characteristic of compound motor.
Incidentally the ﬁgure provides the comparison of the nature of the (T – Ia) characteristics of the three 
kinds of dc motors. 
n
n fl
( )
I
fl
a( )
(a) Compound and shunt motor
Ia
Commutative
compound
Shunt
n
n(fl)
I
fl
a( )
(b) Compound and series motor
Ia
Series
n0
Commutative
compound
n0
n0
Differential
compound
Differential
compound
Fig. 7.77
a characteristics

DC Machines 
375
Speed-torque characteristic Eliminating Ia between Eqs 7.86 and (7.88) we obtain
 
n = 1
1
2
¢
+
-
¢
+
+
K
V
K K
R
R
a
t
sh
se
a
a
a
se
sh
se
F
F
F
F
(
)
T 
(7.90)
where as before no load speed is 
 
n0 = 1
¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
K
V
a
t
sh
F
 
(7.91)
It may be noted that the ﬁrst term in Eq. (7.90) is not a constant quantity. 
As torque increases, Ia and so Fse increases, the ﬁrst term reduces (sharply if the series ﬁeld is stronger 
than shunt ﬁeld); the second negative term reduces but it does not have signiﬁcant effect on speed as (Ra + 
Rse) is very small. The speed reduces with torque and at large torque becomes almost constant because  of 
saluration and demagnetigation. Comparison of speed-torque characteristic of compound motor with shunt 
and series motor at same full load speed is shown in Fig. 7.79.
Speed
Torque
Series motor
Compound motor
(strong series field)
Compound motor
(medium series field)
Shunt motor
T fl
( )
n fl
( )
Fig. 7.79 Comparison of speed-torque characteristic of cumulative compound motor with shunt and series motor
EXAMPLE 7.39 For the series motor of Example 7.38 determine the speed and mechanical power and 
torque developed, when the motor draws 250 A from the mains. 
SOLUTION 
It has been shown in Example 7.38 that the demagnetizing effect of armature reaction in terms of series 
ﬁeld current is 
 
lad = 0.2 ¥ 10–3 I2
a 
At 
la = 250 A 
 
Iad = 0.2 ¥ 10–3 ¥ (254)2 = 12.5 V 
Therefore 
Ia (net) = 250 – 12.5 = 237.5 A 

376 Electric Machines
From the magnetization curve 
 
Ea (at 500 rpm) = 428 V 
 
Ea (actual) = 600 – 250 ¥ 0.105 = 573.75 V 
Therefore, motor speed 
 
n = 500 ¥ 573 75
428
.
 = 670 rpm
Mechanical power developed 
 
Pmech = EaIa = 573.75 ¥ 250 
 
 = 143.44 kW 
 
Torque developed = 143 44
10
670
2
60
3
.
¥
¥
p
 = 2044 Nm
EXAMPLE 7.40 A 240 V compound (cumulative) dc motor has the following open circuit magnetization 
characteristic at normal full load speed of 850 rev/min: 
 Excitation, AT/pole 
1200 
2400 
3600 
4800 
6000
 Generated emf, V 
76 
135 
180 
215 
240
The resistance voltage drop in the armature circuit at full load is 25 V. At full load the shunt and the 
series windings provide equal ampere-turn excitation. 
Calculate the mmf per pole on no load. Estimate the value to which the speed will rise when full load is 
removed, the resistance voltage drop in the armature circuit under that condition being 3 V. Ignore armature-
reaction and brush-contact effects. Assume long-shunt cumulative compounding. 
SOLUTION 
At full load, from Fig. 7.81, 
 
Ea (full load) = V – Ia (Ra + Rse) = 240 – 25 = 215 V 
Vt
+
–
IL
If
Ia
Rse
Ra
Ea
Series field
Shunt
field
Fig. 7.80 
Long-shunt compound dc motor
Corresponding ATnet from magnetizing curve of Fig. 7.81. 
 
ATnet (full load) = 4800
Then  
ATsh = ATse (full load) = 2400 
Now 
Ia (no load) = 3
25 Ia (full load); Ia (no load) = If (shunt ﬁeld)

DC Machines 
377
 
ATse (no load) = 3
25  ¥ 2400 = 288
 
ATsh = 2400 (no change) 
 
ATnet (no load) = 2400 + 288 = 2688 
 
Ea(from the magnetizing curve) = 148 V at 850 rpm, at ATnet (no load) 
 
Ea (no load) = 240 – 3 = 237 V 
Now 
Ea μ n at given ATnet
Hence,  
n(no load) = 850 ¥ 237
148  = 1361 rpm 
It may be seen that in a cumulatively compound dc motor, full load speed is much less than no load speed (see 
Fig. 7.71). 
EXAMPLE 7.41 A 240 V, 10 kW dc shunt motor has 
 
Ra = 0.18 W, R(inter poles) = 0.025 W and Rf = 320 W (ﬁeld only),
 
Shunt ﬁeld turns = 2000
No load test conducted at 240 V by varying the ﬁeld current yielded the following data: 
 Speed, n 
1160  
1180  
1220  
1250  
1300 
 Field current, If (A) 
0.664  
0.632 
0.584 
0.558 
0.522
At no load armature voltage drop is negligible. 
 (a) At full load the motor ﬁeld current is adjusted to 0.6 A for a speed of 1218 rpm. Calculate the 
demagnetizing ampere-turns. 
Ea(V)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
40
80
120
160
200
240
215
148
At 850 rpm
Excitation AT/Pole
Fig. 7.81

378 Electric Machines
 (b) In part (a) calculate the electromagnetic torque. 
 (c) The ﬁeld current is adjusted to the maximum value. The starting armature current is limited to 75 A. 
Calculate the starting torque. Assume demagnetizing ampere-turns to be 165. 
 (d) The shunt ﬁeld current is adjusted to give a no load speed of 1250 rpm. A series ﬁeld is provided to 
give a speed of 1200 rpm at full load current. Calculate the number of turns of the series ﬁeld. Assume 
the series ﬁeld resistance to be 0.04 W.
SOLUTION 
Full load current, 
Ia = 10
10
240
3
¥
 = 41.7 A 
At no load 
Ea ª Vt = 240 V 
 
Ea = K¢a Fn
or 
n = 1
¢
K
E
a
a
F , F = F (If) 
 
n = 1
¢ ◊
K
E
I
a
a
f
F(
) ; F = F (If)
Thus n – If characteristic is the inverse of F – If characteristic scaled by 
E
K
a
a¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ , pulled in Fig. 7.82 
 
(a) At full load current, 
Ia = 41.7 A, If = 0.6 A 
 
  
Ea = Vt – Ia (Ra + Ri) = 240 – (0.18 + 0.025) ¥ 41.7
 
  
Ea = 231.45 V 
 
  
n = 1218 rpm
 
  
n (at Ea = 240 V) = 1218 ¥ 
240
231 45
.
 
  
 = 1262 rpm
 
 The corresponding ﬁeld current required is found from the n – If characteristic at 
 
  
If = 0.548 A 
 
 Actual ﬁeld current required is, 
If = 0.6 A 
 
 Therefore, equivalent demagnetizing ﬁeld current is
 
  
Ifd = 0.6 – 0.548 = 0.052 A
 
 Demagnetizing ampere-turns, 
ATd = 0.052 A ¥ 2000 = 104 
 
(b) Torque developed 
 
  
Tw = EaIa 
 
 or 
T = 231 45
41 7
1218
2
60
.
.
¥
¥
p
 = 75.7 Nm
 
(c) Field current (max), 
If = 240
320  = 0.75 A
 
  
ATd = 165 (given) 
 
  
Ifd = 165
2000  = 0.0825 A
 
  
If (net) = 0.75 – 0.0825 = 0.6675 A 

DC Machines 
379
 
 At this ﬁeld current at Ea = 240 V, the motor speed is from the n – If plot as
 
  
n = 1150 rpm or w = 121.27 rad/s 
 
 We know that 
Ea = KaFw 
(i)
 
 and 
T = KaFIa 
 (ii) 
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
If (A)
1000
1100
1200
1300
n
(rpm)
Fig. 7.82

380 Electric Machines
 
 At If = 0.75, ATd = 165, F has the same value in Eqs (i) and (ii). 
From Eq. (i)  
KaF = Ea
w  = 
240
121 27
.
 = 1.98 
 
 Using this value in Eq. (ii) with Ia (start) = 75 A, we get 
 
  
T (start) = 1.98 ¥ 75 = 148.5 Nm 
 
(d) No load speed, 
n0 = 1250 rpm
 
  
Ea = 240 V
 
 Corresponding ﬁeld current, If = 0.56 A ; from n – If characteristic of Fig. 7.82. 
 
 At full load speed speciﬁed, 
n = 1200 rpm 
 
  
Rse = 0.04 W 
 
  
Total resistance in armature circuit = 0.18 + 0.25 + 0.04 = 0.245 W 
 
  
Ea = 240 – 0.245 ¥ 41.7 = 229.8 V 
 
 At, 
Ea = 240 corresponding speed = 1200 ¥ 240
229 8.
 = 1150 rpm
 
 From n – If characteristic 
 
  
If (net) = 0.684 A
 
 Equivalent If to be produced by the series ﬁeld = 0.684 – 0.56 = 0.124 A 
 
 We then ﬁeld 
Nse = 0 124
2000
41 7
.
.
¥
 = 5.95 or 6 turns
EXAMPLE 7.42 A shunt motor draws a full load armature current of 56.5 A from 230 V supply and runs 
at 1350 rpm. It has an armature-circuit resistance of 0.15 W and shunt ﬁeld turns of 1250. Its OCC data at 
1350 rpm is given below: 
 VOC(V) 
180 
200 
220 
240 
250 
 If (A) 
1.18 
1.4 
1.8 
2.4 
2.84
 (a) Determine the shunt ﬁeld current of the motor at no load speed of 1350 rpm.
 (b) Determine the demagnetizing effect of armature reaction in ampere-turns/pole at full load current.
 (c) By adding series-ﬁeld turns and connecting the motor in long shunt compound, it is required to have a 
speed of 1230 rpm when drawing an armature current of 56.5 A from 230 V supply. Assume the series 
ﬁeld resistance to be 0.033 W. Determine the series ﬁeld turns/pole.
 (d) In part (c) the series ﬁeld turns provided are 25/pole with series ﬁeld resistance of 0.025 W. Determine 
the speed at which the motor would run when connected to 230 V Supply drawing armature current 
of 56.5 A. 
SOLUTION 
The shunt motor connections are drawn in Fig. 7.84 No regulating resistance in the shunt, so the shunt 
ﬁeld current remains constant. The magnetization characteristic from the OCC data is plotted in Fig. 7.85
 
(a) At no load 
n0 = 1350 rpm 
 
 The no load armature voltage drop IaoRa can be neglected. So
 
  
Ea = Vt = 230 V 
 
 We ﬁnd from the OCC at 
Ea = 230 V 
 
  
If = 1.08 A 
 
 The shunt ﬁeld current remains constant throughout as the ﬁeld has ﬁxed resistance.

DC Machines 
381
 
(b) Full load 
Speed n = 1350 rpm 
 
 Armature current, 
Ia = 56.5 A
 
 Therefore 
Ea = 230 – 56.5 ¥ 0.15 = 221.5 V
 
 At 
Ea = 221.5 V (speed 1350) it is found from the OCC that 
 
  
If (net) = 1.8 A
 
 Actual 
If = 2.08 A 
 
 The difference is the demagnetizing effect of armature reaction in terms of ﬁeld current. So
 
  
Ifd = 2.08 – 1.8 = 0.28 A 
 
 Demagnetizing ampere-turns, 
ATd = 0.28 ¥ 1200 = 336 
 
(c) Long shunt compound connections are drawn in Fig. 7.85. Shunt ﬁeld current is same as calculated in part (a)
 
  
If = 2.08 A 
 
 At full load 
Ea = 230 – 56.5 (0.15 + 0.033) 
 
  
 = 219.7 V 
 
 Speed required, 
n = 1230 rpm 
 
 To look up OCC, we ﬁnd Ea at 1350 rpm 
 
  Ea(1350 rpm) = 219.7 ¥ 1350
1230  = 241.1 V
 
 To induce this emf 
 
  
If (net) = 2.41 A or 2.41 ¥ 1200 = 2982 AT 
 
 Actual shunt ﬁeld current
 
  
If = 1.08 A or 1296 AT 
 
 AT balance equation
 
  
ATnet = ATsh – ATd + ATse 
 
  
2892 = 1296 – 336 + ATse 
 
 or 
ATse = 1932
 
 Series ﬁeld turns, 
Nse = 1932
65 5.
 = 34/pole
 
(d)  
ATse = 25 ¥ 56.5 = 1412.5 
 
  
ATnet = 1296 – 334 + 1412.5 = 2374.5 
 
 
100
200
300
1
2
3
VOC(V)
If (A)
 
Fig. 7.83 
Fig. 7.84
Ia
Ea
If
IL
+
–
230 V
If
IL
Ia
n
Ea
+
–
230 V
Fig. 7.85

382 Electric Machines
 
  
If (net) = 2374 5
1200
.
 = 1.98 A
 
 From the OCC 
Ea(at 1350 rpm) = 226 V 
 
 Actual induced emf 
 
  
Ea (actual) = 230 – 56.5 (0.15 + 0.025) = 221.1 V 
 
 We then ﬁnd
 
  
Speed, n = 1350 ¥ 221 1
226
.  = 1320 rpm 
7.16 STARTING OF DC MOTORS 
At the time of starting (n = 0), the induced emf of a motor is zero such that the current drawn from rated 
voltage supply would be 
 
I s
a = V
Ra
 
(7.92)
for a shunt motor. The series ﬁeld resistance would be included in the denominator for a series motor. For 
large motors the armature resistance may be 0.01 pu or less; even for lower kW motors it ranges from 
0.0625 to 0.125. Thus in full-voltage starting of a dc motor, the armature current can be several times (about  
100 times for large motors) the rated value. For several reasons mentioned below such a large current cannot 
be allowed to ﬂow in a motor even for the short starting period.
 
(i) It would cause intolerably heavy sparking at the brushes which may destroy the commutator and 
brush-gear. 
 (ii) Sudden development of large torque causes mechanical shock to the shaft, reducing its life. 
 (iii) Such heavy current cannot be generally permitted to be drawn from the source of supply.
For the above-mentioned reasons all motors, except for small and fractional-kW motors, must be started 
with external resistance included in armature circuit to limit the starting current safe values. Where variable-
voltage dc supply is available, e.g. in the Ward-Leanard control scheme, this can be used for motor starting 
and no starting resistance would be needed. 
One point in favour of direct starting must be mentioned here. Since the motor torque with direct start is 
much higher, the motor starts much more quickly. As a consequence the Joule input per start is much less 
than that with resistance start. This would be helpful in repeated starting–saving energy and causing less 
temperature rise. 
Maximum allowable starting current is not more than 1.5 to 2.0 times the rated value. These values are 
safe and yet at the same time permit a high starting torque for quick acceleration of the motor. Obviously the 
dc motor can start on load. Where a variable-voltage supply is available for speed control, starting poses no 
problem at all.
Shunt and Compound Motor Starters
In shunt and compound motors starting the shunt ﬁeld should be switched on with full starting resistance in 
armature circuit. A short time delay in this position allows the ﬁeld current to build up to the steady value of 
the inductive ﬁeld transients. Also all the regulating resistance in the ﬁeld circuit must also be cut out before 
starting for the ﬁeld current to be maximum as Tstart μ If.

DC Machines 
383
We shall illustrate shunt motor starters, but these are applicable for compound motors as well. There are 
two types of shunt motor starters: 
 
ﬁ Three-point starter – employed where motor ﬁeld current can be varied in a narrow range and so does 
the motor speed 
 
ﬁ Four-point starter – motor ﬁeld current can vary over a wide range and so does the motor speed
Three-point starter The connection diagram of a three-point shunt motor starter is shown in Fig. 7.86. The 
starter terminals to be connected to the motor are A (armature); F (ﬁeld) and L (line). The starting resistance 
is arranged in steps between conducting raised studs. As the starting handle is rotated about its fulcrum, it 
moves from one stud to the next, one resistance step is cut out, and it gets added to the ﬁeld circuit. There 
is a short time wait at each stud for the motor to build up speed. This arrangement ensures a high average 
starting torque. 
+
–
3-point starter
Start
Handle
NVC
OL
release
L
OFF
Spring
ON
Electric machines
A
F
A1
A2
F1
F2
M
DC mains
Fig. 7.86 
DC shunt motor there point starter (manual)
At start the handle is brought to stud one. The line voltage gets applied to the armature with full starting 
resistance in series with armature and to the ﬁeld with NVC in series. Thus the motor starts with maximum 
torque. As it pick up speed the handle is moved from stud to stud to the ‘ON’ position shown in Fig. 7.86. 
The starting resistance has been fully cut out and is now included in the ﬁeld circuit; being small it makes 
little difference in the ﬁeld current. The resistance of NVC is small and forms part of the ﬁeld resistance. The 
voltage across the armature is the line voltage. The handle is held in this position by the electromagnet excited 
by the ﬁeld current ﬂowing through NVC.
Two protections are incorporated in the starter. 
 
1. NVC (no volt coil): In case of failure of ﬁeld current (due to accidental or otherwise open circuiting), 

384 Electric Machines
this coil releases the handle (held electromagneti cally), which goes back to the OFF position under the 
spring action. 
 
2. OL (over-load) release: The contact of this relay at armature current above a certain value (over load/
short circuit) closes the NVC ends, again bringing the handle to OFF position.
In the three-point starter if the ﬁeld regulator is used to reduce the ﬁeld current to low values for high 
motor speed NVC may release the handle causing the motor to shut down where such variation of ﬁeld 
current is desired a four-point starter is used. 
Four-point starter To overcome the problem caused when the ﬁeld current is low, NVC is connected across 
the two lines, one line connected to F terminal through the starter and other directly to the second line from 
another L terminal of the starter. To limit the NVC current a protective resistance R is connected in series with 
it. The starter diagram is drawn in Fig. 7.87. It now has four terminals = A F LL. The rest operation remains 
the same. 
+
–
3-point starter
Start
Handle
NVC
OL
release
L
OFF
Spring
ON
A
F
A1
A2
F1
F2
M
DC mains
R
L
Fig. 7.87 
DC shunt motor four point starter (manual)
The modern practice is to use a push-button type automatic starter in industries. Automatic starters carry 
out essentially the same functions as the manual ones with electromagnetic relays that short out sections of 
the robust metallic starting resistors either in a predetermined time sequence or when the armature current 
has dropped to a preset value. Such an arrangement is shown in Fig. 7.88. Most automatic starters embody 
extra control and safety features.
Starter Step Calculation for dc Shunt Motor 
From Fig. 7.88 it is seen that the instant the starter is moved to stud 1 or conductor* CM is closed, the current 
in the circuit reaches a value I1, designated as the upper current limit, given by 
 
* Resistance arranged in a circular arc with studs on which a conductor arm moves are employed in a manual starter. 
Contactors as shown in Fig. 7.88 are used in automatic starters. 

DC Machines 
385
C1
C2
C3
r1
r2
R
R
4 =
a
r2
R3
R2
R1
Vt
1
2
3
4
CM
Ea
Ra
Fig. 7.88 Automatic Shunt motor starting
 
I1 = V
R1
 
(7.93)
Thereafter the current value decreases as the 
motor speeds up and its back emf rises as shown in 
Fig. 7.89. The current is allowed to reduce to 12, the 
lower current limit, given by. 
 
I2 = V
E
n
R
a
-
(
)
1
1
 
(7.94)
where Ea(n1) is the back emf at speed n1 reached by 
the motor. At this instant the starter is moved to stud 
2 or contactor C1 is closed. The current increases 
instan taneously to I1 as shown in Fig. 7.89 and 
satisﬁes the relationship
 
I1 = V
E
n
R
a
-
(
)
1
2
  
(7.95)
From Eqs (7.96) and (7.97) 
 
I
I
1
2
 = R
R
1
2
 
(7.96a)
0
t1
t2
t3
t4
t5
0
I2
I1
Ia
ILoad
t
0
t1
t2
t3
t4
t5
n1
t
n2
n
Speed
Fig. 7.89 Variation of armature current and speed versus time in shunt motor starting

386 Electric Machines
By induction, for a k-stud ((k – 1) sections of external resistance) starter,
 
I
I
1
2
 = R
R
1
2
 = R
R
2
3
 = º = 
R
R
k
k
-1   
(7.96b)
It immediately follows from Eq. (7.98b) that 
 
R
R
R
R
R
R
k
k
1
2
2
3
1
◊
º
-  = 
I
I
k
1
2
1
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
-
 = g k–1
where 
g = I
I
1
2
 = upper current limit
lower current limit  
(7.96c)
Hence 
R
Rk
1  = g k–1 
(7.96d)
From Fig. 7.89 it is obvious that
 
Rk = rk = Ra (armature resistance)
\ 
R
Ra
1  = g k–1 
(7.96e)
Figure 7.89 shows the plot of the armature current and speed versus time as the starter resistance is cut out 
in steps. During waiting time at each step, the current falls and the speed rises exponentially according to a 
single dominant time-constant (Sec. 7.21). This is the reason why the waiting time at each step progressively 
reduces as is easily evident from Fig. 7.89.
Once the designer has selected the upper and lower limits of armature currents during starting, starter step 
calculations can proceed on the following lines: 
 
(i) From Eq. (7.95) calculate R1. 
 (ii) From Eq. (7.96e) calculate the number of steps k choosing the nearest integral value. 
 (iii) Calculate resistances R1, R2 … from Eq. (7.98(b)). From these the resistance values of various sections 
of the starter can be found out.
OR
 
 It is convenient to calculate the step resistance from the recursive relationship derived below
 
 From Eqs (7.96(b)) and (7.96(d))
 
  
R2 = R1/g
 
 Then 
r1 = R1 – R2 = 1
1
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
g
R1 
(7.97)
 
 Next 
r2 = R2 – R3 = 1
1
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
g
R2 
 
  
 = 1 1
1
g
g
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ R1 = r1/g
 
 By induction 
rn = r n–1/g 
(7.98)
Sometimes the number of sections are speciﬁed in addition to the upper current limit. This problem can be 
handled by a slightly different manipulation of Eqs (7.95) to (7.96(e)).

DC Machines 
387
In the series motor the ﬂux/pole changes with the armature current making the starter step resistance 
calculation somewhat more involved. These are not dealt with in this book.
EXAMPLE 7.43 A starter is required for a 220-V shunt motor. The maximum allowable current is 55 A 
and the minimum current is about 35 A. Find the number of sections of starter resistance required and the 
resistance of each section. The armature resistance of the motor is 0.4 W. 
SOLUTION 
I1 = 55 A;  I2 = 35 A 
 
g = I
I
1
2
 = 1.57
From Eq. (7.95) 
 
R1 = V
I
1
1
 = 200
55  4 W 
From Eq. (7.98(e)) 
 
g n–1 = R
Ra
1  = 4
0 4.
 =10
or 
n = 6.1
For an integral choice of n = 6, 
 
 g  = 1.585, 1/g = 0.631
Using Eq. (7.98(b)) the values of the resistances are obtained as 
 
R1 = 4 W  
 
 
r1 = (1 – 0.631) ¥ 4 = 1.476 W
 
r2 = 1.476 ¥ 0.631 = 0.931 W
Proceeding on the above lines 
 
r3 = 0.587 W, r4 = 0.370 W, r5 = 0.235 W 
EXAMPLE 7.44 A 25 kW, 230 V has an armature resistance of 0.12 W and a ﬁeld resistance of 120 W. Its 
speed at full load is 2000 rpm. The ﬁeld current may be neglected. 
 (a) For a four step (resistance steps) calculate the resistances of the steps if the allowable maximum 
armature current is 1.5 times the full load current. What is the lower current limit? 
 (b) Calculate the motor speed at each stud when the current reaches the lower limit and starting handle 
is to be moved to the next stud 
SOLUTION 
Ia ( fl) = 25
10
230
3
¥
 = 108.7 A 
 
(a) Four resistance steps require ﬁve studs (k = 5) upper current limit, 
 
  
I1 = 108.7 ¥ 1.5 = 163 A
 
  
R1 = 230
1I
 = 230
163  = 1.41 W
 
  
Ra = 0.12 W (given)
 
  
R
Ra
1  = g k–1

388 Electric Machines
 
  
1 41
0 12
.
.
 = g 4 or g = 1 41
0 12
1 4
.
.
/
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
  
g = 1.851
 
  
I
I
1
2
 = g = 1.851, 1/g = 0.54
 
 or 
I2 (lower limit) = 1 63
1 85
.
.
 = 88.1 A
 
 Resistance steps 
r1 = (1 – 0.54) ¥ 1.41 = 0.6486 W = 0.649 W
 
  
r2 = 0.6486 ¥ 0.54 = 0.3502 W = 0.350 W 
 
  
r3 = 0.1891 W = 0.189 W 
 
  
r4 = 0.1021 W = 0.102 W
 
(b) At full load 
 
  
Ia( fl) = 103.7 A 
 
  
Ea = 230 – 103.7 ¥ 0.12 = 217.6 V 
 
  
Speed n = 2000 rpm 
 
  
Ea = K¢a Fn = K¢¢a n ; ﬁled current is constant, armature reaction effect ignored. 
 
 or 
217.6 = K¢¢a ¥ 2000 or K¢¢a = 0.1088
 
 At stud 1 when armature current reduces to I2 = 88.1 A 
 
  
Ea (1) = Vt – I2 ¥ R1 = 230 – 88.1 ¥ 1.41 = 105.8 V 
 
 \ 
n1 = 105 8
0 1088
.
.
 = 971 rpm 
 
 At stud 2 
 
  
Ea (2) = 230 – 88.1 ¥ (1.41 – 0.649) = 230 – 88.1 ¥ 0.761
 
  
 = 162.96 V
 
  
n2 = 162 96
0 1088
.
.
 = 1498 rpm
 
 At stud 3 
 
  
Ea(3) = 230 – 88.1 ¥ (0.761 – 0.35) = 230 – 88.1 ¥ 0.411
 
  
 = 193.8 V
 
  
n3 = 193 8
0 1088
.
.
 = 1778 rpm
 
 At stud 4 
 
  
Ea(4) = 230 – 88.1 ¥ (0.411 – 0.189) = 230 – 88.1 ¥ 0.222 
 
  
 = 210.4 V 
 
  
n4 = 210 4
0 1088
.
.
 = 1934 rpm 
 
 At stud 5 (ON)
 
 The armature current instantaneously rises to I1 = 163 A. The speed increases from 1934 rpm to 2000 rpm and 
armature current falls to 108.7 A to match the full load on the motor of the load is any different the armature 
current and speed adjust accordingly. 
 
 Note: To determine the times at which speeds n1, º, n4 are reaches needs electromagnetic study; Section 7.21.

DC Machines 
389
The Example 7.42 is also solved, by MATLAB. 
clc
clear 
Pop=25*l000; 
Vt=230; 
Ra=0.12; 
rf=120; 
k=5; 
I1=Iamax; 
R1=Vt/ I1; 
r=(R1/Ra)^(l/(k–l)); 
I2 = I1/r ; 
for i=l:(k–l) 
 
if i==l 
 
 
rest(i)=(l–(l/r) )*Rl 
 
else 
 
 
rest(i)=rest(i–l)*(l /r) 
 
end 
end 
Answer: 
rest = 
 
0.6488 
rest = 
 
0.6488 0.3504 
rest = 
 
0.6488 0.3504 0.1892 
rest = 
 
0.6488  0.3504 0.1892 0.1022 
MATLAB code for Example 7.44 is given below:
clc
clear 
Pop=25*l000; 
% Power Output 
Vt=230;   
% Terminal Voltage 
Ra=0.12;   
% Armature resistance
rf=120; 
 
% Field Resistance
Iamax=1.5*Iaf1; 
% Max armature current
k=5;  
 
% No of studs
I1=Iamax; 
R1=Vt/I1; 
r=(R1/Ra)^(l/(k–1)); 
I2=I1/r; 

390 Electric Machines
for i=1 : (k–1) 
 
if i==1 
 
 
rest (i)=(1–(l/r))*R1; % rest=resistance of the studs
  
else 
 
 
rest (i)=rest (i–l)*(l/r); 
 
end 
end
% part (b)
Iaf1 = 103.7;
Ea=Vt–Iaf1*Ra; % back EMF
Ka=Ea/Nf1;
for i=1: (k–1)
 
if i==1 
 
 
Eastud (1)=Vt–I2*R1;
 
 
Rnew=R1 
 
else 
 
 
Eastud (i)=Vt– I2*(Rnew-rest(i–1)); 
 
 
Rnew=Rnew–rest(i–1)
 
end
end 
N=Eastud/Ka;
display (Renw)
Answer: 
Rnew=1.4107
Rnew=0.7618 
Rnew=0.4114 
Rnew=0.2222
Rnew=0.2222
7.17 SPEED CONTROL OF DC MOTORS 
The dc motors are in general much more adaptable speed drives than ac motors which are associated with 
a constant-speed rotating ﬁeld. Indeed one of the primary reasons for the strong competitive position of dc 
motors in modem industrial drives is the wide range of speeds afforded.
From Eq. (7.69)
 
n = 1
¢
K
E
a
a
F  = 1
¢
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
K
V
I R
a
t
a
a
F
 
(7.99)*
Since the armature drop is small, it can be neglected. 
\ 
n ª 1
¢
K
V
a
t
F  
(7.100)
This equation gives us two methods of effecting speed changes, i.e. the variation of ﬁeld excitation, If and 
that of terminal voltage, Vt. The ﬁrst method causes a change in the ﬂux per pole, F and is known as the ﬁeld 
control and the second method is known as the armature control.
 
* In case a series ﬁeld is also provided, the armature drop would be Ia(Ra + Rse). 

DC Machines 
391
Base Speed It is the speed at which the motor runs at rated terminal voltage and rated ﬁeld current. It is 
indeed the name plate speed of the motor. 
Speed Regulation 
 
% speed regulation = 
n
n
n
o
fl
fl
-
¥ 100
 
no = no load speed
 
nf l = full load speed i.e. rated speed.
Field Control
For ﬁxed terminal voltage, from Eq. (7.102)
 
n
n
2
1
 = F
F
1
2
 
(7.101)
which for linear magnetization implies 
 
n
n
2
1
 = F
F
1
2
 = 
I
I
f
f
1
2
 
(7.102)
Certain limitations of the ﬁeld control method are:
 
1. Speeds lower than the rated speed cannot be obtained because the ﬁeld can not be made any stronger; 
it can only be weakened.
 
2. Since the speed is inversely proportional to the ﬂux/pole while the torque is directly proportional to it 
for a given armature current, it can cope with constant kW drives only where the load torque falls with 
speed. 
 
3. For motors requiring a wide range of speed control, the ﬁeld ampere-turns are much smaller than the 
armature ampere-turns at high speeds causing extreme distortion of the ﬂux density in the air-gap. This 
leads to unstable operating conditions or poor commutation. Compensating winding can be used to 
increase the speed range which can be 2 to 1 for large motors, 4 to 1 for medium sized ones and 8 to 1 
for small motors. Even then the ﬁeld control is restricted to small motors. 
 
4. This control method is not suited to applications needing speed reversal; since the only way to reverse 
speed is to disconnect the motor from the source and reverse the ﬁeld/armature polarity. The ﬁeld 
circuit being highly inductive, it is normally the armature which is reversed. 
Shunt Motor
Figure 7.90(a) illustrates the ﬁeld control for shunt motors; the control being achieved by means of a rheostat 
(regulator) in the ﬁeld circuit. Reproducing Eq. (7.77) here for convenience: 
 
n = V
K
R
K K
t
a
a
a
a
¢
-
¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
F
F 2
T 
(7.103)
The speed-torque characteristic which has a small linear drop due to the second term (Ra effect) and 
translates upwards as the ﬁeld is weakened due to the armature reaction is shown in Fig. 7.90(b). The 
demagnetizing effect of the armature reaction causes the characteristics to somewhat bend upwards with 
increasing torque (increasing load current). The working range of the speed-torque characteristic reduces 
with increasing speed in order for the armature current not to exceed the full-load value with a weakening 
ﬁeld. 

392 Electric Machines
EXAMPLE 7.45 A 400-V dc shunt motor takes a current of 5.6 A on no-load and 68.3 A on full-load. 
Armature reaction weakens the ﬁeld by 3%. Calculate the ratio of full-load speed to no-load speed. Given 
Ra = 0.18 W, brush voltage drop = 2 V, Rf = 200 W.
SOLUTION 
If = 400
200  = 2 A
No-load 
 
Ia0 = 5.6 – 2 = 3.6 A 
 
Ea0 = 400 – 0.18 ¥ 3.6 – 2 = 397.4 V 
Full-load 
 
Ia( f l) = 68.3 – 2 = 66.3 A 
 
Ea( f l) = 400 – 0.18 ¥ 66.3 – 2 = 386.1 V 
 
n fl
n nl
(
)
(
)  = 386 1
397 4
1
0 97
.
.
.
¥
 = 1
Observation Because of ﬁeld weakening caused by armature reaction, full-load speed is equal to no-load speed.
EXAMPLE 7.46 A 750 kW, 250 V, 1200 rpm dc shunt motor has armature and ﬁeld resistances of 0.03 W 
and 41.67 W respectively. The motor is provided with compensating winding to cancel out the armature 
reaction. Iron and rotational losses can be ignored. The motor is carrying constant torque load drawing 
126 A and running at 1105 rpm. 
 (a) Assuming magnetic linearity, what would be the line current and motor speed if the ﬁeld current is 
reduced to 5 A. Also calculate the load torque.
 (b) The motor has magnetization data as below. Calculate motor speed and line current as in part (a). 
Compare and comment upon the results of parts (a) and (b)
 
 Speed: 1200 rpm
 
 If (A) 
4  
5 
6 
7 
 
 VOC (V)  
217  
250 
267 
280 
Rreg
n1
n2
n3
If 3
If2
If1
Limit imposed by
full-load current
AR
I
effect
considered
f
f
f
3
2
1
<
<
I
I
0
T
(b)
Rf
Ia
If
IL
+
–
Vt
Ea
(a) Connection diagram
Fig. 7.90 
Field control for shunt motor

DC Machines 
393
SOLUTION
 
(a) Linear magnetization characteristic 
 
  
If 1 = 250
41 67
.
 = 6 A
 
  
Ia1 = 126 – 6 = 120 A
 
  
Ea1 = 250 – 0.03 ¥ 120 = 246.4 V
 
  
n1 = 1105 rpm, w1 = 115.7 rad/s
 
 Now we know
 
  
Ea = KaFw = K ¢¢ a If w  
(i)
 
  
T = KaFIa = K¢¢ a If Ia 
(ii)
 
 From Eq. (i)
 
  
Ea1 = 246.4 = K¢¢a ¥ 6 ¥ 115.7 
 
 or 
K ¢¢a = 0.355
 
  
T = 0.355 ¥ 6 ¥ 120 = 255.6 Nm (constant) 
 
 Field current reduced 
 
  
If 2 = 5 A
 
  
T (constant) = K¢¢a If1Ia1 = K¢¢a If 2Ia2 
 
 or 
Ia2 = 120 ¥ 6
5
 = 144 A 
 
  
IL2 = 144 + 2 = 146 A 
 
 From Eq. (i)
 
  
Ea2 = 250 – 0.03 ¥ 144 = 245.68 V 
 
  
245.68 = 0.355 ¥ 5 ¥ w2
 
 or 
w2 = 138.4 rad/s or 1322 rpm 
 
(b) Rather than drawing the magnetisation curve, we shall linearly interpolate between data points.
 
  
If 1 = 6 A ﬁ VOC = 267 V at 1200 rpm or 125.7 rad/s 
 
  
267 = Ka F1 ¥ 125.7 
 
 or 
KaF1 = 2.124
 
  
If 2 = 5 ﬁ VOC = 250 V at 1200 rpm or 125.7 rad/s
 
 or 
250 = KaF2 ¥ 125.7 
 
  
KaF2 = 250
125 7.
 = 1.989 
 
  
T(constant) = KaF2Ia2 = KaF1Ia1
 
 or 
Ia2 = Ia1
K
K
a
a
F
F
1
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
  
 = 120 ¥ 2 124
1 989
.
.
 = 128.1 A
 
  
IL2 = 128.1 + 2 = 130.1 A 
 
  
Ea2 = 250 – 0.03 ¥ 128.1 = 246.16 V
 
  
246.16 = KaF2w2
 
 or 
w2 = 246 16
1 989
.
.
 = 123.76 rad /s or 1182 rpm

394 Electric Machines
Comparison of results  Speed as calculated by linear assumption is 1322
1182
1182
-
 ¥ 100 = 11.8% higher than obtained 
by consideration of the actual magnetisation characteristic. So the linearization is not very good for speed estimation.
As armature voltage drop is very small the armature induced emf is nearly the same in both cases (245.68 V and 
246.16 V). Therefore, the speed is mainly governed by the ﬂux/pole. On linear basis the ﬂux reduces by a factor of 5/6 
= 0.833 while the actual reduction (obtained from the magnetization characteristic) is 250/267 = 0.936. This is why the 
actual speed is lower than that calculated on linear basis.
EXAMPLE 7.47 A 250-V dc shunt motor has Rf = 150 W and Ra = 0.6 W. The motor operates on no-
load with a full ﬁeld ﬂux at its base speed of 1000 rpm with Ia = 5 A. If the machine drives a load requiring 
a torque of 100 Nm, calculate armature current and speed of motor. If the motor is required to develop  
10 kW at 1200 rpm, what is the required value of the external series resistance in the ﬁeld circuit? Neglect 
saturation and armature reaction. 
SOLUTION 
Assuming linear magnetization characteristic
 
Ea = KaFwm = Kwm  
(i)
 
T = KaFIa = KIa 
(ii) 
At no load 
 
250 – 5 ¥ 0.6 = K ¥ 2
1000
60
p ¥
or 
K = 2.36 
When driving a load of 100 N m, 
 
Ia = T
K  = 100
2 36
.
 = 42.4 A
Now 
wm = E
K
a  = 250
42 4
0 6
2 36
-
¥
.
.
.
 = 95.15 rad/s
\ 
n = 60
2p wn = 909 rpm
Given: 
Output = 10 kW at 1200 rpm 
Assuming linear magnetization, Eqs (i) and (ii) can be written as 
 
Ea = K¢If wm 
(iii) 
 
T = K¢ lf Ia 
(iv)
From the data of no-load operation 
 
If = 250
150  = 1.67 A
\ 
K¢ = K
I f
 = 2 36
1 67
.
.
 = 1.413
Now 
(250 – 0.6 I¢a) I¢a = 10 ¥ 1000 
Solving 
I¢a = 44.8 A (the higher value is rejected) 
Substituting values in Eq. (iii)
 
250 – 0.6 ¥ 44.8 = 1.413 ¥ I¢f ¥ 2
1200
60
p ¥
or 
I¢f = 1.257 A 

DC Machines 
395
\ 
Rf (total) = 250
1 257
.
 = 199 W 
Hence 
Rf (external) = 199 – 150 = 49 W
Series Motor
Speed control is achieved here by adjusting the ﬁeld ampere-turns. There are three ways of changing them: 
 A diverter resistor is 
connected across the ﬁeld winding as shown in 
Fig. 7.91. By varying Rd the ﬁeld current and 
hence the ﬁeld ampere-turns can be reduced. 
From the circuit, it is obvious that 
 
Ise = Ia
R
R
R
d
se
d
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = KdIa 
(7.104)
where 
Kd = 
R
R
R
d
se
d
+
 = 
1
1
R
R
se
d
/
+
For linear magnetization
 
F = KdK fIa  
(7.105)
Hence Eq. (7.79) can be rewritten as 
 
n = 
1
¢
-
+
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
K K K
V
K K K
K
T
R
R
R
a
f
d
t
a
f
d
d
a
se
d
{
(
||
)}  
(7.106)
From Eq. (7.106), speed-torque characteristics for 
decreasing values of Kd (decreasing Rd) are plotted in 
Fig. 7.92. These can be corrected for saturation and 
armature reaction effects.
One precaution to be taken in this method in order to 
avoid oscillations in speed initiated by load changes is to 
use an inductively wound diverter resistor. 
 Here the ﬁeld ampere-turns are 
adjusted in steps by varying the number of turns included 
in the circuit. The circuit is shown in Fig. 7.93, from which 
the following relations are obtained: 
 
Ise (effective) = 
¢
N
N
se
se Ia = Kse Ia 
where 
N¢se = tapped ﬁeld turn with resistance R¢se = KseRse.
Now 
F = Kf Kse Ia, T = Ka Kf Kse J2
a, linear case
substituting F in Eq. (7.79 and eliminating Ia with Rse replaced by Kse Rse)
 
n = 
1
¢
-
+
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
K K K
V
K K K
T
R
K
R
a
f
se
t
a
f
se
a
se
se
(
)  
(7.107)
Ea
Rse
Ise
Rd
Id
Ia
Vt
Fig. 7.91 Diverter resistor control circuit 
n
0
T
Decreasing Kd
Fig. 7.92
torque characteristics 

396 Electric Machines
+
–
N¢se
I a
Vt
Ea
Nse
Fig. 7.93
The controlled speed-torque characteristics are similar to those of Fig. 7.92 except for the marginal effect 
of the resistance term.
3. Series-parallel control Here the ﬁeld windings are divided into two equal halves and then connected 
in series or parallel to control the ﬁeld ampere-turns. The circuits shown in Figs 7.95(a) and (b). For any 
armature current, parallel connection of half windings gives
 
ATparallel = 2
2
2
N
I
se
a
¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
 = 1
2 NseIa = 1
2 ATseries
and 
R¢se = 
R
R
se
se
2
2
||
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = 1
4 Rse 
(7.108)
Nse/2
Ia/2
Nse/2
Ia/2
Ia
+
–
(b) Parallel
V
Ea
(a) Series
Nse/2
Nse/2
Ia
+
–
V
Ea
Fig. 7.94
For the linear case 
 
F = 1
2 Kf Ia 
In speed control Eq. (7.107), it follows from above
 
Kse = 1 or 1
2  
(7.109)
i.e. only two speeds are possible; parallel ﬁeld connection gives the higher speed.

DC Machines 
397
EXAMPLE 7.48 The following open-circuit characteristic was obtained by separately exciting the ﬁeld 
of a series motor and driving the armature at a speed of 900 rev/min. 
 Generated emf (V) 
0 
78 
150 
192 
220 
 Field current (A) 
0 
50 
100 
150 
200 
The armature and series-ﬁeld resistances are 0.035 and 0.015 W respectively. Determine the speed and 
torque of the motor for a current of 200 A when fed from a 220 V supply and operated with (a) the full ﬁeld-
winding, and (b) the ﬁeld turns reduced by half. (c) diverter of resistance 0.03 W. 
SOLUTION 
Total armature resistance = 0.035 + 0.015 = 0.05 W 
 
Ea = 220 – 200 ¥ 0.05 = 210 V 
 
(a) Full ﬁeld winding: 
 
 At 200 A current, 900 rpm, induced emf = 220 V (from magnetization characteristics)
 
  
Motor speed = 900 ¥ 210
220  = 859.1 rpm
 
 Torque developed, 
T = E I
a a
w
 = 210
100
2
859 1
60
¥
¥
p
.
 = 159.24 Nm.
 
(b) Field winding terms reduced to half; 
 
  
Rse = 0 015
2
.
 = 0.0075 W
 
  
R (total) = 0.035 + 0.0075 = 0. 0425 W
 
  
Ea = 220 – 200 ¥ 0.0425 = 211.5 V
 
  
Equivalent full ﬁeld turns current = 200
2
 = 100 A
 
  
Ea = 150 V (at 900 rpm); from magnetization characteristic
 
  
Motor speed = 900 ¥ 211 5
150
.
 = 1269 rpm
 
 Torque developed, 
T = 211 5
200
2
1269
60
. ¥
¥
p
 = 159.24 Nm
 
(c) Diverter across series ﬁeld
 
  
Ra = 0.03, Rse = 0.15
 
  
Kd = 
1
1
R
R
se
d
/
+
 = 
1
1 2
1
/
+
 = 2
3
 
  
Ise = Kd Ia = 2
3  ¥ 200 = 133.3 A
 
 From the open-circuit characteristic (by interpolation) at Ise = 133.3 A
 
  
Ea = 150 + 192
150
150
100
-
-
 ¥ (133.3 – 100)
 
 or 
Ea = 178 V at 900 rpm 
 
  
Rse || Rd = 2
3  ¥ 0.015 = 0.1 W
 
  
Ea = 220 – 200 (0.035 + 0.01) = 211 V

398 Electric Machines
 
  
Motor speed = 900 ¥ 211
178  = 1067 rpm
 
  
Torque developed = 211
200
2
60
1067
¥
¥
p
 = 377.87 Nm.
EXAMPLE 7.49 A 4-pole series-wound fan motor draws an armature current of 50 A, when running 
at 2000 rpm on a 230 V dc supply with four ﬁeld coil connected in series. The four ﬁeld coils are now 
connected in two parallel groups of two coils in series. Assuming the ﬂux/pole to be proportional to the 
exciting current and load torque proportional to the square of speed, ﬁnd the new speed and armature 
current. Neglect losses. Given: armature resistance = 0.2 W, resistance of each ﬁeld coil = 0.05 W.
SOLUTION 
Ea = KE Ise n 
(i)
 
TL = KLn2 = TM = KMIse Ia 
(ii)
Field coils in series 
 
Ise = Ia 
 
Rse = 4 ¥ 0.05 = 0.2 W, Ra = 0.2 W
 
RA = 0.2 + 0.2 = 0.4 W,
 
Ia1 = 50 A
 
Ea1 = 230 – 0.4 ¥ 50 = 210 V
 
210 = KE ¥ 50 ¥ 2000  
(iii)
and 
KL ¥ (2000)2 = KM ¥ (50)2 
(iv)
Field coils in two series groups in parallel 
 
Ise (effective) = Ia/2
 
Rse = 2
0 05
2
¥ .
 = 0.05 W
 
RA = 0.2 + 0.05 = 0.25 W
 
Ea2 = 230 – 0.25 Ia2 = KE ¥ (Ia2 /2) n2 
(v)
and 
KLn2
2 = KM ¥ (Ia2/2) ¥ Ia2  
(vi)
From Eqs (iv) and (vi) 
 
n2
2
2
2000
(
)
 = 
Ia2
2
2
2
50
¥ (
)
or 
n2 = 28.3 Ia2 
(vii)
From Eqs (iii) and (v) 
 
230
0 25
210
2
- .
Ia
 = 
I
n
a2 2
2
50
2000
¥
¥
Substituting for n2 from Eq. (vii) and simplifying 
 
I2
a2 + 8.4 Ia2 – 7740 = 0
or 
Ia2 = 83.9 A; negative value is rejected
 
n2 = 28.3 ¥ 83.9 = 2374 rpm
Armature Control 
The main requirement of this control scheme is a variable voltage supply to the armature whose current rating 
must be somewhat larger than that of the motor. It is superior to the ﬁeld control scheme in three respects, 
outlined below: 

DC Machines 
399
 
(i) It provides a constant-torque drive. In the shunt motor case by keeping the ﬁeld current at maximum 
value full motor torque can be obtained at full-load armature current at all speeds. 
 (ii) Since the main ﬁeld ampere-turns are maintained at a large value, ﬂux density distortion caused by 
armature reaction is limited. 
 (iii) Unlike ﬁeld control scheme, speed reversal can be easily implemented here.
 
 There are three main types of armature control schemes. These are discussed below:
Rheostatic Control 
Series armature-resistance control Here the applied armature voltage is varied by placing an adjustable 
resistance Re in series with the armature as shown in Fig. 7.95 along with the speed-torque characteristics.
Increasing Re
n
n0
0
T
(a)
(b)
Rf
Re
Ia
IL
Ea
If
Vt
+
–
Fig. 7.95 Series armature resistance control and speed-torque characteristics
Some of the limitations of the rheostatic control method are enumerated below:
 
(i) Only speeds below the rated value can be obtained. This can be shown by using Eq. (7.100) (armature 
resistance is negligible) that
 
  
n1 = 1
¢
K
V
a
t
F ; n2 = 1
¢
-
K
V
I R
a
t
a
e
F
 
(7.110)
 
 which gives 
n
n
n
1
2
1
-
 = I R
V
a
e
t
 
(7.111)
 (ii) Range of speeds available is limited because efﬁciency is reduced drastically for large speed reductions. 
By deﬁnition of armature efﬁciency 
 
  
h ª (
)
V
I R I
V I
t
a
e
a
t a
-
 = 1 – I R
V
a
e
t
 = n
n
2
1
 
(7.112)
 (iii) The speed regulation of the method is poor as for a ﬁxed value of series armature resistance, the speed 
varies directly with load, being dependent upon the resistance voltage drop.
In general, rheostatic control is economically feasible only for very small motors (fractional kW) or for 
short-time, intermittent show-downs for medium-sized motors.
Shunted armature control It is a variation of the rheostatic control. The principle of voltage division is used 
to reduce the voltage across the armature as shown for a shunt motor in Fig. 7.96(a). The Thevenin equivalent 
circuit as seen from the armature terminals is drawn in Fig. 7.96(b). The no-load armature speed is governed 

400 Electric Machines
by VTH, which can be independently adjusted by the ratio R2/R1. The series resistance (Thevenin resistance) 
is Re = R1|| R2 = bR1 is very small so the control circuit gives better speed regulation compared to the circuit 
arrangement of Fig. 7.96(a). VTH = b Vt
The potential divider circuit for series motor speed control is shown in Fig. 7.96(c) and its Thevenin 
equivalent is drawn in Fig. 7.96(d). 
On approximate basis neglecting voltage drop in (bR1 + Ra), 
 
Ea ª bVt = K¢aFn 
or 
n = 1
¢
K
V
a
t
b
F ; F(Ise) = F(b Ia)
At light load through F is quite small the reduced value of bVt result in ﬁnite motor speed unlike a series 
motor operating at rated Vt.
(a) Shunt motor
(c) Series motor
Ea
R
R
R
R
e =
||
=
1
2
1
b
+
–
VTH
Vt
+
–
(b) VTH = bVt ; b =
1
1 +
/
R R
1
2
Ea
R2
R1
Vt
Ea
R2
R1
Vt
Rse
+
–
+
–
Rse
R2
R1
Ia
Ea
V
V
TH
t
= b
(d)
Fig. 7.96 Shunted armature speed control

DC Machines 
401
EXAMPLE 7.50 A 230 V dc shunt motor having armature resistance of 2 W draws an armature current of 
5 A to drive a constant torque load at 1250 rpm. At no load it draws a current of 1 A. 
 (a) A resistance of 15 W is added in series to the armature. Find the motor speed with load torque as 
above. Also determine the speed regulation.
 (b) A resistance of 15 W is shunted across the armature and 10 W in series with the supply line (as in 
Fig. 7.96(a). Calculate the load speed and speed regulation. 
 (c) Compare the power wasted in external resistance (s) in parts (a) and (b). 
Rotational loss torque is negligible. The armature reaction effect is to be ignored. 
SOLUTION 
Ea = 230 – 2 ¥ 5 = 220 V 
 
n = 1250 rpm, w = 130.9 rad/s 
 
Ea = KaFw ; F is constant; constant shunt ﬁeld current, no armature reaction effect 
 
220 = KaF ¥ 130.9 
or 
KaF = 1.68
 
(a)  
Re = 15 W in series 
 
 No load speed 
 
  
Iao = 1 A
 
  
Ea = 230 – (15 + 2) ¥ 1 = 213 V 
 
  
w0 = 213
1 68
.
 = 126.8 rad/s
 
 Load torque constant
 
 As F is constant 
Ia = 5 A
 
  
Ea = 230 – (15 + 2) ¥ 5 = 145 V
 
  
w = 145
1 68
.
 = 86.3 rad/s
 
  
Speed regulation = 126 8
86 3
86 3
.
.
.
-
 ¥ 100 = 46.9%
 
(b) From the Thevenin equivalent of Fig. 7.96(c) 
 
  
R1 = 10 W , R2 = 15
 
  
b = 
R
R
R
2
1
2
+
 = 
15
10
15
+
 = 0.6
 
  
VTH = 230 ¥ 0.6 = 230 V 
 
  
RTH = bR1 = 0.6 ¥ 10 = 6 W 
 
 No load speed 
 
  
Iao = 1 A
 
  
Ea = VTH – (RTH + Ra) Iao 
 
  
 = 230 – (6 + 2) ¥ 1 = 130 V
 
  
w0 = 130
1 68
.
 =77.38 rad/s
 
 On load
 
  
Ia = 5 A
 
  
Ea = 138 – (6 + 2) ¥ 5 = 98 V
 
  
w = 98
1 68
.
 = 58.33 rad/s

402 Electric Machines
 
  
Speed regulation = 77 38
58 33
58 33
.
.
.
-
 ¥ 100 = 32.6%
 
 Observation Speed regulation is much better (less) in shunted armature control than in rheostatic control. 
 
(c) Power loss
 
(i) Rheostatic control
 
  
Pe = (5)2 ¥ 15 = 375 W
 
(ii) Shunted armature control 
 
  
Va(across armature) = 98 + 2 ¥ 5 = 108 V 
 
  
P(15 W) = (
)
108
15
2
 = 777.6 W
 
  
I (15 W) = 108
15  = 7.24 A
 
  
I (10 W) = 7.2 + 5 = 12.2 A
 
  
P (10 W) = (12.2)2 ¥ 10 = 1488.4 W
 
 Then 
Pe = 777.6 + 1488.4 = 2266 W
 
 Observation External power loss is far larger in shunted armature control than in rheostatic control. In fact it is 
much larger than power of the motor (230 ¥ 5 = 1150 W) being controlled. 
Remark Shunted armature control is employed for very small motors where speed regulation requirement is stringent.
EXAMPLE 7.51 A dc shunt motor is connected to a constant voltage source and is driving a constant 
torque load. Show that if Ea > 0.5 Vt increasing the resultant ﬂux reduces the speed and if Ea < 0.5 Vt, 
increasing the resultant ﬂux increases the speed. The back emf Ea is changed by a series resistance in the 
armature circuit. 
SOLUTION 
Let 
Rt = Ra + Re 
 
Ea = Vt – IaRt > 1/2 Vt 
(i)
 
w = E
K
a
aF  = 
V
K
I R
K
t
a
a
a
F
F
-
1  
(ii)
As Ia = 
T
KaF , Eq. (i) is converted to the form with F as the only variable (T is constant).
Thus 
w = 
V
K
T R
K
t
a
a
F
F
-
1
2
2  
(iii)
For w to decrease with F, d
d
w
F  should be negative. It then follows from Eq. (ii) 
 
d
d
w
F  = -
+
V
K
T R
K
t
a
t
a
F
F
2
2
2
3  < 0 
(iv)
Substituting 
T = KaFIa, we get
 
-
+
V
K
K
I R
K
t
a
a
a
t
a
F
F
F
2
2
2
3
< 0
or 
–Vt + 2 IaRt < 0 
or 
Vt – 2IaRt > 0 
But 
Ia Rt = Vt – Ea, so 
 
Vt – 2Vt + 2Ea > 0

DC Machines 
403
or 
Ea > 0.5 Vt 
For speed to increase by increasing ﬂux 
 
d
d
w
F  > 0 
By increasing the inequality sign in Eq. (iv) it follows: 
 
Ea < 0.5 Vt 
Series-parallel control Here two identical motors are coupled together mechanically to a common load. Two 
speeds at constant torque are possible in this method—one by connecting the motors armatures in series and 
the other by connecting them in parallel as shown in Fig. 7.97. When connected in series, the terminal voltage 
across each motor is Vt
2  whereas when they are connected in parallel it is Vt. Thus armature control of speed 
is achieved; speed (series): speed (parallel) ::1:2. 
If
Ia
Ia
21a
Ea
Ea
+
–
Vt
(b) Armature in parallel (high speed)
Ea
Ea
Ia
If
+
–
Vt
(a) Armature in series (low speed)
Vt
2
Vt
2
Fig. 7.97 Series-parallel speed control (shunt-motors); case of constant load torque is illustrated; speed ratio 1:2
Figure 7.98(a) and (b) gives the connections for series-parallel speed control of two identical series motors.
(a) Series connection (low speed)
(b) Parallel connection (high speed)
2Ia
Ia
Ia
Vt
+
–
Ia
Vt
Vt
Vt
+
–
Fig. 7.98 Series-parallel speed control of series motors; case of constant load torque is illustrated; speed ratio 1:2

404 Electric Machines
This method is superior to the rheostatic control insofar as efﬁciency is concerned. It is, however, limited 
to two speed steps. The method is commonly employed for speed control of series traction motors.
EXAMPLE 7.52 A dc shunt motor has speed control range of 1600 rpm to 400 rpm by rheostatic control. 
All losses and armature reaction effect may be neglected. 
 (a) The motor drives a constant power load. It has a speed of 1600 rpm drawing 120 A armature current. 
What would be the armature current at 400 rpm? 
 (b) Repeat part (a) if the load is constant torque.
 (c) Repeat parts (a) and (b) if speed is controlled by armature voltage. 
SOLUTION 
All losses neglected means Ra = 0 
 
(a) Constant power 
P = EaIa 
 
  
Ea = Kn as shunt ﬁeld current is constant 
 
 \ 
P = KIan
 
  
n = 1600 
Ia = 120
 
  
n = 400 
Ia = ?
 
  
1600 ¥ 120 = 400 ¥ Ia 
 
  
Ia = 4 ¥ 120 = 480A
 
(b) Constant torque 
T = Ka Ia, F constant
 
 Therefore Ia is constant independent of speed. Thus at n = 400 rpm
 
  
Ia = 120 A
 
(c) Speed adjustment requires control of Va ª Ea. It does not how it is achieved –rheostatic or armature voltage. 
Therefore the armature current is same as found in parts (a) and (b).
Ward Leonard Speed Control
It is combined armature and ﬁeld control and is therefore, operationally the most efﬁcient method of speed 
control with a wide range. The dc motor armature is fed from a variable voltage and adjustable polarity 
supply whose current rating must be somewhat higher than that of the motor. The ﬁeld (shunt) of the motor 
is separately excited from an independent dc source (low current rating). The variable voltage dc supply in 
older installations is obtained from a dc generator driven by a 3-phase squirrel-cage motor. The ﬁeld circuit 
of the generator is separately excited from a small rectiﬁer unit or by an excitor coupled to an extension of the 
motor shaft. The complete arrangement is shown in the connection diagram of Fig. 7.99(a). The connection 
of the potentiometer (Pot 1) makes it possible to easily reverse the generator excitation thereby reversing the 
voltage polarity for reversal of the direction of rotation of the motor. This type of speed control is known as 
Ward-Leonard speed control. Modem installations use SCR circuitry for variable-voltage dc supply drawing 
power from ac mains through a transformer. Though expensive, this arrangement is neat and relatively free 
from maintenance problems. It is also easily adopted to feedback schemes for automatic control of speed. 
 At the base speed nb the motor armature is fed at rated voltage and its ﬁeld current is adjusted to the 
maximum value, i.e. the ﬁeld is excited at rated voltage. Reducing the armature voltage provides a constant-
torque speed control where the speed can be reduced below the base value, while the motor has full torque 
capability (as 1f= max and Ia can have rated value). For obtaining speeds above nb, the ﬁeld is gradually 
weakned maintaining armature voltage at rated value. The motor torque therefore reduces as its speed increases 

DC Machines 
405
which corresponds is to constant-kW (or hp) drive. The kind of control over torque-speed characteristic 
achieved is illustrated in Fig. 7.99(b) where the nature of power-speed characteristic is also revealed.
AC
Mot
DC
Mot
M
Pot 1
Pot 2
Exciter
+
(a) Ward-Leonard speed control system
DC
Gen
AC suplly
+
T
P
P
T
nbase
Va control
If control
(b) Torque-speed and power speed characteristic
Fig. 7.99
Some of the attractive features of the Ward-Leonard system are listed below in addition to the advantages 
mentioned for armature control in general: 
 
(i) The absence of an external resistance considerably improves the efﬁciency at all speeds. Another 
feature which enhances the efﬁciency is that when the generator emf becomes less than the back emf 
of the motor, electrical power ﬂows back from motor to generator, is converted to mechanical form and 
is returned to the mains via the driving ac motor. The latter aspect makes it an ideal choice if frequent 
starting, stopping and reversals are required.
 (ii) No special starting gear is required. As the generator induced voltage is gradually raised from zero, the 
motor starts up smoothly. 
 (iii) Speed reversal is smoothly carried out. 
Explanation through Fundamental Relationships 
Fundamental relationships are reproduced below: 
Electromagnetic power 
 
P = EaIa = Tw 
(i) 
Electromagnetic torque 
 
T = KaF Ia 
(ii)

406 Electric Machines
Back emf 
 
Ea = KaFw  
(iii) 
Armature circuit equation 
 
Ea = Vt – Ia Ra 
(iv)
Constant torque operation 
 
F = F(max) ; If max, all regulating resistance cut out
 
T = constant (max)
From Eq. (ii) 
 
Ia = Ia (rated) = constant
As Vt is increased, Ea increases. It follows from Eq. (iii) w increases, P increases almost linearly (IaRa drop 
ignored). At Vt = Vt (rated), n = nbase where maximum (rated) power is reached. 
Constant power operation 
 
Vt = Vt (rated) held constant 
 
Ia = Ia (rated)
From Eq. (iv), Ea is constant and so P is constant. As If is reduced, F reduces. So from Eq. (iii) speed w 
increases and from Eq. (ii) T reduces but P remains constant.
EXAMPLE 7.53 A 200-V shunt motor with a constant main ﬁeld drives a load, the torque of which varies 
at the square of the speed. When running at 600 rpm, it takes 30 A. Find the speed at which it will run and 
the current it will draw, if a 20-W resistor is connected in series with armature. Neglect motor losses. 
SOLUTION 
Armature resistance is assumed negligible. Further ﬁeld current is ignored in comparison to armature 
current, i.e.,
 
IL = Ia
As per the data given 
200 = Ke ¥ 600 
(i)
 
T = Kt ¥ 30 = KL ¥ (600)2 
(ii)
With a 20-W resistor added in the armature circuit
 
(200 – 20Ia) = Ke ¥ n
 
Kt Ia = KLn2 
(iv)
Dividing Eq. (iii) by (i) and (iv) by (ii) 
 
200
20
200
-
Ia  = 
n
600  
(v) 
 
Ia
30  = 
n2
2
600
(
)
 
(vi)
 
n = 260.5 rpm
Solving 
Ia = 5.66 A
EXAMPLE 7.54 A 400 V series motor has a total armature resistance of 0.25 W. When running at 
1200 rpm it draws a current of 25 A. When a regulating resistance of 2.75 W is included in the armature 
circuit, it draws current of 15 A. Find the speed and ratio of the two mechanical outputs. Assume that the 
ﬂux with 15 A is 70% of that with 25 A. 

DC Machines 
407
SOLUTION 
Ea = K¢a F n
 
400 – 0.25 ¥ 25 = K¢a F1 ¥ 1200 
(i) 
 
400 – (2.75 + 0.25) ¥ 15 = K¢a F2 ¥ n2 
(ii)
Dividing Eq. (ii) by (i) 
 
355
393 75
.
 = n2
2
1
1200 ¥ F
F  = n2
1200  ¥ 0.7
which gives 
n2 = 1545.6 rpm
Ratio of mechanical outputs, 
P
P
02
01
 = 
355
15
393 75
25
¥
¥
.
 = 0.541 
EXAMPLE 7.55 A dc shunt motor is driving a centrifugal pump whose load torque varies as square of 
speed. The pump speed is controlled by varying the armature voltage of the motor with the ﬁeld current 
remaining constant. At full load with an armature voltage of 500 V, the armature current is 128 A. Calculate 
the armature voltage required to reduce the speed to 1/
2  of its original value. Ra = 0.28 W. Ignore the 
effect of armature reaction and loss torque (reduction in torque output on account of rotation losses). 
SOLUTION 
Ia1 = 128 A
 
Ea1 = 500 – 0.28 ¥ 128 = 464.2 V
As the ﬁeld current remains constant
 
T = KT n2
1 μ 128; ﬁeld current constant 
 (i) 
Speed is to be reduced to n2 = n1/
2 . Then 
 
KT (n1/
2 )2 μ Ia2 
(ii)
From Eqs (i) and (ii) 
 
Ia2
128  = 1
2  or Ia2 = 64 A
 
New applied armature voltage = Vt2
 
(Vt2 – 0.28 Ia2) μ n1
2
 
(iii) 
 
464.2 μ n1 
(iv)
From Eqs (iii) and (iv) we get 
 
Vt2
0 28
128
464 12
-
¥
.
.
 = 1
2
or 
Vt2 = 346.1 V
EXAMPLE 7.56 The Ward Leonard speed control system of Fig. 7.99 uses two identical machines of 
rating 230 V, 4.5 kW, 1500 rpm. The generator is driven at a constant speed of 1500 rpm, Ra = 0.5 W each 
machine. 
The magnetization characteristic data obtained at 1500 rpm is as under 
 If (A) 
0.0 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
0.6 
0.7 
0.8 
1.0 
1.2 
 Voc(V) 
45 
110 
148 
175 
195 
212 
223 
230 
241 
251 
Neglect the effect of armature reaction. 

408 Electric Machines
 (a) The motor ﬁeld current is held constant at 0.8 A. To obtain a motor speed at range of 300-1500 rpm 
with power (mechanical) output of 4.5 kW, determine the range of the generator ﬁeld current.
 (b) The generator ﬁeld current is kept constant at 1 A, while the motor ﬁeld current is reduced to 0.2 A. 
Determine the motor current and speed for a power output of 4.5 kW. 
SOLUTION 
OCC will not be drawn. Instead interpolation will be used in the regions between the given data points. 
 
(a)  
Ifm = 0.8 A ﬁ Eam = 230 V at 1500 rpm
 
  
nm = 300 – 1500 rpm (range)
 
(i)  
nm = 300 rpm
 
  
Eam = 230
300
1500
¥
 = 46 V
 
  
Pmot = 4500 = 46 Ia
 
 or 
Ia = 97.8 A
 
  
Eag = 46 + 2 ¥ 0.5 ¥ 97.8 = 143.8 V
 
 From the magnetisation characteristic we get 
 
  
If = 0.3 – 
0 1
148
110
.
(
)
-
 ¥ (148 – 143.8) = 0.29 A 
 
(ii)  
nm = 1500 rpm and Eam = 230 V
 
  
Pmot = 230 ¥ Ia = 4500
 
 or 
Ia = 4500
230  = 19.6 A
 
  
Eag = 230 + 2 ¥ 0.5 ¥ 19.6 = 249.6 V
 
 From the magnetisation characteristic
 
  
If = 1.2 – 
0 2
241
230
.
(
)
-
 ¥ (251 – 249.6) = 1.18 A 
 
 Hence range of If is 0.29 – 1.18 A
 
(b)  
If g = 1 A ﬁ Eag = 241 A, 1500 rpm (constant)
 
  
241
2
0 5
-
¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
Eam
.
 ¥ Eam = 4500
 
 or 
E2
am – 241 Eam + 4500 = 0
 
 or 
Eam = 220.5 V; lower value is rejected
 
  
Ifm = 0.2 A ﬁ Eam = 110 V at 1500 rpm
 
  
nm = 1500 ¥ 
220 5
110
.
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = 3007 rpm
 
  
Io = 241
220 5
2
0 5
-
¥
.
.
= 20.5 D
7.18 
BRAKING OF DC MOTORS
Controlled slowing or stopping of a motor and its driven load is as important as starting in many applications 
(e.g. cranes, traction on a slope to avoid excessive speed, etc.). Braking methods based on friction, 
electromechanical action, eddy-currents, etc. are independent of the motor but sometimes electric braking is 
better justiﬁed owing to its greater economy and absence of brake wear. The dc motor is still being widely 

DC Machines 
409
used for traction purposes. One of the main reasons for this is its excellent braking characteristics and ability 
of smooth transition from the motor to the generator mode and vice versa. During the braking period, the 
motor is operated as a generator and the kinetic or gravitational potential energy (cranes or hoists) is dissipated 
in resistors (plugging) or returned to the supply (regenerative braking). 
There are three methods of electrical braking:  
 
(i) plugging or counter-current, (ii) dynamic or rheostatic, and (iii) regenerative. These will be discussed 
here brieﬂy. The dynamics of the braking problem is discussed in Ref. [9]. 
Plugging
This involves the sudden reversal of the connections of either the ﬁeld or armature* winding during motor 
operation. A strong braking torque is achieved by maintaining the supply voltage to the armature with 
connections reversed (Fig. 7.100). The effective armature voltage 
(Ea + Vt) is initially ª 2Vt so that a limiting braking resistor (may 
be a starting resistor) must be brought into the circuit. The kinetic 
energy of the moving system is dissipated in the armature and 
braking resistances. 
Electrical braking of any variety becomes less effective as speed 
decreases with a consequent decrease in the braking torque. This is 
because the braking torque 
 
Tb = P
n
b(breaking power)
 
 = [E2
a/Rb]/n
 
 = (
) /
nK
R
n
a
b
2
 
  = n(K2
a/Rb)
The supply must be switched off close to zero speed (unless the intention is to run the motor in the reverse 
direction), using a current or speed directional relay and applying back-up mechanical or hydraulic brakes 
to bring the motor to a halt. The large initial current and the resultant high mechanical stress restrict the 
application of plugging to small motors only.
Dynamic Braking
The armature is disconnected from the supply 
and then a braking resistor Rb is immediately 
connected across it (Fig. 7.101). The motor acts 
as a generator, driven by the stored kinetic energy 
dissipating power in Rb. This is a simple method of 
bringing a motor nearly to a standstill. The braking 
time is a function of the system inertia, load torque 
and motor rating. The ﬁeld circuit is left connected 
to the supply. The only danger is that if the supply 
 
* Because of the problem of interrupting highly inductive ﬁeld current and the time needed for the ﬁeld current to 
build up in opposite direction, it is a common practice to reverse armature connections.
Braking
resistor, Rb
Ea
Ia
It
Vt
+
–
Fig. 7.100 Plugging connections for a 
shunt motor
Ea
Rb
Ia
+
–
If
Vf
Fig. 7.101 
Dynamic braking, shunt motor

410 Electric Machines
fails, braking also fails. If the ﬁeld is left connected across the armature, then initially the braking torque is the 
same but starts falling sharply with speed, and the problem arises once the speed falls below the critical value 
for self-excitation. For a series motor, it is necessary for braking to reverse either the ﬁeld or the armature 
winding connections for build-up of the armature emf. The value of Rb should be such that (Rb + Ra + Rse) is 
less than the critical resistance for the speed at which the braking is commenced.
Regenerative Braking
In this method most of the braking energy is returned to the supply and is used specially where the duty cycle 
requires the braking or slowing of the machine more frequently and is most useful in holding a descending 
load of high potential energy at a constant speed. The condition for regeneration is that the rotational emf 
is more than the applied voltage so that the current is reversed and the mode of operation changes from 
motoring to generating.
Regeneration is possible with a shunt and separately excited motors and with compound motors with 
weak series compounding. Series motors need a reversal of either the ﬁeld or the armature connections. 
Regeneration is achieved by increasing the ﬁeld current or armature speed or reducing the supply voltage. 
It has been shown in literature [9] that about 35% of the energy put into an automotive vehicle during 
typical urban traction is theoretically recoverable by regenerative braking. However, the exact value of the 
recoverable energy is a function of the type of driving, the terrain, the efﬁciency of the drive train, gear ratios 
in the drive/train, etc. The method needs a supply capable of accepting the generated power without undue 
rise of the terminal voltage.
7.19 
EFFICIENCY AND TESTING
Machine efﬁciency, in general, has been discussed in Sec. 5.10. The approach here will be to apply the 
general principles for the speciﬁc case of dc machines.
The power ﬂow diagrams for the generating and motoring modes of a dc machine are shown in 
Figs. 7.102(a) and (b). 
Pin
Pm
Pwf
Pi
Psh
Pc
Pb
Pe
P
= VI
out
L
P = P
= E I
e
m
a a
(a) Generating mode
Pout
Pm
Pwf
Pi
Pb
Pc
Psh
Pe
P
= VI
in
L
P
= P = E I
m
e
a a
(a) Motoring mode
Fig. 7.102
i and stray copper-loss in Pc)

DC Machines 
411
Various losses indicated in these ﬁgures are:
 
Pwf = winding and friction in loss
 
Pi = total core loss
 
 = Pio + (stray load iron loss)
 
  (This break up is possible only for shunt machine)
where 
 
Pio = no load core loss 
(7.113)
We deﬁne rotational loss as
 
Prot = Pio + Pwf = rotational loss 
(7.114)
 
Psh = shunt ﬁeld loss in shunt and compound machine
 
Pc = armature copper losses including loss in series winding and stray load copper 
 
Pb = brush contact losses 
We will combine these losses as 
Constant loss, 
Pk = (Pio + Pwf) + Psh  
(7.115)
Variable loss, 
Pv = (Ra + Rse) I2
a + P l
st 
(7.116)
where 
P l
st = total stray load loss (iron plus copper)
 
 ª proportional to square of armature current 
We can than write
 
Pv = Kv I2
a
The brush contact loss Pb will be treated separately as it proportional to Ia. 
The expressions of dc machine efﬁciencies are derived below: 
 
Machine efﬁciency, h = Output
Input
For generating machine
 
hG = 
Output
Output + losses  = 1 – 
Losses
Output
losses
+
In form of symbols in Fig. 7.102(a) 
 
hG = 1 – 
P
K I
V I
VI
P
K I
V I
k
v a
b a
L
k
v a
b a
+
+
+
+
+
2
2
 
(7.117)
For motoring machine
 
hM = Input
losses
Input
-
 = 1 – Losses
Input
In terms of symbols of Fig. 7.102(b)
 
hM = 1 – P
K I
V I
VI
k
v a
b a
L
+
+
2
 
(7.118)
It is known from Eqs. (5.82) and (5.84) that the maximum efﬁciency occurs when 
 
Variable loss = constant loss 
or 
KvI2
a = Pk 
(7.119)

412 Electric Machines
or 
Ia = 
P
K
k
v
The ratio Ia/la(f l) can be adjusted in machine design by apportioning iron and copper content of the 
machine. 
7.20 TESTING OF DC MACHINES
Swinburne’s Test
There is a wide variety of non-loading tests that could be performed on dc machines. Swinburne’s test and 
Hopkinson’s test are the most important and actually conducted in practice on shunt motors. For obvious 
reasons the non-loading test cannot be conducted on a series motor.
This is a no-load test and hence cannot be performed on a series motor. Figure 7.103 gives the connections 
for the test. The motor is run at no-load at rated speed by adjusting the ﬁeld current to a rated value for 
accurate determination of no-load loss (Pi0 + Pwf). The machine would run at higher than rated speed with a 
rated armature voltage. Therefore a series in the armature circuit is employed to reduce voltage applied to the 
motor armature such that it runs at rated speed.
A1
A2
Va
nrated
If
Ia0
Supply, Vs
Fig. 7.103 Swinburne’s test
Constant loss In Fig. 7.103
 
Motor input, Va Ia0 = Pi0 + Pwf + I 2
a0 Ra
 
Rotational loss = Pi0 + Pwf = VaIa0 – I2
a0 Ra 
(7.120)
New 
Psh = shunt ﬁeld loss
 
 = I2
f Rf = Vf If 
(7.121)
Hence 
Pk = constant loss
 
 = (Va Ia0 – I2
a0 Ra) + I2
f Rf  
(7.122)
Variable loss The armature resistance (inclusive of brush contact drop assumed approximately linear) is 
measured by a dc test by passing a rated armature current from a battery supply. Then 
 
Pv = I 2
aRa
The stray load-loss can be neglected or estimated as 1% of rated output at full load. 
Total loss 
 
PL = Pk + Pv
 
 = (VaIa0 – I2
a0Ra) + I 2
f Rf + I 2
a Ra 
(7.123)

DC Machines 
413
Efﬁciency can now be calculated at any load current on the following lines: 
Generator 
 
Ia = IL + If
Then 
hG = 1 – 
P
V I
P
L
t L
L
+
 
(7.124)
Motor 
 
Ia = IL – If 
Then 
hM = 1-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
P
V I
L
t
L
 
(7.125)
Note: Since the resistances (Ra and Rf) are measured cold, temperature correction must be applied to these 
before using in efﬁciency calculations. 
Disadvantages 
 
(i) The stray-load loss cannot be determined by this test and hence efﬁciency is over-estimated. Correction 
can be applied by assuming the stray-load loss to be half the no-load loss. 
 (ii) Steady temperature rise of the machine cannot be determined. 
 (iii) The test does not indicate whether commutation would be satisfactory when the machine is loaded .
Separating out Windage and Friction Loss–Retardation Test 
If both the armature and ﬁeld are simultaneous by disconnected in Fig. 7.103 when the motor was running at 
steady speed, the armature is governed by the homogeneous ﬁrst order differential equation. 
 
J d
dt
w  + fw = 0, motor torque is given 
(i)
where J = moment of inertia of the armature in Kg-m2, f = windage and friction coefﬁcient in Nm/rad/s
The natural solution of this equation is 
 
w(t) = Aest 
(ii)
Substituting in Eq. (i), we get 
 
JAs est + f Aest = 0
or 
(Js + f  ) = 0 
or 
s = – f /J 
(iii)
Substituting in Eq. (ii) 
 
w(t) = Ae–(f/J)t
Let 
J/f = t, time constant
then 
w(t) = Ae–t/T 
(iv)
At t = 0, switch-off time w (0) = w0, then A = w0
Therefore at any time t,
 
w(t) = w0 e–t/t 
(v) 
where t is known as the time constant. At t = t, the speed will be
 
w(t = t ) = w0 e–1 = 0.368 w0
Thus at t = t, the speed reduces to 36.8% of the initial value. This result can be used to determine t = J/f.
or initial slope of w (t)

414 Electric Machines
 
d
dt
t e
t
t
t
w
w
t
=
=
= -
0
0
0
(
/ )
/
-
 = – (wot) 
(vi)
Tangential line to w(t) at t = 0, intersects the t-axis at t.
This is the alternative way to determine t 
The Retardation Test 
The motor is run to rated speed (or any high speed) and the supply is switched-off. As the motor decelerates 
(retards), several speed-time readings are taken, by a speedometer and watch with seconds hand. Initial 
readings are taken at small time intervals and the time interval 
is increased as the motor slows down. The readings (w vs t) are 
plotted as shown in adjoining ﬁgure. From the graph we ﬁnd the 
time T at which the speed reduces to 36.8% of the initial value. Now 
 
T = J/ f seconds 
The moment of inertia is estimated from the measured 
dimensions and estimated density of the armature, commutator, 
fan and axle. Therefore, we ﬁnd 
 
f = J/T, Nm/rad/s 
The windage and friction loss at any speed is then 
 
Pwf = f w  W 
(vi)
EXAMPLE 7.57 A 10 kW, 250 V, dc shunt motor with an armature resistance of 0.8 W and a ﬁeld resistance 
of 275 W takes 3.91 A, when running light at rated voltage and rated speed. 
 (a) What conclusions can you draw from the above data regarding machine losses? 
 (b) Calculate the machine efﬁciency as a generator when delivering an output of 10 kW at rated voltage 
and speed and as a motor drawing an input of 10 kW. What assumption if any do you have to make in 
this computation? 
 (c) Determine the maximum efﬁciencies of the machine when generating and when motoring.
SOLUTION
 
(a) Shunt ﬁeld loss, 
Psh = (
)
250
275
2
 = 227.3 W
 
  
Rotational loss = Prot = 250 ¥ 3.91 – (3.91)2 ¥ 0.8 = 965 W
 
(b) Generator
 
  
IL  = 10
10
250
3
¥
 = 40 A; If = 250
275  = 0.91 A 
 
  
Ia = 40 + 0.91 = 40.91 A 
 
  
PL = 965 + 227.3 + (40.91)2 ¥ 0.8 = 2.53 kW 
 
  
hG = 1 – 
2 53
10
2 53
.
.
+
 = 79.8%
 
 Motor
 
  
Ia = IL – If = 40 – 0.91 = 39.1 A 
 
  
PL = 965 + 227.3 + (39)2 ¥ 0.8 = 415 kW
 
  
hM = 1 – 2 415
10
.
 = 75.85%
3t
4t
5t
t
2t
t
0
w vs   plot
t
0.368 w0
w0
w
Slope (–
/ )
w0 t

DC Machines 
415
 
 Assumption: Stray-load loss has been neglected.
 
(c) The condition for maximum efﬁciency is
 
  
I2
a Ra = Prot + Psh 
 
  
0.8Ia = 965 + 227.3 = 1192.3 W
 
 or 
Ia = 38.6 A
 
 Total loss 
PL = 2 ¥ 1192.3 = 2384.6 W
 
 Generator
 
  
IL = Ia – If = 38.6 – 0.91 = 37.69 A
 
  
Pout = 250 ¥ 37.69 = 9422.5 W
 
  
hG (max) = I – 
2384 6
9422 5
2384 6
.
.
.
+
 = 79.8%
 
 Motor
 
  
IL = Ia + If = 38.6 + 0.91 = 39.51 A
 
  
Pin = 250 ¥ 39.51 = 9877.5 W
 
  
hM (max) = 1 – 2384 6
9877 5
.
.
 = 75.85%
The MATLAB program for the Example 7.57 is shown below. 
clc 
clear 
Pop=l0*l000; Vt=250; Ra=0.8; Rf=275; Ia=3.91; 
%% part (a)
Psh=Vt^2/Rf; 
Prot=Vt*Ia–Ia^2*Ra; 
%% part (b)
%% generator
I1=Pop /Vt; 
If=Vt/Rf; 
Ia=I1 + If; 
Ploss=Prot+Psh+Ia^2*Ra;
Eff_gen=(l–Ploss/(Ploss+Pop))*100
%% motor
Ia=I1–If; 
Ploss=Prot+Psh+Ia^2*Ra; 
Eff_rnotor=(1–Ploss/(Pop))*100 
%% part (c)
Ia=sqrt((Prot+Psh)/Ra); 
Ploss_tot=2*(Prot+Psh)
%% generator
I1=Ia–If; 
Pout=Vt*I1; 
Eff_gen_rnax=(1–Ploss_tot/(Ploss_tot+Pout))*100 
% motor
I1=Ia+If; 
Pin = Vt*I1; 
Eff_motor_max=(1–Ploss_tot/Pin)*100 

416 Electric Machines
Answer: 
Eff_gen = 79.7996 
Eff_ motor = 75.8498 
EfC_gen_max = 79.8048 
Eff_motor_max = 75.8585
EXAMPLE 7.58 A 50-kW, 250 V, 1200 rpm dc shunt motor when tested on no-load at 250 V draw an 
armature current of 13.2 A, while its speed is 1215 rpm. Upon conducting other tests it is found that Ra = 
0.06 W and Rf = 50 W while Vb (brush voltage drop) = 2 V. 
Calculate the motor efﬁciency at a shaft load of 50 kW at rated voltage with a speed of 1195 rpm. Assume 
that the stray load loss is 1% of the output. 
What would be the load for the motor to have maximum efﬁciency and what would be its value?
SOLUTION 
No-load test 
 
Armature input = 250 ¥ 13.2 = 3300 W 
 
Prot = Pi0 + Pfw = 3300 – 0.06 ¥ (13.2)2 – 2 ¥ 13.2 
 
 = 3263 W 
As speed varies very little from no-load to full-load Prot almost remains constant. 
On-load 
 
Pout = 50 kW (at shaft) 
Let the armature current be Ia. We write the power balance equation. 
 
250 Ia – 0.06 I 2
a – 2 Ia – 3263 – 0 01
50
103
.
¥
¥
Pst





 = 50 ¥ 103
or 
0.06 I2
a – 248 Ia + 53763 = 0 
Solving we get 
 
Ia = 229.6 A
 
Pin = 250 ¥ 229.6 + (
)
250
50
2
 = 58650 W 
 
h = 50000
58650  ¥ 100 = 85.25% 
We shall assume that Pst remains mainly constant in the range of load, we are investigating. Then 
 
h = 250
0 06
2
3763
250
250
5
2
I
I
I
P
P
I
a
a
a
out
st
a
-
-
-
+
+
¥
.
(
)
For maximum efﬁciency 
d
dIa
h  = 0
Solving we get 
Ia = 284 A
Substituting this value of Ia in h expression, we get 
 
hmax = 86.36%
EXAMPLE 7.59 A 600 V dc shunt motor drives a 60 kW load at 900 rpm. The shunt ﬁeld resistance is 
100 W and the armature resistance is 0.16 W. If the motor efﬁciency at the load is 85%, determine 
 (a) the rotational loss 

DC Machines 
417
 (b) the no load armature current and speed. Also ﬁnd speed regulation
 (c) the armature current for electromagnetic torque of 600 Nm 
SOLUTION 
Pout = 60 kW 
 
PL = 
1
1
h -
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  Pout = 
1
0 85
1
.
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  ¥ 60
 
 = 10.59 W 
 
Pin = 60 + 10.59 = 70.59 kW 
 
IL = 70 59
10
600
3
.
¥
 = 117.65 A
 
If = 600
100  = 6 A
 
Ia = 117.65 – 6 = 111.65 A 
 
Ea = 600 – 111.65 ¥ 0.16 = 582.14 V 
 
n = 900 rpm (given) 
 
(a)  
PL = I2
a Ra + Prot + Psh
 
  
10.59 ¥ 103 = (111.65)2 ¥ 0.16 + Prot + 600 ¥ 6
 
 or 
Prot = 4995 W or 4.995 kW 
 
(b) No load
 
 Armature resistance loss can be ignored
 
  
Rotational loss = Prot = 4995 W (loss in nearly independent of speed)
 
  
Input power, P0 ª Prot = 4995 W
 
  
Iao = 4995
600  = 8.325 A
 
 At no load IaoRa drop can be neglected. Therefore
 
  
Eao ª 600 V
 
  
n0 = 900 ¥ 
600
582 14
.
 = 927.6 rpm
 
  
Speed regulation = 927 6
900
900
. -
 ¥ 100 = 3.07%
 
(c)  
Ea = KaF w
 
 Substituting full load values
 
  
582.14 = KaF ¥ 900 ¥ 2
60
p
 
 or 
KaF = 6.177 (constant as F is constant)
 
 Electromagnetic torque 
T = KaF Ia 
 
  
600 = 6.177 Ia
 
 or 
Ia = 97.13 A 
EXAMPLE 7.60 A dc shunt motor rated 10 kW connected to 250 V supply is loaded to draws 35 A 
armature current running at a speed of 1250 rpm. Given Ra = 0.5 W 
 (a) Determine the load torque if the rotational loss is 500 W. 
 (b) Determine the motor efﬁciency if the shunt ﬁeld resistance is 250 W. 

418 Electric Machines
 (c) Determine the armature current for the motor efﬁciency to be maximum and its value. What is the 
corresponding load torque and speed? 
SOLUTION
 
(a)  
Ea = 250 – 0.5 ¥ 35 = 232.5 V
 
 Electromagnetic power, 
Pe = EaIa = Pout (gross)
 
  
Pout (gross) = 232.5 ¥ 35 = 8137.5 W
 
  
Prot = 500 W
 
  
Pout (net) = 8137.5 – 500 = 7637.5 W
 
 Speed 
w = 2
60
p  ¥ 1250 = 130.9 rad/s
 
 Load torque, 
TL = 7637 5
130 9
.
.
 = 58.35 Nm
 
(b)  
I f = 250
250  = A
 
  
IL = 35 + 1 = 36 A
 
  
Pin = 250 ¥ 36 = 9000 W
 
 Efﬁciency, 
h = P
P
out
in
(
)
net  = 7637 5
9000
.  = 84 86%
 
(c) Constant loss, 
Pc = Prot + Psh ; Psh is neglected
 
 or 
Pk = 500 + 250 ¥ 1 = 750 W
 
 For maximum efﬁciency 
I2
a Ra = Pk
 
 or 
Ia = 
750
0 5.
 = 38.73 A
 
  
Total loss = 2 ¥ 750 = 1500 W
 
  
IL = 38.73 + 1 = 39.73 A
 
  
Pin = 250 ¥ 39.73 A = 9932.5 W
 
  
hmax = 1 – 1500
9932 5.  = 84.9% 
 
 Speed 
Ea = 250 – 0.5 ¥ 38.73 = 230.64 V
 
  
n = 1250 ¥ 230 64
232 5
.
.
 = 1240 rpm (marginally different) 
 
  
w = 2
60
p  ¥ 1240 = 129.85 rad/s
 
  
Pout (gross) = 230.64 ¥ 38.73 = 8932.7 W
 
  
Pout (net) = 8932.7 – 500 = 8432.7 W
 
  
TL = 8432 7
129 85
.
.
 = 84.94 Nm
EXAMPLE 7.61 A 250 V, 25 kW shunt motor has maximum efﬁciency of 89% at shaft load of 20 kW and 
speed of 850 rpm. The ﬁeld resistance is 125 W. Calculate the rotational loss and armature resistance. What 
will be the efﬁciency, line current and speed at an armature current of 100 A? 

DC Machines 
419
SOLUTION 
Total loss, 
PL = P(
)
shaft
h
 – P(shaft) = 
1
1
h -
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  P(shaft) 
 
PL = 
1
0 89
1
.
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  ¥ 20 = 2.472 kW or 2472 W 
Power input, 
Pin = 20 + 2.472 = 22.472 kW
Line current, 
IL = 22 472
250
.
 ¥ 103 = 89.89 A 
 
If = 250
125  = 2 A 
 
Ia = 89.89 – 2 = 87.89 A 
At maximum efﬁciency  
 
I2
a Ra = P rot + Psh = 2472/2 = 1236 W
 
Ra = 
1236
89 89 2
(
.
)
 = 0.153 W
 
Psh = 250 ¥ 2 = 500 W 
\ 
Prot = 1236 – 500 = 736 W 
 
Ea = 250 – 89.89 ¥ 0.153 = 236.25 V 
At speed, 
n = 850 rpm 
Now shaft load is raised till armature current becomes Ia = 100 A 
Armature copper loss, 
Pc = (100)2 ¥ 0.153 = 1530 W 
 
PL = Pc + Prot + Psh 
 
 = 1530 + 1236 = 2766  W 
 
Pin = 250 ¥ IL = 250 ¥ (100 + 2) = 25.5 kW 
 
h = 1
2 766
25 5
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
.
.
 ¥ 100 = 89.15
 
Ea = 250 – 100 ¥ 0.153 = 234.7 V 
 
n μ Ea, constant If 
\ 
n = 850 ¥ 234 7
236 25
.
.
 = 844.4 rpm 
Hopkinson’s Test
This is a regenerative test in which two identical dc shunt machines are coupled mechanically and tested 
simultaneously. One of the machines is made to act as a motor driving the other as a generator which supplies 
electric power to motor. The set therefore draws only loss-power from the mains while the individual machines 
can be fully loaded. (Compare this test with Sumpner’s test on two identical transformers).
Figure 7.104 shows the connection diagram for Hopkinson’s test. One of the machines of the set is started 
as a motor (starter connections are not shown in the ﬁgure) and brought to speed. The two machines are made 
parallel by means of switch S after checking that similar polarities of the machine are connected across the 
switch. If this is the case, the voltage across the switch can be almost reduced to zero by adjustment of the 
ﬁeld currents of the machines. Otherwise the polarities of either one of the armatures or one of the ﬁelds must 
be reversed and the set restarted. The switch S is closed after checking that the voltage across it is negligible 
so that heavy circulating current will not ﬂow in the local loop of armatures on closing the switch.

420 Electric Machines
Iag
+
+
–
–
Ia
Gen
Mot
n
Aag
Aam
V2
V1
Afm
Afg
S
Ifg
Iam
Ifm
DC Supply
Fig. 7.104 
Hopkinson’s test 
The speed of the set and electric loading of the machines can be adjusted by means of rheostats placed in 
the two ﬁeld circuits. The cause-effect relationship to load variation is given below:
 
Ifg ≠ Æ Eag ≠ Æ Eag > Eam Æ Iag ≠, Iam ≠
 
Ifm Ø Æ n≠ Æ Eag > Eam Æ Iag ≠, Iam ≠.
Computation of losses and efﬁciencies
Current drawn from supply. 
Ia = Iam – Iag; motor draws larger current as it runs the generator 
(7.126)
 
Total input to armature circuit = VtIa 
 
 = total armature losses since set output is zero 
(7.127)
Hence 
 
Total stray loss = VtIa – I2
am Ram – I2
agRag  
(7.128)
 
 = [(Windage and friction loss) + (no-load iron-loss)
 
  + (stray-load loss)] of both machines  
 
Since the generating machine excitation is more than that of the motoring machine, their no-load iron 
(Pi0) and stray-load loss (Pl
st) are not quite equal. As there is no way of separating these in this test and the 
difference in any case is small, these are regarded as equal in the two machines. Hence 
 
Pstray (each machine) = 1
2 [Vt Ia – I2
amRam – I2
agRag] 
(7.129) 
 
Motor ﬁeld copper-loss = Vt Ifm
 
Generator ﬁeld copper-loss = Vt Ifg
Therefore, 
PLm = (Pstray + Vt Ifm) + I2
am Ram 
(7.130) 
and 
PLg = (Pstray + Vt Ifg) + I2
ag Rag 
(7.131)
Now 
hM = 1 – P
P
Lm
m
in,
 
(7.132)
and 
hG = 1 – 
P
P
P
Lg
g
Lg
out, +
 
(7.133)

DC Machines 
421
Advantages of Hopkinson’s Test 
 
(i) The two machines are tested under loaded conditions so that stray-load losses are accounted for.
 (ii) Since it is a regenerative test, the power drawn from the mains is only that needed to supply losses. The 
test is, therefore, economical for long duration test like a “heat run”.
 (iii) There is no need to arrange for actual load (loading resistors) which apart from the cost of energy 
consumed, would be prohibitive in size for large-size machines.
 (iv) By merely adjusting the ﬁeld currents of the two machines, the load can be easily changed and a load 
test conducted over the complete load range in a short time.
Drawbacks of Hopkinson’s Test
 
(i) Both machines are not loaded equally and this is crucial in smaller machines.
 (ii) Since a large variation of ﬁeld currents is required for small machines, the full-load set speed is usually 
higher than the rated speed and the speed varies with load. The full load in small machines is not 
obtained by cutting out all the external resistance of the generator ﬁeld. Sufﬁcient reduction in the mo-
tor ﬁeld current is necessary to achieve full-load conditions resulting in speeds greater than the rated 
value.
 (iii) There is no way of separating the iron-losses of the two machines, which are different because of 
different excitations.
 
 Thus the test is better suited for large machines.
EXAMPLE 7.62 The following test results were obtained while Hopkinson’s test was performed on two 
similar dc shunt machines: 
 
Supply voltage = 250 V 
 
Field current of motor = 2 A 
 
Field current of generator = 2.5 A 
 
Armature current of generator = 60 A 
 
Current taken by the two armatures from supply = 15 A 
 
Resistance of each armature circuit = 0.2 W 
Calculate the efﬁciency of the motor and generator under these conditions of load. 
SOLUTION 
Iam = Iag + Ia = 60 + 15 = 75 A
Using Eq. (7:128) 
 
Pstray = 1
2 [VtIa – I2
am Ram – I2
ag Rag]
 
 = 1
2 [250 ¥ 15 – 752 ¥ 0.2 – 602 ¥ 0.2] = 952.5 W
 
Pin,m = Vt Iam + Vt Ifm = 250 ¥ 75 + 250 ¥ 2 = 19250 W
Recalling Eq. (7.129)
 
PLm = (Pstray + Vt Ifm) + I 2
am Ram
 
 = (952.5 + 250 ¥ 2 ) + 752 ¥ 0.2 = 2577.5 W
The motor efﬁciency is given by
 
 hM = 1 – P
P
Lm
m
in,
 = 1 – 2577 5
19250
.
 = 86.66%

422 Electric Machines
Using Eq. 7.130
 
PLg = (Pstray + VtIfg) + I2
ag Rag 
 
 = (952.5 + 250 ¥ 2.5) + 602 ¥ 0.2 = 2297.5 W
 
Pout,g = Vt Iag = 250 ¥ 60 = 15000 W
 
hG = 1 – 
P
P
P
Lg
g
Lg
out,
+
 = 1 – 
2297 5
15000
2297 5
.
.
+
 = 86.7% 
Field’s Test: Two Identical Series Motors 
Regenerative test on two identical series motors is not feasible because of instability of such an operation and 
the possibility of run-away speed. Therefore, there is no alternative but to conduct a loading test. In Field’s 
test the two motors are mechanically coupled with the motoring machine driving the generator which feeds 
the electrical load. The connection diagram of the Field’s test is shown in Fig. 7.105. It is observed that
excited and its excitation is identical to that of motor at all loads. This ensures that the iron-loss of both 
the machines are always equal. 
load cannot be switch off accidentally. 
Vm = Vrated
Im
Mot
Gen
n
Im
Vm
Ig
Vg
Local (
)
P0
V supply
+
–
Fig. 7.105
 
 Under load conditions:
 
 Input to the set, 
Pi = VmIm 
 
 Output of the set, 
P0 = VgIg
 
 Total loss, 
PL = VmIm – VgIg  
(i)
 
 Total copper loss, 
Pc = (Ram + 2Rse) I2
m  
(ii)
 
 Total rotational loss, 
Prot(total) = Pi – P0 – Pc  
(iii)
 
 Rotational loss of each machine 
Prot = Prot (total)/2  
(iv)
 
 Efﬁciencies
 
  
hM = 1 – P
R
R
I
V I
rot
am
se
m
m
m
+
+
(
) 2
 
(v)

DC Machines 
423
 
  
hG = 1 – 
P
R
I
R I
V I
P
R
I
R I
rot
ag g
se m
g
g
rot
ag g
se m
+
+
+
+
+
(
)
[
(
]
2
2
2
2
 
(vi)
Note: Series traction motors are normally available in pairs because of the speed control needs. Being a load 
test even though the load is electrical it can be conducted on small motors only.
7.21 
DC MACHINE DYNAMICS
The DC machines are quite versatile and are capable of giving a variety of V-A and speed-torque characteristics 
by suitable combinations of various ﬁeld windings. With solid-state controls their speeds and outputs can be 
controlled easily over a wide range for both dynamic and steady-state operation. By addition of the feedback 
circuit, the machine characteristics can be further modiﬁed. The aim of this section is to study dc machines 
with reference to their dynamic characteristics. 
For illustration, let us consider the separately excited 
dc machine shown schematically in Fig. 7.106. For 
ease of analysis, the following assumptions are made:
 
(i) The axis of armature mmf is ﬁxed in space, 
along the q-axis.
 (ii) The demagnetizing effect of armature reaction is 
neglected.
 (iii) Magnetic circuit is assumed linear (no hysteresis 
and saturation). As a result all inductances 
(which came into play in dynamic analysis) are 
regarded as constant.
The two inductance parameters appearing in Fig. 7.106 are deﬁned below:
 La = armature self-inductance caused by armature ﬂux; this is quite small* and may be neglected without 
causing serious error in dynamic analysis 
 
Lf = self-inductance of ﬁeld winding; it is quite large for shunt ﬁeld and must be accounted for 
Mutual inductance (between ﬁeld and armature) = 0; because the two are in space quadrature. 
Further for dynamic analysis it is convenient to use speed in rad/s rather than rpm. 
Applying Kirchhoff’s law to the armature circuit, 
 
Vt = ea(t) + Raia (t) + La
d
dt ia (t)  
(7.134)
where 
ea(t) = Keif (t)wm; Ke = constant (f (t) μ if (t)) 
(7.135) 
Similarly for the ﬁeld circuit, 
 
vf (t) = Rfif (t) + Lf d
dt if (t) 
(7.136)
For motoring operation, the dynamic equation for the mechanical system is
 
T(t) = Ktif (t)ia(t) = J d
dt wm(t) + Dwm(t)  + TL(t) 
(7.137) 
 
* The armature mmf is directed along the low permeance q-axis.
Ra
Ia
La
TL
+
–
wm
T
–
Vt
ea
+
Lf
If
Rf
Vf
+
–
Fig. 7.106 Schematic representation of a separately 

424 Electric Machines
where 
J = moment of inertia of motor and load in Nms2
 
D = viscous damping coefﬁcient representing rotational torque loss, Nm rad/s
Energy storage is associated with the magnetic ﬁelds produced by if and ia and with the kinetic energy 
of the rotating parts. The above equations are a set of nonlinear* (because of products if (t)wm and if (t)ia(t)) 
state equations with state variables if, ia and wm. The solution has to be obtained numerically. 
Transfer Functions and Block Diagrams
In the simple linear case of motor response to changes in armature voltage, it is assumed that the ﬁeld voltage 
is constant and steady-state is existing on the ﬁeld circuit, i.e. If = constant. Equations (7.134), (7.136) and 
(7.137) now become linear as given below
 
v(t) = K¢ewm(t) + Raia (t) + La
d
dt ia (t)  
(7.138)
 
T(t) = K¢t ia (t) = J d
dt wm(t) + Dwm(t) + TL(t) 
(7.139)
Laplace transforming Eqs (7.138) and (7.139)  
 
V(s) = K¢ewm(s) + (Ra + sLa) Ia(s) 
(7.140) 
 
T(s) = K¢t Ia(s) = (sJ + D)w m(s) +TL(s)  
(7.141) 
These equations can be reorganized as 
 
Ia(s) = V s
K
s
R
sL
e
m
a
a
( )
( )
(
)
-
¢
+
w
 
 = [V(s) – K¢ewm(s)] ¥ 
1
1
/
(
)
R
s
a
a
+ t
 
(7.142)
where 
ta = La/Ra = armature circuit time-constant 
Also 
wm(s) = [T(s) – TL (s)] ¥ 
1
1
/
(
)
D
s m
+ t
 
(7.143)
where 
tm = J/D = mechanical time-constant
 
T(s) = K¢t Ia (s)  
(7.144)
From Eqs (7.142) – (7.144), the block diagram of the motor can be drawn as in Fig. 7.107. It is a second-
order feedback system with an oscillatory response in general. It is reduced to simple ﬁrst-order system, if La 
and therefore ta is neglected 
V(s)
I (s)
a
K¢t
K¢e
T(s)
T (s)
L
+
–
+
–
1/
1
R
+s
a
a
t
1/
1
D
+stm
wm( )
s
Fig. 7.107
wm(s) 
 
* This is inspite of the fact that the magnetic circuit has been regarded as linear.

DC Machines 
425
Shunt Generator Voltage Build-up
The qualitative explanation for the voltage build-up 
process in a shunt generator has already been advanced 
in Sec. 7.11. Here the mathematical treatment of this 
problem will be given, which in fact boils down to the 
solution of a nonlinear differential equation.
Referring to Fig. 7.108 it is seen that for any ﬁeld 
current the intercept ab, between the OCC and the 
Rf -line gives the voltage drop caused by the rate of 
change of Ff and the intercept bc gives the drop in 
the ﬁeld resistance. The two together balance out the 
generated emf ea (neglecting if Ra, the armature drop). 
Thus
 
Nf d
dt
f
F
 = ea – Rfif  
(7.145)
where 
Ff = ﬁeld ﬂux/pole 
 
Nf = number of turns of ﬁeld winding
The ﬁeld ﬂux Ff is greater than the direct axis air-gap ﬂux Fd because of leakage. 
Taking this into account
 
Ff = sFd  
(7.146) 
Here s is known as the coefﬁcient of dispersion. 
Recalling Eq. (7.3),
 
Fd = 
e
K
a
a
m
w
 
(7.147)
Substituting Eqs (7.146) and (7.147) in Eq. (7.148),
 
N
K
de
dt
f
a
m
a
s
w
◊
 = ea – if Rf 
(7.148)
Multiplying numerator and denominator by Nf Pag 
where Pag is the permeance of the air-gap/pole 
 
N
K
f
a
m
s
w
 = 
N
K
N
f
ag
a
m
ag
f
2s
w
P
P
It is easily recognized that the numerator is the unsaturated value of ﬁeld inductance, Lf, and the 
denominator is the slope of the air-gap line. Both are constants. Hence, 
 
L
K
de
dt
f
g
a  = ea – Rfif 
(7.149)
Rewriting Eq. (7.145)
 
dt = 
L
K
de
e
R i
f
g
a
a
f
f
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
Rf -line
OCC
Nf
dFf
dt
a
b
c
ea
ea0
er
0
R I
f f
If
Fig. 7.108 
Magnetization curve and Rf-line

426 Electric Machines
or 
t = L
K
de
e
R i
f
g
a
a
f f
e
e
r
a
-
Ú
 
(7.150)
where the limits of integration, 
 
er = residual voltage 
 
ea = instantaneous generated voltage 
This integral can be evaluated graphically by sum-
ming up the areas on a plot of 1/(ea – R fif) against ea. 
This approach is employed to plot ea against time. The 
theoretical time needed for the generated emf to attain the 
no-load value, ea0 would be inﬁnite; hence in practice the 
time needed to reach 0.95 ea0 is taken as the time needed 
to reach ea0. The variation of ea with time is plotted in 
Fig. 7.109.
The response is rather sluggish since only small 
voltage differences (= ea – R f if) contribute to the ﬂux 
build-up (Ff)·
As has been discussed in Chapter 2, a number of new permanent magnet materials—ceramics, and rare earth 
magnetic materials-have become available commercially. These materials have high residual ﬂux as well as 
high coercivity. Smaller fractional and sub-tractional hp dc motors are now constructed with PM poles. As 
no ﬁeld windings are needed, so no ﬁeld current and continuous ﬁeld loss. As a result PMDC motors are 
smaller in size than the corresponding rated ﬁeld wound type motors, this fact partially off-sets the high cost 
of permanent magnets. Obviously, these motors offer shunt type characteristic and can only be armature 
controlled. The risk of permanent magnetism getting destroyed by armature reaction (at starting/reversing or 
heavy over-loads) has been greatly reduced by the new PM materials. 
Constructional Features 
The stator is an annular cylindrical shell of magnetic material on the inside of which are bonded fractional 
cylindrical permanent magnets (usually two poles) as shown in the cross-sectional view of Fig. 7.110. The 
magnetics are radially magnetized as shown by arrows. The rotor is laminated magnetic material with slotted 
structure in which the winding is placed whose coil ends suitably connected to the commutator (usual 
construction).  
Magnetic Circuit 
It is seen from Fig. 7.110 that the ﬂux crosses the air gap length (lg) twice and the thickness of the permanent 
magnet tm twice. The iron path in the shell and rotor teeth and core being highly permeable (m
) can be 
assumed to consume any mmf. The mmf balance equation is then 
 
2lg Hg + 2tm Hm = 0 ; no external mmf is applied 
or 
lg Hg + tm Hm = 0
er
t
0
ea
Fig. 7.109 Voltage build-up of a shunt generator 

DC Machines 
427
or 
Hg = –
t
l
m
g
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ Hm 
(7.151)
Air-gap ﬂux density, 
Bg = m0Hg  
(7.152)
Also 
Bg = Bm
it then follows from Eq. (7.151) that 
 
Bg = – m0 t
l
m
g
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ Hm = Bm 
(7.153)
which is the load line of the magnetic circuit.
The dc magnetization characteristics of various PM materials is presented in Fig. 2.20. Obvious choice of 
PMDC motor is neodymium-iron-boron which has high coercivity and high retentivity. Its characteristic is 
almost a straight line which can be expressed as 
 
Bm = –
1 25
940
10
4
10
3
7
.
¥
¥
¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
-
p
m0Hm + 1.25
or 
Bm = –1.06 m0Hm + 1.25 
(7.154)
The solution of Eqs. (7.153) and (7.154) yields Bm = Bg from which we can ﬁnd the ﬂux/poles as 
 
F = BgAg
Unlike a normal dc motor F is a constant quantity 
Emf and torque equations 
 
Ea = KaFw 
 
T = KaF Ia 
As F is constant 
Ea = Kmw  
(7.155)
 
T = Km Ia  
(7.156)
where Km = motor torque constant
Electromagnetic power, 
Pe = EaIa 
Outer shell
Radially magnetized
permanent magnets
(arrows indicate direction
of magnetization)
Rotor
Fig. 7.110 Cross section view of permanent-magnet motor

428 Electric Machines
Circuit model As there is no electrically excited ﬁeld and the 
permanent magnetic creates a constant ﬂux/pole, the circuit of a 
permanent magnet motor is as drawn in Fig. 7.111. where the armature 
resistance Ra is shown in series with the armature which has induced 
back emf. The armature circuit equation is Ea = Vt – IaRa.
 
ﬁ In PMDC, even for wider range of armature voltage the torque 
speed characteristics are linear, Fig. 7.112(b)
 
ﬁ PMDC motor exhibits better speed regulation and efﬁciency 
than dc shunt motor. 
 
ﬁ The main problem of dc shunt motor is goes to run away when the ﬁeld terminals are opened. But in   
PMDC there is no run away problem, so it gives practical beneﬁt to the industry applications. 
 
ﬁ PMDC produces high torque even at low speeds which is shown in Fig. 7.112(a) and also it produces 
high starting torque compared to dc shunt motors.
Rated output
(both motors)
Starting torque of
shunt motor
Starting torque of
PMDC motor
Torque
(a)
V1
V2
V3
V4
V
V
V
V
4
3
2
1
>
>
>
Torque
Speed
Speed
(b)
Fig. 7.112 Speed torque characteristics of PMDC motors
EXAMPLE 7.63 A PMDC motor has an armature resistance of 4.2 W. When 6 V supply is connected to 
the motor it runs at a speed 12,125 rpm drawing a current of 14.5 mA on no-load 
 (a) Calculate its torque constant 
 (b) What is the value of rotational loss?
 
 With an applied voltage of 6 V, 
 (c) calculate the stalled torque and stalled current of the motor (motor shaft held stationary)
 (d) at a gross output of 1.6 W, calculate the armature current and efﬁciency. Assume that the rotational 
loss varies as square of speed.
 (e) calculate the motor output at a speed of 10,250 rpm and the efﬁciency. 
SOLUTION 
No load 
Vt = 6 V, Iao = 14.5 mA, n = 12125 rpm or w = 1269.7 rad/s 
 
(a)  
Ea = 6 – 14.5 ¥ 103 ¥ 4.2 = 5.939 V
 
  
5.939 = Kmw = Km ¥ 1269.7
Ea
Ra
Ia
+
–
Vt
n
Fig. 7.111 Circuit model

DC Machines 
429
 
 or 
Km = 4.677 ¥ 10–3
 
(b) Rotational loss, 
Prot = EaIa ; there is no load
 
  
 = 5.939 ¥ 14.5 ¥ 10–3 = 0.0861 W
 
(c) Stalled current
 
  
w = 0 so Ea = 0
 
  
Ia(stall) = 6
4 2.
 = 1.4285 A
 
  
Torque (stall) = K mIa(stall) = 4.677 ¥ 10–3 ¥ 1.428
 
  
 = 6.67 m Nm 
 
(d)  
Pout(gross) = 1.6 W = EaIa 
 
  
(6 – 4.2 Ia) Ia = 1.6
 
  
4.2 I2
a – 6Ia + 1.6 = 0 
 
 Solving we ﬁnd
 
  
Ia = 0.354 A, 1.074 A 
 
 Thus
 
  
Ia = 0.354 A; higher value rejected
 
  
Ea = 6 – 0.854 ¥ 4.2 = 4.513 V = Kmw
 
  
w = 4 513
103
.
¥
4.677
 = 965 rad/s
 
 Rotational loss (proportional to square of speed)
 
  
Prot = 0.0861 ¥ 
965
1269 7
2
.
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = 0.05 W
 
  
Pout(net) = Pout(gross) – Prot
 
  
 = 1.6 – 0.05 = 1.55 W
 
 Power input, 
Pi = Vt Ia = 6 ¥ 0.354 = 2121 W
 
  
h = 1 55
2 124
.
.
 ¥ 100 = 73% 
 
(e) Motor speed, 
n = 10250 rpm or w = 1073.4 rad/s
 
  
Ea = Km
w = 4.513 ¥ 10–3 ¥ 1073.4 = 4.844 V
 
  
Ia = 6
4 844
4 2
- .
.
 = 0.275 A
 
  
Pout(gross) = Pe = EaIa
 
  
 = 4.844 ¥ 0.275 = 1.332 W
 
  
Prot = 0.0861 ¥ 1073 4
1269 7
2
.
.
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = 0.0615 W
 
  
Pout (net) = 1.332 – 0.0615 = 1.27 W
 
  
Pin = 6 ¥ 0.275 = 1.65 W
 
  
h = 1 27
1 65
.
.
 ¥ 100 = 77% 

430 Electric Machines
7.23 
DC MACHINE APPLICATIONS 
 Whenever the application of any machine is considered, its operating characteristics along with its economic 
and technical viability as compared to its competitors are the essential criteria. For a dc machine, of course, 
the main attraction lies in its ﬂexibility, versatility and ease of control. This explains why in spite of its rather 
heavy initial investment it still retains its charm in strong competitive industrial applications. In the world, 
today, around 25% of the motors manufactured are dc motors. 
With the advent of various power electronic devices, there is no doubt that the importance of a dc generator 
has gone down. Now, for ac to dc transformation, the dc generator as part of an ac-to-dc motor-generator 
set has to compete with SCR rectiﬁers and various other types of controlled power electronic devices 
which usually are less costly, compact, relatively noise-free in operation and need minimum maintenance, 
but suffer from the disadvantages of having poor power factor, harmonic generation, poor braking, etc. 
However, some of the important applications of a dc generator include—dynamometers, welding, cross-
ﬁeld generators for closed-loop control systems, tachogenerators, etc. Separately-excited generators are 
still in use for a wide output-voltage control such as in the Ward- Leonard system of speed control. 
In dc series motor the starting torque is very high, up to ﬁve times the full-load torque. It may be interesting 
to note that the maximum torque in a dc motor is limited by commutation and not, as with other motors, by 
heating. Speed regulation of a dc series motor can be varied widely. For drives requiring a very high starting 
torque, such as hoists, cranes, bridges, battery-powered vehicles and traction-type loads, the series dc motor 
is the obvious choice. Speed control is by armature resistance control. Its closest rival is the wound-rotor 
induction motor with a rotor resistance control. But ultimately the availability and economics of a dc power 
is the deciding factor rather than the motor characteristics. 
Compound motor characteristics depend naturally upon the degree of compounding. Shunt ﬁeld of course 
restricts the no-load speed to a safe value. Its main competitor is the squirrel-cage high-slip induction motor. 
A compound motor has a considerably higher starting torque compared to a shunt motor and possesses, 
a drooping speed-load characteristic. Compound dc motors are used for pulsating loads needing ﬂywheel 
action, plunger pumps, shears, conveyors, crushers, bending rolls, punch presses, hoists, rolling mill, planing 
and milling machines, etc. 
A dc shunt motor has a medium starting torque. Speed regulation is about 5–15%. It is used essentially 
for constant speed applications requiring medium starting torques, such as centrifugal pumps, fans, blowers, 
conveyors, machine tools, printing presses, etc. Owing to the relative simplicity, cheapness and ruggedness 
of the squirrel cage induction motor, the shunt motor is less preferred for constant-speed drives except at low-
speeds. At low speeds, dc shunt motors are comparable with synchronous motors. The outstanding feature 
of a dc shunt motor however is its superb wide range ﬂexible speed control above and below the base speed 
using solid-state controlled rectiﬁers (discussed in Ch. 12). 
In general, whenever a decision is to be made for a choice of a suitable motor for a given application, it 
is necessary to make speciﬁc, analytic, economic, and technical comparison of all practical choices. Finally, 
it should be mentioned to the credit of a dc machine that it still remains most versatile, ﬂexible, easily 
controllable energy conversion device whose demand and need would continue to be felt in industries in 
future for various applications discussed above. 

DC Machines 
431
 
 The main advantage of dc machines lies in their ﬂexibility, versatility and high degree of control. The
 disadvantages are complexity associated with armature winding and commutator/brush system, more 
maintenance and less reliability. 
 
 Lap winding – number of parallel paths A = P 
 
 number of brushes  = P, equalizer rings needed = P
 
 Wave winding – number of parallel paths = 2, independent of number of poles
 
 number of brushes, 2 needed but P used in practice
 
 no equalizer rings needed 
 
  
Ea = KaFwm = 2
60
p
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ KaFn V 
 
 where 
Ka = 
ZP
A
2p
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ , machine constant 
 
  
T = KaFIa ; Ka same as in emf equation 
 
  
T = electromagnetic torque developed 
 
  
Twm = EaIa 
 
  
Vt = Ea – Ia Ra ; Vt < Ea
 
  
Ra = armature resistance, very small 0.01 pu 
 
 There is constant voltage drop at brush about 1 to 2 V. Ia ﬂow out of positive terminal. 
 
  
Vt = Ea + IaRa; Vt > Ea 
 
 Ia ﬂows into positive terminal
 
 d-axis – along the axis of main poles
 
 q-axis – along the magnetic neutral axis at 90° electrical to d-axis 
ATa along magnetic neutral axis (q-axis) at 90° to d-axis 
 
 Nature – cross magnetizing, weakens one side of poles and strengthens the other side of poles. F 
remains constant in linear region of magnetizing. In saturation region of main poles F decreases, 
a demagnetizing effect. 
 
 Armature reaction creates distortion in the ﬂux density, shift in MNA, increased iron loss, commutation 
problem and commutator sparking.
the harmful effects of armature reaction

432 Electric Machines
 out the inﬂuence of one pole pair to the next pole pair, 
the current in it must reverse. The reactance emf di
dt
(
)
coil
È
ÎÍ
˘
˚˙  opposes the change.
 
 Interpoles – to aid current reversal in commutating coil narrow poles are placed in magnetic neutral 
region with polarity such that the speed emf induce in the coil opposes reactance emf. 
 Excitation of machine poles Separate excitation from independent source, shunt excitation (from 
armature voltage), series excitation (from armature current), compound excitation (combined); it 
could be cumulative compound (series excitation aids shunt excitation) or differential compound 
(series excitation opposes shunt excitation, not used in practice)
 Machine types as per method of excitation 
 
 Generator: shunt, series, compound 
 
 Motor : shunt, series, compound 
 
 Compound connection – long shunt and short shunt 
VOC (= Ea) vs If. Machine is run as separately excited generator 
at constant speed. This indeed is the magnetization characteristic.
 
 Separately excited dc generators have the advantage of permitting a wide range of output voltages. 
But self-excited machines may produce unstable voltages at lower output voltages, where the ﬁeld 
resistance line becomes essentially tangent to the magnetization curve. 
 
 Cumulative compounded generators may produce a substantially ﬂat voltage characteristics or one 
which rises with load, where as shunt or separately excited generators may produce a drooping voltage 
characteristics. 
Shunt Motor 
 
  
n = 1
¢
-
K
V
I R
o
t
a
a
F
, T = KaF Ia ; K¢a = 
2
60
p
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ Ka
 
 The speed n decreases slightly as load torque increases and so IaRa drop increases. This is typical 
slightly drooping shunt characteristic. However, armature reaction reduces F due to saturation 
effect. This counters drop in speed. 
 
 Speed Control 
 
  
n = 1
¢
Ko
Vt
F , IaRa ignored
 
 Field Control As shunt ﬁeld current is reduced, F reduces and n increases and torque developed 
reduces. Constant-kW control. 
 
 Armature Control As Vt is increased with Fmax’ n increases. The machine develops constant 
torque. Constant – T control 
Series Motor As the series ﬁeld is excited by armature current
 
  
n = 
1
¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
K K
o
f
V
I
t
a
, T = Ka FIa = (KaKf  )I2
a, on linear basis
 
 The speed reduces sharply with load torque (Ia increases). This is typical series characteristics. To 
be noted that at no-load Ia becomes zero and speed tends to inﬁnite. The series motor should never 
be light loaded. Ideal for traction-type loads.

DC Machines 
433
 
 Speed Control 
 
 Field Control F is controlled by tapping series ﬁeld turns or by a diverter resistance across the 
series ﬁeld. 
 
 Armature Control Vt is controlled in two steps by series-parallel connection of two mechanically 
coupled identical series motors. 
Compound Motor (cumulative) Speed-torque characteristic lies in between shunt and series 
characteristic depending upon compounding. The motor has a deﬁnite no-load speed determined 
by the shunt ﬁeld. 
Motor starting At start Ea = 0, direct starting current is unacceptably high. A series resistance is 
included in motor armature circuit and is cutout in steps as the motor speeds up. 
Motor efﬁciency Constant loss, Pk = core loss, windage and friction loss, shunt ﬁeld loss 
 
 Variable loss, armature copper loss I2
a Ra 
 
 At h max 
 
  
Variable loss = Constant loss
 
  
I 2
aRa = Pk or Ia = 
P
R
k
a
 
 Relationships to remember
 
  
n μ Ea
F , T μ FIa
 
 If F μ I f (linear magnetization) 
 
  
n μ Ea
If
, T μ If Ia, T μ I2
a (for series motor)
 
 Approximation 
 
  
On no-load, Ea ª Vt 
 
 This approximation may be used even on load where less accuracy is acceptable. 
 
 7.1 A compensated dc machine has 20000 AT/
pole. The ratio of the pole arc to pole pitch 
is 0.8. The interpolar air-gap length and ﬂux 
density are respectively 1.2 cm and 0.3 T. For 
rated Ia = 1000 A, calculate the compensating 
winding AT per pole and the number of turns 
on each interpole.
 7.2 The no-load saturation curve for a generator 
operating at 1800 rpm is given by the 
following data
 
 Eg (V) 
8 
40 
74 
113 
152
 
  
213 
234 
248 
266 
278
 
 If (A) 
0 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
2.5
 
  
3.0 
3.5 
4.0 
5.0 
6.0
 
(a) Plot the no-load saturation curve for 
1500 rpm.
 
(b) Calculate the generated voltage when the 
generator is operating on no-load with a 
ﬁeld current of 4.6 A and at a speed of 
1000 rpm.
 
(c) What is the ﬁeld current required to gener-
ate 120 V on no-load when the generator 
is operating at 900 rpm?
 
(d) This machine is operated as a shunt 
generator at 1800 rpm with a ﬁeld current 

434 Electric Machines
of 4.6 A. What is the no-load voltage when 
the generator is operating at 1500 rpm? 
 7.3 The accompanying data are given for 
the saturation curve of an 80-kW, 220-V, 
1200-rpm shunt generator, the data being for 
1200 rpm:
 
 If (A) 
0 
0.4 
0.8 
1.2 
1.6 
2.0
 
  
2.5 
3.2 
4.0 
4.5 
5.0 
5.5
 
 Eg (V) 10 
38 
 66  
96  
128 
157
 
  
188 
 222  248  259  
267  275 
 
(a) The shunt ﬁeld resistance is adjusted to 
50 W and the terminal voltage is found to 
be 250 V, at a certain load at 1200 rpm. 
Find the load supplied by the generator 
and the induced emf. Assume that the ﬂux 
is reduced by 4% due to armature reaction. 
Armature resistance is 0.1 W.
 
(b) For the same ﬁeld resistance and an 
armature current of 250 A obtain the 
values of Eg, Vt and If. 
 7.4 Find the resistance of the load which takes a 
power of 5 kW from a shunt generator whose 
external characteristic is given by the equation 
Vt = (250 – 0.5IL) 
 7.5 A dc shunt generator rated 175 kW, 400 V, 
1800 rpm is provided with compen sating 
winding. Its magnetization data at 1800 rpm 
is given below:
 
 If (A) 
1 
2  
3  
4  
5
 
  
6  
7  
8  
9
 
 VOC(V)  100  
200 
 300  370  
415
 
  
440  
765 
 475 
 480 
 
 Other data of the generator are 
 
 
Ra = 0.05 W, Rf = 20 W, Rext = 0 to 300
 
 when Rext = regulating resistance in the shunt 
ﬁeld. 
 
 The generator connected as shunt is run by a 
prime-mover at 1600 rpm. 
 
(a) Find the value of Rext for the no-load 
voltage to be 400 V. 
 
(b) A load resistance of 1 W is connected 
across the generator terminals. What 
should be the value of Rext for the load 
voltage to be 400 V. 
 
(c) What would be the generator terminal 
voltage when the load resistance is 
disconnected? 
 7.6  In a 110 V compound generator, the resistance 
of the armature, shunt and series windings are 
0.06, 25 and 0.05 W respectively, The load 
consists of 200 lamps each rated at 55 W, 
100 V. Find the emf and armature current, 
when the machine is connected for (a) long 
shunt (b) short shunt (c) How will the ampere-
turns of the series windings be changed, if in 
(a) a diverter of resistance 0.1 W is connected 
across the series ﬁeld? Ignore armature 
reaction and brush voltage drop.
 7.7 A dc shunt generator has the following open-
circuit characteristic when separate ly excited:
 
 Field current, A 0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8
 
  
1.0 
1.4 
2.0
 
 Emf, V 
80 
135 
178 
198
 
  
210 
228 
246
 
 The shunt winding has 1000 turns per pole 
and a total resistance of 240 W. Find the 
turns per pole of a series winding that will be 
needed to make the terminal voltage the same 
at 50 A output as on no-load. The resistance 
of the armature winding, including the series 
compounding winding, can be assumed to be 
0.36 W and constant. Ignore armature reaction.
 7.8 A dc compound generator has a shunt ﬁeld 
winding of 3600 turns per pole and a series 
ﬁeld winding of 20 turns per pole. Its open-
circuit magnetization characteristic when it is 
separately excited by its shunt ﬁeld winding 
and driven at its no- load rated speed is given 
below: 
 
 AT/pole 3120 4680 6240 7800 9360
 
 Emf (V) 289 
361 
410 
446 
475
 
  The full-load armature current is 100 A and 
the ohmic drop in the armature circuit for this 
current is 20 V including brush drop. At no 
load the ohmic drop may be ignored and the 

DC Machines 
435
terminal voltage is 415 V. The fall in speed 
from no-load to full-load is 8%; the shunt 
ﬁeld circuit is connected across the output 
terminals of the machine and its resistance is 
kept constant.
 
  Determine the terminal voltage and power 
output for the full-load armature current 
of 100 A. Neglect the effects of armature 
reaction.
 7.9 A 250 kW, 6-pole, dc compound generator is 
required to give 500 V on no-load and 550 V 
on full-load. The armature is lap-connected 
and has 1080 conductors; the total resistance 
of the armature circuit is 0.037 W. The open-
circuit character istic for the machine at rated 
speed is given by:
 
 Armature 
 
 voltage, V 
500 
535 
560 
580
 
 Field ampere-  
 
 turns/pole 
6000 
7000 8000 9000
 
  The ﬁeld ampere-turns per pole to 
compensate for armature reaction are 10% 
of the armature ampere-turns per pole. The 
shunt ﬁeld winding is connected across the 
output terminals and has a resistance of 85 W. 
Determine the required number of series turns 
per pole.
 7.10 A 10 kW, 250 V shunt motor has an armature 
resistance of 0.5 W and a ﬁeld resistance of 
200 W. At no load and rated voltage, the speed 
is 1200 rpm and the armature current is 3 A. 
At full load and rated voltage, the line current 
is 47 A and because of armature reaction, the 
ﬂux is 4% less than its no-load value. 
 
(a) What is the full-load speed?
 
(b) What is the developed torque at full load? 
 7.11 A 75 kW, 250 V, dc shunt motor has the 
magnetisation data at 1200 rpm as below: 
 
 If (A) 
1 
2 
3 
4
 
  
5 
6 
7 
8
 
 Ea(V) 
70 
130 
183 
207
 
  
250 
274 
292 
307
 
  No-load test on the motor conducted at 
1100 rpm yielded rotational loss (no-load iron 
loss + windage and frictional loss) as 2200 W. 
Stray load loss can be taken as 1% of output. 
Given: Ra = 0.025 W 
 
(a) Determine the motor speed and mechani-
cal (net) output at an armature cur rent 
of 300 A. Assume that armature reaction 
causes 5% voltage reduction in induced 
emf. 
 
(b) Shunt ﬁeld turns/pole = 1200. Two series 
turns are added in cumulative compound. 
Assuming Rse to be negligible, calculate 
speed and power output. 
 7.12 A 200 V shunt motor has Ra = 0, 1 W, Rf  = 
240 W and rotational loss 236 W. On full-
load, the line current is 9.8 A with the motor 
running at 1450 rpm.
 
 Determine:
 
(a) the mechanical power developed 
 
(b) the power output 
 
(c) the load torque 
 
(d) the full-load efﬁciency. 
 7.13 A 220 V unsaturated shunt motor has an 
armature resistance (including brushes and 
interpoles) of 0.04 W and the ﬁeld resistance 
of 100 W. Find (a) the value of resistance to be 
added to the ﬁeld circuit to increase the speed 
from 1200 to 1600 rpm, when the supply 
current is 200 A, (b) With the ﬁeld resistance 
as in (a), ﬁnd the speed when the supply 
current is 120 A. If the machine is run as a 
generator to give 200 A at 220 V, ﬁnd (c) the 
ﬁeld current at 1300 rpm, and (d) the speed 
when the ﬁeld current is 2 A.
 7.14 Derive the standard torque equation of a dc 
motor, from ﬁrst principles. A 4-pole series 
motor has 944 wave-connected armature 
conductors. At a certain load the ﬂux per pole 
is 34.6 mWb and the total mechanical power 
developed is 4 kW. Calculate the line current 
taken by the motor and the speed at which it 
will run with an applied voltage of 500 V. The 
total motor resistance is 3 W. 

436 Electric Machines
 7.15 The following data pertain to 250 V dc series 
motor:
 
 
Z = 180, P
A  = 1
 
 Flux/pole = 3.75 m Wb/ﬁeld amp
 
 Total armature circuit resistance = 1 W
 
 The motor is coupled to centrifugal pump 
whose load torque is
 
 
TL = 10–4 n2 Nm
 
 where n = speed in rpm.
 
 Calculate the current drawn by the motor and 
the speed at which it will run. 
 7.16 A dc shunt motor is being operated from 300 V 
mains. Its no-load speed is 1200 rpm. When 
fully loaded, it delivers a torque of 400 Nm 
and its speed drops to 1100 rpm. Find its speed 
and power output when delivering the same 
torque; if operated with an armature voltage of 
600 V. Excitation is assumed unchanged, i.e. 
the motor ﬁeld is still excited at 300 V. State 
any assumption you are required to make.
 7.17 A 50 kW, 230 V dc shunt motor has an ar-
mature resistance of 0.1 W and a ﬁeld resis-
tance of 200 W. It runs on no-load at a speed 
of 1400 rpm, drawing a current of 10 A from 
the mains.
 
  When delivering a certain load, the motor 
draws a current of 200 A from the mains. 
Find the speed at which it will run at this load 
and the torque developed. Assume that the 
armature reaction causes a reduction in the 
ﬂux/pole of 4% of its no-load value.
 7.18 A 250 V dc series motor has the following 
OCC at 1200 rpm:
 
 If (A) 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30
 
 VOC(V) 100 175 
220 
240 260 
275
 
 Ra = 0.3 W and series ﬁeld resistance is 0.3 W. 
Find the speed of the machine when (a) Ia = 
25 A and (b) the developed torque is 40 Nm. 
 7.19 A 15 kW, 250 V, 1200 rpm shunt motor 
has 4 poles, 4 parallel armature paths, and  
900 armature conductors; Ra = 0.2 W. At rated 
speed and rated output the armature current is 
75 A and If = 1.5 A. Calculate (a) ﬂux/pole, (b) 
the torque developed, (c) rotational losses, (d) 
h, (e) the shaft load, and (f ) if the shaft load 
remains ﬁxed, but the ﬁeld ﬂux is reduced to 
70% of its value by ﬁeld control, determine 
the new operating speed.
 7.20 A 115 kW, 600 V dc series wound railway 
track motor has a combined, ﬁeld and armature 
resistance (including brushes) of 0.155 W. The 
full-load current at rated voltage and speed is 
216 A. The magnetization curve at 500 rpm is 
as follows.
 
 EMF (V) 375 
400 
425 
450 
475
 
 If (A) 
188 
216 
250 
290 
333
 
(a) Neglecting armature reaction, calculate 
the speed in rpm at the rated current and 
voltage. 
 
(b) Calculate the full-load internal (developed) 
torque. 
 
(c) If the starting current is to be restricted to 
290 A, calculate the external resistance 
to be added in the motor circuit and the 
starting torque. 
 7.21 A 100 kW, 600 V, 600 rpm dc series wound 
railway motor has a combined ﬁeld and 
armature resistance (including brushes) of 
0.155 W. The full-load current at the rated 
voltage and speed is 206 A. The magnetization 
curve at 400 rpm is as follows:
 
 If (A) 
188 206 216 
250 
290 333
 
 EMF (V)  375 390 400 
425 
450 475
 
(a) Determine the armature reaction in 
equivalent demagnetizing ﬁeld current at 
206 A. 
 
(b) Calculate the internal (developed) torque 
at the full-load current.
 
(c) Assuming demagnetizing armature reac-
tion mmf proportional to (I2
a). deter mine 
the internal starting torque at the starting 
current of 350 A. 
 7.22 A 3 kW series motor runs normally at 800 rpm 
on a 240 V supply, taking 16 A; the ﬁeld coils 

DC Machines 
437
are all connected in series. Estimate the speed 
and current taken by the motor if the coils are 
reconnected in two parallel groups of two in 
series. The load torque increases as the square 
of the speed. Assume that the ﬂux is directly 
proportional to the current and ignore losses. 
 7.23 A 20 kW, 500 V shunt motor has an efﬁciency 
of 90% at full load. The armature copper-
loss is 40% of the full-load loss. The ﬁeld 
resistance is 250 W. Calculate the resistance 
values of a 4-section starter suitable for this 
motor in the following two cases:
 
 Case 1: Starting current £ 2If l 
 
 Case 2: Starting current (min) = 120% If l· 
 7.24 A starter is to be designed for a 10 kW, 
250 V shunt motor. The armature resistance 
is 0.15 W. This motor is to be started with 
a resistance in the armature circuit so that 
during the starting period the armature current 
does not exceed 200% of the rated value or 
fall below the rated value. 
 
 That is, the machine is to start with 200% of 
armature current and as soon as the current 
falls to the rated value, sufﬁcient series 
resistance is to be cut out to restore current to 
200% (or less in the last step). 
 
(a) Calculate the total resistance of the starter. 
 
(b) Also calculate the resistance to be cut out 
in each step in the starting operation. 
 7.25 A dc motor drives a 100 kW generator having 
an efﬁciency of 87%. 
 
(a) What should be the kW rating of the 
motor? 
 
(b) If the overall efﬁciency of the motor 
generator set is 74%, what is the efﬁciency 
of the motor?
 
(c) Also calculate the losses in each machine. 
 7.26 A 600 V dc motor drives a 60 kW load at 
900 rpm. The shunt ﬁeld resistance is 100 W 
and the armature resistance is 0.16 W. If the 
motor efﬁciency is 85%, determine: 
 
(a) the speed at no-load and the speed 
regulation. 
 
(b) the rotational losses.
 7.27 Enumerate the principal losses that occur in a 
dc generator, and where appropri ate, state the 
general form of the physical law upon which 
each loss depends. Calculate the efﬁciency 
of a self-excited dc shunt generator from 
the following data; Rating: 10 kW, 250 V, 
1000 rpm.
 
  
Armature resistance = 0.35 W
 
  
Voltage drop at brushes = 2 V
 
  Windage and friction losses = 150 W
 
  
Iron-loss at 250 V = 180 W
 
 Open circuit characteristic:
 
 EMF (V): 11 
140 227 285 
300 312
 
 Field 
 
 
 current (A) 0 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
2.2 
2.4
 7.28 A 60 kW, 252 V shunt motor takes 16 A when 
running light at 1440 rpm. The resistance of 
armature and ﬁeld is 0.2 and 125 W respectively 
when hot. (a) Estimate the efﬁciency of the 
motor when taking 152 A. (b) Also estimate 
the efﬁciency if working as a generator and 
delivering a load current of 152 A at 250 V.
 7.29 A 200 V shunt motor takes 10 A when running 
on no-load. At higher loads the brush drop is 
2 V and at light loads it is negligible. The stray-
load loss at a line current of 100 A is 50% of 
the no-load loss. Calculate the efﬁciency at 
a line current of 100 A if armature and ﬁeld 
resistances are 0.2 and 100 W respectively.
 7.30 Hopkinson’s test on two machines gave the 
following results for full load; line voltage 
230 V, line current excluding ﬁeld current 
50 A; motor armature current 380 A; ﬁeld 
currents 5 and 4.2 A. Calculate the efﬁciency 
of each machine. The armature resistance of 
each machine = 0.02 W. State the assumptions 
made. 
 7.31 Calculate the efﬁciency of a 500 V shunt 
motor when taking 700 A from the following 
data taken when the motor was hot: motor 
stationary, voltage drop in the armature 
winding 15 V, when the armature current was 
510 A; ﬁeld current 9 A at normal voltage. 

438 Electric Machines
Motor running at normal speed unloaded; the 
armature current was 22.5 A, when the applied 
voltage was 550 V; allow 2 V for brush contact 
drop and 1 % of the rated output of 400 kW 
for stray-load losses. 
 7.32 A 480 V, 20 kW shunt motor took 2.5 A, when 
running light. Taking the arma ture resistance 
to be 0.6 W, ﬁeld resistance to be 800 W and 
brush drop 2 V, ﬁnd the full-load efﬁciency. 
 7.33 The open-circuit characteristic for a dc 
generator at 1200 rpm is:
 
 Field current (A) 0 
2 
4 
6 
8
 
 Armature vol- 
 
 tage (V) 
13 
140 230 285  320
 
  Estimate the critical ﬁeld resistance at this 
speed. Keeping the ﬁeld resistance ﬁxed at 
this speed, the generator is run at 1600 rpm. 
What would be the no-load voltage?
 
  The generator is now loaded to an armature 
current of 500 A. Estimate the terminal 
voltage and line current (at 1600 rpm). Neglect 
armature reaction effects.
 
 Given: Armature resistance = 0.05 W,
 
  
Brush voltage drop = 2 V 
 7.34 The open-circuit voltage of a dc shunt 
generator is 130 V. When loaded the voltage 
drops to 124 V. Determine the load current.
 
 Given: Ra = 0.03 W, Rf = 20 W 
 7.35 A 220 V dc shunt motor runs at 1400 rpm on 
no-load drawing an armature current of 2.4 A 
from the supply. Calculate the motor speed for 
an armature current of 60 A. Assume that the 
ﬂux/pole reduces by 4% armature reaction. It 
is given that Ra = 0.24 W. 
 7.36 A dc shunt machine has an open-circuit volt-
age of 220 V at 1200 rpm. The armature resis-
tance is 0.2 W and ﬁeld resistance is 110 W. 
Calculate its speed as a motor when draw-
ing a line current of 60 A from 230 V mains. 
Assume that armature reaction demagnetizes 
the ﬁeld to the extent of 5%.
 7.37 The full-load current in the armature of a 
shunt motor is 100 A, the line voltage being 
400 V, the resistance of the armature circuit 
0.2 W and the speed 600 rpm. What will be 
the speed and line current if the total torque 
on the motor is reduced to 60% of its full-load 
value and a resistance of 2 W is included in the 
armature circuit, the ﬁeld strength remaining 
unaltered.
 7.38 230 V dc is shunt motor has an armature 
resistance of 0.25 W. What resistance must 
be added in series with the armature circuit to 
limit the starting current 90 A?
 
 With this starting resistance in circuit, what 
would be the back emf when the armature 
current decreases to 30 A?
 7.39 For the hoist drive system shown in Fig. P.7.39.
 
(a) Calculate the minimum size of the motor. 
 
(b) If the line voltage drops to 180 V, what 
would be the hoisting speed? 
Rt = 350 W
Ra = 0.2 W
2.5 m/s
Radius = 16 cm
230 V
750
kg
Fig. P.7.39 
 7.40 A 400 V dc shunt motor takes a current of 
5.6 A on no-load and 68.3 A on full-load. 
The load current weakens the ﬁeld by 3%. 
Calculate the ratio of full-load speed to no-
load speed. Given: Ra = 0.18 W, brush voltage 
drop = 2 V, Rf = 200 W.
 7.41 What resistance must be added in series with 
the armature of the shunt motor of Prob. 7.40 
to reduce the speed to 50% of its no-load value 
with gross torque remaining constant. The 
shunt ﬁeld resistance also remains unchanged.

DC Machines 
439
 7.42 A 200 V dc series motor yielded the following 
operational data:
 
 Speed (rpm) 
640 
475 
400
 
 Current (A) 
20 
30 
40
 
  Find the speed at which the motor will 
run when connected to 200 V mains with a 
series resistance of 2 W while drawing 35 A. 
Armature circuit resistance = 1.2 W.
 7.43 A series motor takes 50 A at 400 V while 
hoisting a load at 8 m/s. The total series 
resistance of the armature circuit is 0.46 W. 
What resistance must be added in series with 
the armature circuit to slow the hoisting speed 
down to 6 m/s? Assume magnetic linearity. 
What other assumption you need to make.
 7.44 The magnetization curve of a 4-pole dc series 
motor with a 2-circuit winding was obtained 
by separately exciting the ﬁeld with currents 
of the values given below, and loading the 
armature to take the same current. the speed 
being maintained constant at 800 rpm:
 
 Current (A) 
10 
20 
30 
40
 
  
50 
60 
70 
80
 
 Voltage between 160 
295 
375 
425
 
 brushes (V) 
 460 
485 
505 
525
 
 Determine the speed and torque for this motor 
for currents of 10 A, 50 A and 80 A for a 
line voltage of 600 V, having been given that 
the total number of conductors is 660, the 
resistance of the armature circuit is 0.30 W 
and that of the ﬁeld coils is 0.25 W.
 7.45 A dc series motor has the following 
magnetization characteristic at 800 rpm:
 
 Field current (A) 
0 
40 
80
 
  
120 
160 
200
 
 OC voltage (V) 
40 
390 
680
 
  
910 
1080 
1220
 
  
Armature resistance = 0.2 W
 
  
Field resistance = 0.2 W 
 
  
Brush voltage drop = 2 V (total) 
 
 The machine is connected to 750 V mains. If a 
diverter of resistance 0.2 W is connected across 
the ﬁeld windings, calculate (a) the speeds, 
and (b) the torques developed at armature 
currents of 80 A and 120 A respectively.
 7.46 The following test results were obtained while 
Hopkinson’s test was performed on two similar 
dc Shunt Machines: supply voltage is 250 V, 
ﬁeld current of generator and motor was 6 A 
and 5 A respectively and the line current and 
motor current were 50 A and 400 A. Calculate 
the efﬁciency of motor and generator of each 
having 0.0150 W armature resistance.
 7.47 The Hopkinson’s test was performed at full 
load on two similar shunt machines. The test 
results are:
 
  
Line voltage = 110 V
 
  
Line current = 48 A,
 
  
 Armative current = 230 A (motor)
 
  
Field currents = 3 A and 5 A
 
  
Armature resistance = 0.035 W (each)
 
  
Brush contact drop = 1 V per brush
 
 Calculate the efﬁciency of both the machines.
 7.48 At no load, a dc shunt motor takes 5 A from 
400 V supply. Armature and ﬁeld resistance 
of that shunt motor is 0.5 W, 200 W. Find the 
efﬁciency of the motor when it takes 60 A line 
current.
 7.49 The following test results are obtained while 
Swinburne’s test is performed on dc shunt 
motor with input voltage is 200 V. At no 
load the input power is 1.1 kW, the current is 
5.5 A, and the speed is 1150 rpm. Calculate 
the efﬁciency at 50 A load. Given: armature 
resistance is 0.6 W and shunt ﬁeld resistance 
is 110 W. 
 7.50 A 250 V dc shunt motor takes 5 A at no load. 
The armature resistance including brush 
contact resistance is 0.2 W, ﬁeld resistance 
is 250 W. Calculate the output and efﬁciency 
when input current is 20 A.
 7.51 Determine the minimum speed at which the 
motor can hold the load by means of regen-
erative braking. The following parameters are: 

440 Electric Machines
input voltage is 250 V, armature resistance is 
0.1 W with full load condition. It has an emf 
of 240 V at a speed of 1200 rpm. The motor 
is driving an overhauling load with a torque of 
180 Nm. 
 7.52 A series motor has an armature resistance of 
0.7 W and ﬁeld resistance of 0.3 W. It takes a 
current of 15 A from a 200 V supply and runs 
at 800 rpm. Find the speed at which it will run 
when a 5 W resistance is added in series to 
the motor and it takes the same current at the 
supply voltage. 
 7.53 Find the efﬁciency of a long shunt compound 
generator rated at 250 kW, 230 V when 
supplying 76% of rated load at rated voltage. 
The resistance of armature and series ﬁeld are 
0.009 W and 0.003 W. The shunt ﬁeld current 
is 13 A. When the machine is run as a motor 
at no load the armature current is 25 A at rated 
voltage?
 7.54 A PMDC mator connected to 48 V supply 
runs on no-load at 2000 rmp drawing 1.2 A. It 
is found to have an armature resistance of 1.02 
W.
 
(a) Calculate torque constant and no-load 
relational loss
 
(b) It is now connected to 50 V supply and 
runs at 2200 rpm.
 
 Calculate its shaft power output and 
electromagnetic torque
 7.55 A reparality excited dc generator has OCC 
data at 1200 rmp as below.
 
 VOC 
10 54 160 196 248 284 300 360
 
 If (A) 0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7
 
 At If = 6 A when loaded at Ia = 50 A, it has 
a terminal voltage of 230 V at speed of 1200 
rpm. Given: Ra = 0.5 W.
 
(a) Determine the armature voltage drop due 
to the demagnetizing effect of armature 
reaction 
 
(b) Assuming that this voltage drop in 
proportional to the square of armature 
current, determine the ﬁeld current for 
a terminal voltage of 230 V at armature 
current of Ia = 40 A
 
(c) In part (a) determine the ﬁeld current 
equivalent of demagnetization   
 7.56 A 260 V dc shunt mator has armature resistance 
of Ra = 0.4 W and ﬁeld resistance of Rf  = 50 W. 
It is drawing full load armature current of Ia = 
50 A. Which has a demagnetizing ﬁeld current 
equivalent of 0.8 A. Calculate the motor speed. 
The mator’s OCC data at 1200 rpm is as given 
in Problem 7.55.
 7.57 Design a suitable double-layer lap winding 
for a 6-pole armature with 18 slots and two 
coil-sides per slot. Give the values of front-
pitch, back-pitch and commutator pitch. Draw 
the developed diagram and show the positions 
of brushes.
 7.58 Design a suitable double-layer wave winding 
for a 4-pole, 13-slot dc armature with two 
coil-sides per slot. Give values of pitches, 
Draw the developed diagram and show the 
positions of brushes.
 7.59 A 6-pole, dc armature with 36 slot and 2 coil-
sides per slot is to be wave-wound (double-
layer). Calculated the back-pitch, front-pitch 
and commutator-pitch. How many dummy 
coils, if any, are required? Draw the developed 
diagram of the winding and show the locations 
of brushes and the distance between them in 
terms of commutator segments. If
 
 (a) 2 brushes are used, and
 
 (b) 6 brushes are used.
 7.60 A 25 kW dc generator has a 6-pole lap-
connected armature of 312 conductors. How 
would you change the connections to the 
commutator to form two armature circuits 
and what effect would this change have on the 
voltage, current and output of the machine?

DC Machines 
441
 
 
1. What is the effect of magnetic saturation 
on the external characteristics of a dc shunt 
generator?
 
2. Discuss that emf and torque of a dc machine 
depend on the ﬂux/pole but are independent of 
the ﬂux density distribution under the pole. 
 
3. Write the expressions for the induced emf 
and torque of a dc machine using standard 
symbol. What is the machine constant? What 
is the value of the constant relating wm and n? 
 
4. Explain the meaning and signiﬁcance of the 
critical ﬁeld resistance of a shunt generator.
 
5. Each commutator segment is connected to 
how many coil ends? 
 
6. What are interpoles, their purpose, location 
and excitation? Explain why of each item. 
 
7. Compare the number of parallel paths in the 
lap and wave windings. 
 
8. State the condition which determines if a dc 
machine is generating or motoring. 
 
9. Write the expression relating the electrical 
power converted to the mechanical form in a 
dc motor. How are the electrical power input 
and mechanical power output different from 
these powers? 
 10. What is OCC and what information does it 
reveal about a dc machine? At what speed is it 
determined? What is the air-gap line? 
 11. Write the basic proportionality relationships 
of a dc machine. What form these take for 
linear magnetization? 
 12. State the types of dc motors. What is the basis 
of the classiﬁcation? 
 13. Based on emf and torque equation compare 
and contrast the two methods of speed control 
of dc motor.
 14. How can one choose between a short shunt 
and long shunt cumulatively compound dc 
motor?
 15. List the factors involved in voltage build-up in 
a shunt generator. 
 16. Explain how the back emf of a motor causes 
the development of mechanical power.
 17. Sketch the speed-torque characteristic of a 
shunt motor at ﬁxed ﬁeld current. Explain the 
nature of the characteristic through relevant 
fundamental relationships of the dc machine.
 18. Sketch the speed-torque characteristic of a 
dc series motor and advance the underlying 
reasoning for the nature of the characteristic 
based on fundamental relationships of the dc 
machine.
 19. Explain through sketch and derivations the 
speed-torque characteristic of a differentially 
compound dc motor.
 20. Advance the methods of varying the shunt 
ﬁeld and the series ﬁeld excitation of a dc 
machine.
 21. Discuss the method of speed control of a dc 
series motor.
 22. How is a shunt motor started? Why it should 
not be started direct on line?
 23. Why do we need a compensating winding to 
nearly over come the armature reaction and 
how is this winding excited and why?
 24. Enumerate and classify the losses in a dc 
shunt motor. 
 25. How to determine the load current of a dc 
shunt motor at which the motor efﬁciency is 
maximum?
 26. Explain the different methods of braking of dc 
motors.
 27. What are the advantages of Hopkinson’s test 
over Swinburne’s test and what are its limits?
 28. By what test on dc reparalely excited generator 
would you determine the armature reaction 
equivalent ﬁeld current at rated armature 
current.
 29. Assuming magnetic linearity derive the 
expression for speed-torque characteristic of 
a dc series motor using suitable symbols.
 30. Compare the speed troque characteristices 
of a series and cummulative compound 

442 Electric Machines
 
 
 7.1 Why is the armature of a dc machine made of 
silicon steel stampings?
 
(a) To reduce hysteresis loss 
 
(b) To reduce eddy current loss 
 
(c) For the ease with which the slots can be 
created
 
(d) To achieve high permeability.
 7.2 Slot wedges in a dc machine are made of
 
(a) mild steel 
(b) silicon steel
 7.3 The armature reaction AT in a dc machine 
 
(a) are in the same direction as the main poles 
 
(b) are in direct opposition to the main poles 
 
(c) make an angle of 90° with the main pole 
axis
 
(d) make an angle with the main pole axis 
which is load dependent.
 7.4 A dc series motor has linear magnetization 
and negligible armature resistance. The motor 
speed is
 
(a) directly proportional to 
T ;
 
 T = load torque
 
(b) inversely proportion a to 
T
 
(c) directly proportional to T
 
(d) inversely proportional to T
 7.5 The armature reaction mmf in a dc machine is
 
(a) sinusoidal in shape 
 
(b) trapezoidal in shape 
 
(c) rectangular in shape
 
(d) triangular in shape. 
 7.6 What losses occur in the teeth of a dc machine 
armature?
 
(a) Hysteresis loss only
 
(b) Eddy current loss only
 
(c) Both hysteresis and Eddy current loss
 
(d) No losses 
 7.7 The process of current commutation in a dc 
machine is opposed by the 
 
(a) emf induced in the commutating coil 
because of the inter-pole ﬂux
 
(b) reactance emf 
 
(c) coil resistance
 
(d) brush resistance
 7.8 In a level compound generator the terminal 
voltage at half full-load is
 
(a) the same as the full load voltage
 
(b) the same as no load voltage
 
(c) is more than the no-load voltage
 
(d) is less than the no-load voltage
 7.9 Field control of a dc shunt motor gives
 
(a) constant torque drive 
 
(b) constant kW drive
 
(c) constant speed drive
 
(d) variable load speed drive 
 7.10 In a series-parallel ﬁeld control of a dc series 
motor with ﬁxed armature current
 
(a) such connections are not used in practice
 
(b) both series and parallel connections give 
the same speed
 
(c) series connection gives higher speed
 
(d) parallel connection gives higher speed
motor. Why does the compound motor have a 
defenite no-load speed?
 31. Sketch the external characteristic of a shunt 
generator and explain the reason for its special 
nature: part of it is two-valued.
 32. What is te signiﬁcance of  a winding diagram?
 33. When do you use concentric winding?
 34. What are the advantages of fractional slot 
winding over integral slot winding?
 35. Compare lap and wave winding. Where each 
type is used and why?
 36. Why double layer winding is preferred?
 37. Explain how fractional slot winding reduces 
the emfs of ripple frequencies.

DC Machines 
443
 7.11 If the magnetic circuit of dc machine is in 
saturation region, the armature reaction 
 
(a) does not affect the ﬂux/pole
 
(b) increases ﬂux/pole.
 
(c) decreases ﬂux/pole
 
(d) affects the ﬂux/pole only when armature 
current in very small.
 7.12 In Hopkinson’s test
 
(a) iron loss in both machines are equal
 
(b) iron loss in motoring machine is more 
than in generating machine
 
(c) iron loss in generating machine is more 
than in motoring machine
 
(d) only stray load iron loss is equal in both 
machine.
 7.13 In a dc motor electromagnetic torque is
 
(a) wm/EaIa, in the direction of wm
 
(b) wm/EaIa, opposite to the direction of wm
 
(c) EaIa/wm, opposite to the direction of wm
 
(d) EaIa/wm, in the direction of wm.

444 Electric Machines
 
8.1 
INTRODUCTION
A synchronous machine is one of the important types of electric machines; in fact 
all generating machines at power stations are of synchronous kind and are known 
as synchronous generators or alternators. 
 The structure and certain operational features of the synchronous machine have 
already been explained in Ch. 5, while the 3-phase ac windings used in the stator of the synchronous 
machine have been further elaborated in Ch. 6. In this chapter the basic model used for performance 
analysis of the synchronous machine and some of the operational features peculiar to this type of machine 
will be discussed. The methods of obtaining model parameters and active and reactive power transfer 
characteristics will also be discussed at length.
 It has been seen in Ch. 5 that essentially two types of constructions are employed in synchronous 
machines–one of these is known as the cylindrical-rotor type and the other is called the salient-pole type. 
The cylindrical-rotor machine has its rotor in cylindrical form with dc ﬁeld windings (distributed type) 
embedded in the rotor slots. This type of construction provides greater mechanical strength and permits 
more accurate dynamic balancing. It is particularly adopted for use in high-speed turbo-generators wherein 
a relatively long but small diameter rotor is used to limit the cent rifugal forces developed. Two or at most 
4-pole machines use this type of construction.
 The second type of synchronous machine, known as the salient-pole type, has its rotor poles projecting 
out from the rotor core. This type of construction is used for low-speed hydroelectric generators and the 
large number of poles necessary are accommodated in projecting form on a rotor of large diameter but 
small length. This construction is almost universally adopted for synchronous motors.
 Because of the distinguishing constructional features explained above, the cylindrical-rotor machine has 
uniform air-gap, so that the permeance offered to the mmf acting on the magnetic circuit is independent 
of the angle between the axis of the mmf and that of the rotor poles. On the other hand, in the salient-pole 
construction, the permeance offered to the mmf varies considerably with the angle between the mmf axis 
and that of the rotor poles. It is on this account that the cylindrical-rotor machine is simpler to model 
and analyse, compared to the salient-pole type. The modelling and analysis of both these types will be 
presented in this chapter.
 It has been seen in Ch. 5 that the essential feature that distinguishes the synchronous machine from the 
other types of electric machines is the synchronous link between the rotor and stator rotating ﬁelds. As a 
8

Synchronous Machines 
445
8.2 
BASIC SYNCHRONOUS MACHINE MODEL
As stated above the cylindrical-rotor synchronous machine offers constant permeance to mmf waves 
irrespective of the mechanical position of the rotor and is, therefore, simpler to model. Figure 8.1 shows the 
cross-sectional view of a 2-pole* cylindrical-rotor synchronous machine. 
Positive direction of emf
(conductor ‘
under
influence of N-pole)
a’
Positive direction of emf
(conductor ‘
under
influence of S-pole)
a’
Axis of field (at the
instant considered)
Axis of coil aa
(phase ‘ )
¢
a’
Stator
ws
S
N
ws
Ff
a¢
a
Rotor
a
w
=
st
Æ
Fig. 8.1 Cylindrical-rotor synchronous machine 
The rotor has distributed windings which produce an approximately sinusoidally distributed mmf wave 
in space rotating at synchronous speed ws rad (elect.)/s (ns rpm) along with the rotor. This mmf wave is 
represented by the space vector 

Ff  in the diagram and which at the instant shown makes an angle a = wst 
result there is a ﬁxed relationship between the rotor speed and the frequency of emfs and currents on the 
stator, which is reproduced below:
 
Frequency f = Pns
120  Hz 
(8.1)
where 
P = number of poles 
 
ns = speed of rotor in rpm (called synchronous speed) 
 
ws = 2pf = synchronous speed in rad/s.
 A synchronous generator when supplying isolated load acts as a voltage source whose frequency is 
determined by its primemover speed as per Eq. (8.1). Synchronous generators are usually run in parallel 
connected through long distance transmission lines. The system (called power system) is so designed as 
to maintain synchronism in spite of electrical or mechanical disturbances. Such an interconnected system 
offers the advantages of continuity of supply and economies in capital and operating costs. Synchronous 
motors ﬁnd use in industry wherever constant-speed operation is desired. Another advantage of the 
synchronous motor is that its power factor can be controlled simply by variation of its ﬁeld current. This is 
the reason why in most large industrial installations a part of the load is usually handled by synchronous 
motors which are operated at a leading power factor so as to yield an overall high power factor for the 
complete installation.
 
* Multipolar structure is merely a cyclic repetition of the 2-pole structure in terms of the electrical angle.

446 Electric Machines
with the axis of coil aa¢ on the stator (coil aa¢ represents the phase a). The peak value of the vector 

Ff  
is Ff. As a consequence of the uniform air-gap, the mmf wave Ff  produces sinusoidally distributed ﬂux 
density wave Bf, in space phase with it. Figure 8.2 shows the developed diagram depicting the space phase 
relationship between Bf and Ff waves. As the rotor rotates (at synchronous speed ws), the Bf wave causes 
sinusoidally varying ﬂux f to link with the coil aa¢. The maximum value of this ﬂux is Ff, the ﬂux per pole. 
Considering the time reference when 

Ff  lies along the axis of coil aa¢, this is a cosinusoidal variation, i.e.
 
f = Ff cos wst; ws = 2pf 
(8.2)
MMF wave, Ff
Flux density
wave, Bf
Axis of field
Axis of coil
phase ‘ ’)
aa
a
¢(
a
w
=
st
a¢
a
a
ws
ws
N
S
Stator
Rotor
Fig. 8.2
¢ of stator
It is, therefore, seen that the ﬂux linking the coil aa¢ is a sinusoidal time variation and can be represented 
as the time phasor Ff . It will be referred to as ﬂux phasor. 
Consider now the space vector 

Ff  as seen from the axis of coil aa¢ on the stator. As 

Ff  rotates at 
synchronous speed, it appears to be sinusoidally time-varying at ws = 2pf elect. rad/s as is evident from 
the developed diagram of Fig. 8.2. Furthermore, when the maximum positive value of Ff space wave is 
directed along the axis of coil aa¢, the ﬂux linkage of 
the coil has maximum positive value. It may, therefore, 
be considered that the rotating space vector 

Ff  as 
seen from the stator is a time phasor Ff  which is in 
phase with the ﬂux phasor Ff  as shown in Fig. 8.3. 
The magnitude relationship between Ff  and Ff  will 
be governed by the magnetization curve; this will be 
linear if the iron is assumed to be inﬁnitely permeable 
in which case 
 
Ff = P Ff
where P = permeance per pole (see Eq. (5.59)).
The emf induced in the coil aa¢ of N turns is given 
by the Faraday’s law, 
 
eaf = –N d
dt
l , l = ﬂux linkage of one coil
Axis of field
Ff
Ff
ws
Ef
Axis of phase ‘ ’a
90°
Fig. 8.3

Synchronous Machines 
447
 
 = –N d
dt (Ff cos wst)
 
 = Nws Ff sin wst 
(8.3)
The positive direction of the emf is indicated on the coil aa¢. This is also veriﬁed by the ﬂux cutting rule 
when conductor a lies under the inﬂuence of N-pole of the rotor and conductor a¢ simultaneously lies under 
the inﬂuence of the S-pole. It immediately follows from Eqs (8.2) and (8.3) that the emf eaf represented as 
time phasor E f  lags behind the mmf phasor Ff  and the ﬂux phasor Ff  by 90° as shown in Fig. 8.3. This 
ﬁgure also shows the relative location of the ﬁeld axis and the axis of phase a wherein the axis of phase a is 
90° behind the rotor ﬁeld axis. This is indicative of the fact that the ﬁeld vector 

Ff  lies 90° ahead of the axis 
of coil aa¢ in Fig. 8.1 when the emf in coil aa¢ has maximum positive value (projection of the phasor E f  on 
the axis of phase a). The rotor ﬁeld axis is known as the direct-axis and the axis at 90° elect. from it is known 
as the quadrature-axis. 
It immediately follows from Eq. (8.3) that the rms value of the emf induced in coil aa¢ is 
 
Ef = 
2 pf NFf 
(8.4) 
wherein 
Ff = Ff (Ff) or Ff (If)  ﬂux/pole 
(8.5) 
If being the direct current in the rotor ﬁeld. Equation (8.5) between the ﬂux/pole and ﬁeld current is indeed 
the magnetization characteristic. Equation (8.4) suitably modiﬁed for a distributed (and also possibly short-
pitched) stator winding is 
 
Ef = 
2 p Kw fNph Ff  (see Eq. (5.20)) 
(8.6) 
It easily follows that the emfs produced in the other phases of the stator would progressively differ in time 
phase by 120°.
The conclusions drawn from the above discussion are indeed general and are reproduced below.
Whenever the magnetic structure of a cylindrical rotor synchronous machine is subjected to rotating mmf 
vector, it is seen as an mmf phasor from the stator with its ﬂux phasor in phase with it, while the phasor 
representing the phase emf induced lags behind both these phasors by 90° (see Fig. 8.3).
It was shown in Sec. 5.5 that when a 3-phase stator supplies a balanced load, it sets up its own mmf vector 

Far  (sinusoidally distributed in space), called the armature reaction, rotating at synchronous speed in the 
same direction as the rotor. The magnetic circuit is now subjected to two rotating mmf vectors 

Ff  and 

Far, 
both rotating at synchronous speed with a certain angle between them. The objective here is to establish what 
determines this angle.
To begin with, it is observed that in the generating operation of the machine, the emf and current have the 
same positive direction. Consider the case when the current Ia supplied by the coil aa¢ is in phase with the 
coil emf Ef. It means that at the time instant when the emf is maximum positive in the coil aa¢, its current 
also has maximum positive value. The emf in coil aa¢ will be maximum positive when the ﬁeld mmf vector 

Ff  is 90° ahead of the coil axis (in the direction of rotation) as shown in Fig. 8.4(a). Simultaneously, 
Far  is 
directed along* the axis of coil aa¢ which has maximum positive current at this instant. It is therefore, seen 
 
* It was shown in Sec. 5.5 that the mmf vector of stator carrying balanced 3-phase currents is directed along the axis 
of coil aa¢ when phase a carries maximum positive current.

448 Electric Machines
from Fig. 8.4(a) that 

Ff  is 90° ahead of 

Far  when E f  and Ia  are in phase. The resultant mmf vector 

Fr  is 
the vector sum 
 

Fr  = 


F
F
f
ar
+
 
(8.7)
as shown in Fig. 8.4(a). It is observed that 

Fr  lags 

Ff  by angle d. The corresponding phasor diagram, 
drawn as per the general conclusions stated earlier, is shown in Fig. 8.4(b) wherein the phasor equation 
corresponding to the vector Eq. (8.7) is 
 
Fr  = F
F
f
ar
+
( Fr lags Ff  by angle d)  
(8.8)
ws
Ff
Fr
Far
Tem torque
Ia (max positive)
Axis of coil
(phase ‘ ’)
aa
a
¢
d
Field axis
a¢
a
ws
Fr
Far
Ff
Far
d
Ia
Ef
Er
Ia (max positive)
Axis of
phase ‘ ’a
Ff
Field axis
Fr
d
(a) MMF vector diagram
(b) Phasor diagram
Æ
Æ
Æ
T
–
Fig. 8.4 Synchronous machine on load (generating action), Ia  in phase with E f
It is observed from the phasor diagram that Ia  and Far  are in phase; this is logical* because Far  is 
produced by Ia  and is proportional to it. The resultant mmf vector Fr  produces the resultant air-gap ﬂux 
phasor 

Fr  which in turn induces the emf Er  in phase a lagging 90∞ behind the phasor Fr . The phase emf 
Er  induced in the machine, called air-gap emf, lags by angle d behind E f (emf induced by 
Ff  acting alone) 
which is the same angle by which 

Fr  lags behind 

Ff  in the vector diagram of Fig. 8.4(a). E f  is known as 
the excitation emf.
In case Ia  lags E f  by an angle y, the positive current maximum in the coil aa¢ will occur angle y later, 
so that 

Ff  now lies (90° + y) ahead of 

Far  as shown in the vector diagram of Fig. 8.5(a). The corresponding 
phasor diagram is shown in Fig. 8.5(b) wherein Ff  leads Far  by (90° + y). The phase angle between Er  
and Ia  indicated by q is the power factor angle provided it is assumed that the armature has zero resistance 
and leakage reactance so that the machine terminal voltage
 
Vt  = Er
It is seen from Figs 8.5(a) and (b) that the ﬁeld poles lie an angle d ahead of the resultant mmf (or 
resultant ﬂux) wave. The electromagnetic torque developed in the machine tries to align the ﬁeld poles with 
the resultant ﬁeld and is, therefore, in a direction as shown in Fig. 8.5(a) as well as in Fig. 8.5(b). It is 
immediately seen that the torque on the ﬁeld poles is in opposite direction to that of rotation which means 
 
* An observer on stator from the axis of phase a observes simultaneous occurrence of maximum positive value of 
Far and Ia.

Synchronous Machines 
449
that mechanical power is absorbed by the machine. This is consistent with the assumed condition of the 
generating action (positive current in the direction of positive emf ). It may, therefore, be concluded that in 
generating action, the ﬁeld poles are driven ahead of the resultant ﬂux wave by an angle d as a consequence 
of the forward acting torque of the primemover. Also, the ﬁeld poles are dragged behind by the resultant ﬂux 
from which results the conversion of mechanical energy into electrical form.
Ff
Far
Axis of
phase ‘ ’a
Ff
Fr
Fr
T
Ef
Er
Ia
Far
d
y d
ws
Field axis
ws
Ff
Ff
Far
a¢
a
d
Ia (max
positive)
Axis of coil
(phase ‘ ’)
aa
a
¢
T
y
Field axis
(a) Vector diagram
(b) Phasor diagram
Æ
Æ
q
Fig. 8.5 Synchronous machine on load (generating action), Ia  lags E f  by angle y 
As already shown in Sec. 5.6 Eq. (5.58), if the magnetic circuit is assumed linear, the magnitude of the 
torque is given by
 
T = p
2
2
2
P
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ Fr Ff sin d 
(8.9) 
where Fr is the resultant ﬂux/pole, Ff the peak value of ﬁeld ampere-turns and d is the angle by which 

Ff  
leads 

Fr. It is also observed from Fig. 8.5(b) that E f  also leads Er by the same angle d.
When Ff and Fr are held constant in magnitude, the machine meets the changing requirements of load 
torque by adjustment of the angle d which is known as the torque (power*) angle. 
The torque expression of Eq. (8.9) can also be written in terms of voltages as 
 
T = KEr Ef sin d  
(8.10)
where Er = emf induced in the machine under loaded condition; called air-gap emf. 
 
Ef = emf induced by the ﬁeld mmf Ff acting alone, i.e. the machine is on no-load with same Ff (or 
rotor ﬁeld current) as on-load; called excitation emf.
In motoring action of the synchronous machine, the positive current ﬂows opposite to the induced emf. 
Since the phasor diagrams above have been drawn with the convention of generating current (i.e. current in 
the direction of emf ), the armature reaction phasor Far  will now be located by phase reversing the motoring 
current for consistency of convention. Accordingly the phasor diagram for motoring action is drawn in 
Fig. 8.6. It is immediately observed from this ﬁgure that Ff  and E f  now lag Fr  and Er  respectively by 
angle d. The torque of electromagnetic origin therefore acts on the ﬁeld poles in the direction of rotation so 
that the mechanical power is output meaning thereby motoring action.
 
* Torque and power are proportional to each other as the machine runs at synchro nous speed (ws) under steady 
operating conditions.

450 Electric Machines
If the terminal voltage Vt  = Er  and its frequency 
is held constant by an external 3-phase source, called 
inﬁnite bus, the machine operates as a generator 
(Fig. 8.5) or as a motor (Fig. 8.6) depending upon the 
mechanical conditions at a shaft.
Figure 8.3 is representative of no-load conditions 
when the machine is said to be ﬂoating on busbars with 
zero stator current and the rotor being run at synchronous 
speed by external means (prime mover). If mechanical 
power from the primemover is now increased, the ﬁeld 
poles (rotor) move ahead causing current to be fed into 
the bus-bars. Under steady condition, the ﬁeld poles lie 
ahead of the resultant ﬂux wave by angle d (Figs 8.4 and 
8.5) creating electromagnetic torque in opposition to the direction of rotor rotation; the value of d corresponds 
to the balance of torques (or power, P = Tws). The electrical power output is 
 
3Vt (= Er)Ia cos q  (for 3 phases) 
which balances the mechanical power input from the primemover because there are no losses in the stator 
(resistance is assumed to be zero). Here Ia is the generating current taken to be positive in the direction of the 
machine’s induced emf Er.
If instead, the shaft is mechanically loaded from the no-load condition (Fig. 8.3), the ﬁeld poles lag behind 
the resultant ﬂux wave as in Fig. 8.6 creating electromagnetic torque in the direction of rotation thereby 
outputting mechanical power; the electrical input power being 3 Vt (= Er)Ia cos q, where Ia is the motoring 
current taken as positive in opposition to the positive direction of Er.
The torque (power)-angle (T – d ) relationship 
of Eq. (8.10) for ﬁxed Ef and Er (= Vt) is drawn 
in Fig. 8.7 with d taken as positive for generating 
action and negative for motoring action. The 
operating points as the generator and motor are 
indicated by g and m on this curve corresponding 
to the speciﬁc condition of loading. The 
characteristic exhibits, both in generating and 
motoring operation, a maximum torque at d = 
90°, called the pull-out torque, beyond which 
the synchronous link between ﬁeld poles and the 
resultant ﬂux wave is severed and the machine 
falls out-of-step (or loses synchronism). The 
average developed machine torque now becomes 
zero and so the average electric power fed by the 
generating machine to the bus-bars, (inﬁnite) or 
average electric power drawn by the motoring 
machine from the bus bars reduces to zero. The generating machine thus accelerates and so overspeeds 
(primemover power is assumed to remain constant) and the motoring machine decelerates and comes 
to stop.
Fr
T
ws
Fr
Ff
Far
Ff
d
Field axis
Axis of
phase ‘ ’a
Far
Ef
Er
d
y
Ia (motoring)
–Ia
q
–
Fig. 8.6 
Synchronous machine on load (motoring 
action)
– 180°
– 90° dm
dg
90°
180°
T, P
Tpull-out
Generating
Motoring
Tpull-out
m
d
Fig. 8.7 T-d characteristic of synchronous machine

Synchronous Machines 
451
Realistic Machine 
A realistic synchronous machine will have resistance Ra and leakage reactance Xl per armature phase which 
can be assumed to be lumped in series between the terminal voltage Vt and the air-gap emf Er for each 
machine phase. The circuit diagram of the machine on a per phase basis is drawn in Fig. 8.8(a) for the 
generating mode (armature current in same direction as Er). From Fig. 8.8(a) 
 
Vt  = E
I
r
a
-
(Ra + jXl) (generating mode) 
(8.11) 
and from Fig. 8.8(b) 
 
Vt  = E
I
r
a
+
(Ra + jXl) (motoring mode) 
(8.12)
The resistance of a synchronous machine armature is usually very small and can generally be neglected in 
performance analysis (see Sec. 8.3). 
If
Ra
XI
Ia
Er
+
–
Vt
+
–
Field
If
+
–
Ra
XI
Ia
Er
Vt
+
–
Field
(a) Generating mode
(b) Motoring mode
Fig. 8.8 
Voltage Regulation
The voltage regulation of a synchronous generator is deﬁned on lines similar to that of a transformer. Consider 
the generator supplying full-load current at a speciﬁed power factor and rated terminal voltage, Vt (rated). As 
the load is thrown off keeping the ﬁeld current constant, the terminal voltage rises to 
 
Vt (no-load) I f kept constant
as at full - load
specified power factor
 
 
 = Ef, the excitation emf
The percentage voltage regulation is then deﬁned as
 
E
V
V
f
t
t
-
¥
(
)
(
)
%
rated
rated
100
At specified power factor
 
(8.13)
8.3 CIRCUIT MODEL OF SYNCHRONOUS MACHINE 
By assuming linearity of the magnetic circuit, it is possible to obtain simple circuit model of the synchronous 
machine. The validity of this assumption stems from the fact that air-gap is the predominant component of the 
magnetic circuit of the machine. Approximate nonlinear analysis is the subject matter of Sec. 8.4. 
As per Eq. (8.7), the resultant mmf phasor is given by 
 
Fr  = F
F
f
ar
+
 
(8.14) 

452 Electric Machines
The resultant ﬂux Fr and the air-gap emf Er  must in general be obtained from Fr. However, the assumption 
of linear magnetic circuit (F = PF; P is constant permeance*), allows one to ﬁnd the resultant ﬂux by the 
principle of superposition as 
 
 Fr  = Ff  + Far  
(8.15)
where Ff  = ﬂux component produced by Ff  acting alone 
 
Far  = ﬂux component produced by Far  acting alone.
Since emf induced is proportional to the ﬂux/pole (Eq. (8.6)) and lags behind it by 90°, from the ﬂux 
phasor Eq. (8.15), the emf phasor equation can be written as 
 
Er  = E f  + Ear  
(8.16)
where 
E f  = emf induced by Ff  acting alone (excitation emf ) 
 
Ear  = emf induced by Far  acting alone. 
The emf phasors in Eq. (8.16) are proportional to the 
corresponding ﬂux phasors of Eq. (8.15) with the emf 
phasors lagging the respective ﬂux phasors by 90°. The 
phasor Eqs (8.15) and (8.16) are represented by the phasor 
diagram of Fig. 8.9. In this ﬁgure the ﬂux phasor triangle 
and emf phasor triangle are similar to each other with the 
emf phasor triangle being rotated anticlockwise from the 
ﬂux phasor triangle by 90°. 
As Far  is in phase with Ia  (generating machine) and is 
proportional to it, the emf Ear  is proportional** to Ia  and 
lags behind Far  by 90°, i.e.
 
Ear  = – j Ia Xar 
(8.17)
where Xar’ the constant of proportionality, is indeed an inductive reactance. Thus Eq. (8.16) can be written as
 
Er  = E f  – j Ia Xar 
(8.18) 
Corresponding to Eq. (8.18), Fig. 8.10(a) gives the per phase circuit model of the synchronous machine. 
Comparing Eqs (8.15), (8.16) and (8.18), it is concluded that the reactance Xar equivalently replaces the 
effect of the armature reaction ﬂux. If Xar is known for a machine, one can work in terms of voltages and 
currents and need not represent ﬂuxes on the phasor diagram.
 
* In cylindrical-rotor machine being considered here, P is independent of the direc tion along which 
F  is directed 
because of a uniform air-gap.
 
**  
Ear  = – jKaFar; Ka = emf constant of armature winding
 
  
 = – jKa P Far ; P  = permeance/pole 
 
  
 = – jKa P Kar Ia ; Kar = constant of armature winding (see Eq. (5.44b)) 
 
  
 = – jXar Ia
 
 where 
Xar = KaP Kar 
 
 Xar will be more for a machine with higher permeance, i.e., smaller air-gap,
d
Ff
Er
Far
Fr
d
Ia
Ef
Ear
a ar
= – jI X
Fig. 8.9
components in synchronous machine 

Synchronous Machines 
453
The effect of armature resistance Ra and leakage reactance Xl are embodied in the phasor equation as (see 
Eq. (8.11)) 
 
Vt  = E
I
r
a
-
(Ra + jXl)  
(8.19)
From Eq. (8.19) and Fig. 8.10(a) follows the complete circuit model of Fig. 8.10(b) which can be reduced 
to the simpler form of Fig. 8.10(c) by combining series reactances and by allowing the identity of Er  to be 
lost. In the circuit model of Fig. 8.10(c), the total reactance
 
Xs = Xar + Xl (per phase) 
(8.20) 
is known as the synchronous reactance of the machine, while
 
Zs = 
R
X
a
s
2
2
+
 
(8.21) 
is the synchronous impedance of the machine. 
Xar
Ia
Ef
+
–
Er
+
–
(a)
Ra
Xar
Ia
Ef
+
–
Xl
+
–
Er
Vt
(b)
Xs
Ia
Ef
+
–
+
–
Ra
Vt
(c)
Fig. 8.10 Circuit model of synchronous machine 
The synchronous reactance takes into account the ﬂux produced by the ﬂow of balanced 3-phase currents 
in the stator as well as the leakage ﬂux. The excitation emf, Ef, accounts for the ﬂux produced by the rotor 
ﬁeld (dc excited). The magnitude of the excitation emf can be controlled by the dc ﬁeld current (If) called 
the excitation current. If the load on the machine is thrown off, Ef appears at the machine terminals which 
then is the open-circuit voltage of the machine. With reference to Fig. 8.10(c) Ef is also called voltage behind 
synchronous impedance or reactance (as Ra can be neglected). 
It must be remembered here that the synchronous impedance model of the synchronous machine is based 
on the linearity assumption and will hold for the unsaturated region of machine operation and is valid only 
for the cylindrical-rotor machine.
In the above method, we have converted mmfs to emfs based on magnetic linearity assumption this method 
is also known as the emf method. 

454 Electric Machines
Range of Synchronous Impedance 
Expressed in the pu system, the synchronous reactance of synchronous machines lies in a narrow range of 
values. From practical data, it is observed that the armature resistance (Ra) is usually of the order of 0.01 pu, 
i.e. the voltage drop in the armature resistance at the rated armature current is about 1% of the rated voltage. 
The leakage reactance value ranges from 0.1 to 0.2 pu and the synchronous reactance (Xs = Xar + Xl) is of 
the order of 1.0 to 2 pu. It is, therefore, seen that the armature resistance of a synchronous machine is so 
low that it can be neglected for all practical purposes except in the computation of losses, temperature rise 
and efﬁciency. It may be noted here that Ra must be small in order to minimize the I2R loss and limit the 
temperature rise of the machine, and Xs should be large to limit the maximum current that may ﬂow under 
fault (short-circuit) conditions. However, the modern practice is to design* synchronous machines with a 
medium range of values for synchronous reactance as quick-acting** circuit breakers are now available to 
disconnect a machine from the faulted line. 
8.4 
DETERMINATION OF THE SYNCHRONOUS REACTANCE 
With the assumption of a linear magnetic circuit, the circuit model (per phase) of a synchronous machine is 
as given in Fig. 8.10(c). If Ra is neglected, it then follows that 
 
E f  = Vt  + j Ia Xs  
(8.22) 
It is immediately seen from Eq. (8.22) that for a given ﬁeld current under short-circuit condition (Ia = ISC, 
Vt = 0), 
 
Xs = E
I
f
SC
 
(8.23)
But Ef = VOC (open-circuit voltage, i.e. Ia = 0 with the same ﬁeld current). Then with the linearity assumption 
 
Xs = V
I
OC
SC
I f =const
 
(8.24)
where VOC = open circuit voltage and ISC = short-circuit current on a per phase basis with the same ﬁeld 
current. 
Since the magnetization characteristic of the machine is nonlinear, it is necessary to determine the 
complete open-circuit characteristic (OCC) of the machine (VOC – If relationship). However, it will soon
be shown that it is sufﬁcient to determine one point on the short-circuit characteristic (SCC) of the machine 
(ISC – If relationship). as it is linear in the range of interest (for ISC up to 150% of the rated current). 
Open-circuit Characteristic (OCC) 
In this test the machine is run by a primemover at synchronous speed ns to generate voltage at the rated 
frequency, while the armature terminals are open-circuited as in Fig. 8.11 with switch S open. The readings 
of the open-circuit line-to-line armature voltage, VOC = 
3 Ef, are taken for various values of If, the rotor 
ﬁeld current. It may be noted that If is representative of the net mmf/pole acting on the magnetic circuit of 
 
* The designer can achieve the desired value of synchronous reactance by adjusting air-gap of the machine (see 
footnote p. 450). 
 
** The typical circuit breaker opening time is 1-1.5 cycles.

Synchronous Machines 
455
the machine. These data are plotted as OCC in Fig. 8.12 which indeed is the magnetization characteristic, i.e. 
the relation between the space fundamental component of the air-gap ﬂux and the net mmf/pole acting on the 
magnetic circuit (space harmonics are assumed negligible).
Air-gap line
OCC
Ia (rated)
Vt (rated)
Xs (unsaturated)
Xs (adjusted)
SCC
VOC (line)
O
O¢
If
V
I
OC
SC
/  3
f¢
f¢¢
ISC
Isc ( =
)
I
Of
f
¢
Fig. 8.12 Open-circuit and short-circuit characteristics
The OCC exhibits the saturation phenomenon of the iron in machine. At low values of If when iron is in 
the unsaturated state, the OCC is almost linear and the mmf applied is mainly consumed in establishing ﬂux 
in the air-gap, the reluctance of the iron path being almost negligible. The straight-line part of the OCC, if 
extended as shown dotted in Fig. 8.12, is called the air-gap line and would indeed be the OCC if iron did not 
get saturated. 
Open Circuit Loss
The loss in the open-circuit method conducted as above comprises no load (OC) core loss and windage and 
friction loss. The power corresponding to these losses is drawn from the prime-mover running the machine, 
which can be measured by a dynmometer or torque meter. The plot of POC versus ﬁeld current is shown in 
A
V
A
A
A
If
N
Switch S
ns
Fig. 8.11 Schematic diagram for open-circuit and short-circuit tests 

456 Electric Machines
Fig. 8.13. The winding and friction loss being constant gets separated out by reducing the ﬁeld current to 
zero. The OC core loss arises from hysteresis and eddy-current losses which very as 1.6th power of open 
circuit voltage which is shown in the plot of Fig. 8.13(b).
OC (core) loss
Open-circuit voltage
(b)
POC = OC loss
Field current
(a)
Windage and friction loss
OC core loss
Fig. 8.13 
Short-circuit Characteristic (SCC)
The short-circuit characteristic of the machine is obtained by means of the short -circuit test conducted as 
per the schematic circuit diagram of Fig. 8.11 with switch S closed. While the rotor is run at synchronous 
speed ns, the rotor ﬁeld is kept unexcited to begin with. The ﬁeld excitation is then gradually increased till 
the armature current equals about 150% of its rated value. While the current in all the three ammeters should 
be identical, practically a small unbalance will always be found on account of winding and ﬁeld current 
dissymmetries which cannot be completely avoided in a machine. Therefore ISC the short-circuit current per 
phase is taken as the average value of the three ammeter readings. 
It is to be noted that the machine must not be short-circuited under excited conditions with a near about 
rated voltage. This can give rise to intolerably large transient currents in the machine. 
The circuit model of the machine under short-circuit conditions is given in Fig. 8.14(a) and the corresponding 
phasor diagram in Fig. 8.14(b) wherein Ra = 0. Since the armature circuit is assumed purely inductive, the 
Ff
Fr
Fr
Ia
I
(SC) X
Er
Far
Ia (SC)
(b) Phasor diagram
Ia
s
(SC) X
Ff
Xar
XI
I
SC
a(     )
Ef
+
–
(a) Circuit model
Er
Vt= 0
Xs
Fig. 8.14 Short-circuit test

Synchronous Machines 
457
short-circuit current lags the air-gap voltage Er  by 90° so that the armature reaction mmf phasor Far  is in 
direct opposition to Ff , i.e, the armature reaction is fully demagnetizing in effect. 
The air-gap voltage needed to circulate the short-circuit current in the armature is given by 
 
Er = Ia (SC) Xl 
(8.25)
As Xl is about 0.1 to 0.2 pu (while Xs may be as high as 1.0 pu), Er is very small even when Ef has a value 
close to rated voltage of the machine. This implies that under the short-circuit condition with the armature 
current as high as 150% of the rated value, and resultant air-gap ﬂux is small and so the machine is operating 
under the unsaturated magnetization condition, so that the SCC (ISC versus If) is linear and therefore only one 
short-circuit reading is necessary for the complete determination of the SCC as shown in Fig. 8.12. 
Since under the short-circuit condition the machine is highly underexcited, the losses as drawn in from 
the mechanical shaft drive comprise mechanical loss and copper-loss in the resistance of the armature, the 
iron-loss being negligible. 
The unsaturated synchronous reactance can be obtained from the OCC and SCC of Fig. 8.12 as
 
Xs (unsaturated) = 
V
I
OC
SC
I f
/ 3
const
 
(8.26)
where If corresponds to the unsaturated magnetic region or VOC value corresponding to the air-gap line could 
be used. 
Since a synchronous machine under operating conditions works in a somewhat saturated region of the 
magnetization characteristic, the performance of the machine as calculated from Xs, deﬁned above, will differ 
considerably from the actual value effective during normal operation. To account for the fact that the machine 
actually operates in the saturated region, it is a must to resort to the nonlinear analysis (Sec. 8.4) or use a 
heuristic technique of adjusting Xs to a suitable value.
If Xs, as deﬁned in Eq. (8.26), is plotted for various values of the ﬁeld current, the chain-dotted curve of 
Fig. 8.12 will be obtained. Initially in the unsaturated region the value of the synchronous reactance remains 
constant at Xs (unsaturated) and then drops off sharply because of saturation of the OCC. 
The value of Xs corresponding to the ﬁeld current, which gives rated voltage on open-circuit, is deﬁned as 
 
Xs (adjusted) = V
I
t
SC
I
V
f
t
(
)/
rated
corresponding to
(rated) on OCC
3
; If = Of ¢ 
(8.27)
The value of Xs (adjusted) is less than Xs (unsaturated) as shown in Fig. 8.12. Obviously Xs (adjusted) 
would yield the machine performance ﬁgures closer to those obtained under actual operation.
Short Circuit Ratio (SCR)
The short-circuit ratio (SCR) is deﬁned as the ratio of the ﬁeld current required to produce rated voltage 
on open-circuit to the ﬁeld current required to produce rated armature current with the armature terminals 
shorted while the machine is mechanically run at synchronous speed. From the OCC and SCC as shown in 
Fig. 8.15,
 
SCR = of
of
¢
¢¢  
(8.28)

458 Electric Machines
as per the deﬁnition. It is further noted from this ﬁgure that 
 
Xs (adjusted) = V
o c
t (
)/
rated
3
¢
 
(8.29)
and slopes of OCC and SCC are 
 
k1 = OC voltage
field current  = V
of
t (
)
rated
¢
 
(8.30) 
 
k2 = SC current
field current  = I
of
a(
)
rated
¢¢
 = 
¢
¢
o c
of
 
(8.31)
Substituting Eqs (8.30), and (8.31) in Eq. (8.28), 
 
SCR = of
of
¢
¢¢
 
 = V
k
k
I
t
a
(
)
(
)
rated
rated
1
2
◊
 
 = 
¢
◊
o c
V
V
I
t
t
a
(
)
(
)
(
)
rated
rated
rated
 
 = 
¢
◊
o c
V
V
I
t
t
a
(
)/
(
)/
(
)
rated
rated
rated
3
3
 
 = 
1
X s(
)
adjusted  ◊ XBase
 
SCR = 
1
X s(
)(
)
adjusted
pu  
(8.32)
VOC (line)
Vt (rated)
ISC
Slope k1
Ia (rated)
f¢¢
f¢
OCC
SCC
o
o¢
Slope k2
c
Fig. 8.15 Short-circuit ratio (SCR)

Synchronous Machines 
459
Equation (8.32) means that SCR is the reciprocal of Xs (adjusted) in pu. Therefore, a low value of SCR 
implies a large value of Xs (adjusted) (pu) and vice versa.
Short Circuit Loss 
During the short circuit test the loss can be obtained by measuring the mechanical power required to drive the 
machine. The loss PSC comprises the following items: 
 
1. I2R loss in armature winding due to the ﬂow of short circuit current (ac). 
 
2. Local core loss caused by armature leakage ﬂux. 
 
3. Core loss due to resultant air-gap ﬂux. As the ﬂux is very small, this loss can be ignored.
 
4. Windage and friction loss. 
The windage and friction loss can be separated out as explained in open circuit loss. The remaining loss 
(items 1 and 2) is called short circuit load loss whose 
plot with armature current is shown in Fig. 8.16. By 
measuring armature dc resistance correcting it for ac and 
the armature temperature during SC test, dc I2R loss can 
then be subtracted leaving behind the stray load loss – 
sum of load core loss and loss due to additional conductor 
resistance offered to alternating current. The stray load 
loss is also plotted in Fig. 8.16.
The armature resistance as calculated from armature 
current and short circuit load loss is called effective 
armature resistance. It can be calculated at rated current and then assumed to remain constant. Thus 
 
Ra (eff ) = short circuit load loss (per phase)
(short circuit armature current)2  
(8.33)
EXAMPLE 8.1 Draw the open-circuit and short-circuit characteristics using the data given below for a 
150 MW, 13 kV, 0.85 pf, 50 Hz synchronous generator. 
Open-circuit characteristic 
 If (A) 
200 
450 
600 
850 
1200
 VOC (line) (kV) 
4 
8.7 
10.8 
13.3 
15.4
Short-circuit characteristic 
 
If = 750 A,  ISC = 8000 A
 (a) Determine the unsaturated synchronous reactance of the machine. 
 (b) Determine the saturated synchronous reactance of the machine.
 (c) Convert the value of reactances in part (a) and (b) in their pu value.
 (d) What is the short circuit ratio of this machine?
 (e) The machine supplies full-load at a pf of 0.85 lagging and a terminal voltage of 13 kV.
 
 Case I – Find the excitation emf and voltage regulation using the synchronous reactance (linear 
circuit model).
 
 Case II – Find again the excitation emf using saturated synchronous reactance and then ﬁnd the ﬁeld 
SC load loss
Stray load loss
Armature current
Loss
Fig. 8.16

460 Electric Machines
current needed to supply the speciﬁed load. With ﬁeld current remaining constant, ﬁnd the OC voltage 
and therefrom calculate the voltage regulation of the machine.
 ( f ) Compare the results of part (e) cases I and II.
 (g) For the load as in part (e) draw the phasor diagram showing voltages and current. Calculate the 
angle between the terminal voltage and excitation emf. 
SOLUTION 
The OCC and SCC as per the data are drawn in Fig. 8.17.
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
o
OCC
SCC
f¢¢
f¢
Modified air-gap line
Air-gap line
I
A
SC ( )
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
VOC (Line)(kV)
I A
f ( )
Vt (rated)
Fig. 8.17
Note:  Values have been read from Fig. 8.17 drawn on enlarged scale
 
(a) Corresponding to VOC = 13 kV on the air-gap line, ISC = 7000 A for the same ﬁeld current.
 
 \ 
Xs (unsaturated) = 13
1000
3
7000
¥
¥
 
  
 = 1.072 W
 
(b) Corresponding to VOC = 13 kV on the OCC, ISC = 8600 A for the same ﬁeld current.
 
 \ 
Xs (adjusted) = 13
1000
3
8600
¥
¥
 
  
 = 0.873 W
 
  
Ia (rated) = 
150
10
3
0 85
13
10
6
3
¥
¥
¥
¥
.
 
  
 = 7837 A

Synchronous Machines 
461
 
  
Base ohms = 13
1000
3
7837
¥
¥
 = 0.958 W 
 
(c)  
Xs (unsaturated) (pu) = 1 072
0 958
.
.
 = 1.12
 
  
Xs (adjusted) (pu) = 0 873
0 958
.
.
 
  
 = 0.911 pu
 
(d)  
If corresponding to VOC = Vt (rated) is of ¢ = 810 A
 
  
If corresponding to ISC = Ia (rated) is of ≤ = 750 A
 
 \ 
SCR = 810
750  = 1.08 = 
1
Xs(
)(
)
adjusted
pu
 
(e)  
Vt = 13
1000
3
¥
 = 7505 V (phase value)
 
  
Vt  = 7505 –0° V
 
  
cos f = 0.85, f = 31.8°
 
  
Ia (fl) = 7837 A
 
  
Ia  = 7837 – –31.8°
 
  
 = 7837 (0.85 – j 0.527)
 
 For generating operation
 
  
E f  = Vt  + j Ia Xs
 
 Case I: 
Xs (unsaturated) = 1.072 W
 
 \ 
Ef = 7505 + j 7837 (0.85 – j0.527) ¥ 1.072
 
  
 = 11747 + j 6841
 
  
Ef = 13594 V or 23.54 kV (line) = Vt(OC) (linear model)
 
  
Regulation = V OC
V
V
t
t
t
(
) -
 ¥ 100
 
  
 = 13594
7505
7505
-
 ¥ 100
 
  
 = 81%
 
 Case II: 
Xs (adjusted) = 0.873 W
 
 \ 
E f  = 7505 + j 7837 (0.8 – j 0.527) ¥ 0.873
 
  
 = 11110 + j 5815 = 12540 –27.6° V
 
 or 
Ef = 12540 V or 21.72 kV (line)
 
  The ﬁeld current needed for this Ef is found from the modiﬁed air-gap line. This cannot be found from the 
OCC where Ef will correspond to highly saturated region. In fact the machine under lagging load operates in 
lightly saturated region as the load current is demagnetizing. So on empirical basis ﬁeld current is found from the 
modiﬁed air-gap line (line joining origin to Vt (rated) in OCC). From this line use ﬁnd.
 
  
If = 810
13  ¥ 21.72 = 1353 A

462 Electric Machines
 
 For this value of ﬁeld current when the machine is open circuited 
 
  
Vt (OC) = 16.3 kV
 
  Voltage regulation = 16 3 13
13
. -
 ¥ 100 = 25.4% 
 
 Comment: The voltage regulation as obtained by Xs 
(adjusted) as found from the modiﬁed air-gap line 
is far more realistic than that obtained by use of Xs 
(unsaturated). 
 
(f ) The phasor diagram is drawn in Fig. 8.18. It is 
immediately seen that Ef leads Vt by d = 27.2°.
 
 Observation The approximation used in transformer 
(Eq. (3.60)) in calculat ing voltage drop cannot be 
used in a synchronous machine as Xs is much larger 
than in a transformer where Xeq is 0.05-0.08 pu. So 
phasor calculation must be carried out.
8.5 
MMF METHOD
In the synchronous reactance method of ﬁnding voltage regulation, we linearly converted all mmfs into emfs 
and then heuristically adjusted the synchronous reactance to account for saturation. In the mmf we will follow 
the reverse procedure.
Reproducing Eqs (8.14) and (8.19), Vt and Ia are rated valued throughout,
 
Fr  = F
F
f
ar
+
 
(8.34)
 
Vt  = Er  – j Ia Xl – Ia Ra 
(8.35)
or 
Vt  = 
¢
Er  – Ia Ra  
(8.36)
where 
¢
Er  = Er  – j Ia Xl ; 
¢
Er is not air-gap emf  
(8.37) 
In the synchronous machine, induced emf is found from associated mmf through OCC and lags it 90°, i.e., 
 
E
OCC
¨
Æ
ææ
 – j F  
(8.38) 
If we assume magnetic linearity (that is operation on the air-gap line), we can write
 
E  = – jK F ; K = constant, units 
V
mmf
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  
(8.39) 
This result helps to convert the leakage reactance voltage to equivalent mmf. Thus 
 
– j Ia Xl = – jKFal  
(8.40) 
where Fal  is equivalent mmf. 
 
Far  = Kar Ia , Kar = armature constant, units mmf
A
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  
(8.41)
Substituting Ia  from Eq. (8.41) in Eq. (8.40), we get 
 
F
K
ar
ar
Xl = K Fal
Ia
= 7837
0.873
= 6842 V
¥
Xs
Ia = 7837 A
Ef = 12540 V
27.2°
31.8°
Vt = 7505
Fig. 8.18

Synchronous Machines 
463
or 
Fal  = 
X
K K
F
l
ar
ar
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
  
(8.42)
Units of 
X
K K
l
ar
 = 
W
◊
V
mmf
mmf
A
 = constant dimensionless
We can now write the mmf equivalent of Eq. (8.37) using Eq. (8.39) 
 
¢
Fr  = F
F
r
al
+
; – jK cancels out 
(8.43) 
Substituting Fr  from Eq. (8.34), we have 
 
¢
Fr  = F
F
F
f
ar
al
+
+
(
)  
(8.44) 
in which Far  and Fal  are in phase with Ia
From 
¢
Fr  we can ﬁnd 
¢
Er  from the OCC 
For clarity of understanding let us draw the phasor diagram corresponding to the phasor Eqs (8.36) and 
(8.44) where q = pf angle. If IaRa is ignored, b = q 
90°
b
90°
Fr¢
Ff
F
+ F
ar
al
q
b
Ia
Vt
IaRa
E¢r
F
F
ar
al
+
Fig. 8.19 
Phase diagram of mmf method
Important Note 
mmfs are measured in units of ﬁeld current 
 
mmf
N f
 = If , Nf = number of effective ﬁeld turns which need not be known
To determine (Far + Fal)

464 Electric Machines
Under short circuit at rated current, the ﬁeld excitation is consumed in balancing armature reaction mmf 
and the balance induces emf to balance ISC(rated) Xl voltage drop. 
Thus  
 
If | at rated SC current = If,ar + If ,al 
With 
¢
Fr  and F
F
ar
al
+
(
)  known as above Ff  can be found by drawing the mmf phasor diagram to scale. 
Computationally it is convenient to use trigonometric relationship derived below.
The mmf phasor diagram is redrawn in Fig. 8.20 in convenient orientation. It easily follows that 
 
Ff = 
(
sin )
(
cos )
AB
BC
BC
+
+
b
b
2
2  
(8.45)
Observation
In this (mmf ) method linear assumption has only been made in ﬁnding mmf equivalent of leakage reactance 
voltage drop. Otherwise, saturation has been accounted for by ﬁnding emfs from mmfs and vice versa. 
Steps to Compute Voltage Regulation
 
1. For Vt (rated) and Ia(rated) at speciﬁed pf 
ﬁnd E¢r
 
2. From OCC ﬁnd F¢r 
 
3. From SCC at rated current, ﬁnd (Far + Fal) 
 
4. From mmf phasor diagram or Eq. (8.44) 
determine Ff 
 
5. Consult OCC to ﬁnd Ef = Vt (no load)
 
6. Compute voltage regulation 
EXAMPLE 8.2 For the synchronous generator of Example 8.1, determine its voltage regulation by the 
mmf method. 
SOLUTION 
PF = 0.85 lagging
 
Ia (rated) = 
150
10
3
0 85
13
10
6
3
¥
¥
¥
¥
.
 = 7837 A
From Fig. 8.17 corresponding to  
ISC = Ia(rated) = 7837 A
 
If = 750 A = Far + Fal
At rated current, 0.85 pf lag 
 
E¢r = Vt  = 13 kV (line-to-line) ; IaRa = 0.
From the OCC corresponding mmf is 
 
If = 810 = F¢r ; in units (A) of ﬁeld current
 
b = q = cos–1 0.85 = 31.8° 
From the phasor diagram of Fig. 8.20 and Eq. 8.44 
 
Ff = 
(
sin
.
)
(
cos
.
)
810
750
31 8
750
31 8
2
2
+
∞
+
∞
F
F
ar
al
+
b
C
b
Ff
A
Fr¢
B
D
Fig. 8.20

Synchronous Machines 
465
 
 = 1505 A = If 
At If = 1500 A from the OCC, we ﬁnd
 
Ef = 16.3 kV (line) 
 
Vt (no load) = Ef = 16.3 kV (line)
 
Voltage regulation = 16 3
13
13
. -
 ¥ l 00 = 25.4%
The simple circuit model of the synchronous machine was obtained in Sec. 8.3 by making the assumption that 
the magnetic circuit of the machine is linear. However, it is known that, under normal operating conditions, the 
machine operates in a somewhat saturated region. In order to take account of magnetic saturation a procedure 
for heuristic adjustment of synchronous reactance was suggested so that the simple circuit model could still be 
used with the reactance parameter Xs (adjusted). While this does give more accurate results for many practical 
purposes compared to the use of Xs (unsaturated), it still does not fully account for magnetic saturation. 
The mmf method presented in Section 8.5 gives more accurate results but it also uses linearity in converting 
leakage reactance drop to equivalent mmf.
For taking saturation into account, superposition cannot be applied and, therefore, mmf phasor equation, 
 
Fr  = F
F
f
ar
+
  (see also Fig. 8.5 (b)) 
must be used. 
The induced emfs Ef and Er corresponding to Ff and Fr can be found from the OCC (which takes magnetic 
saturation into account). The problem, however, is to determine Far for a given armature current Ia, i.e. the 
armature reaction constant 
 
Kar = F
I
ar
a
 
(8.46)
This proportionality constant* must be found experimentally for a given machine. 
Knowing the magnetization characteristic of the machine and the proportionality constant Kar, the phasor 
diagram of Fig. 8.5(b) can be constructed for given operating conditions (say, for generating mode) wherein 
no approximation of neglecting the nonlinearity need be made. The next step then is to ﬁnd the terminal 
voltage of the machine which immediately follows from the phasor equation 
 
Vt  = Er  – Ia  (Ra + jXl) (generating mode) 
(8.47) 
The armature resistance, Ra, can be easily measured under dc conditions and duly corrected to its ac value 
and operating temperature; it can even be altogether neglected without any signiﬁcant loss of accuracy of 
analysis since its value is only about 0.01 pu as stated already. However, Xl, the leakage reactance of the 
machine must be determined. This can be calculated from the design parameters of the machine (provided 
these are known) but only to a low degree of accuracy. Therefore, it is necessary to obtain its actual value by 
experimental methods. 
 
* This proportionality constant is given by Eq. (5.44b) provided the design constants of the machine, Kw and Nph 
(series) are known. Even then a designer would be interested to determine the experimental value of this propor-
tionality constant to verify his design calculations.

466 Electric Machines
Accurate analysis of the synchronous machine performance can be carried out under any operating 
conditions provided Kar (Eq. (8.34)) and Xl, the leakage reactance are known. Because of the nonlinearity of 
iron, there are a variety of experimental methods of determining these quantities to high but varying degrees 
of accuracy. One of the well-known methods called the Potier method is described here.
Potier Method 
In the Potier method, tests are conducted to determine the following two characteristics with the machines 
running at synchronous speed. 
 
1. Open-circuit characteristic (OCC) as described in Sec. 8.3, with reference to Fig. 8.12. This is redrawn in 
Fig. 8.21.
R
Q
P
S
OCC
ZPFC
( rated)
Ia
If
F
N
I
ar
f
f
/
= ar
Q≤
P≤
R≤
S≤
A
B
I
X
a
l
(rated)
Er
Vt(rated)
V
Q¢
P¢
F
N
ar
f
f
/
= Iar
O
S¢
F N
I
f
f
f
/
=
F N
I
r
f
f
/
=
r
Air-gap line
Fig. 8.21 Graphical features of the Potier method
 
2. Zero power factor (lagging) characteristic (ZPFC) This is conducted by loading the machine as a 
generator with pure inductive load* (balanced 3-phase) which is adjusted to draw rated current from 
the machine while the ﬁeld current is adjusted to give various values of terminal voltage. Figure 8.21 
 
* The zero power factor test could be performed on a machine by employing loading inductors; these constitute the 
load of nearly but not exactly zero of and also are impractical for large machines. The ZPF test at rated voltage 
only could also be conducted by synchronizing it to the mains and regulating its excitation to yield zero pf opera-
tion (see Sec. 8.9).

Synchronous Machines 
467
also shows the ZPFC. However, there is no need for conducting this test fully to determine the ZPFC. 
All one needs is two points on this characteristic—P corresponding to a ﬁeld current which gives the 
rated terminal voltage while the ZPF load is adjusted to draw rated current, and the point P¢which 
corresponds to the short-circuit conditions on the machine (Vt = 0) with the ﬁeld current adjusted 
to give rated armature current. Since the armature resistance is of negligible order, the short-circuit 
current lags behind the resultant induced emf Er by almost 90°, Vt being equal to zero. Therefore, P¢ 
constitutes a point on the ZPFC. It will soon be shown that the complete ZPFC, if required, can be 
constructed from the knowledge of the points P and P¢. 
Figure 8.22 gives the phasor diagram under conditions of zero 
power factor (lagging) load with the armature resistance neglected. It 
is seen from this ﬁgure that the mmf and voltage phasor equations
 
Vt  = Er  – j Ia Xl 
(8.48)
and 
Fr  = F
F
f
ar
+
 
(8.49)
These reduce to simple algebraic equations
 
Vt = Er – Ia Xl 
(8.50) 
and 
Fr = Ff – Far 
(8.51)
The algebraic Eqs (8.50) and (8.51) can now be translated onto the 
OCC and ZPFC of Fig. 8.21. Further, in the test data the horizontal 
axis of Fig. 8.21 being the ﬁeld current If, Eq. (8.51) must be converted 
into its equivalent ﬁeld current form by dividing throughout by Nf, the 
effective number of turns/pole on the rotor ﬁeld. It then modiﬁes to 
 
Fr/Nf = Ff /Nf – Far/Nf 
(8.52a)
or 
Ir
f = If – Iar
f 
(8.52b)
Point P on the ZPFC corresponds to terminal voltage Vt (rated) and a ﬁeld current of OB = Ff /Nf  = If. 
Corresponding to point P on the ZPFC, there will be a point S on the OCC which pertains to the emf Er and 
the resultant excitation OA = Fr/Nf (= Ff /Nf – Far/Nf). 
From Fig. 8.21 and Eqs (8.50) and (8.51) it easily follows that 
 
(i) SQ, the vertical distance between points P and S is nothing but the leakage reactance drop Ia (rated) Xl. 
 (ii) QP, the horizontal distance between points P and S, is in fact Far/Nf. 
It is observed here that while point P is known from the ZPF test, the corresponding point S on the OCC is 
not yet known because so far the numerical values of Ia (rated) Xl and Far/Nf are not known. 
By constructing triangles parallel to SQP, points can be found on the ZPFC corresponding to the points 
on the OCC, e.g. P≤ corresponds to S≤, and thereby construct the complete ZPFC, if desired. In the reverse 
process, corresponding to P¢, the short-circuit point, S¢ can be located on the OCC by drawing S¢ P¢ parallel 
to SP.
Obviously 
 
S¢Q¢ = Ia (rated) Xl and Q¢P¢ = Far/Nf 
Since the initial part of the OCC is almost linear, OS¢ is part of air-gap line. Therefore going back to point 
P and by taking horizontal distance RP = OP¢ and drawing RS parallel to OS¢, the desired point S can be 
located on the OCC corresponding to the known point P on the ZPFC. 
Once point S on the OCC has been located, the following can be measured to scale:
 
SQ = Ia (rated) Xl and QP = Far/Nf = I ar
f 
(8.53)
O
Ff
Fr
Far
Far
Ia
Vt
Er
I X
a I
Fig. 8.22 
Phasor diagram for zero 
power factor (lagging) load

468 Electric Machines
from which Xl and Far can be calculated. Since I ar
f  corresponds to Ia (rated), the armature mmf proportionality 
constant can be found as 
 
K¢ar = Iar
f /Ia (rated) 
With the knowledge of Xl and K¢ar for the stator windings, the complete phasor diagram of the machine can 
be constructed corresponding to any operating conditions, generating or motoring.
It must be observed here that the Potier method though elegant is not exact because of the following 
explicit and implicit assumptions made therein: 
 
1. In arriving at the algebraic Eqs (8.50) and (8.51)/(8.52), the armature resis tance has been neglected. 
This being a very valid assumption, introduces no error of any signiﬁcance. 
 
2. If inductors are used for conducting the ZPF test, the power factor is somewhat different from zero. 
 
3. It has been assumed that in Fig. 8.21, S¢Q¢ = SQ = Ia (rated) Xl which means that in the ZPF test 
corresponding to point P and the short-circuit test corre sponding to point P¢, the leakage reactance 
of the machine is assumed to remain unchanged. This is not altogether correct because the machine 
excita tion under short-circuit conditions is OP¢ while it is OA for point P (this point on the ZPFC 
corresponds to rated terminal voltage and rated armature cur rent). Since OA >> OP¢, point P 
corresponds to saturated conditions on the machine with a larger leakage ﬂux and hence a larger value 
of leakage reactance contrary to the assumption made. 
Better methods [48] are available in literature which attempt to overcome assumption 3 above but these 
are beyond the scope of this book.
Construction Procedure—Potier Method (Fig. 8.23)
From the SC test ISC = Ia (rated) which locates P¢ on If – axis such that OP¢ = ISC
f
R
Q
S
OCC
P (ZPF at rated voltage)
If
ar
If
A
B
O
P¢
Short circuit point,
(rated)
Ia
Er
Vt (rated)
I
X
a
l
(rated)
Air-gap line
V
Fig. 8.23 Construction procedure Potier method

Synchronous Machines 
469
Vt (rated) and Ia (rated) locate the point P such that OB = Izpf 
f
P draw a line parallel to If – axis and locate R such that RP = OP¢
R draw line parallel to the air-gap line which locates point S on OCC.
S draw SQ perpendicular to RP
PQ = Iar
f ; Xl = SQ
Ia
(
)
(
)
to scale
rated
3
; OC voltage is line voltage
EXAMPLE 8.3 The following data were obtained for the OCC of a 10 MVA, 13 kV, 3-phase, 50 Hz, star-
connected synchronous generator:
 If (A) 
50 
75 
100 
125 
150 
162.5 
200 
250 
300
 VOC (line) (kV) 
6.2 
8.7 
10.5 
11.6 
12.8 
13.7 
14.2 
15.2 
15.9
An excitation of 100 A causes the full-load current to ﬂow during the short-circuit test. The excitation 
required to give the rated current at zero pf and rated voltage is 290 A. 
 (a) Calculate the adjusted synchronous reactance of the machine.
 (b) Calculate the leakage reactance of the machine assuming the resistance to be negligible. 
 (c) Determine the excitation required when the machine supplies full-load at 0.8 pf lagging by using 
the leakage reactance and drawing the mmf phasor diagram. What is the voltage regulation of the 
machine? 
Also calculate the voltage regulation for this loading using the adjusted synchronous reactance. Compare 
and comment upon the two results. 
SOLUTION 
Ia (rated) = 
10
10
3
13
10
6
3
¥
¥
¥
 = 444 A
 
(a) The OCC and SCC are plotted in Fig. 8.24 from which the short-circuit armature current corresponding to Vt 
(rated) = 13 kV (line) on the OCC is
 
  
ISC = 688 A
 
 \ 
Xs (adjusted) = 
V
I
V
t
SC
t
(
)
(
(
))
rated
corresponding to 
rated
3 ¥
 
  
 = 13
1000
3
688
¥
¥
 = 10.9 W
 
(b) To ﬁnd the leakage reactance, the Potier triangle must be constructed. Figure 8.25 shows the plot of the OCC and 
the location of the point P corresponding to ZPF at rated current and voltage and the point P¢ corresponding to 
short-circuit at rated current.
 
  At P draw parallel to the horizontal axis PR = OP¢. At R draw RS parallel to the initial slope of the OCC thereby 
locating the point S on the OCC. Draw SQ perpendicular to RP. Then
 
  
SQ = 
3 Ia (rated) Xl = 1200 V
 
 \ 
Xl = 
1200
3
444
¥
 = 1.56 W 
 
(c) From Fig. 8.22, the armature reaction in the equivalent ﬁeld current is
 
  
Iar
f  = QP = 90 A

470 Electric Machines
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Field current (A)
2
4
6
8
10
12
13 kV
14
16
VOC (line) (kV)
250
500
688
750
1000
ISC(A)
Air-gap line
Modified air-gap line
OCC
SCC
Fig. 8.24
S
Q
If
ar
P
OCC
P¢
S¢
O Q¢
50
100
150
200
250
300
O
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
÷3IaXl
R
Field current (A)
VOC (line)(kV)
Fig. 8.25
 
 The phasor diagram is drawn in Fig. 8.26. Proceeding computationally 
 
  
Er  = 13–0º + j
3  ¥ 444 ¥ 1.56 ¥ 10–3 = 13.75 –4º kV (line)

Synchronous Machines 
471
b
If
r = 178.5 A
If = 253.3 A
4°
36.9°
Vt = 13 KV
Er = 13.75 KV
If = (rated)
b = 36.9° + 4° = 40.9°
If
ar = 90° A
j
I X
÷3 a 2
Fig. 8.26
 
 From the OCC corresponding to 
Er = 13.75 kV
 
  
I r
f = 185 A leads Er by 90º
 
 From the phasor diagram
 
  
If = [(185 + 90 sin 40.9º)2 + (90 cos 40.9º)2]1/2
 
  
 = 253 A
 
 corresponding to which the value of Ef from the OCC is
 
  
Ef = 15.2 kV (line) 
 
 \ 
Voltage regulation = E
V
V
f
t
t
-
 ¥ 100 
 
  
 = 15 2
13
13
. -
 ¥ 100 = 16.9% 
 
 Voltage regulation using Xs (adjusted): 
 
  
E f  = Vt  + j
3 Ia  (rated) Xs (adjusted)
 
  
 = 13000 +j
3  ¥ 444 (0.8 – j 0.6) ¥ 10.9
 
  
 = 18029 + j 6706
 
 or 
Ef = 19.24 kV (line)
 
  
If (from modiﬁed air-gap line) = 150
13  ¥ 19.24 = 222 A
 
  
Vt (OC)| If = 222 A = 14.8 kV
 
 \ 
Voltage regulation = 14 8
13
13
. -
 ¥ 100 
 
  
 = 13.85% 

472 Electric Machines
Comment
The voltage regulation as calculated above by Potier’s method is quite accurate. In fact this value is somewhat 
lower than the actual as it does not account for increase in leakage reactance under condition of load. This fact 
has already been mentioned earlier. A lower value given by Xs (adjusted) method compared to Xs (unadjusted) 
is explained by the fact that the method is empirical and the error caused by it depends upon the saturation 
level of the machine at rated voltage.
EXAMPLE 8.4 The OCC of a 3-phase, 50 Hz synchronous machine is given by the following data:
 If (A) 
15 
30 
50 
75 
90 
120 
160 
 VOC (line) (V) 
600 
1200 
2000 
2900 
3300 
3700 
4000
Under short-circuit conditions a ﬁeld current of 40-A gives the full-load stator current. The armature 
resistance and leakage reactance per phase are known to be 0.01 and 0.12 pu. When the machine is 
operating as a motor drawing full-load current at the rated terminal voltage of 3.3 kV and 0.8 pf leading, 
calculate the ﬁeld current required. 
SOLUTION 
The OCC as per the data given is drawn in Fig. 8.27. The ﬁeld current required to circulate the full-load 
short-circuit current is indicated by OP¢ = 40 A. Now 
 
3 Ia Xl = 0.12 ¥ 3300 = 396 V (at rated current)
Corresponding to 396 V on OCC, a point S¢ is marked and a vertical line S¢Q¢ drawn. Q¢P¢ now corresponds to Far/
Nf = Iar
f = 30 A.
OCC
Er (line)
4000
3000
2000
1000
400
0
Q¢
25
50
75
100
125
175
P¢
150
S¢
VOC (line)(kV)
I f
ar
If (A)
Ir
f
Fig. 8.27 

Synchronous Machines 
473
Given that Ra = 0.01 pu, the voltage drop in resistance is so small that it can be neglected. 
 
Vt = 3 3
3
.
 ¥ 1000 = 1905 (phase)
 
IaXl = 396
3
 = 229 V
The machine is operating as a motor at 0.8 pf leading. Therefore as per Eq. (8.12) and Fig. 8.8(b)
 
Er  = Vt  – jIaXl ; Vt (phase) = 3300
3  = 1905 V
 
Er  = 1905 –0º – j 229 (0.8 + j0.6)
 
 = 2042 – j 183.2
 
 = 2050 –– 5.1º V or 3551 V (line)
From the OCC for Er = 3551 V, we get 
 
Ir
f = 108 A
The phasor diagram is drawn in Fig. 8.28. I r
f  
leads Er by 90º and I ar
f is drawn anti-parallel to Ia 
(motoring operation) Angle b = 36.9º + 5.1º = 42º. 
The construction lines are shown dotted. From the mf 
phasor diagram geometry
 
If = [(If + Iar
f sin b )2 + (Iar
f cos b)2]1/2
or 
If = [(108 + 30 sin 42º)2 + (30 cos 42º)2]1/2
or 
If = 125 A
From the OCC at 
 
If = 125 A
 
Ef = 3760 V (line)
ASA method of ﬁnding voltage regulation is heuristic modiﬁcation of the mmf method which requires the 
value of Xl. Therefore, OCC and ZPFC tests are conducted and Xl is determined from the Potier triangle by 
the method of Section 8.6.
The OCC is sketched in Fig. 8.29 and the short circuit point is located on the If – axis.
The basic kVL equations of the mmf method are:
 
¢
Er  = Vt  + I R
a
a  
Eq. (8.36)
or 
¢
Er  = Vt ; I R
a
a  ignored; b = q
 
Er  = Vt + jI X
a
l  
Eq. (8.35)
where we know Xl.
In stead of ﬁnding 
¢
Fr  from the OCC against E¢r = Vt (rated). F¢r is read on the air-gap line as shown in
Fig. 8.29(a). If means saturation has been ignored. 
42°
If
ar
= 40 A
If = 125 A
If
r = 108 A
Ia
36.9°
5.1°
Vt = 1905 V
Er = 2050 V
I X
a L = 229 V
Fig. 8.28

474 Electric Machines
Now draw the mmf phasar diagram of Fig. 8.29(b). with b = q, the pf angle. This determines
 
¢
Ff  = 
¢
Fr  + F
F
ar
al
+
(
) ; saturation ignored
Saturation Correction 
Against Er, the intersept LM = Fsat between air-gap line and OCC in found out. Heuristically this is the 
saturation correction. We extend 
¢
Ff on the phasar diagram by Fsat to yield
 
Ff = F¢f  + Fsat; magnitude-wise
Having determined Ef we read Ef from the OCC and therefrom calculate the volatage regulation.
Fsat
Air-gap line
K
L
G
H
F¢r
M
OCC
Er
V
E
t
r
(rated) =
¢
O
P
(S.C.point)
F
F
ar
al
+
If
(a)
b
F¢f
Fsat
Ff
F
F
ar
al
+
F¢r
V
(b)
Fig. 8.29 Determination of voltage regulation by ASA (latest) method
EXAMPLE 8.5 For Example 8.4 calculate the voltage regulation by the ASA method.
SOLUTION 
For the data of Example 8.4 the OCC and air-gap are drawn in Fig. 8.30. Ignoring IaRa drop 
 
E¢r = Vt (rated) = 13 kV (line)
and 
Er = VL  + j Ia (rated) Xl = 13.75 kV (line); calculated in Example 8.4
From the air-gap against 
Vt = 13 kV, we ﬁnd
 
F¢r = 100 A, b = 36.9º + 4º = 40.9º

Synchronous Machines 
475
Against Er = 13.75 kV, the line segment between air-gap line and OCC, we ﬁnd
 
Fsat = 80 A
Also 
OP¢ = Far + Fal = 100 A
From the values of ASA, the mmf phasor diagram is sketched in Fig. 8.31 from which we ﬁnd 
 
F¢f = [(100 + 100 sin 40.9º)2 
+ (100 cos 40.9°)2]1/2
 
 = 182 A
Then 
Ff = 182 + 80 = 262 A
From the OCC, we ﬁnd
 
Ef = 15 kV (line)
 
Voltage regulation = 15 13
13
-
 ¥ 100 = 15.4%
8.8 
NATURE OF ARMATURE REACTION
The nature of the armature reaction is dependent on the power factor at which the machine is operating mode-
generating/motoring. For simplicity of explanation, it will be assumed here that the armature resistance and 
leakage reactance are negligible so that 
 
Vt  = Er
Figure 8.32 shows the phasor diagrams, with component ﬂuxes (i.e. the magnetic circuit is assumed linear) 
indicated therein for a generating machine for (a) zero power factor lagging (Fig. 8.32(a)), (b) zero power 
factor leading (Fig. 8.32(b)) and (c) for unity power factor (Fig. 8.32(c)). The following observations are 
immediately made from these phasor diagrams.
Air-gap line
O
Er = 13.75 kV
F¢r = 100 A
100
150
200
250
300
2
6
4
8
10
12
14
16
If (A)
F
F
ar
aL
+
= 100 A
Fsat = 80 A
V(kV)
E¢r = 13 kV
P
Fig. 8.30
Fsat = 80 A
Ff
F
F
ar
al
+
= 100 A
F¢r = 100 A
40.9°
F¢f
Fig. 8.31

476 Electric Machines
 
1. Armature reaction is demagnetizing (Far opposes Ff) when a generating ma chine supplies zero power 
factor lagging current.
 
2. Armature reaction is magnetizing (Far aids Fr) when a generating machine supplies zero power factor 
leading current. 
 
3. Armature reaction is mostly cross-magnetizing (i.e. at 90° to Fr) though it has a small demagnetizing 
component (see dotted curve in Fig. 8.32(c), when a generating machine supplies unity power factor 
current.
la
V
E
t
r
=
la
V
E
t
r
=
Fr
F r
a
Ff
Ff
F r
a
Fr
V
E
t
r
=
la
Fr
F r
a
Ff
(c) Unity power factor
(b) Zero power factor leading
(a) Zero power factor lagging
Fig. 8.32 Nature of armature reaction in generating machine 
From the above discussion the following more general conclusions regarding a synchronous machine in 
generating mode can be drawn: 
 
(i) When the machine supplies a lagging power factor current, the armature reaction has both demagnetizing 
and cross-magnetizing components. 
 (ii) When the machine supplies leading power factor current, the armature reac tion has both magnetizing 
and cross-magnetizing components. 
Since in a motoring machine the armature reaction mmf and ﬂux are in phase opposition to the armature 
current, the nature of the armature reaction is just the reverse of what is stated above for the generating 
machine. The corresponding conclusions for the motoring machine are stated below: 
 
(i) When the machine draws a lagging power factor current, the armature reac tion has both magnetizing 
and cross-magnetizing components. 
 (ii) When the machine draws leading power factor current, the armature reaction has both demagnetizing 
and cross-magnetizing components. 
The effect of the above conclusions on machine operation will be seen in further detail in Sec. 8.10. 
A deﬁnite procedure has to be followed in connecting a synchronous machine to bus-bars which for the 
present purpose will be assumed to be inﬁnite. Inﬁnite bus bars means a 3-phase supply of constant voltage and 
frequency independent of the load exchanged (fed into the bus-bars or drawn from the bus-bars). Figure 8.33 

Synchronous Machines 
477
shows a synchronous machine with terminals a, b, c which is required to be connected to bus-bars with 
terminals A, B, C by means of a switch S.
synchronous
machine
V machine
a
S
A
3-phase mains
(infinite bus-bars)
Vbus
B
b
c
C
ns
Fig. 8.33
The machine is run as a generator with its terminals so arranged that its phase sequence is the same as that 
of the bus-bars. The machine speed and ﬁeld current are adjusted so as to satisfy the following conditions:
 
(i) The machine terminal voltage must be nearly equal to the bus-bars voltage.
 (ii) The machine frequency is nearly equal to the bus-bars frequency, i.e. the machine speed is close to 
synchronous speed.
After the above conditions are satisﬁed the instant of switching on (synchronising) must be determined 
such that the two voltages are almost co-phasal (the acceptable phase difference is of the order of 5°). This 
instant is determined with the help of the method described below.
Figure 8.34 shows the phasor diagram for phase voltages 
(line-to-neutral) for the machine and bus-bars. As the two 
frequencies are not exactly equal, the machine phasors are 
rotating slowly with respect to the bus-bar phasors at 2 pDf 
rad/s, where Df is the difference in the two frequencies. At the 
instant when the two sets of phasors are coincident (cophasal), 
the voltage
 
VaA = 0
 
VbC = VcB 
(8.54) 
The condition can be easily determined by connecting three 
lamps—one across aA, the other across bC and the third across 
cB (in order to use standard-voltage lamps it may be necessary 
to employ potential transformers). The rms values of voltages 
VaA, VbC and VcB oscillate at the difference frequency Df so 
that each lamp is alternately dark and bright. At the instant 
of synchronization, as per the condition (8.54) stated above, the lamp across aA is dark while the other two 
lamps are equally bright. It is at this instant that switch S is closed. Instead of using lamps, generating stations 
use an instrument called synchroscope. 
Once switch S is closed the stator and rotor ﬁelds of the machine lock into each other (synchronize) and 
the machine then onwards runs at synchronous speed. The real power exchange with the mains will now be 
B
b
C
c
A
a
2
rad/s
p D f
Fig. 8.34 Determination of the synchronizing 
instant

478 Electric Machines
governed by the loading conditions on the shaft while the reactive power exchange will be determined by the 
ﬁeld excitation.
As a generator is coupled to a primemover it is easy to follow the above procedure to connect it to the 
bus-bars. The same procedure has to be followed for a synchronous motor which must be run initially by 
an auxiliary device (may be a small dc/induction motor) and then synchronized to the bus-bars. It may 
be pointed out here that the synchronous motor is non-self-starting. If, for example, switch S is closed in
Fig. 8.35 with the rotor stationary, the stator and rotor ﬁelds will be moving relative to each other at 
synchronous speed so as to develop alternating torque with zero average value and as a result the motor 
would not start. Synchronous motors are made self- starting by providing short-circuited bars on the rotor 
which produce induction torque for starting (see Sec. 5.6). 
The operating characteristics of a synchronous machine are examined here under conditions of variable 
load and variable excitation. One of these quantities will be assumed to be held constant at a time while the 
other will be allowed to vary over a wide range. Further, here too the armature resistance will be assumed 
negligible. This does not signiﬁcantly change the operating characteristic of the machine but leads to easier 
understanding of the machine operation. The more general case of the machine with armature resistance 
accounted for will be discussed in Sec. 8.11. By virtue of negligible resistance assumption, the electrical 
power at the machine terminals and the mechanical power at its shaft are simply related as follows: 
 
Pe (out) = Pm (in) (net)
where Pe (out) = electrical power output of the machine (electrical power developed) 
 
Pm (in) = net mechanical power input to the machine after deducting iron-loss and windage and 
friction loss
Motoring Machine
 
Pe (in) = Pm (out) (gross mechanical power developed)
 
Pe (in) = electrical power input to the machine
where 
Pm (out) (gross) = gross mechanical power output of the machine; the net mechanical power output 
will be obtained by deducting iron-loss and windage and friction loss 
Power-angle Characteristic (Constant Excitation Variable Load)
Figure 8.35 shows the circuit diagrams and phasor diagrams of a synchronous machine in generating mode 
(Figs 8.35(a) and (c) and motoring mode (Figs 8.35 (b) and (d)). The machine is assumed to be connected 
to inﬁnite bus-bars of voltage Vt. It is easily observed from the phasor diagrams that in generating mode, the 
excitation emf Ef leads Vt by angle d, while it lags Vt in the motoring mode. It follows from the phasor triangle 
OMP (Figs 8.35(c) and (d) that
 
E f
sin (
)
90 ±f  = I X
a
s
sind ; (
),
(
),
90
90
∞+
∞-
f
f
generating
motoring

Synchronous Machines 
479
or 
Ia cos f = E
X
f
s
sin d 
(8.55) 
where f is the power factor angle.
Multiplying both sides of Eq. (8.55) by Vt 
 
VtIa cos f = V E
X
t
f
s
 sin d 
or 
Pe = V E
X
t
f
s
 sin d 
(8.56) 
where 
Pe = Vt Ia cos f = electrical power (per phase) exchanged with the bus-bars
 
d  = Angle between Ef and Vt and is called the power angle* of the machine (d has opposite sign 
for generating/motoring modes).
The relationship of Eq. (8.56) is known as the power-angle characteristic of the machine and is plotted in 
Fig. 8.36 for given Vt and Ef. The maximum power 
 
Pe,max = V E
X
t
f
s
 
(8.57)
occurs at d = 90° beyond which the machine falls out of step (loses synchronism). The machine can be taken 
up to Pe,max only by gradually increasing the load. This is known as the steady-state stability limit of the 
+
Ef
Ia
Xs
+
–
–
+
Ef
Ia
Xs
+
–
–
Vt
(b) Motoring mode
=
–
E
V
I
f
t
a s
j X
(a) Generating mode
=
+
E
V
I
f
t
a s
j X
O
d
f
Ef
j X
Ia s
M
Vt
Ia
P
f
d
O
Vt
M
j X
Ia s
P
Ef
Ia
(c) Generating mode
(d) Motoring mode
Vt
Fig. 8.35 Synchronous machine operation (generating/motoring mode)
 
* The angle d in Eq. (8.56) is between Vt and Ef while in Fig. 8.9 it is the angle between Er and Ef. The difference 
between these two angles is due to the fact that now the leakage reactance of the machine is being accounted for. 

480 Electric Machines
machine. The machine is normally operated at d much less** than 90°. The phasor diagram of a generating 
machine under condition of Pe,max is drawn in Fig. 8.37. Obviously Ia will be several times larger than the 
rated machine current in this condition. 
 
Generating
P
Pe, max
–180°
–90°
Motoring
Pe, max
90°
180°
d
 
Fig. 8.36 
Power-angle characteristic 
Fig. 8.37 
Phasor diagram of generating machine at
 
 
 
 
steady-state stability limit
Operation at Constant Load with Variable Excitation 
At constant load, from Eq. (8.56)
 
Ef sin d = P X
V
e
s
t
 = const 
(8.58)
Also 
VtIa cos f = Pe = const
or 
Ia cos f = P
V
e
t
 = const 
(8.59)
It is therefore, observed that at constant load, as the excitation emf Ef is varied (by varying ﬁeld current If), 
the power angle d varies such that Ef sin d remains constant. The machine bahaviour is depicted by the 
phasor diagrams of Figs 8.38(a) and (b)). As Ef varies, the tip of phasor E f  moves on a line parallel to Vt  
and at distance Ef sin d = Pe Xs/Vt from it. Since Ia cos f = constant, the projection of the current phasor on Vt 
must remain constant, i.e. the tip of the current phasor traces a line perpendicular to Vt at distance Ia cos f = 
Pe/Vt from the origin. The current phasor Ia  is always located at 90° to phasor Ia Xs (phasor joining tips to 
E f and Vt  in the direction of E f ). The effect of varying excitation (Ef) on machine operating characteristics 
is brought out by Figs 8.38(a) and (b).
Normal excitation: At this excitation the machine operation meets the condition Ef cos d = Vt at which the 
machine power factor is unity.
Over excitation: 
Ef cos d >Vt
Under excitation: 
Ef cos < Vt
Ef
d = 90°
f
Vt
jl X
a s
Ia
 
** This is to prevent the machine from going into an unstable region (where it will fall out of step) during transient 
power swings. This topic concerns transient stability of the machine and is discussed in books on power sys-
tems [7].

Synchronous Machines 
481
The following conclusions* are drawn from the phasor diagrams of Figs 8.38(a) and (b).
P
V
e
t
P X
V
e s
t
jI
X
a
a
1
Ef1
Ef2
Ef3
Ia3
Ef (min)
o
f1
Ia2
d1
Under-excitation
Over-excitation
Normal-excitation
Unstable
region
Vt
(a) Generating machine;
(out) =
(in) (net) = constant
P
P
e
m
Under-excitation
Unstable
region
Ef (min)
f1
o
d1
Ia2
Ef1
Ef2
Ef3
Ia1
P
V
e
t
Ia3
Vt
j X
Ia s
P X
V
e s
t
Over-excitation
Normal-excitation
(b) Motoring machine;
(in) =
(out) (grass) = constant
P
P
e
m
Ia1
Fig. 8.38
 
1. The machine supplies a lagging power factor current when over-excited. 
 
2. The machine supplies a leading power factor current when under-excited. 
 
* These conclusions are corroborated by the nature of the armature reaction dis cussed in Sec. 8.7. For example, 
when a generator is overexcited it supplies lag ging current which has a demagnetizing effect so that the air-gap 
emf Er matches the applied voltage. Similarly an overexcited motor draws a leading current which has demagne-
tizing effect.

482 Electric Machines
Motoring Machine
 
1. The machine draws a leading power factor current when over-excited.
 
2. The machine draws a lagging power factor current when under-excited.
Minimum Excitation
From Figs 8.38(a) and (b) it is seen that as excitation is reduced, the angle d continuously increases. The 
minimum permissible excitation, Ef (min), corresponds to the stability limit, i.e. d = 90°. Obviously 
 
Ef (min) = P X
V
e
s
t
 
(8.60)
The reader is advised to draw a phasor diagram at Ef (min) for motoring machine corresponding to
Fig. 8.37.
V– Curves
Let us consider the phasor diagram of Fig. 8.38 (b) for the motoring machine. At low excitation, Ia is large and 
pf is low lagging at a given constant Pe = Pm (load) say 1 pu. As the excitation is increased Ia reduces and pf 
increases till at normal excitation Ia is minimum and pf is unity. As the excitation is increased further Ia begins 
to increases and pf becomes leading and begins to reduce. The plot of Ia vs at Pm = 1 pu exhibits a V-curve 
nature as shown in Fig. 8.39(a). At lower values of Pm the plot has same V-curve shape except that Ia (min) 
is smaller and occurs at lower values of If as shown by the dotted curve passing that Ia (min). The minimum 
excitation stability limit given by Eq. (8.60) is also indicated in the ﬁgure.
Stability limit (min. excitation)
0.8 pf
1.0 pf
0.8 pf
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1pu load (real power)
Over-excitation
Lagging pf (generator)
Leading pf (motoring)
Under-excitation
Leading pf (generator)
Lagging pf (motoring)
Normal-excitation
Armature
current, Ia
If
Fig. 8.39(a)

Synchronous Machines 
483
It is easily seen that pf vs If curves for ﬁxed Pm are inverse of Ia vs If plot. Thus these are inverted V-Curves 
each having maximum value of unity (pf) also shown in Fig. 8.39(b).
The generator V-curves and inverted V-curves can be found to have the same form as for the motor except 
for reversal of lagging and leading pf regions as shown in Figs 8.39(a) and (b).
Stability
limit
pf
1 Pu load
0 Pu load
Leading pf (generating)
Loagging pf (motoring)
Lagging pf (
)
Leading pf (
)
generating
motoring
If
1
Fig. 8.39(b)
Observation
In a synchronous machine the real electrical power exchanged with the bus-bars is controlled by the 
mechanical shaft power irrespective of excitation. The excitation, on the other hand, governs only the power 
factor of the machine without affecting the real power ﬂow. For example, in a generator if it is desired to 
feed more real power into the bus-bars the throttle must be opened admitting more steam into the turbine 
(coupled to generator) thereby feeding more mechanical power into shaft. As a consequence the power angle 
d increases and so does the electrical power output (Eq. 8.56)). However, if it is desired to adjust the machine 
power factor, its excitation should be varied (well within the limit imposed by Eq. (8.60)). 
Compounding Curves
The dotted curves of Fig. 8.39(a) pertain to constant 
terminal voltage, constant power factor operation of a 
synchronous machine. For a generating machine operation 
these curves are called compounding curves. These are 
presented once again in Fig. 8.40 as the ﬁeld current 
needed for a given armature current or kVA loading at 
a particular power factor for constant terminal voltage. 
These are useful guide for generator operation in a power 
house.
0.8 pf lag
1.0 pf
0.8 pf lead
Armature current ( ) or kVA
la
I
V
f
t
to maintain
constant
Fig. 8.40 
Compounding curves of a synchronous 
generator 

484 Electric Machines
While the shape of the compounding curves can be visualize from the dotted curves of Fig. 8.39(a), these 
are better understood by means of the phasor diagrams of Fig. 8.41.
Ef > 1
Locus of Ef
I X
a s
Vt = 1
Ia
(a) pf = 0.8 lag
f
E > 1
t
Vt = 1
I X
a s
Locus of
Ef
(b) pf = unity
Ia
Locus of Ef
Ia
I X
a s
Vt = 1
f
(c) pf = 0.8 lead
Ef
Fig. 8.41
These phasor diagrams are drawn to determine excitation emf Ef and so the ﬁeld current If to maintain 
constant terminal voltage Vt = 1.0(say) for speciﬁed power factor with increasing armature current, Ia. The 
three phasor diagrams pertain to lagging (0.8), unity and leading (0.8) power factors.
The following conclusions are drawn 
 (a) 0.8 pf lagging
 
 Ef > 1 ; Ef and so If required increases with increasing Ia as shown by the locus of Ef tip.
 (b) unity pf
 
 Ef > 1 but less than Ef (lagging pf ), also increases at a slower rate. Therefore If needed is less than 
lagging pf case and has to be increased.
 (c) 0.8 pf lagging 
 
 Ef < Vt; it is seen from the locus the Ef reduces goes through a minimum and then continues to increase. 
Therefore, If should be adjusted accordingly.
These conclusions corroborate the compounding curves of Fig. 8.41.
Zero power factor case 
Ef = Vt – j Ia Xs,  
Ia  = Ia – ∓ 90º = ∓ j Ia
or 
 Ef = Vt ± IaXs, a scalar equation
Hence Ef increases linearly from Vt = 1 for increasing Ia with zero pf lagging but decreases linearly for 
increasing Ia with zero pf leading.
It is instructive for the reader to draw the corresponding phasor diagram.
The corresponding compounding curves has no practical signiﬁcance for a motor and are not drawn in 
Fig. 8.40. It needs to be mentioned here that for zero pf leading load Ef cannot be reduced below Ef (min) as 
per Eq. (8.60).

Synchronous Machines 
485
Rating based on temperature rise is volt-amperes (in practical units of kVA, MVA). As the temperature rise 
is related to losses, the iron loss determines the voltage rating and I2
aRa loss determines the current rating.
However, MVA rating unlike transformers is incomplete for alternators it gives no information on the real 
power which is needed to determine the size of the prime mover (turbine) to drive the alternator. Therefore, 
the alternator is rated in terms MW capacity and not in terms of MVA. The other alternator rating is the power 
factor at which it supplies power. The pf rating is normally in the range of 0.8 to 0.9 lagging. It limits the 
exciter output and the ﬁeld current and so the heating of ﬁeld winding. Of course, the terminal voltage must 
remain within narrow limits (± 5%) of the rated value. As the alternator is normally connected to the bus-bars, 
its terminal voltage is the bus-bar voltage. 
The reactive power output of an alternator is Q = P tan (cos–1 pf ). The reactive power ﬂow increases if 
the alternator is operated at lower factor at rated real power. The reactive power ﬂow is limited by armature 
heating. At still larger reactive power ﬂow (lower pf ), much larger ﬁeld current is needed which would not 
be permissible.
To Sum Up 
Alternator ratings are Vt (kV line), MW and pf = 8.0 – 0.9 lagging (if unspeciﬁed it should be taken as lagging 
because at lagging pf alternator requires larger ﬁeld current)
For a unit system – boiler-turbine, alternator and step-up transformer form one generator unit.
 
Turbine rating = MW rating of alternator plus over-load margin 
 
Transformer rating, MVA = MW rating of alternator
pf rating
Synchronous Condenser
It has been seen above that a synchronous motor under over-excited condition operates at a leading power 
factor. Synchronous motors are therefore employed in large power installation for overall high power factor 
of the installation.
At no-load with losses assumed negligible, a synchronous motor operates at 
 
d = 0  (see Eq. (8.56))
which means that Ef and Vt are in phase. It is seen from the phasor diagram of Figs 8.42(a) and (b), that the 
machine (motor) draws zero power factor leading current 
 
Ia = E
V
X
f
t
s
-
  (Ef >Vt, over-excited)
and draws zero power factor lagging current 
 
Ia = V
E
X
t
f
s
-
  (Ef < Vt, under-excited) 
Thus a synchronous motor at no-load behaves as a variable condenser or inductor by simply varying 
its excitation. The machine operated under such a condition (motor on no-load or light load) is known as 
a synchronous condenser and ﬁnds application in large integrated power systems for improving the power 
factor under heavy-load conditions and for deproving the power factor under light-load conditions, thereby 
controlling the voltage proﬁle of the power system within reasonable limits.

486 Electric Machines
Dual-purpose Synchronous Motor
Synchronous motor is used in an industry/factory for serving two purposes. It drives a constant speed 
mechanical load such as a large pump, a dc generator, etc. and at the same time it also corrects an otherwise 
low lagging pf of the electrical load such as induction motors and ﬂuorescent tubes. Such a synchronous 
motor serving dual-purpose is called dual-purpose synchronous motor. 
EXAMPLE 8.6 A, 3300 V, delta-connected motor has a synchronous reactance per phase (delta) of 18 W. 
It operates at a leading power factor of 0.707 when drawing 800 kW from the mains. Calculate its excitation 
emf. 
SOLUTION 
On equivalent-star basis,
 
Vt = 3300/
3  = 1905 V 
 
Xs = 18/3 = 6 W 
 
Ia = 
800
1000
3
3300
0 707
¥
¥
¥ .
 = 198 A
 
IaXa = 198 ¥ 6 = 1188 V 
 
cos f = 0.707 or f = 45° (leading)
The phasor diagram is drawn in Fig. 8.43 from which Ef 
can be measured if the diagram is drawn to scale, or directly by 
calculating from the geometry of the phasor diagram. 
 
–MPQ = 45° 
 
MQ = PQ = 1188/
2  = 840 
 
Ef = OP = 
(
)
(
)
1905
840
840
2
2
+
+
 = 2871
or 
 4972 V (line) 
It may be seen that the motor is operating over-excited. 
EXAMPLE 8.7 A 1000 kW, 3-phase, star-connected, 3.3 kV, 24-pole, 50 Hz synchronous motor has a 
synchronous reactance of 3.24 W per phase; the resistance being negligible.
Ia
f = 45°
d
Vt
j Ia
s
X
M
f
Et
O
P
Q
Fig. 8.43
la
jl X
a s
Vt
Ef
jl X
a s
Ef
Vt
(a) As capacitor (variable)
(over-excited)
la
(b) As inductor (variable)
(under-excited)
Fig. 8.42 Synchronous condenser 

Synchronous Machines 
487
 (a) The motor is fed from inﬁnite bus-bars at 3.3 kV. Its ﬁeld excitation is adjusted to result in unity pf 
operation at rated load. Compute the maximum power and torque that the motor can deliver with its 
excitation remaining constant at this value. 
 (b) The motor is now fed from a 1200 kVA, 3-phase star-connected, 3.3 kV, 2-pole, 50 Hz synchronous 
generator with a synchronous reactance of 4.55 W per phase, the resistance being negligible. Compute 
the ﬁeld excitations of motor and generator when the set is operating at rated terminal voltage at unity 
pf and the motor is delivering full-load power. The ﬁeld excitations of both the machines remaining 
constant, the motor load is gradually raised. Compute the maximum power and torque that the motor 
can deliver. Also compute the terminal voltage when the motor is delivering maximum power. 
SOLUTION
 
(a) The operation of motor at inﬁnite bus-bars is shown in Fig. 8.44.
 
  
Vt = 3300/
3  = 1905 V
 
  
Ia = 1000
1000
3
3300
1
¥
¥
¥
 = 175 A
 
  
cos f = 1, f = 0º
 
 Taking the terminal voltage as reference, 
 
  
Vt  = 1905 –0º V
 
  
Ia  = 175 –0º A
 
 Then the excitation emf is computed as
 
  
Efm = 1905 –0° – j 175 –0º ¥ 3.24 
 
  
 = 1905 – j 567
 
 which gives 
Efm = 1987 V
 
 Excitation remaining ﬁxed, the maximum power delivered by the motor is
 
  
pe,max = Pm,max (gross)
 
  
 = 3 ¥ V E
X
t
f
sm
 = 3 ¥ 1905
1987
3 24
1000
¥
¥
.
 
  
 = 3505 kW (3-phase)
 
  
wsm = 120
50
2
24
60
¥
¥
¥
p  = 26.18 rad/s
 
 \ 
Tmax = 3505
1000
26 18
¥
.
 = 133.9 ¥ 103 N m
 
(b) Figure 8.45(a) shows the generator feeding the motor. At rated 
terminal voltage, unity pf, full-load operation
 
  
Vt  = 1905 –0°
 
  
Ia  = 175 –0°
 
 As calculated before 
Efm = 1905 V
 
 Now 
E fg  = 1905 –0° + j 175 –0° ¥ 4.55
 
  
 = 1905 + j 796
+
–
Efm
3.24 W
Ia
+
–
Vt
Fig. 8.44
3.24 W
Ia
4.55 W
+
–
Efm
+
–
Efg
+
–
Vt
Fig. 8.45(a)

488 Electric Machines
 
 or 
Efg = 2065 V
 
 The total series reactance X = Xsm + Xsg
 
  
 = 3.24 + 4.55 = 7.79 W
 
 The maximum power output delivered by the motor is
 
  
Pe,max = Pm,max (gross)
 
  
 = 3 ¥ E
E
X
fg
fm
¥
 
  
 = 3 ¥ 2065
1987
7 79
1000
¥
¥
.
 = 1580 kW (3-phase)
 
  
Tmax = 1580
1000
26 18
¥
.
 = 60.35 ¥ 103 Nm
 
 The phasor diagram under condition of maximum power output is drawn in Fig. 8.45(b). For convenience, 
choosing the motor excitation as reference,
 
 At maximum power
 
  
Output d = 90º
 
  
E fm  = 1987 –0º V
 
  
E fg  = 2065 –90º V
 
 Then 
Ia  = 
E
E
jX
fg
fm
-
 
  
 = 
2065
90
1987
0
7 79
–
∞-
– ∞
j .
 
  
j Ia Xsm = -
+
1987
2065
7 79
j
j .
 ¥ j 3.24 
 
  
 = – 826.4 + j 858.9
 
 Now 
Vt  = E fm  + j Ia Xsm
 
  
 = 1987 – 826.4 + j 858.9
 
  
 = 1160.6 + j 858.9
 
 or 
Vt = 1443.85 or 2500 V (line) 
 
 Remark The reduction in Pe,max in case (b) compared to case (a) is explained by the fact that Vt in this case is 
only 2500 V (line) compared to 3300 V in case (a). 
Consideration of Armature Resistance
Figures 8.46(a) and (b) show the circuit model of synchronous machine for generating motoring modes of 
operation with due consideration of armature resistance. Operational analysis can be carried out by means of 
the phasor equations for Figs 8.46(a) and (b) respectively or by the phasor diagrams of Figs 8.46(c) and (d). 
For the sake of clarity IaRa voltage drop is shown larger, i.e. out-of-proportion. (The armature resistance has 
to be accounted for in efﬁciency calculations). 
EXAMPLE 8.8 A synchronous generator feeds power to a power system. The generator and power 
system data are: 
Generator: 
100 MVA, 11 kV 
j Ia Xsg
j Ia
sm
X
Ia
Efm
Vt
Efg
Fig. 8.45(b)

Synchronous Machines 
489
Unsaturated synchronous reactance 
Xs = 1.3 pu 
Power System: Thevenin’s equivalent as seen from the generator terminals is
 
VTH = 1 pu, XTH = 0.24 pu (on generator base)
Generator open circuit voltage 11 kV at a ﬁeld current of If = 256 A 
 (a) Generator internal emf Ef is adjusted to 1 pu. What is the maximum power that the generator supplies 
to the power system?
 (b) The generator feeds power Pe = 1 pu to the power system at generator terminal voltage Vt = 1 pu.
 
 Calculate the power angle d of the generator and the corresponding ﬁeld current If.
 
 Plot Vt as the load is varied from a to 0.8 pu. Ef held constant at 1 pu. Use MATLAB.
 (c) The generator is ﬁtted with automatic voltage regulator, which is set for Vt = 1 pu. Load is now varied.
 
 Plot If versus Pe.Use MATLAB. 
SOLUTION 
The equivalent circuit model of the generator feeding the power system is drawn in Fig. 8.47(a). 
Bases 
(MVA)B = 100 
 
(kV)B = 11 
 
Power (MW)B = 100 
 
(a) Ef =1 pu, Pe = 1 pu, speciﬁed VTH = 1 pu
 
 Max. Power Supplied,
 
  
Pe,max = 
E V
X
X
f
s
th
TH
+
Ia
Ra
Xa
+
–
Ef
Vt
+
–
(a) Generating mode
=
+
+
R
j
E
V
I
I X
f
t
a
a
a
s
Ia
Ra
Xa
+
–
Ef
Vt
+
–
(a) Motoring mode
=
–
–
R
j
E
V
I
I X
f
t
a
a
a
s
O
f
Q
Vt
M
Ia
a
R
j
X
Ia
s
P
Ia
d
Ef
(d)
d
Ef
Vt
j
X
Ia
s
Ia
a
R
Ia
Q
M
O
(c)
f
Fig. 8.46 Synchronous machine operation; armature resistance considered (generating/motoring mode)
Ia
+
–
+
–
Ef
Vt
VTH
Xs
XTH
Fig. 8.47(a)

490 Electric Machines
 
 or 
Pe,max = 
1
1 3
0 24
.
.
+
 = 0.649 pu or 64.9 MW
 
(b)  
Pe = 1 pu, Vt = 1 pu; speciﬁed VTH = 1 pu
 
 For power transferred from generator terminals to load
 
  
Pe = V V
X
t
TH
TH
 sin d1
 
  
1 = 
1
0 24
.
 sin d1
 
  
d1 = sin–1 (0.24) = 13.9º
 
 Reference phasor VTH –0º
 
  
Vt  = e j13.9°
 
  
Ia  = V
V
j X
t -
TH
TH
 
  
 = (
)
.
.
e
j
j13 9
1
0 24
∞-
 = 1 + j 0.122 = 1.007 –7º pu 
 
 To ﬁnd Ef and If 
 
  
E f  = VTH  + j(Xs + XTH) Ia
 
  
 = (1 + j0) + j (1.54) (1 + j 0.122) = 1.74 e j62.2º
 
  
| E f | = 1.741 pu
 
  
 = 19.15 kV
 
  
d = 62.2∞
 
 Slope of air-gap line, 
V
I
oc
f  = 11
256  V/A
 
 For 
Ff = 19.15 kV
 
  
If = 256
11  ¥ 19.15
 
  
 = 445.7 A
 
(b)  
Ef = 1 pu (held constant), Pe varied
 
 Let 
E f  = Ef e jd
 
  
Pe = 
E V
X
X
f
s
TH
TH
+
 
  
Pe = 
1
1 54
.
e jd 
(i)
 
  
Ia  = E e
V
j X
X
f
j
s
d -
– ∞
+
TH
TH
0
(
)
 = e
j
jd -1
1 54
.
 
(ii) 
 
 We then get
 
  
Vt  = VTH  + j XTH Ia
 
  
Vt  = 1 + 0 24
1 54
.
.
(e jd – 1) 
(iii)
 
 Choose a value of Pe and ﬁnd d from Eq. (i). Substitute in Eq. (ii) and ﬁnd the magnitude Vt from Eq. (iii).
 
 Vt  versus Pe is plotted as shown in the Fig. 8.47(b) by Using MATLAB program given below.

Synchronous Machines 
491
 
  
Pe = 0 : 0.01 : 0.8 
 
  
Vt = 1 + (0.24 /1.54). * (1.54 * Pe – 1);
 
 Plot (Pe, Vt)
1.05
1
0.95
0.9
0.85
0.8
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Load
Vt
Fig. 8.47(b)
 
(c)  
V1 = 1 pu (controlled at this value)
 
 Pe varied 
 
  
Pe = V V
X
t
TH
TH
sin d1 = 
1
0 24
.
sin d1
 
  
Vt  = e jd1 
 
  
Ia  = e
j
jd1
1
0 24
-
.
 
  
E f  = VTH  + j 1.54 Ia
 
  
 = 1 + ( j 1.54) (
)
.
e
j
jd1
1
0 24
-
 
  
 = 1 + 1 54
0 24
.
.
(e jd 1 – 1)
 
  
I f  = 256
11 E f
 
  
 = 256
11 1
1 54
0 24 3
1
1
+
-
È
ÎÍ
˘
˚˙
.
.
(
)
jd

492 Electric Machines
 
 For If vs Pe plot MATLAB program is given as follows and its resultant plot is shown in the Fig. 8.47(c).
 
 MATLAB Program to Plot If vs Pe
 
 Pe=0: 0.01:0.8
 
 d1=asin(0.24*Pe)
 
 Ef=1+(1.54/0.24).*(exp(i*d1)-1)
 
 If=(256/11).*Ef
 
 plot(Pe,abs(If))
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Load
36
34
32
30
28
26
24
22
Excitation Current
Fig. 8.47(c)
EXAMPLE 8.9 A 4 pole, 50 Hz, 24 kV, 600 MVA synchronous generator with a synchronous reactance of 
1.8 pu is synchronized to a power system which can be represented by a Thevenin voltage of 24 kV in series 
with Thevenin reactance of 0.24 pu on generator base. The generator voltage regulator adjusts the ﬁeld 
current to maintain its terminal voltage and 24 kV independent of load.
 (a) The generator prime mover power is adjusted so that it feeds 400 MV.
 
(i) Draw the phasor diagram under this operating condition
 
(ii) Calculate the generator current and its power factor
 (b) Repeat part (a) when the generator feeds 600 MW
 
  
(MVA)B = 600, (kV)B = 24, (MW)B = 600
 
 The system diagram is drawn in Fig. 8.48(a).

Synchronous Machines 
493
SOLUTION
 
(a)  (i) As the generator is feeding power to the systems
 
  
 Vt  leads VTH  by angle d
 
  
Pe = V V
t
TH
0 24
.
 sin d
 
  
Pe = 400
600  = 2/3 pu, Vt = 1 pu, VTH = 1 pu
 
  
2
3  = 
1
0 24
.
sin d1 or d1 = 9.2º
 
 The phasor diagram is drawn in Fig. 4.48(b); d1 is not to scale 
 
(i) From the phasor-diagram geometry
 
  
0.24 Ia = 2 ¥ 1 sin d1/2 
 
 or 
Ia = 
2
0 24
.
 sin 9.2º/2 = 0.668 pu
 
  
(Ia)B = (
/ )
600 3
10
24
3
10
6
3
¥
¥
 = 14433 A
 
  
Ia = 0.668 ¥ 14433 = 9641 A
 
 Phase angle, 
f = d
2  = 4.6º lag
 
  
Power factor = cos 4.6º = 0.9968 
 
 Check 
Pe = 
3 kV Ia ¥ 10–3 cos f
 
  
 = 
3  ¥ 24 ¥ 9.641 ¥ 0.9968 = 399.5 ª 400 MW
 
 Observation 
Pe = V V
X
t
TH
TH
sin d1 = Vt Ia cos f (in pu)
 
  
E f  = Vt  + j Ia Xs
 
  
 = 1 –0º + j 0.668 –– 4.6º ¥ 1.8 = 1 + 1.2 –85.4º = 1.622 –47.4º
 
 or 
Ef = 1.622 or 38.9 kV, d2 = 47.4º
 
(b)  
Pe = 600 MW or Pe = 1 pu 
 
  
1 = 
1
0 24
.
sin d1, d 1 = 13.89º
 
  
Ia = 
2
0 24
.
sin d1/2 = 1 pu
 
 or 
Ia = 14433 ¥ 1 = 14433 A
 
 Phase angle, 
f = 13.89º/2 = 6.945º lag
 
  
Power factor = 0.993 lag
 
  
E f  = 1–0º + j ¥ 1–– 6.95º ¥ 1.8 = 1 + 1.8 –83 .05º = 2.157 –55.6º
 
  
Ef = 2.157 pu
 
 or 
Ef = 2.157 ¥ 24 = 31.77 kV, d2 = 55.6°
Ia
Ef
VTH
= 1 pu
1.8 pu
0.24 pu
Vt = 1 pu
+
–
+
–
+
–
Fig. 8.48(a)
Ef
1 pu
d1
I X
I
a
TH
a
= 0.24
Ia
VTH
I X
I
a
a
= 1.8
s
2
d1
f =
1 pu
Vt
Fig. 8.48(b)

494 Electric Machines
 
 Let us ﬁnd power factor from Ef to VTH 
 
  
Pe = 
E V
X
X
f
s
TH
TH
+
sin (d1 + d2) 
 
 or 
Pe = 2 157
1
1 8
0 24
.
.
.
¥
+
 sin (13.89º + 55.6º) = 0.99 pu
 
 It should be 1 pu. The difference is due to rounding off errors.
8.11 
EFFICIENCY OF SYNCHRONOUS MACHINES 
The losses in a synchronous machine have been dealt with elaborately in Section 8.4 while presenting OC and 
SC test. These are summarized below: 
OC Test 
As it is no load test, the open circuit loss POC comprises two losses. 
(i) Core loss, P(core, OC) (ii) windage and friction loss, Pwf. P(core, OC) is proportional to square of VOC 
and Pwf is constant (machine speed is synchronous)
Pwf gets separately out during OC test by reducing the ﬁeld current to zero, thereby making P(core) = 0.
It is to be noted that there is no armature ohmic loss in OC test.
SC Test 
As the test is conduced at very much reduced ﬁeld current and so P(core) is negligible. The components of 
the PSC loss are
 
1. Armature copper loss I2
a Ra (dc, hot) 
 
2. Stray load loss, Pst comprising stray core and armature teeth loss caused by leakage ﬂux and stray 
copper loss 
 
3. Windage and friction loss 
As Pwf is known from the OC test it can be subtracted from the total SC losses. The remaining loss is 
Psc(load) loss. The stray loss is found as 
 
Pst = PSC(load) – I2
a Ra (dc, hot)
Ra (dc) can be measured by a battery test and corrected for a temperature of 75°C. 
Synchronous machine losses from OC and SC tests as separated out above are 
 
P (core, OC)
 
Pwf constant 
 
I2
a Ra (dc, hot), computed
 
Pst
Loss Measurement 
OC and SC loss measurement can be carried out by measuring the mechanical input to the synchronous 
generator during the tests. For this purpose, the generator is run at synchronous speed by a dynamometer 
dc motor wherein the stator is free to rotate but is prevented by spring balances from the readings of which 

Synchronous Machines 
495
mechanical power input can be computed. The other convenient and accurate method is the torque meter 
which measures the prime mover shaft torque calibrated in torque units.
Where such facilities are not available, a dc shunt motor of rating somewhat more than estimated machine 
losses. Before coupling the dc motor to the synchronous machine the Swinburne’s test is performed on it at 
synchronous speed to determine the rotational loss of the motor and also its armature resistances is measured. 
The dc motor is now-coupled to the synchronous generator and the set driven at synchronous speed. The 
motor terminal voltage and armature current is measured during the test. 
The OC/SC loss is found as 
 
VtIa – I 2
a Ra – Prot = POC/PSC
The efﬁciency calculation are illustrated by a comprehensive example.
EXAMPLE 8.10 A 60 kVA, 400 V, 50 Hz synchronous generator is tested for by means OC and SC tests 
whose data are given below:
  
Field current 
OC voltage  
SC current 
SC loss
  
 
(line) 
(line) 
(3 phase)
 OC 
2.85 A 
400 V 
 
 
 SC (at 75°C)  
1.21 A  
–– 
108 A 
3.95 kW
The OC loss data are plotted in Fig. 8.49.
3.2
2.8
2.4
2.0
1.6
1.2
0.8
0.4
0
80
160
240
320
400
480
560
OC loss
VOC (line) (V)
Losses, kW
0
Fig. 8.49

496 Electric Machines
The armature (star connected) has dc resistance/phase at 25ºC of 0.075 W. The machine is operating at 
full-load 0.8 pf lagging at rated terminal voltage with a ﬁeld current of 3.1 A. The ﬁeld resistance is 110 W 
at 75ºC. 
Calculate:
 (a) Effective armature resistance and synchronous reactance (saturated). 
 (b) Full-load stray load loss.
 (c) Ratio of effective armature resistance/dc resistance.
 (d) Various category of losses at full-load (75ºC) 
 (e) Full-load efﬁciency at 75ºC
SOLUTION
 
(a) From SC test data
 
  
3 ¥ (108)2 ¥ Ra (eff ) = 3.95 ¥ 100
 
 or 
Ra (eff ) = 0.113 W 
 
 As SC current is linear function of ﬁeld current 
 
  
lSC (If = 2.85 A) = 108 ¥ 2.85/1.21 = 254 A 
 
  
Zs = (400/
3 )/254 = 0.91 
 
  
Xs = [(0.91)2 – (0.113)2]1/2 = 0.903 W (saturated) 
 
(b)  
Ra (dc) (75ºC) = 0.075 ¥ 
75
273
25
273
+
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = 0.088 W
 
  
Ia (rated) = (60 ¥ 1000)/(
3  ¥ 400) = 86.6 A 
 
  
SC loss at 86.6 A = 3.95 ¥ (86.6/108)2 = 2.54 kW 
 
  
3 I2
a Ra (dc) = 3 ¥ (86.6)2 ¥ 0.088 = 1.98 kW 
 
  
Stray load loss = 2.54 – 1.98 = 0.56 kW 
 
(c)  
Ra (eff )/Ra (dc) = 0.113/0.088 = 1.284
 
(d) From the OC loss curve of Fig. 8.49 
 
 Windage and friction loss (at zero excitation) = 0.9 kW 
 
 We will now ﬁnd excitation emf on full-load 
 
  
E f  = (400/
3 ) + 86.6 –– 36.9° ¥ j 0.903; Ignoring IaRa voltage drop
 
 or 
Ef = 285 V or 494 V (line)
 
 From the OC loss curve at 
VOC = Ef = 494 V
 
  
Core loss + windage and friction loss = 2.44 kW
 
  
Then core loss = 2.44 – 0.9 = 1.54 kW
 
  
Field copper loss (75°C) = (3.l)2 ¥ 110 = 1.06 kW
 
 Various losses on full load are summarised below:
 
  
Windage and friction loss = 0.9 kW
 
  
Core loss = 1.54 kW
 
  
Armature loss (in dc resistance) = 1.98 kW
 
  
Stray load loss = 0.56 kW
 
  
Field copper loss = 1.06 kW
 
  
Total loss = 6.04 kW

Synchronous Machines 
497
 
 Note: Losses in exciter* and ﬁeld rheostat are not accounted against the machine.
 
(e)  
Output = 60 ¥ 0.8 = 48 kW
 
  
Input = Output + losses = 48 + 6.04 = 54.04 kW 
 
 Efﬁciency, 
h = 1
6 04
48
6 04
-
+
.
.
 = 88.8% 
The ﬂow of active and reactive power in a synchronous link will now be studied. The approach will be 
analytical and armature resistance will be considered for generality of results. All quantities are per phase, 
star connection 
Figure 8.50(a) shows the schematic diagram of a synchronous generator wherein E f  leads Vt  by angle d. 
The synchronous impedance** is 
 
Zs  = Ra + jXs = Zs –q 
(8.61) 
as shown by the impedance triangle of Fig. 8.50(b) wherein
 
q = tan–1 X
R
s
a
 
(8.62a)
and 
a = 90º – q = tan–1 R
X
a
s
 
(8.62b)
The armature current in Fig. 8.50(a) can be expressed as 
 
Ia  = E
V
Z
f
t
s
– -
– ∞
–
d
q
0  
(8.63)
The complex power output is 
 
Se  = Pe + jQe = Vt –0º Ia*  
(8.64)
where
 
Pe = active power, W
 
Qe = reactive power, vars, positive for lagging pf and negative for leading pf
 
Power factor = cos tan–1 Q
P
Substituting for Ia from Eq. (8.63) in Eq. (8.64),
 
Pe + jQe = Vt –0 
E
V
Z
f
t
s
– -
–
–
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
d
q
0
*
 
 = 
V E
Z
t
f
s
–(q – d ) – V
Z
t
s
2
–q 
(8.65)
 
* In a practical arrangement ﬁeld will be supplied from a dc exciter (coupled to machine shaft) through a rheostat 
for adjusting the ﬁeld current This ﬁeld current (3.1 A) with ﬁeld resistance of 110 W requires voltage at ﬁeld 
terminal of 341 V. So exciter voltage must be 400 V. The difference is dropped in the ﬁeld rheostat.
 
** If a line is present as a part of the synchronous link, the line resistance and reactance will be included in Ra and 
Xs respectively.

498 Electric Machines
Equating the real and imaginary parts of Eq. (8.65), the following expressions for real and reactive power 
output are obtained as 
 
Pe(out) = – V
Z
t
s
2
cos q + V E
Z
t
f
s
cos (q – d ) 
(8.66a)
 
Qe(out) = – V
Z
t
s
2
sin q + 
V E
Z
t
f
s
sin (q – d ) 
(8.66b)
The net mechanical power input to the machine is given by
 
Pm (in) = P¢e = Re
¢
–
– -
–
–
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
S
E
E
V
Z
e
f
f
t
s
=
d
d
q
0
*
; Re = real of
 
 = 
E
Z
f
s
2
cos q – V E
Z
t
f
s
cos (d + q) 
(8.67)
It is the mechanical power converted to electric power. It is convenient to express the above results in terms 
of angle a deﬁned in the impedance triangle of Fig. 8.50(b) (Eq. 8.62b). Equations (8.66a), (8.66b) and (8.67) 
then modify as below 
 
Pe(out) = – V
Z
t
s
2
2 Ra + V E
Z
t
f
s
sin (d + a) 
(8.68a)
 
Qe(out) = – V
Z
t
s
2
2 Xs + V E
Z
t
f
s
cos (d + a) 
(8.68b)
 
Pm (in) = E
Z
f
s
2
2 Ra + V E
Z
t
f
s
sin (d – a) 
(8.69) 
 
Pm(in) – Pe (out) = I2
a Ra
as the only loss is in resistance. This result can be proved by substituting Pm (in) and Pe (out) from 
Eq. (8.67) and (8.68a) followed by several steps of manipulation and reference to the phasor diagram of 
Fig. 8.46. 
The real electrical power output, Pe, as per Eq. (8.68a) is plotted in Fig. 8.51 from which it is observed 
that its maximum value is
 
Pe(out)|max = – V R
Z
V E
Z
t
a
s
t
f
s
2
2
+
, at d + a = 90° 
(8.70) 
 
Ia
+
–
+
–
Vt –0∞
Ef –d
S
P
jQ
¢
¢
¢
e
e
e
=
+
S
P
jQ
e
e
e
=
+
Ra
Xs
Zs –q
 
Zs
q
a
Ra
Xs
 
Fig. 8.50(a) 
Fig. 8.50(b) 
Impedance triangle

Synchronous Machines 
499
occurring at d = q, which deﬁnes the limit of steady-state stability. The machine will fall out of step for angle 
d > q. Of course, q will be 90° if resistance is negligible in which case the stability limit will be at d = 90° as 
already explained in Sec. 8.9.
V R
t
a
s
2
2
Z
V E
t
f
s
Z
d
q
=
Motor
(Electrical power input)
q
a
+ 2
d
V E
t
f
s
Z
Pe
Pe (max)
Generator (Electrical
power output)
a
Fig. 8.51
At maximum electrical power output, the corresponding reactive power output is found from Eq. (8.68b) 
by substituting d = q
 
Q
at P
e
e
(
)|
(
), max
out
out
 = – V
Z
X
V E
Z
t
s
s
t
f
s
2
2
+
cos (d + a)
or  
Qe (out) = – V
Z
t
s
2
2 Xs ; as d + a = 90º 
As the Qe (out) is negative, it means the generator var output is leading i.e. the generator operates at 
leading pf. 
We can ﬁnd Qe (out)max from Eq. (8.68 b). It occurs at d + a = 180º or d = 180º – a. Its value is 
 
Qe (out)max = – V
Z
X
V E
Z
t
s
s
t
f
s
2
2
-
Corresponding 
 
Pe (out) = – V
Z
t
s
2
2 Ra ; insigniﬁcant value as Ra is very small 
As Qe(out)max is negative, the generator operates at very low, leading pf (close to 90º). 
These result have no signiﬁcance for generator operation as that not how a generator is operated.
It follows from Eq. (8.69) that 
 
Pm (in)|max = 
E R
Z
V E
Z
f
a
s
t
f
s
2
2
+
; at d = 90º + a = q + 2a 
(8.71)

500 Electric Machines
Since the angle d in Eq. (8.71) is more than q, the maximum mechanical power input (net) operation for a 
generator lies in the unstable region. 
Equations (8.68a), (8.68b), (8.69) and (8.70) simplify as below when armature resistance is neglected 
 
Pe (out) = 
V E
X
t
f
s
sin d 
(8.72a)
 
Qe (out) = – V
X
V E
X
t
s
t
f
s
2
+
cos d 
(8.72b)
 
Pm (in) = Pe (out) = 
V E
X
t
f
s
sin d 
(8.72c)
 
Pe (out)|max = Pm (in)|max = V E
X
t
f
s
; at d = 90º 
(8.72d)
For unity pf 
Qe (out) = – V
X
V E
X
t
s
t
f
s
2
+
cos d = 0
or 
Ef cos d = Vt ; normal excitation (generator)
For lagging pf 
Qe (out) > 0
or 
Ef cos d > Vt ; over-excited (generator)
For leading pf 
Qe (out) < 0
or 
Ef cos d < Vt ; under-excited (generator)
These results can be elloborated with the phasor diagram of Fig. 8.38(a)
Motor Operation
Figure 8.52 shows the operation of the synchronous machine as a motor*. Here the angle d by which Ef lags 
Vt is deﬁned as positive. Also the direction of power ﬂow is now into the machine while the mechanical power 
ﬂows out at the machine.
It then follows from Eqs (8.68a), (8.68b) and (8.69) by changing the sign of d that for motoring operation 
 
Pe (in) = – Pe (out)
 
 = V
Z
R
V E
Z
t
s
a
t
f
s
2
2
+
sin (d – a) 
(8.73a) 
 
Qe (in) = – Qe (out) 
 
 = V
Z
X
V E
Z
t
s
s
t
f
s
2
2
-
cos (d – a) 
(8.73b) 
 
Pm (out, gross) = –Pm (in) 
 
 = – E
Z
R
V E
Z
f
s
a
t
f
s
2
2
+
sin (d + a) 
(8.74) 
Ia
+
–
+
–
Vt –0
Et ––d
P
P
¢e
m
=
P
Q
e
e
,
Ra
Xs
Zs –q
Fig. 8.52
 
* The motoring operation can be analyzed by the generator power ﬂow equation except that d will have a negative 
sign and active and reactive powers will be negative of those obtained from Eqs (8.68a); (8.68b) and (8.69).

Synchronous Machines 
501
The maximum mechanical power output from Eq. (8.74) is given by
 
Pm (out)|max = – E
Z
R
V E
Z
f
s
a
t
f
s
2
2
+
 
(8.75)
It occurs at d = q which deﬁnes the limit of steady-state stability. It is easily seen from Eq. (8.73a) that the 
maximum electrical power input occurs at d = q + 2a which lies outside the stability limit. The reader should 
compare these results with that of the generator. 
 
Qe (in)max = V
Z
X
V E
Z
t
s
s
t
f
s
2
2
+
Occurs at 
(d – a) = 180º or d = 180º – a
Corresponding 
Pe (in) = V
Z
t
s
2
2 Ra : very small 
As Qe is positive and Pe is very small, the motor operate a low lagging pf (close to 90º). The motor acts 
as an inductor.
For the case of negligible resistance
 
Pe (in) = V E
X
t
f
s
sin d  
(8.76a) 
 
Qe (in) = V
X
V E
X
t
s
t
f
s
2
-
cos d 
(8.76b)
 
Pm (out) = Pe (in) = V E
X
t
f
s
sind  
(8.76c)
Unity pf
 
Qe = 0 ﬁ Ef cos d = Vt ; normal excitation (motor)
Lagging pf
 
Qe > 0 ﬁ Ef cos d < Vt ; under-excited (motor)
Leading pf
 
Qe < 0 ﬁ Ef cos d > Vt ; over-excited (motor)
These results can be veriﬁed from the phasor diagram of Fig. 8.38 (b).
Conditions for Power Factor, Ra Accounted
These could be arrived at by the sign Qe from Eq. (8.68 b) for generator and from Eq. (8.73 b) for motor. 
However, simple from of these conditions are found from the phasor diagrams of Fig. 8.46. These phasor 
diagrams are redrawn in Fig. 8.53(a) for generator with lagging power factor and in Fig. 8.53(b) for motor 
with leading power factor with some projections shown in dotted line. 
Generator 
 
AF = Ef cos d
 
AE = Vt  + IaRa cos f
From the phasor diagram geometry
 
AF > AE

502 Electric Machines
or 
Ef cos d > (Vt + IaRa cos f)
or 
Ef cos d – IaRa cos f > Vt : over-excited, lagging pf 
(i) 
Other two conditions are 
 
Ef cos d – IaRa cos f = Vt ; normal excitation, unity pf 
(ii)
 
Ef cos d – IaRa cos f < Vt : under-excitation, leading pf 
(iii)
Motor The pf condition that follow similarly from Fig. 8.52(b) are
 
Ef cos d + IaRa cos f > Vt ; over-excited, leading pf 
(i)
 
Ef cos d + IaRa cos f = Vt ; normal excitation, unity pf 
(ii)
 
Ef cos d + IaRa cos f < Vt ; under-excitation, lagging pf 
(iii)
(a) Generator, lagging pf
Ia
A
F
B
E
C
F
Ef
I X
a a
Vt
I R
a
a
d
f
(b) Motor, leading pf
A
d
f
D
F
E
B
C
Vt
Ia
IaRa
Ef
Fig. 8.53 Determination of power factor conditions
EXAMPLE 8.11 A 400 V, 3-phase, delta-connected synchronous motor has an excitation emf of 600 V and 
synchronous impedance per phase of 0.3 + j6 W. Calculate the net power output, efﬁciency, line current and 
power factor when the machine is developing maximum mechanical power (gross). Windage, friction and 
core losses may be assumed to be 2.4 kW.
SOLUTION 
Zs (eq. star) = 1
3 (0.3 + j6) = 0.1 + j2 = 2 –87.14° 

Synchronous Machines 
503
For maximum mechanical power output 
 
d = q = 87.14° (Ef lags Vt) 
 
Vt = 400/
3  = 230.9 V 
 
Ef = 600/
3  = 346.4 V 
From the phasor diagram of Fig. 8.54
 
IaZs = 
V
E
V E
t
f
t
f
2
2
2
+
-
cosq
 
IaZs = 
(
. )
(
. )
.
.
cos
.
230 9
346 4
2
230 9
346 4
87 14
2
2
+
-
¥
¥
¥
∞
 
 = 406.6 V
\ 
Ia = 203.3 A 
Further cos b = (
. )
(
. )
(
. )
.
.
230 9
406 6
346 4
2
230 9
406 6
2
2
2
+
-
¥
¥
or 
b = 58.31° 
From the geometry of the phasor diagram 
 
f = 90° – 58.31° – 2.86° = +28.8° 
 
pf = cos f = 0.876 lag 
 
Pe (in) = 230.9 ¥ 203.3 ¥ 0.876 = 41.12 kW 
 
I2
aRa = (203.3)2 ¥ 0.1 = 4.13 kW, (stray load loss is included as Ra is effective value) 
 
Pwf + Pcore = 2 4
3
.
 = 0.8 kW
 
Pm (out)|net = 41.12 – 4.13 – 0.8 = 36.19 kW or 108.57 kW (3-phase)
 
h = 36 59
41 12
.
.
 = 89%
Note: Field copper loss is not accounted for here.
EXAMPLE 8.12 A 3300 V, star-connected synchronous motor is operating at constant terminal voltage 
and constant excitation. Its synchronous impedance is 0.8 + j5 W. It operates at a power factor of
0.8 leading when drawing 800 kW from the mains. Find its power factor when the input is increased to 
1200 kW, excitation remaining constant.
SOLUTION 
Figure 8.55 gives the circuit model of the motor
 
Zs = 0.8 + j 5 = 5.06–81º ;  a = 9º
 
Vt = 3300/
3  = 1905 V
 
Pe (in) = 800/3 = 266.7 kW  (per phase)
 
cos f = 0.8 leading 
\ 
Qe (in) = –Pe (in) tan f = –200 kVAR
Note that Qe (in) is negative because the power factor is leading. 
From Eqs (8.73a) and (8.73b)
 
Pe (in) = V
Z
R
V E
Z
t
s
a
t
f
s
2
2
+
sin (d – a) 
(i)
 
Qe (in) = V
Z
X
E V
Z
t
s
s
f
t
s
2
2
-
cos (d – a) 
(ii)
Ef
Vt
Ia
Ia
s
X
Ia
s
Z
d
q
=
f
b
90° – 87.14° = 2.86° = a
q
Ia
a
R
Fig. 8.54
Ia
+
–
+
–
Vt –0
Ef ––d
P
P
¢e
m
=
P , Q
e
e
0.8 W
5 W
Fig. 8.55

504 Electric Machines
Substituting the values
 
266.7 ¥ 1000 = (
)
.
( .
)
(
)
.
1905
0 8
5 06
1905
5 06
2
2
¥
+
E f sin (d – a)
 
– 200 ¥ 1000 = (
)
( .
)
(
)
.
1905
5
5 06
1905
5 06
2
2
¥
-
E f cos (d – a)
These equations simplify as
 
Ef sin (d – a) = 407.2
 
Ef cos (d – a) = 2413.6 
from which Ef is obtained as 
 
Ef = 2447.7 V 
Under new operating conditions 
 
Pe (in) = 1200/3 = 400 kW 
Substituting in (i),
 
400 ¥ 1000 = (
)
.
( .
)
(
)
(
. )
.
1905
0 8
5 06
1905
2447 7
5 06
2
2
¥
+
¥
sin (d – a)
or 
sin (d – a) = 0.31 or d – a = 18º
Now Eq. (ii) is used to ﬁnd Qe for (d – a) = 18°
 
Qe = (
)
( .
)
.
.
1905
5
5 06
1905
2447 7
5 06
2
2
¥
-
¥
cos 18º
 
 = – 167.7 kVAR
 
Power factor = cos (tan–1Qe/Pe) 
 
 = cos (tan–1167.7/400) = 0.92 leading
EXAMPLE 8.13 A three phase 10 kVA, 400 V, 4-pole, 50 Hz star connected synchronous machine has 
synchronous reactance of 16 W and negligible resistance. The machine is operating as generator on 400 V 
bus-bars (assumed inﬁnite). 
 (a) Determine the excitation emf (phase) and torque angle when the machine is delivering rated kVA at 
0.8 pf lagging.
 (b) While supplying the same real power as in part (a), the machine excitation is raised by 20%. Find the 
stator current, power factor and torque angle.
 (c) With the ﬁeld current held constant as in part (a), the power (real) load is increased till the steady-
state power limit is reached. Calculate the maximum power and kVAR delivered and also the stator 
current and power factor. Draw the phasor diagram under these conditions. 
SOLUTION 
The circuit equivalent of the machine is drawn in Fig. 8.56. 
 
(a)  
Ia = 10
10
400
3
¥
3 ¥
 =14.43 A
 
 pf angle, 
f = cos–1 0.8 = 36.9° lag
 
  
Ia = 14.43 – – 36.9° 
 
  
Vt = 400
3
 = 231 V
Ia
+
–
+
–
Ef –d
Xs
Vt –0∞
jIa
s
X
+
–
Fig. 8.56

Synchronous Machines 
505
 
 From the circuit equivalent E f  = 231–0º + j 14.43 – – 36.9° ¥ 16 
 
  
 = 231 + 231–53.1° = 369.7 + j 184.7
 
 or 
E f  = 413.3–26.5° 
 
 Torque angle, 
d = 26.5°, Ef leads Vt (generating action)
 
(b) Power supplied (source), 
Pe = 10 ¥ 0.8 = 8 kW (3 phase) 
 
  
Ef (20% more) = 413.3 ¥ 1.2 = 496 V
 
  
Pe = E V
X
f
t
s
sin d
 
  
8
10
3
3
¥
 = 496
231
16
¥
sin d
 
 Torque angle, 
d = 21.9° 
 
 From the circuit equivalent
 
  
Ia  = E
V
j X
f
t
s
– -
– ∞
d
0  = 496
21 9
231
16
–
∞-
.
j
 
  
 = 229
185
16
+ j
j
 = 11.6 – j 14.3 = 18.4– – 50.9º  
 
  
Ia = 18.4 A, pf = cos 50.9° = 0.63 lagging 
 
(c) Ef = 413 V ; ﬁeld current same as in part (a)
 
  
Pe (max) = E V
X
f
t
s
; d = 90° 
 
  
 = 413
231
16
¥
 ¥ 10–3 = 5.96  kW/phase or 17.38 kW, 3-phase 
 
  
Ia  = 413 90
231
16
–
∞-
j
 = 25.8 + j 14.43 
 
  
 = 29.56 –29.2º A
 
  
Ia = 29.56 A, pf = cos 29.2° = 0.873 leading
 
 The phasor diagram is drawn in Fig. 8.57 
 
 kVAR delivered (negative) 
 
  
Q
P
e
e
 = tan – 29.2
 
 or 
Qe = 8 ¥ 0.559 = – 4.47 kVAR
EXAMPLE 8.14 The synchronous machine of Example 8.13 is acting as a motor. 
 (a) The motor carries a shaft load of 8 kW and its rotational loss is 0.5 kW. Its excitation emf is adjusted 
to 750 V (line). Calculate its armature current, power factor and power angle. Also calculate the 
developed and shaft torques. 
 (b) The motor is running at no load and its losses can be neglected. Calculate its armature and power 
factor at excitation emf (line) of (i) 600 V, and (ii) 300 V. Calculate also the kVAR drawn in each case.
 (c) The motor is on no load (losses to be ignored). What should be its excitation for it to draw a leading 
kVAR of 6? Draw the phasor diagram. 
Ef = 413 V
Ia = 29.56 A
Vt = 231 V
I X
a
s
Fig. 8.57

506 Electric Machines
SOLUTION
 
(a)  
Pm(gross) = 8 + 0.5 = 8.5 kW
 
  
Pe(in) = Pm(gross), as Ra = 0 
 
  
Ef = 750
3
 = 433 V, Vt = 231 V (data Example 8.13)
 
  
Pe(in) = E V
X
f
t
s
sin d
 
  
8 5
10
3
3
. ¥
 = 433
231
16
¥
sin d
 
  
d = 27º, Ef lags Vt 
 
  
E f  = 433– – 27º V, Vt  = 231–0º V
 
 In a motor current Ia will ﬂow in Fig. 8.56.
 
  
Ia  = 231 0
433
27
16
– ∞-
– -
∞
j
 = 15.6–38º A
 
  
Ia = 15.6 A, pf = cos 38.1º = 0.787 leading
 
 Synchronous speed, 
ns = 120
50
4
¥
 = 1500 rpm or 157.1 rad/s
 
  
Torque developed = 8 5
10
157 1
3
.
.
¥
 = 54.1 Nm
 
  
Shaft torque = 8
10
157 1
3
¥
.
 = 50.9 Nm
 
(b) Motor running no load, no loss
 
  
d = 0
 
(i)  
Ef  = 600
3
 = 346.4 V, Vt = 231 V
 
  
Ia  = 231
346 4
16
-
.
j
 = j 7.213 A leading Vt by 90º
 
 kVAR drawn 
3V I
t a*  = 3 ¥ 231 ¥ (– j 7.213) ¥ 10–3 
 
  
 = – j5 ; minus sign is for leading kVAR 
 
 The motor acts as a capacitor 
 
  
C = 7 213
231
1
2
50
.
¥
¥
p
 = 99.4 mF
 
(ii)  
Ef = 300/
3  = 173.2 V, Vt = 231 V
 
  
Ia  = 231 173 2
16
-
.
j
 = j 3.61 A lagging Vt by 90°
 
 kVA drawn 
3V I
t a*  = 3 ¥ 231 ¥ ( j 3.61) ¥ 10–3 
 
  
 = j 2.5; plus sign means for lagging kVA 
 
 The motor acts as inductor 
 
  
L = 231
2 5
1
2
50
.
◊
¥
p
 = 294.1 mH

Synchronous Machines 
507
 
(c)  
3V I
t a*  ¥ 10–3 = – j 6, Vt = 231
 
  
Ia*  = – j 2000
231  = – j 8.66
 
  
Ia  = j 8.66 A (leading Vt by 90º)
 
  
E f  = Vt  – j Ia Xs = 231 – j ( j 8.66) ¥ 16 = (231 + 138.6) –0° 
 
  
E f  = 369.6 –0ºV, Ef = 640 V (line) 
 
 The phasor diagram is drawn in Fig. 8.58.
Ia = 8.66 A
j
jI X
j
a s = – 138.6 V
Vt – ∞
0
Ef – ∞
0
0
–
Fig. 8.58 
Phasor diagram 
EXAMPLE 8.15 A 6-pole, 3-phase, 4 MVA, 50 Hz, star connected synchronous motor is supplied from 
6.6 kV bus-bars. It has a synchronous reactance of 4.8 W: 
 (a) The motor is operating at a power angle of 20º at rated current. Find the excitation emf if the power 
factor is lagging leading.
 (b) In part (a) ﬁnd the mechanical power developed and power factor in each case. 
SOLUTION 
Vt = 6 6
3
.
 = 3.81 kV
 
Ia (rated) = 4
10
3
6 6
3
¥
¥ .
 = 350 A
 
Ia (rated) Xs = 350 ¥ 4.8
 
 = 1680 V or 1.68 kV
 
(a) In the motor 
 
  
Ef lags Vt by d = 20° 
 
  
E f  = Vt –0º – j Ia Xs 
 
 The phasor diagram is drawn in Fig. 8.59.
 
 As IaXs = 1.68 kV constant, there are two possible solutions. 
From the geometry of triangle ABD
 
  
V 2
t + E2
f – 2 Vt Ef cos d = (IaXs)2 
 
 Substituting values 
 
  
(3.81)2 + E2
f  – 2 ¥ 3.81 Ef cos 20º = (1.68)2
 
 or 
E2
f – 7.16 Ef + 11.69 = 0 
 
 Its solutions are 
Ef 1 = 2.52 kV, Ef2 = 4.64 kV 
I X
a s = 1.68 kV
Vt = 3.81 kV
Ia
Ef1
Ia
A
D
B
q1
q2 = ?
d = 20°
Ef2
Fig. 8.59 
Phasor diagram

508 Electric Machines
 
 or 
Ef 1 = 4.36 kV (line), Ef 2 = 8.04 kV (line)
 
(b) Ef 1 = 2.52 kV ; motor under-excited case, pf lagging 
 
  
Pm = 3 ¥ 3 81
2 52
4 8
.
.
.
¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ sin 20° = 2.052  MW
 
  
3  ¥ 6.6 ¥ 350 cos q1 = 2.052 ¥ 103 
 
  
pf1 = cos q1 = 0.513 lagging 
 
  
Ef2 = 4.64 kV ; motor over-excited pf leading
 
  
Pm = 3 ¥ 3 81
4 64
4 8
.
.
.
¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ sin 20º = 3.779 MW
 
  
3  ¥ 6.6 ¥ 350 cos q2 = 3.779 ¥ 103 
 
  
pf 2 = cos q2 = 0.944 leading; q2 = 19.2° 
EXAMPLE 8.16 A synchronous motor is drawing 50 A from 400 V, three-phase supply at unity pf with a 
ﬁeld current of 0.9 A. The synchronous reactance of the motor is 1.3 W.
 (a) Find the power angle.
 (b) With the mechanical load remaining constant, ﬁnd the value of the ﬁeld current which would result in 
0.8 leading power factor. Assume linear magnetization. 
SOLUTION 
We proceed on per basis, star connection 
 
(a)  
Vt = 400
3  = 231–0 A
 
  
pf = unity, pf angle, q = 0°, Ia = 50–0° 
 
  
E f  = Vt  – j Ia Xs = 231 – j 50 ¥ 1.3 = 231 – j 65 = 240–– 15.7° V 
 
 Power angle, 
d = 15.7°, Ef lags Vt (motor)
 
(b) Mechanical load in part (a) 
 
  
Pm = Vt Ia cos q = 231 ¥ 50 ¥ 1 = 11550 W
 
 It remains constant. As there is no ohmic loss 
 
  
Pe = Pm = Vt Ia  cos q
 
  
11550 = 231 ¥ Ia ¥ 0.8 
 
 or 
Ia = 62.5 A 
 
  
IaXs = 62.5 ¥ 1.3 = 81.25 V 
 
  
q = cos–1 0.8 = 36.9° leading 
 
 The phasor diagram is drawn in Fig. 8.60.
 
  
E2
f  = (Vt cos q)2 + (Vt sin q + IaXs)2
 
  
 = (184.8)2 + (219.85)2
 
 or 
Ef = 287.2 V 
 
 On linear magnetization basis 
 
  
If = 0.9 ¥ 287 2
240
.
 = 1.077 A
q
d
I X
a a
Ia
Ef
Vt
Fig. 8.60

Synchronous Machines 
509
EXAMPLE 8.17 A 40 kVA, 600 V star-connected synchronous motor has armature effective resistance of 
0.8 W and synchronous reactance of 8 W It has stray loss of 2 kW.
The motor is operating at 600 V bus-bar while supplying a shaft load of 30 kW, it is drawing rated 
current at leading pf.
 (a) Calculate the motor efﬁciency. 
 (b) What is its excitation emf and power angle? 
 (c) With this excitation calculate the maximum power output (gross) and corresponding net output and 
the power angle. 
SOLUTION
 
(a) Shaft load, 
Pm(net) = 30 kW 
 
 Stray loss, 
Pst = 2 kW 
 
 Mechanical power developed, 
Pm (dev) = 30 + 2 = 32 kW
 
 Armature current, 
Ia = Ia(rated) = 40
10
3
600
3
¥
¥
 = 38.5 A
 
 Ohmic loss, 
3 I2
aRa = 3 ¥ (38.5)2 ¥ 0.8 ¥ 10–3 = 3.557 kW 
 
 Electrical power input, 
Pe(in) = 32 + 3.557 = 35.557 kW
 
 Efﬁciency, 
h = 1 – 2
3 557
35 557
+ .
.
 = 84.4%
 
(b)  
Pe(in) = 
3 VtIa cos q 
 
  
35.557 ¥ 103 = 
3 ¥ 600 ¥ 38.5 cos f 
 
  
pf, cos f = 0.889 leading 
 
  
f = 27.3° leading 
 
  
Ia  = 38.5–27.3° A 
 
 Terminal voltage, 
Vt  = 600
3 –0° = 346.4–0° V 
 
  
Zs  = 0.8 + j 8 = 8.04–84.3° W, q  = 84.3° 
 
 For a motor 
E f  = Vt  – I Z
a
a  
 
 Substituting values 
 
  
E f  = 346.4–0º – 38.5–27.3° ¥ 8.04–84.3° 
 
  
E f  = 346.4 – 309.54–111.6°
 
 or 
E f  = 460.4 – j 287.8° = 542.8– – 32° 
 
  
Ef = 542.8 V or 940 V line; over-excited
 
  
d = 32°, Ef lag Vt; motoring action 
 
 Phasor diagram method 
IaRa = 38.5 ¥ 0.8 = 30.8 V, IaXs = 38.5 ¥ 8 = 308 V
 
 The phasor diagram is drawn in Fig. 8.61. 
 
  
AD = Vt cos f – IaRa = 346.4 ¥ 0.889 – 30.8 = 277.1 V 
 
  
CD = Vt sin f + IaXa = 158.62 + 308 = 466.6 V 
 
  
Ef = 
(
)
(
)
AD
CD
2
2
+

510 Electric Machines
 
 Substituting value, we get
 
  
Ef = 542.7 V 
 
  
d + f = 59.3º
 
  
d = 59.3° – 27.3° = 32°
 
(c) For 
Ef = 542.8 V 
 
 Maximum power output (gross) 
 
 From Eq. (8.75)
 
  Pm (out, gross)|max = – E
Z
R
V E
Z
f
s
a
t
f
s
2
2
+
 
 Substituting values 
 
  
Pm (max) = – (
. )
( .
)
.
.
.
( .
)
542 8
8 04
0 8
346 4
542 8
8 04
2
2 ¥
+
¥
 
  
 = 197.40 kW
 
  
Pm(max, net)  = 197.4 – 2 = 195.4 kW
 
 Power angle, 
d = q = 84.3° 
The Example 8.17 is also solved by MATLAB. 
clc 
clear
j=sqrt(–1); 
Sop=40*l000; Vt=600; Ra=0.8; Xs=8; 
%% Part (a)
Pst=2*l000; Pm_net=30*1000; 
Pm_dev=Pst+Pm_net;
Ia=Sop/(sqrt(3)*Vt); 
Poh=3*Ia^2*Ra; 
Pin=Pm_dev+Poh;
Eff=(1–(Poh+Pst)/Pin)*100 
%% part (b)
cos_phi=Pin/(sqrt(3)*Vt*Ia); 
phi=acos(cos_phi); 
phi_deg=phi*180/pi 
Ia=Ia*(cos(phi)+sin(phi)*j); 
Vt=Vt/sqrt(3); 
Za=Ra+Xs*j; 
Ef=Vt–Ia*Za; 
Ef_line=Ef*sqrt(3) 
delta=angle(Ef)*180/pi
IaRa=abs(Ia)*Ra; 
IaXs=abs(Ia)*Xs; 
AD=Vt*cos(phi)–IaRa 
CD=Vt*sin(phi)+abs(Ia)*Xs
Ef_mag=(sqrt((abs(AD))^2+(abs(CD))^2))
%% part (c)
f
d
A
D
E
C
I X
a a
I R
a
a
Ia
I R
a
a
Vt
Ef
Fig. 8.61

Synchronous Machines 
511
Pm_out_gross=–((abs(Ef_mag))^2*Ra/(abs(Za))^2)+(Vt*abs(Ef_mag)/abs(Za))
power_angle=angle(Za)*180/pi 
Answer: 
Eff = 84.3750 
phi_deg = 27.2660 
Ef_line = 7.9692e+002 –4.9851e+002i 
delta = –32.0276 
AD = 277.1281 
CD = 466.6186
Ef_mag = 542.7088
Pm_out_gross = 1.9738e+004
power_angle = 84.2894
EXAMPLE 8.18 A 5 kVA, 400 V, 50 Hz synchronous generator having synchronous reactance of 25 W 
is driven by a dc motor and is delivering 4 kW, to a 400 V mains at 0.8 pf lagging. The ﬁeld current of the 
dc motor is gradually increased till it begins to act as a generator delivering power to d.c. mains, while 
the synchronous machine acts as a motor drawing 4 kW from the ac mains. What is the total change in the 
power angle of the synchronous machine in this process? The ﬁeld current of the synchronous machine is 
kept constant throughout. Neglect all losses. 
SOLUTION 
As generator 
 
Pe = 
3  ¥ 400 Ia ¥ 0.8 = 4 ¥ 103
or 
Ia = 7.22 A
 
f = cos–1 0.8 = 36.9° lag 
 
Ia  = 7.22– – 36.9° 
 
Vt  = 400
3 –0º = 231–0° V 
 
E f  = 231–0º + j 7.22– – 36.9° ¥ 25 = 231 + 180.5–53.1° 
 
 = 339.4 + j 144.3 = 368.8–23°
 
Ef = 368.6 V, d = + 23° Ef leads Vt 
As motor 
Excitation emf (constant), 
Ef = 368.8
 
Pe (in) = V E
X
t
f
s
sin d 
 
1
3  ¥ 4000 = 231
368 8
23
¥
.
sin d
 
d  = 23º, Ef lags Vt 
 
Total change in power angle = 23° + 23° = 46°
EXAMPLE 8.19 A three phase hydroelectric alternator is rated 110 MW, 0.8 pf lagging, 13.6 kV delta 
connected, 100 rpm. Determine the
 (a) number of poles

512 Electric Machines
 (b) MVA rating
 (c) prime mover rating if the full load generator efﬁciency is 97.1% ( ﬁeld loss left out)
 (d) output torque of the prime mover
SOLUTION
 
(a) P = 120 f
ns
 = 120
50
100
¥
 = 60
 
(b) (MVA)rating = 110
0 8.
 = 137.5
 
(c) (MW)turbine = 110
0 971
.
 = 113.3
 
(d) TPM (shaft) = 113.3 ¥ 1000 ¥ 
60
2
100
p ¥
 = 10.82 ¥ 102  Nm 
EXAMPLE 8.20 The per phase circuit equivalent of a synchronous generator feeding a synchronous 
motor through a transmission line is drawn in Fig. 8.62. 
Ia
+
–
Eg
0.8 pu
0.2 Pu
Vt
+
–
Em
0.8 pu
+
–
+
–
–
+
Fig. 8.62
Each machine is rated 10 kVA, 400 V, 50 Hz. The motor is driving a load of 8 kW. The ﬁeld currents of 
the two machines are so adjusted that the motor terminal voltage is 400 V and its pf is 0.8 leading.
 (a) Determine the magnitude of Eg and Em and their relative angle.
 (b) Minimum value of Em for the machine to remain in synchronism.
SOLUTION 
VBase = 400 V, (kVA)Base = 10, (MW)Base = 10
Motor load, 
Pm = 8
10  = 0.8 pu 
 
Vt = 1–0° pu
As there is no loss 
 
Pe (in) = Pm = 0.8 pu 
 
Pe (in) = Vt Ia cos q; pf = cos q = 0.8 leading
 
0.8 = 1 ¥ Ia ¥ 0.8
 
Ia = 1 pu  
Ia  = 1–36.9° 
Motor
 
Em  = 1–0 – j1–36.9° ¥ 0.8 = 1 + 0.8–– 53.1°
 
 = 1.48 – j 0.64 = 1.612––23.4° 

Synchronous Machines 
513
 
Em = 1.612 pu or 644.8 V (line) 
 
dm = –23.4° 
Generator
 
Eg = 1–0º +  j1–36.9°  ¥ (0.8 + 0.2)
 
 = 1 + 1–126.9° = 0.4 + j 0.8
 
 = 0.894–63.4º
 
Eg = 0.894 pu or 357.6 V (line), dg = 63.4° 
Relative angle, 
dgm = 63.4º + 23.4º = 86.8º
 
(a) Solution by phasor diagram
 
 The phasor diagram is drawn in Fig. 8.63. From the geometry of the diagram
 
  
AE = Vt cos q = 0.8
 
  
BE = Vt sin q = 0.6
 
  
BC = 1 ¥ 0.8 = 0.8
 
  
BD = 1 ¥ (0.8 + 0.2) = 1
 
  
CE = BC + BE = 0.8 + 0.6 = 1.4 
 
  
Em = 
(
)
(
)
AE
CE
2
2
+
 
  
 = 
( . )
( . )
0 8
1 4
2
2
+
 = 1.612 pu
 
  
tan (q + dm) = CE
AE  = 1 4
0 8
.
.
 = 1.75
 
  
q + dm = 60º, dm = 60º – 36.9º = 23.4º
 
  
DE = BD – BE = 1 – 0.6 = 0.4
 
  
Eg = 
(
)
(
)
AE
DE
2
2
+
 
  
 = 
( . )
( . )
0 8
0 4
2
2
+
 = 0.894 pu
 
  
tan (dg – q) = DE
AE  = 0 4
0 8
.
.
 = 0.5
 
  
dg – q = 26.6º dg = 63.5 º
 
(b)  
Pe = V E
t
m
0 8.
sin dm
 
 For maximum Em, 
dm = 90°, limit of stability 
 
  
Em (min) = 0 8
0 8
1
.
.
¥
 = 0.64 pu or 256 V
EXAMPLE 8.21 A 3.3 kV, 50 Hz star connected synchronous motor has a synchronous impedance of 
(0.8 + j 55) W. It is synchronized to 3.3 kV main from which it is drawing 750 kW at an excitation emf of
4.27 kV (line). Determine the armature current, power factor and power angle. Also ﬁnd the mechanical 
power developed. If the stray load loss is 30 kW, ﬁnd the efﬁciency. 
SOLUTION 
Converting to per phase 
 
Vt = 3 3
3
.
 = 1905 V, Ef = 4 27
3
.
 = 2465 V
dm
dg
q
A
Ia = 1 Pu
Vt = 1 Pu
Em
Eg D
E
B
C
IaXm
I
X
X
a
g
tl)
(
+
Fig. 8.63

514 Electric Machines
Power input to motor, 
Pi (in) = 750
3
 = 250 kW
 
Zs  = 0.8 + j 5.5 = 5.56–81.7° W
 
Zs = 5.56 W, q = 81.7°, a = 90º – 81.7° = 8.3°
As per Eq. (8.73 a)
 
Pe(in) = V
Z
R
V E
Z
t
s
a
t
f
s
2
2
+
sin (d – a)
 
250 ¥ 103 = (
)
( .
)
.
.
1905
5 56
0 8
1905
2465
5 56
2
2 ¥
+
¥
sin (d – 8.3º)
 
(
)
.
250
10
5 06
1905
3
¥
¥
 = 1905
5 56
.
 ¥ 0.89 + 2465 sin (d – 8.3º)
Power angle, 
d = 18.95° 
 
I Z
a
s  = Vt –0 – Ef –– d
or 
I Z
a
s  = 1905 – 2465 –– 18.95º
 
 = – 42.64 + j 800.5 
 
 = 907–118°
 
Ia  = 907 118
5 56 81 7
–
∞
–
∞
.
.
 = 1631–36.3º A
 
Ia = 163.1 A, pf = cos 36.3° = 0.806 leading 
 
E f  = 2465––18.95° or 4270––18.95° V (line) 
 
Ia  leads E f  by (18.95º + 36.3º) = 55.25°. The phasor diagram is drawn in Fig. 8.64(a). 
Mechanical power developed  
Pm (dev) = 3Ef Ia cos (d + f)
 
Pm (dev) = 
3  ¥ 4270 ¥ 163.1cos(55.25°) ¥ 10–3 = 687.5 kW 
 
Pst = 30 kW 
 
Pm(net) = 687.5 – 30 = 657.5 kW 
 
h = 657 5
750
.
 ¥ l 00 = 87.7% 
Alternative The phasor method 
We want to ﬁnd out current and pf. 
 
I Z
a
s  = V
E
t
f
-
 
(i)
We convert it to current form 
 
Ia  = V
Z
E
Z
t
s
f
s
-
 = I
I
t
e
-
 
Ia  = 1905
5 56
.
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ – –81.7º – 
2465
5 56
.
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ –?
 
Ia  = 342.6 – – 81.7º – 443–? 
(ii)
As power input is known 
 
Pe(in) = 
3  ¥ 3.3 Ia cos f = 750 kW
or  
Ia cos f = 131 A (real power component, in phase with Vt)
f
d
Ia
Vt
IaZs
Ef
Fig. 8.64(a)

Synchronous Machines 
515
The phasor diagram is drawn to scale in Fig. 8.64(b) in following steps.
 
OA = Ia cos f = 131 A along Vt (in phase)
Draw the locus of Ia phasor tip at 90° to Vt
Draw 
OB = It = 342.6 A lagging Vt by q = 81.7°
From B draw an arc of radius Ie = 443 A to locate point C on the current locus. We can now measure to scale
 
Ia = 162 A, f = 36°, cos f = 0.809 as found by the quantitative method.
f
q = 81.7
131A
Ie = 443 A
It = 342.6 A
A
B
Vt
C
O
Locus : tip Ia
Fig. 8.64(b)
EXAMPLE 8.22 The synchronous motor of Example 8.21 when excited to an emf of 4.27 kV (line) develops 
mechanical power of 600 kW. Find the armature current, power faction and power input. 
SOLUTION 
Pm(out, grass) relationship of Eq. (8.74) is reproduced below 
 
Pm (dev) = Pm(out, gross) = – E
Z
R
E V
Z
f
s
a
f
t
s
2
2
+
(d + a) 
(i)
On per phase basis 
Vt = 1905 V,  Ef = 2465 V
 
Zs  = 5.56 –81.7º; Zs = 5.56 W, q = 81.7°, a = 90º – q = 8.3º
 
Pm (dev) = 600
3
 = 200 kW
Substituting values in Eq. (i) 
 
200 ¥ l 03 = – (
)
( .
)
.
.
2465
5 56
0 8
2465
1905
5 56
2
2 ¥
+
¥
sin (d + a) 
 
200
10
5 56
2465
3
¥
¥ .
 = – 2465
5 56
.
 ¥ 0.8 + 1905 sin (d + a)
 
sin (d + a) = 0.423 
 
d + a = 25°, d = 25° – 8.3° = 16.7° 

516 Electric Machines
In a motor E f  lags Vt  by d. As per basic armature circuit equation 
 
E f  = V
I Z
t
a
s
-
or 
I Z
a
s = V
E
t
f
-
, Vt  reference phasor 
Substituting values 
 
I Z
a
s  = 1905–0° – 2465– –16.7° = – 456 + j 708.3
 
 = 842.4 –122° V 
 
Ia = 842 4 122 8
5 56 81 7
.
.
.
.
–
–
∞ = 151.5–41.l° A 
or 
Ia = 151.5 A, f = 41.1º, pf = 0.753 leading 
 
Pe(in) = 
3  ¥ 3.3 ¥ 151.5 ¥ 0.753 = 652 kW 
Check  
Ohmic loss = Pe(in) – Pm(dev)
 
 = 652 – 600 = 52 kW 
 
3 I 2
aRa = 3 ¥ (151.5) ¥ 0.8 = 55 kW 
The difference is due to rounding of small angles.
EXAMPLE 8.23 A 10 MV A, 13.8 kV, 50 Hz synchronous generator yields the following test data:
OC test 
If = 842 A at rated voltage
SC test 
If = 226 A at rated armature current
 (a) Calculate its pu adjusted synchronous reactance OC test revealed that the armature resistance per 
phase is 0. 75 W.
 (b) The generator is operating at power output of 8.75 MW, 0.9 pf lagging. Calculate 
 
(i) its ﬁeld current and reactive power output 
 
(ii) the rotor power angle and reactive power output if the ﬁeld current is adjusted to 842 A while the 
net shaft power supplied by the prime mover remains constant 
SOLUTION
 
(a)  
Xs(adjusted) = V
ISC
I
V
V
f
OC
rated
At
corresponding to
rated
/ 3
=
 
 Rated armature current 
 
  
3 Vrated Ia (rated) = 10 MVA
 
  
Ia(rated) = 10
10
3
13 8
3
¥
¥
.
 = 418.4 A 
 
 At 
If = 842 A, ISC = 418 4
226
.
 ¥ 842 = 1558.8 A
 
 The 
Xs (adjusted) = 13 8
10
3
1558 8
3
.
/
.
¥
 = 5 W
 
 Base values 
(MVA)B = 10, (kV)B = 13.8
 
  
Xs (pu) = 5 ¥ 
10
13 8 2
(
. )
 = 0.2625 
 
  
Ra = 0.75 W 

Synchronous Machines 
517
 
  
Zs  = 0.75 + j 5 = 5.06 –81.5° W
 
  
Zs = 5.06 W, q = 81.5°, a = 8.5°
 
(b) (i) 
pf = 0.9 lagging ; f = cos–1 0.9 = 25.84° 
 
  
Pe = 8.75 MW 
 
  
tan f = Q
P
e
e
 
  
Qe = Pe tan f = 8.75 tan 25.84°
 
  
 = 4.24 MVA, positive as it a lagging. 
 
 To ﬁnd the ﬁeld current, we need excitation emf. On per phase basis 
 
  
Vt = 13.8/
3  = 7968 V
 
  
Pe
3  = Vt Ia cos f 
 
  
8 75
106
.
¥
3
 = 7968 Ia
 ¥ 0.9
 
 or 
Ia = 406.7 A, 
Ia  = 406.7 – – 25.8° 
 
  
I Z
a
s  = 4067 ¥ 5.06 –81.5° – 25.8° 
 
  
 = 2058 –55.7° V 
 
 Generator equation 
E f  = V
I Z
t
a
s
+
 
 or 
E f  = 7968–0° + 2058–55.7°
 
  
 = 9128 + j1700 = 9285–10.5° V 
 
 The phasor diagram is drawn in Fig. 8.65  
 
  
Ef = 9285 or 16.04 kV (line) 
 
 From the modiﬁed air-gap line
 
  
If = 842
13 8.
 ¥ 16.04 = 978.7 A
 
 Ohmic loss
 
  
3 I2
a Ra = 3 ¥ (406.7)2 ¥ 0.75 
 
  
 = 0.372 MW 
 
  
Pm(in) = 8.75 + 0.372 = 9.122 MW
 
 (ii) From Eq. (8.69)
 
  
Pm(in) = 
E
Z
R
V E
Z
f
s
a
t
f
s
2
2
+
 sin (d – a) 
(i)
 
 Field current adjusted to 
 
  
If = 842 A
 
  
Ef = VOC = Vt (rated) = 7968 V = 7.968 kV
 
  
Pm(in) = 9.122/3 = 3.04 MW per phase
 
 Substituting in Eq. (i) 
 
  
3.04 = (
)
( .
)
( .
)
( .
)
7968
5 06
7 968
5 06
2
2
2
¥ 0.75 +
 sin (d – a)
 
  
118 = (
)
( .
)
7968
5 06
2
2 sin (d – a)
d
25°
55.7°
81.5°
Ia
Ef
I Z
a
s
Vt
Fig. 8.65 

518 Electric Machines
 
  
sin (d – a) = 0.094
 
  
d – a = 5.4°
 
  
d = 5.4° + 8.5° = 13.9°
 
 Reactive power output (Eq. 8.68b)
 
  
Q = -
+
V
Z
X
V E
Z
t
s
s
t
f
s
2
2
cos (d + a)
or 
  
Q = - ( .
)
( .
)
7 968
5 06
2
2 ¥ 5 + ( .
)
( .
)
7 968
5 06
2
cos (13.9° + 8.5°)
or 
  
Q = – 0.82 MVAR/phase
or 
  
Q = 2.46 MVAR, leading
The capability curve of the synchronous generator deﬁnes the bounds within which it can operate safely. 
Various bounds imposed on the machine are:
 
1. MVA-loading cannot exceed the generator rating. This limit is imposed by the stator heating.
 
2. MW-loading cannot exceed the turbine rating which is given by MV A (rat ing) ¥ pf* (rating).
 
3. The generator must operate a safe margin away from the steady-state stability limit (d = 90°). This can 
be laid down as a maximum allowable value of d.
 
4. The maximum ﬁeld current cannot exceed a speciﬁed value imposed by rotor heating. 
To draw the capability curve of the synchronous generator, its phasor diagram is used which is redrawn 
in Fig. 8.66, armature resistance is neglected. After multiplying voltage magnitude of each voltage phasor by 
(3 Vt/Xs), the phasor diagram is redrawn in Fig. 8.67. It is immediately recognized that OMN is the complex 
power triangle (in 3-phase values) wherein
 
OM = S(VA); NM = P(W); ON = Q(V AR) 
Obviously Q is positive for lagging power factor, f being the angle of OM from the P-axis. A mere scale 
change will convert these values to the units of MVA, MW and MVAR. 
 
d
f
Vt
Ef
f
X I
s a sin f
X I
s a cos f
X I
s a
O
N
O¢
M
Ia
 
3V E
X
t f
s
S
V I
= 3
t a
M
O¢
O
Q
N
f
P
V I cos
= 3
t a
f
Q
V I sin
= 3
t a
f
P
3V
X
t
s
2
d
 
Fig. 8.66 
Fig. 8.67
 
* The name plate rating of a synchronous generator speciﬁes this power factor. Of course, the machine can operate 
at any pf as long as MVA and MW do not exceed the ratings.

Synchronous Machines 
519
Constant S operation will lie on a circle centred at O and radius OM. Constant P operation will lie on a line 
parallel to 0¢Q -axis. Constant-excitation (Ff) operation will lie on a circle centred at O¢ of radius OM (3Vt Ef /
Xs). Constant-pf operation will lie on a radial line through O.
Now with speciﬁed upper limits of S, P and Ef (ﬁeld current), the boundaries of the capability curve can be 
drawn in Fig. 8.68. The limit on the left side is speciﬁed by d (max), the safe operating value from the point 
of view of transient stability.
P
P (max)
S (max)
Ef (max)
Steady-sate
stability limit
d (max)
3 V E IX
t f
s
O¢
O
N
Q
M
Ef = 0
d
f
3V
X
t
s
2
Lead
Lag
Fig. 8.68 Capability curve of synchronous generator
Since the minimum excitation operation corresponds to d = 90°, the machine operation is at a safe limit 
from Ef (min) by specifying d (max). 
The capability curve of the synchronous motor can be similarly drawn and will lie in the lower half of the 
PQ-plane and “lag” and “lead” regions will interchange.
EXAMPLE 8.24 Referring to the circuit model of Fig. 8.50(a) and neglecting armature resistance, derive 
an expression for real and reactive power outputs of a synchronous generator. Draw there from the loci of 
constant kVA (max) and constant ﬁeld current (max). Assume the machine to operate at constant (rated) 
terminal voltage.
SOLUTION 
The circuit model ignoring armature resistance is redrawn in Fig. 8.69(a).
 
Ia  = 
E
V
j X
f
t
s
–
-
– ∞
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
d
0
 
Se  = Pe + j Qe = Vt –0º Ia*
 
 = Vt
E
V
j X
f
t
s
–
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
d
*
 
 = V E
X
t
f
s
–(90º – d ) – V
X
t
s
2
–90º

520 Electric Machines
It then follows that
 
S2
e = (VtIa)2 = P2
e + Q2
e 
(i)
 
Pe = Re(Se ) = 
V E
X
t
f
s
sin d 
(ii)
 
Qe = Im(Se ) = – V
X
V E
X
t
s
t
f
s
2
+
cos d 
(iii)
 
Q
V
X
e
t
s
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
2
 = V E
X
t
f
s
cos d 
(iv) 
Ia
+
–
Ef –d
Xs
Vt –0∞
P Q
,
e
e
(a)
3V E
X
t f
s
3V
X
t
s
2
–
Ef (max) locus
kVA (max) locus
3Vt a
I
O
P
Q
(b)
Fig. 8.69
Squaring Eqs (ii) and (iv) and adding we get 
 
S2
e = P2
e + Q
V
X
e
t
s
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
2
2
 = 
V E
X
t
f
s
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
2
 
(v)
In terms of 3 phase quantities Eqs (i) and (v) become 
 
S2 = (3 VtIa)2 = P2 + Q2 
(vi) 
 
P2 + Q
V
X
t
s
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
3
2
2
 = 
3
2
V E
X
t
f
s
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  
(vii)
It is seen from Eq. (vi) that constant–S locus is a circle in PQ plane with radius 3VtIa centred at origin; while Eq. (vii) 
tells us that constant Ef -locus is a circle of radius 3V E
X
t
f
s
 centred at 
P
Q
V
X
t
s
=
=
0
2
,
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ . Of course Vt is assumed 
constant. These circles are drawn in Fig. 8.69(b) for kVA (max) and Ef (max). These two specify the armature heating 
limit (Ia (max)) and ﬁeld heating limit (Ef (max)) respectively as indicated in the ﬁgure. 

Synchronous Machines 
521
In a cylindrical rotor synchronous machine the ﬂux established by a mmf wave is independent of the spatial 
position of the wave axis with respect to the ﬁeld pole axis. On the other hand, in a salient-pole machine 
as shown in the cross-sectional view of Fig. 8.70 the permeance offered to a mmf wave is highest when it 
is aligned with the ﬁeld pole axis (called the direct-axis or d-axis) and is lowest when it is oriented at 90° 
to the ﬁeld pole axis (called the quadrature axis or q-axis). Though the ﬁeld winding in a salient-pole is 
of concentrated type, the B-wave produced by it is nearly sinusoidal because of the shaping of pole-shoes 
(the air-gap is least in the centre of the poles and progressively increases on moving away from the centre). 
Equivalently, the Ff wave can be imagined to be sinusoidally distributed and acting on a uniform air-gap. It 
can, therefore, be represented as space vector 

Ff . As the rotor rotates, 

Ff  is always oriented along the d-axis 
y
Far
ws
S
a¢
Axis of coil
(phase ‘ ’)
aa
a
¢
q-axis
Current (generator)
maximum positive
Axis of field ( -axis)
d
Ff
Fq
Fd
N
a
Æ
Æ
Æ
Æ
Fig. 8.70 Salient-pole synchronous machine
and is presented with the d-axis permeance. However in case of armature reaction the permeance presented 
to it is far higher when it is oriented along the d-axis than when it is oriented along the q-axis. 
Figure 8.70 shows the relative spatial location of 

Ff  and 

Far  at the time instant when current (generating) 
in phase a is maximum positive and is lagging E f  (excitation emf due to 

Ff ) by angle y (refer to Fig. 8.5(a)). 
As angle y varies, the permeance offered to 

Far’  the armature reaction mmf, varies because of a change in 
its spatial position relative to the d-axis. Consequently 

Far  produces Far  (armature reaction ﬂux/pole) whose 
magnitude varies with angle y (which has been seen earlier to be related to the load power factor). So long as 
the magnetic circuit is assumed linear (i.e. superposition holds), this difﬁculty can be overcome by dividing 

Far  into vectors 

Fd  along the d-axis and 

Fq  along the q-axis as shown by dotted lines in Fig. 8.70. 
Figure 8.71 shows the phasor diagram corresponding to the vector diagram of Fig. 8.70. Here the d-axis 
is along Ff  and 90° behind it is the q-axis along E f . The components of Ia  and Far  along d-and q-axis are 
shown in the ﬁgure from which it is easily observed, that Fd  is produced by Id ’ the d-axis component of Ia  
at 90° to E f  and Fq  is produced by Iq, the q-axis component of Ia, in phase with E f .

522 Electric Machines
Fd
Id
Fd
Far
Far
Fq
Fq
Iq
Ef
q-axis
d-axis
Ff
Ff
y
Ia
Fig. 8.71
Figure 8.72 shows the relative locations of Fd, Fq and ﬁeld poles and the B-waves produced by these. 
It is easily seen that the B-waves contain strong third-harmonic space waves. For reasons advanced in
Ch. 5, one can proceed with the analysis on the basis of space fundamentals of Bd and Bq while neglecting 
harmonics.*
Bq
Fq
Fd
Bd
ws
d-axis
q-axis
d-axis
90°
90°
N
S
Fig. 8.72
The ﬂux components/pole produced by the d- and q-axis components of armature reaction mmf are 
 
Fd = PdFd = PdKarId  (in phase with Id) 
(8.77)
and 
Fq = PqFq = PqKarIq  (in phase with Iq) 
(8.78) 
where 
Pd, Pq = permeance of pole-arc oriented along the d-axis/the q-axis (Pd > Pq).
 
Kar = constant of armature winding (see Eq. (5.44b))
The ﬂux phasors Fd  and Fq  are also drawn in Fig. 8.53. The resultant armature reaction ﬂux phasor 
Far  is now no longer in phase with Far  or Ia  because Pd > Pq in Eqs (8.77) and (8.78). In fact Far  lags or 
 
* Third-harmonic B-waves induce third-harmonic emfs in phases but no third-har monic voltage appears between 
lines. 

Synchronous Machines 
523
leads Ia  depending upon the relative magnitudes of the d-axis, q-axis permeances. 
The emfs induced by Fd and Fq are given by 
 
Ed = – jKeFd  
(8.79)
and 
Eq = – KeFq  
(8.80) 
where Ke = emf constant of armature winding (see Eq. (5.20))
 The resultant emf induced in the machine is then 
 
Er  = E
E
E
f
d
q
+
+
 
 = E f – jKeFd  – jKeFq
Substituting for Fd  and Fq  from Eqs (8.79) and (8.80),
 
Er  = E f  – jKePdKar Id  – jKePqKar Iq  
(8.81)
Let  
X ar
d = KePdKar = reactance equivalent of the d-axis component of armature reaction  
(8.82)
 
X ar
q = KePqKar = reactance equivalent of the q-axis component of armature reaction 
(8.83) 
Obviously 
 
X ar
d > X ar
q   (∵Pd > Pq) 
(8.84) 
It then follows** from Eq. (8.81) that 
 
E f  = Er  + jX ar
d Id  + jX ar
q Iq  
(8.85) 
Also for a realistic machine 
 
Er = Vt  + Ra Ia  + jXl Ia ;  
Ia  = I
I
d
q
+
 
(8.86) 
Combining Eqs (8.85) and (8.86) 
 
E f  = Vt  + Ra Ia  + j (X ar
d + Xl) Id  + j (X ar
q + Xl) Iq  
(8.87) 
Deﬁne 
X ar
d + Xl = Xd = d-axis synchronous reactance
 
X ar
q + Xl = Xq = q-axis synchronous reactance 
It is easily seen that 
Xd > Xq 
(8.88)
Equation (8.87) can now be written as 
 
E f = Vt  + Ra Ia  + jXdIa + jXq Iq  
(8.89) 
The phasor diagram depicting currents and voltages as per Eq. (8.89) is drawn in Fig. 8.73 in which d is 
the angle between the excitation emf Ef and the terminal voltage Vt.
Analysis of Phasor Diagram
In the phasor diagram of Fig. 8.73, various angles are
y is angle by which Ia  lags E f  taken as positive, leading is negative
 
 ** 
In a cylindrical-rotor machine 
 
  
Xd = Xq = Xar  (∵ Pd = Pq independent of spatial direction of Ear)
 
 so that 
E f  = Er  + jXar ( Id  + Iq)
 
  
 = Er + jXar Ia

524 Electric Machines
f is the phase angle, taken as positive when Ia  lags Vt , leading is negative
d is the power (or torque) angle taken as positive, generating E f  leads —t by d, motoring E f  lags Vt  by d
In the phasor diagram of Fig. 8.73, the angle y = f + d is not known for a given Vt, Ia and f. The 
location of Ef being unknown, Id and Iq cannot be 
found which are needed to draw the phasor diagram. 
This difﬁculty is overcome by establishing certain 
geometric relationships for the phasor diagrams 
which are drawn in Fig. 8.74(a) for the generating 
machine and in Fig. 8.74(b) for the motoring 
machine. 
In Fig. 8.74(a) AC is drawn at 90° to the current 
phasor Ia  and CB is drawn at 90° to E f. Now 
 
Id = Ia sin y 
(8.90)
 
Iq = Ia cos y 
(8.91) 
\ 
Ia = Iq/cos y 
(8.92)
In DABC
 
cos y = BC
AC  = I X
AC
q
q
or 
AC = 
I X
q
q
cosy  = Ia Xq 
(8.93)
It is easily seen that 
AB = Ia Xq sin y = IdXq 
and 
CD = BF = Id(Xd – Xq) 
(8.94)
The phasor E f  can then be obtained by extending OC by + CD for generation machine and – CD for 
motoring machine (Fig. 8.74b), where CD is given by Eq. (8.94). Let us indicate the phasor OC by 
¢
E f .
The general result in terms of magnitude is
 
E f  = E¢f  ± Id (Xd – Xq); + for generating machine, – for motoring machine 
(8.95)
where Id is taken as positive if it lags Iq (by 90º) as in Fig. 8.74(a) and (b) while Id is taken as negative if it 
leads Iq.
¢
E f  is obtained from equation
 
¢
E f  = V
I
t
a
+
Ra + j Ia Xq ; generation machine 
(8.96(a))
or 
¢
E f  = V
I
t
a
-
Ra – j Ia Xq ; motoring machine 
(8.96(b))
The phasor diagram for leading power factor generating and motoring machine with Ra = 0 based on 
Eqs (8.95) and (8.96) are drawn in Fig. 8.75(a) and (b) where Vt is taken as the reference.
It may be notes that as E f  is extension of 
¢
E f  in Eq. (8.81) the angle between 
¢
E f  and Vt  is the power 
angle d.
In Eq. (8.95), we need sign of Id. This equation can be written separately where we do not need to attach 
sign to Id. Thus
Iq
y f
d
Ia
a
R
Ia
Id
Ef
Vt
j X
Id d
j X
Iq q
Fig. 8.73

Synchronous Machines 
525
j X
Id d
Ia q
X
j X
Iq q
I X – X
d
d
q
(
)
Vt
Id
a
R
Ia
Iq
Id
y d
f
O
C
D
B
A
Iq
a
R
Ef
y
I X
d d
I X
d q
Ia
a
R
D
V cos
t
d
I R
q
a
(a) Generating, lagging pf
d
f y
Ia
a
R
j X
Iq q
Ia q
X
I X – X
d
d
q
(
)
O
Iq
Ia
Id
Ef
D
C
y
D
F
B
A
Vt
I R
a
a
(b) Motoring, lagging pf
j X
Id d
I X
d q
F
Fig. 8.74 Geometric relationships for phasor diagram of salient-pole machine
Generator 
Ef = E¢f + Id (Xd – Xq) lagging pf, upf
and 
Ef = E¢f – Id (Xd – Xq) leading pf
Motor 
 
Ef = E¢f + Id (Xd – Xq) lagging pf
and 
Ef = E¢f – Id (Xd – Xq) leading pf, upf
The phasor diagram for unity pf are drawn in Fig. 8.75(a) and (b) for generator and motor respectively.

526 Electric Machines
f
Ia
Id
d
E¢f
I
X
X
d
d
q
(
–
)
Ef
Iq
Vt
90°
jI X
a q
 Fig. 8.75(a) Generator leading pf; Id is negative 
Fig. 8.75(b) 
Motor leading pf; Id is negative
d
Id
I X
X
d
d
q
(
–
)
Iq
E¢f
Ef
j X
Iq q
j X
Ia d
(a) Generator, upf
j X
Ia q
Ia
(a) Motor, upf
d
Ia
Iq
Id
j X
Id d
j X
Iq q
I X
X
d
d
q
(
–
)
j X
Ia q
E¢f
Ef
Vt
Vb
Fig. 8.76
EXAMPLE 8.25 A synchronous generator has Xd (direct-axis synchronous reactance) = 0.8 pu and Xq 
(quadrature-axis synchronous reactance) = 0.5 pu. It is supplying full-load at rated voltage at 0.8 lagging 
pf. Draw the phasor diagram and calculate the excitation emf.
Once again calculate excitation emf by ignoring Xq and assuming Xs (synchronous reactance like in a 
round rotor machine) = Xd. Comment upon the results. Also justify the use of this approximation from the 
phasor diagram.
Also calculate angle d (power angle) with and without Xq.
SOLUTION 
The phasor diagram in terms of symbols is drawn in Fig. 8.77. 
 
Vt  = 1 –0° pu, Ia = 1 pu 0.8 lagging,
 
Ia  = 1 – – 36.9° pu 
 
¢
E f  = Vt  + j Ia Xq
 
 = 1 + j1 – – 36.9º ¥ 0.5 = 1 + 0.5–53.1º
 
 = 1.30 + j 0.40 = 1.30 – 17.1º pu 
I
X
X
d
d
q
(
–
)
j X
Ia q
Ef
Ia
d
f
E¢f
–
Vt
–

Synchronous Machines 
527
It then follows that 
 
d = 17.1º 
 
y = f + d = 36.9° + 17.1° = 54° 
 
Id = Ia sin y = 1 ¥ sin 54° = 0.81 
 
CD = Id (Xd – Xq) 
 
 = 0.81 (0.8 – 0.5) = 0.243 
 
E f  = 
¢
E f  + CD = 1.36 + 0.243 = 1.60 pu 
Now neglecting Xq and assuming Xs = Xd the phasor diagram is indicated in dotted lines in Fig. 8.77. Here 
 
¢¢
E f  = Vt  + j Ia Xd 
y
f
d d¢
Id
Ia
Vt
Iq
jIa
d
q
(X – X )
E¢f
E¢¢f
D
Ef
C
jId
d
q
(X – X )
j X
Ia q
90°
Fig. 8.77 
 
 = 1 + j 1 – – 36.9º ¥ 0.8 
 
 = 1.48 + j 0.64 = 1.61 – 23.4º
 
E¢¢f = 1.61 pu, d ¢= 23.4º 
The error caused in excitation emf by the approximation is 1/160 or 0.625% which is negligible. It is also observed 
from the phasor diagram that Ef < E¢¢f. 
However error in d is signiﬁcant; 23.4° in place of 17.1º. 
Some Useful Relationships
Instead of the above approach relationships given below  derived from the phasor diagrams of Figs 8.74(a) 
and (b) can be used for computing power angle and excitation emf.
In DODC in Figs 8.74(a) and (b) 
 
tan y = V
I X
V
I R
t
a
q
t
a
a
sin
cos
f
f
+
+
 (generating) 
(8.97a) 

528 Electric Machines
and 
tan y = 
V
I X
V
I R
t
a
q
t
a
a
sin
cos
f
f
-
-
 (motoring) 
(8.97b)
from which angle y can be determined. Then
 
d = y – f (generating) 
(8.98a) 
 
 = f – y (motoring) 
(8.98b)
The magnitude of excitation emf obtained from the phasor diagrams is given by 
 
Ef = Vt cos d + IqRa+ IdXd (generating) 
(8.99a) 
 
Ef = Vt cos d – IqRa– IdXd (motoring) 
(8.99b)
Note: Since f is taken positive for lagging pf, it will he negative for leading pf.
Power-angle Characteristic
Figure 8.78 shows the one-line diagram of a salient-
pole synchronous machine connected to inﬁnite bus-
bars of voltage Vb through a line of series reactance 
Xext. (per phase). The total d- and q-axis reactances are 
then 
 
Xd = Xdg + Xe
 
Xq = Xqg + Xe 
The resistances of the machine armature and line are 
assumed negligible. 
Figure 8.79 gives the phasor diagram when the 
machine is generating. It is easy to see from this ﬁgure 
that the real power delivered to the bus-bars is 
 
Pe = IdVb sin d + IqVb cos d (8.100)
Now 
Id = E
V
X
f
b
d
-
cosd  
(8.101) 
and 
Iq = V
X
b
q
sind  
(8.102)
Substituting in Eq. (8.100), 
 
Pe = E V
X
V
X
X
X X
f
b
d
b
d
q
d
q
sin
sin
d
d
+
-
2
2
2
Reluctance power





 
(8.103) 
Equation (8.103) gives the expression for the electrical power output of a salient-pole generator. The same 
expression would give the electrical power input of a motoring machine wherein Ef lags Vb by angle d. 
The second term in Eq. (8.103) compared to Eq. (8.42) of a cylindrical motor arises on account of saliency 
and is known as the reluctance power (torque). The reluctance power varies as sin 2d with a maximum value 
at d = 45°. It is to be further observed that this term is independent of ﬁeld excitation and would be present 
Ia
Xe
Vt
Xdg
q
,X g
Ef
Infinite bus-bars
Vb
Fig. 8.78
Id
d
Iq
Ia
Vt
Ef
Vb
j X
Ia e
j X
Id a
j X
Iq q
Fig. 8.79

Synchronous Machines 
529
even if the ﬁeld is unexcited* (also refer to Sec. 4.3). A synchronous motor with salient poles but no ﬁeld 
winding is known as the reluctance motor. It is used for low-power, constant-speed applications where special 
arrangements for dc excitation would be cumbersome. 
The power angle plots of both the terms of Eq. (8.103) along with the form of the resultant power-angle 
curve are shown in Fig. 8.80. It is immediately observed that Pe,max = Ppull-out now occurs at d < 90° (usually 
at d about 70°) and further its magnitude is larger than that for a cylindrical machine with same Vb, Ef and
Xs = Xd on account of the reluctance power term.
Gen
Mot
– 180°
– 90°
45°
180°
d
Reluctance power
Pe –
plot
d
Pe
Pe, max
90°
Fig. 8.80 Power-angle characteristic of salient-pole synchronous machine 
EXAMPLE 8.26 A 1500 kW, 3-phase, star-connected, 3.3 kV synchronous motor has reactances of Xd = 
4.01 and Xq = 2.88 W/phase. All losses may be neglected. 
Calculate the excitation emf when the motor is supplying rated load at unity pf. Also calculate the 
maximum mechanical power that the motor can supply with excitation held ﬁxed at this value. 
SOLUTION 
Using trignometric identity cos 2d = 2cos2 d – 1 the solution gives
 
Vt = 3300/
3  = 1905 V 
 
cos f = 1, sin f = 0, f = 0º
 
Ia = 1500
1000
3
3300
1
¥
¥
¥
 = 262.4 A
 
* Which means that a salient pole synchronous machine can stay synchronized to mains with its ﬁeld unexcited so 
long as the electrical loading does not exceed
V 2
b
X
X
X X
d
q
d
q
-
2

530 Electric Machines
From Eq. (8.97b) 
 
tan y = 1905
0
262 4
2 88
1905
¥
-
¥
.
.
 = – 0 397
 
y = – 21.6° 
 
d = f – y = 0 – (–21.6°) = 21.6° 
 
Id = Ia sin y = 262.4 sin (– 21.6°) = – 96.6 A 
 
Iq = Ia cos y = 262.4 cos (– 21.6°) = 244 A 
From Eq. (8.99b) 
 
Ef = Vt cos d – IdXd
 
 = 1905 cos 21.6° + 96.6 ¥ 4.01 
 
 = 2158.6 V or 3738.6 V (line) 
Alternative The phasor diagram is drawn in Fig. 8.81.
 
Vt = 1905 V, Ia = 262.4 A
 
IaXq = 262.4 ¥ 2.88 = 755.7 V
 
E¢f = [(1905)2 +  (755.7)2]1/2 = 2049.4 V
Id  leads Iq, so in a motor from Eq. (8.95)
 
Id = – Ia sin d = –96.6 A, Id leads Iq
 
Id (Xd – Xq) = –96.6 (4.01 – 2.88) = –109 V
Therefore 
Ef = E¢f  – Id (Xd – Xq) = 2049.4 + 109.2 
or 
Ef = 2158.6 or 3738.7 V (line)
EXAMPLE 8.27 A synchronous generator is connected to an inﬁnite bus of voltage 1 pu through an 
external reactance. The reactance values are as under.  
Saturated reactance of generator 
 
Xd = 1.48 pu Xq = 1.24 pu 
External reactance 
Xe = 0.1 pu 
The generator is feeding rated MVA to the bus at 0.9 pf lagging measured at generator terminals.
 (a) Draw the complete phasor diagram showing bus voltage (Vb), generator terminal voltage (Vt), 
armature current (Ia) and power angle d with respect to bus voltage.
 (b) Calculate the generator terminal voltage, excitation emf and power angle. 
SOLUTION 
The one-line diagram of the system is drawn in Fig. 8.82(a)
 
Xd(total) = Xdt = Xd + Xe = 1.48 + 0.1 = 1.58 pu
 
Xq(total) = Xqt = Xq + Xe = 1.24 + 0.1 = 1.34 pu 
 
(a) The phasor diagram is drawn in Fig. 8.82(b).
 
  
f  = pf angle between Vt  and Ia , generator terminals
 
  
y = angle between E f  and Ia
 
  
d = power angle between E f  and Vb . E f  leads Vb  as generator is feeding bus 
 
  
f¢ = pf angle between Vb  and Ia  at bus 
 
(b)  
MVA (fed to bus) = 1 pu
d
Id
Ia
Iq
Vt
j X
Ia q
E¢f
Ef
Fig. 8.81

Synchronous Machines 
531
Ia
Xe
Vt
Xd
q
,X
Ef
bus
Vb
+
–
 
y
f
f¢
d
j X
Ia e
O
A
D
Iq
E¢f
Vt
j X
Iq qt
j X
Id dt
Id
Ia
Ef
Vb
 
Fig. 8.82(a) The system  
Fig. 8.82(b) 
Phasor diagram sketch (not to scale)
 
 Bus voltage 
Vb = 1 pu 
 
  
Current fed to bus = generator current, Ia = 1 pu
 
  
Generator pf = 0.9 lagging 
 
  
f = cos–1 0.9 = 25.8° (Ia lags Vt)
 
  
IaXe = 1 ¥ 0.1 = 0.1 pu
 
 Part of the phasor diagram in is sketched in Fig. 8.83 (not to scale)
 
 Form the geometry of the phase diagram 
 
  
[(Vt cos f) + (Vt sin f – 0.1)2]1/2 = Vb = 1
 
  
Vb = 1, f = 25.8°
 
 Solving we ﬁnd,
 
  
Vt = 1.04 V, f¢ = 20°, 
 
 Second solution 
 
  
Vt = 0.796 < Vb = 1 is rejected 
 
  
Vt = 1.04 pu
 
  
f¢ = 20° (Ia lags Vb) 
 
  
tan y = V
I X
V
b
a
qt
t
sin
cos
¢ +
¢
f
f
 = sin
.
cos
20
1
1 34
20
∞+ ¥
∞
, Eq. (8.97(a))
f = 25.8°
f¢
Vt
Vb = 1
Ia X = 0.1
e
Ia
D
A
E
O
Fig. 8.83
 
 or 
tan y = 1.79   y = 60.8°
 
  
y = d + f¢, d = 60.8° – 20° = 40.8°
 
  
Ef = Vt cos d + Id Xd ; Eq. (8.99(a)) 
 
  
Id = Ia siny = 1 ¥ sin 60.8° = 0.873 

532 Electric Machines
 
 Substituting values,
 
  
Ef = 2.136 pu 
 
 Alternative method 
 
  
 Taking Vb  as reference 
 
  
Ia  = l –– 20°
 
  
j Ia Xqt = j1 ––20° ¥ 1.34 = 1.34 –70°
 
  
¢
E f  = Vb  + j Ia  Xqt = 1 + 1.34 –70° 
 
  
 = 1.458 + j 1.259 = 1.926–40.8°
 
  
E¢f = 1.926    d = 40.8° 
 
  
y = 40.8° + 20° = 60.8° 
 
  
Id = 1 sin y = sin 60.8° = 0.873
 
 Id lags Iq, so Id is positive
 
 Thus 
Ef = E¢f + Id (Xd – Xq) = 1.926 + 0.873 (1.58 – 1.34)
 
  
Ef = 2.135 pu
EXAMPLE 8.28 A salient pole synchronous motor having Xd = 1.02 pu and Xq = 0.68 pu is synchronized 
to inﬁnite bus-bars. Its excitation is gradually reduced to zero. What maximum pu power it can deliver 
without losing synchronization?
Under this operating condition calculate the pu armature current and pu reactive power it draws from 
the bus-bars. There are no losses.
SOLUTION 
In a motor Ef lags Vt by angle d and Ia is in phase with Ef. Therefore Iq lagsVt by d. In the condition under 
consideration Ef is zero. Accordingly the phasor diagram of the motor is drawn in Fig. 8.84. 
As there is no loss 
 
Pm(out) = Pe(in)
From the phasor diagram 
 
Pm = IqVt cos d – Id Vt sin d 
(i) 
where IdVt sind is negative as Id is in phase opposition to Vt sin d.
Now 
Vt cos d = Id Xd or Id = V
X
t
d
cosd  
(ii)
and 
Vt sin d = IqXq or Iq = V
X
t
q
sind  
(iii)
Substituting these values in Eq.(i), we have 
 
Pm = V
X
V
X
t
q
t
d
2
2
sin
cos
sin
cos
d
d
d
d
-
Simplifying 
Pm = V2
t 
X
X
X X
d
q
d
q
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
2
sin 2d 
(iv)
This is the reluctance power of a motor. 
The above result follows from Eq. (8.103) by reversing the sign of d and Pe. 
Pm is maximum at 2d = 90° or d = 45° and is given by 
Iq
Ia
Vt
IqXq
IdXd
f
d
Id
Fig. 8.84 Phasor diagram motor with Ef = 0; 
not to scale 

Synchronous Machines 
533
 
Pm(max) = V 2
t 
X
X
X X
d
q
d
q
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
2
 
(v)
Substituting values 
 
Pm (max) = 12 ¥ 
1 02
0 68
2
1 02
0 68
.
.
.
.
-
¥
¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = 0.245 pu 
(v) 
We ﬁnd that the reluctance power is much less than one pu, i.e, the motor rating 
Armature current 
 
Id = V
X
t
d
cosd  = 1
45
1 02
¥
∞
cos
.
 = 0.698 pu
 
Iq = V
X
t
q
cosd  = 1
45
0 68
¥
∞
sin
.
 = 1.034 pu
Observe that Iq > Ia 
Ia = 
I
I
d
q
2
2
+
 = 
( .
)
( .
)
0 693
1 02
2
2
+
 
 = 1.233 pu
Reactive power From the phasor diagram
 
Qe = IdVt cosd + IqVt sind 
(vi)
Substituting values 
Qe = 0.693 ¥ 1 ¥ cos 45° + 1.034 ¥ 1 ¥ sin 45°
 
 = 1.221 pu lagging VARs
 
Power factor = cos tan–1 1 221
0 245
.
.
 = 0.197 lagging
Observation A synchronous motor when used as a reluctance motor (no ﬁeld excitation) operates at a low lagging pf as 
it has to provide its own excitation. 
EXAMPLE 8.29 A 300 MVA, 22 kV, three phase salient-pole generator is operating at 250 MW power 
output at a lagging power factor of 0.85 synchronized to 22 kV bus. The generator reactances are Xd = 1.93 
and Xq = 1.16 in pu. The generator gives rated open circuit voltage at a ﬁeld current of 338 A. 
Calculate the power angle, excitation emf and the ﬁeld current. 
SOLUTION 
(MVA)B = 300 (kV)B = 22
 
Power output, Pe = 250
300  = 0.833 pu
 
Pe = Vt ¥ Ia cosf
 
0.833 = 1 ¥ Ia ¥ 0.85
 
Ia = 0.98, f = 31.8° lag 
 
Ia  = 0.98–– 31.8°
 
¢
E f  = V
jI
t
a
+
Xq
 
 = 1 + j 0.98––31.8° ¥ 1.16
 
 = 1 + 1.1368–58.2° 
 
¢
E f  = 1.91, d = 28.4º 
 
y = f + d = 31.8° + 28.4° = 60.2°
 
Id = Ia siny = 0.98 sin 60.2° = 0.85 

534 Electric Machines
 
Id (Xd – Xq) = 0.85 (1.93 – 1.16) = 0.654
 
Ef = E¢f + Id (Xd – Xq) = 1.91 + 0.654 = 2.564 pu or 56.4 kV 
The reader is advised to sketch the phasor diagram. 
From the modiﬁed air-gap line 
 
If = 338
1
 ¥ 2.564 = 866.6 A 
The phasor diagram of a salient-pole synchronous generator at a lagging pf is redrawn in Fig. 8.85.
y
d
f
Ia
Id
Vt
Iq
IdXd
IqXq
Ef
Fig. 8.85
Reactive power components
 
 +IdVt cos d as Id lags Vt cos d by 90° 
 
 – IqVt sind as Iq leads Vt sin d by 90° 
Therefore 
Qe = IdVt cos d – IqVt sin d 
(8.104) 
From the ﬁgure 
Id = 
E
V
X
f
t
d
-
cosd
 
Iq = 
E
V
X
f
t
q
-
sind
Substituting these values in Eq. (8.103), we get 
 
Pe = E V
X
V
X
X
f
t
d
t
q
d
sind +
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
2
1
1
sin 2 d 
(8.105) 
For a cylindrical rotor generator 
Xd = Xq = Xs
Eq. (8.105) reduces to
 
Pe = 
E V
X
f
t
s
sind ; as in Eq. (8.56)
It is straight forward to ﬁnd the expression for Qe(max) (Eq. (8.72b)) but it results in negative value, the 
generator supplies leading VARs. That is not now how a generator is operated. 

Synchronous Machines 
535
Short Circuit Test 
From Fig. 8.85 (Ra = 0) 
 
Vt sind = IqXq 
Under short-circuit conditions (at reduced excitation), Vt = 0, therefore Iq = 0
Hence 
ISC  = I
I
d
q
+
 = Id
 
E f  = j Id Xd = j ISC  Xd
The phasor diagram is drawn under SC in Fig. 8.86 from which it follows that 
 
Xd = E
I
f
SC
 = open-circuit voltage
short circuit current At If
 
(8.106)
Thus Xd can be determined by the usual open-circuit and short-circuit tests.
EXAMPLE 8.30 A synchronous generator with saturated synchronous reactance Xd = 0.71 pu and Xq 
= 0.58 pu connected to an inﬁnite bus with 1 pu voltage through external reactance Xe = 0.08 pu. It is 
supplying only reactive power to the bus.
Find the maximum and minimum pu ﬁeld excitation if the armature current is not to exceed rated value. 
Note: 1 pu ﬁeld excitation is the ﬁeld current needed to produce rated terminal voltage on no load. 
SOLUTION 
Refer to one line diagram of the system drawn in Fig. 8.82(a). 
 
Xd(net) = Xd + Xe = 0.71 + 0.08 = 0.79 pu
 
Xq(net) = Xq + Xe = 0.58 + 0.08 = 0.66 pu 
For convenience we will write net values as Xd and Xq. 
As the generator is supplying only reactive power, Pe = 0 and so d = 0 and f = ± 90° 
The phasor diagram for lagging pf is drawn in Fig. 8.87(a).
 
Iq  = 0, 
Id  = Ia
For 
Ia = 1 pu (max limit) 
 
Ef = Vt + IdXd, scalar equation
or 
Ef = 1 + 1 ¥ 0.79 = 1.79 pu 
Maximum ﬁeld excitation 
If (max) = 1.79 pu 
The phasor diagram for leading pf is drawn in Fig. 8.87(b).
 
Vt
Ef
I
I
a
d
=
(rated)
jI Xd
d
 
Ia
d
=
(rated)
I
Vt
Ef
jId d
X
 
Fig. 8.87(a) 90º lagging pf 
Fig. 8.87(b) 90° leading pf
 
Iq = 0, 
Ia  = Id
 
Id = Ia = 1 pu (max limit)
E
j X
f
d d
= I
Isc =Id
Fig. 8.86 

536 Electric Machines
 
Ef = Vt + IdXd, scalar equation
or 
Ef = 1 – 1 ¥ 0.79 = 0.21 pu
Maximum ﬁeld excitation 
 
If (min) = 0.21 pu 
We ﬁnd that at Pe = 0
 
Ia = 
E
V
X
f
t
d
-
Its plot on If scale is drawn in Fig. 8.88. It is a V-curve at zero real power.
1
Ia (pu)
0.21
1
1.79
If
 Fig. 8.88 
How a synchronous machine is synchronized to the bus-bars and the loaded electrically as a generator or 
mechanically as a motor has been explained in Section 8.9. The machine runs at synchronous speed (rotor 
and stator ﬁelds are locked together) at any load well within its maximum steady load capability. For proper 
operation, it is essential that the machine stays in synchronism for limited amplitude electrical/mechanical 
disturbances.
We will advance arguments for cylindrical rotor 
synchronous generator which can then be extended for 
a motor and also for salient-pole machines. 
The power-angle characteristic of a cylindrical 
generator is drawn in Fig. 8.89 wherein 
 
Pe = 
E V
X
f
t
s
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ sind  
(8.106)
 
Pe = P(max) sind
 
P(max) = E V
X
f
t
s
These are per phase values. 
Consider that the generator is operating at load P0 at 
angle d0. Let an electrical transitory disturbance cause 
DP
d0
d
d
+ D
0
90°
d
Pe
Po
P (max)
Fig. 8.89

Synchronous Machines 
537
rotor declaration and rotor angle increases by Dd. This result in increase of generator output DP which 
causes the rotor to declare countering the increase in d. The reverse happens if Dd is negative. The rotor 
settles back to d0 in oscillatory manner. Thus DP caused by Dd is the power that brings the generator back to 
synchronism. The DP is the synchronizing power.
The above arguments equally apply for a synchronous motor for disturbances of mechanical load. The 
reader is advised to write out the arguments.
Remark As any disturbance causes change Dd, the disturbance appears both electrical and mechanical sides 
of the machine (generator or motor).
The ratio DP/Dd is indicative of the capability of the synchronous machine to stay in synchronism for 
bounded amplitude disturbances; electrical or mechanical. In the limit dP/dd is known as synchronizing 
power coefﬁcient, Psyn or stiffness of the electromechanical coupling. It then follows from Eq. (8.106) that
 
Psyn = dP
dd  = 
E V
X
f
t
s
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ cos d W/elect. rad 
(8.107) 
We have dropped the sufﬁx e as it applies to both generating and motoring operation of the machine.
The plot of P – d with Psyn – d super imposed on it is drawn in Fig. 8.90. It is seen that Psyn = P(max) at 
d = 0 (no load) and then reduces. It is zero at d = 90°, which is the steady-state stability limit beyond which 
Psyn becomes negative. 
To convert Psyn to unit if W/electrical degree it is multiplied by 
p
180
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ .
Psyn
P
Stable
unstable
P
P (max)
90°
d
Fig. 8.90
The synchronizing torque is obtained from Eq. (8.107) by multiplying it by 3 (phases) and dividing it by
n¢s = speed in mech rad/s. Thus
 
Tsyn = 3
¢ns
P(max) cos d  Nm /mech rad 
(8.108) 

538 Electric Machines
where 
n¢s = (2p f ) 2
P  = 4p f
P
 mech rad/s
The units of Tsyn are changed to Nm/mech degree by multiplying Eq. (8.108) by 
p
180
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ .
We ﬁnd from Eq. (8.107) that the machine stiffness increases with Ef (over excitation) and with reduction of 
Xs (a design factor; if air-gap is increased). Excessive stiffness of the electromagnetic link has two detrimental 
effects.
 
1. In a motor with no disturbances on power supply the electromagnetic stiffness almost prevents the 
changes in motor speed. Any sudden large load torque has a shock effect on the shaft and coupling 
which may damage the shaft leading to shaft fracture on repeated occurrences.
 
2. The frequency of oscillation of electromechanical coupling increases with stiffness. This results in 
shaft fatigue and consequent fracture over a period of time. 
For a given machine, Xs is ﬁxed, so it should not be operated for long periods of time with extreme over 
excitation. 
In a salient-pole synchronous machine taking derivative of Eq. (8.103), the synchronizing coefﬁcient is
 
Psyn = 
E V
X
f
t
d
cos d + V2
t 
X
X
X X
d
q
d
q
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ cos 2d  W/elect rad. 
(8.109) 
and so 
Tsyn = 3
2
2
¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
+
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
n
E V
X
V
X
X
X X
s
f
t
d
t
d
q
d
q
cos
cos
d
d
 
(8.110)
Because of the reluctance component, a salient-pole synchronous machine is comparatively stiffer than a 
cylindrical rotor machine. 
Synchronizing Power and Torque 
For a small change Dd in power angle 
Synchronizing power, 
Ps = Psyn Dd 
(8.111)
Synchronizing torque, 
Ts = Tsyn Dd 
 (8.112) 
EXAMPLE 8.31 A 6 MV A, 11 kV, 8 pole, 50 Hz synchronous generator having saturated synchronous 
reactance of 0.5 pu is synchronized to 11 kV bus. Calculate its synchronizing power and torque coefﬁcient 
per degree mechanical shift of rotor angle at (a) no load, and (b) at full load 0.8 lagging pf.
SOLUTION 
Vt = 11
10
3
3
¥
 = 6351 V
 
Ia (rated) =  
6
10
3
11
10
3
3
¥
¥
¥
 = 314.9 A
 
Base ohms = 6351
314 9.
 = 20.16 W
 
Xs = 0.5 ¥ 20.16 = 10 W
 
Pe = 3 ¥ E V
X
f
t
s
sind  W/elect rad 
(i) 

Synchronous Machines 
539
 
Mechanical degree = elect rad ¥ 2
180
P ¥ p
 
 = electrical rad ¥ 45
p ; P = d 
(ii) 
 
Psyn = p
15
E V
X
f
t
s
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ cos d  W/mech degree 
(iii) 
 
n¢s = 120
2
60
f
P
¥
p  = 120
50
2
8
60
¥
¥
¥
p  = 25p rad mech/s
 
Tsyn = Psyn
25p
 
Tsyn = 1
375
E V
X
f
t
d
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ cosd  Nm/mech degree 
(iv)
 
(a) No load
 
  
Ef = Vt = 6351 V, d = 0
 
  
Psyn = p
15
6351
10
2
¥ (
)
 ¥ 10–3 = 844.8 kW/degree mech
 
  
Tsyn = 1
375
6351
10
2
¥ (
)
 = 10756 Nm/degree mech
 
(b)  
Ia( fl) = 314.9 A pf = 0.8 lag f = 36.9° lag 
 
  
Ia  = 314.9– –36.9°
 
  
Vt  = 6351–0º V
 
  
E f  = 6351–0º + j 314.9 ¥ 10– – 36.9º
 
  
 = 8242 + j 2518 = 8618 –17º
 
 or 
Ef = 8618, d = 17º
 
  
Psyn = p
15
8618
6351
10
¥
¥
cos 17º ¥ 10–3 = 1096 kW/rad mech
 
  
Tsyn = 1
375
8618
6351
10
¥
¥
 cos 17º = 13958 Nm /degree mech 
EXAMPLE 8.32 A 12 pole, 50 Hz synchronous motor has saturated Xd = 0.8 pu and Xq = 0.5 pu. It is 
supplying full load at rated voltage of 0.8 pf leading. Draw the phasor diagram and calculate the excitation 
emf in pu. 
Calculate its pu synchronizing power per degree elect. and pu synchronizing torque per degree mech. 
SOLUTION 
The phasor diagram is drawn in Fig. 8.91. 
 
Vt  = 1–0°, Ia  = 1–36.9°, cos–1  0.8 = 36.9° leading 
 
¢
E f  = Vt  – j Ia Xq 
 
 = 1 – j 1 ¥ 0.5–36.9° = 1 + 0.5– – 53.1°
 
¢
E f  = 1.3 – j 0.4 = 1.36– – 17º 
 
¢
E f  = 1.36, d = 17°, Ef lags Vt 
 
y = f + d = 36.9º + 17º = 53.9º
 
Id  = Ia sin y = 1 sin 53.9° = 0.808 

540 Electric Machines
y
f
d
Id
Ia
Vt
Iq
E¢f
I
X
X
d
d
(
–
)
q
j X
Ia q
Ef
Fig. 8.91
As it lead Ef by angle f sign of Ia is negative in Eq. (8.95), therefore 
 
Ef = E¢f + Id (Xd – Xq) = 1.36 + 0.808(0.8 – 0.5)
 
Ef = 1.6 pu, d = 17°
 
Psyn = 
E V
X
f
t
d
cos d + V2
t 
X
X
X
X
d
q
d
q
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  cos 2d pu/elect.rad
In pu system multiplier 3 is not needed 
Substituting values
 
Psyn = 1 6
1
0 8
.
.
¥
cos 17º + 12
0 8
0 5
0 8
0 5
.
.
.
.
-
¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ cos (2 ¥ 17°)
 
 = 1.913 + 0.622 = 2.53 pu/elect. rad 
or 
Psyn = p
180  ¥ 2.53 = 0.044 pu/degree elect.
 
qm = 
2
P
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ qe = 1
6 qe
 
n¢s = 120
2
60
f
P
¥
p  = 120
50
12
2
60
¥
¥
p  = 
p
16 67
.
 elect rad/s
 
Tsyn = 16 67
.
p
 ¥ 6 ¥ 0.044 = 1.4 Nm (pu)/degree mech.
Synchronizing EMF and Current (Incremental Variation)
Consider a motoring machine with terminal voltage Vt operating at rotor angle d, drawing armature current Ia 
and having excitation emf Ef. A sudden disturbances causes its rotor angle to increase to (d + Dd ). As we have 
seen above it develops synchronizing power Ps which counters the change. The synchronizing power arises 
from synchronizing emf Es and synchronizing current Is. As the terminal voltage is constant the armature 
equations before and after the change are 
 
Vt  = Ef – – d + j Ia Xs = Ef –– (d + Dd ) + j Ia1 Xs 
(i)

Synchronous Machines 
541
 
Es  = E f – – (d + Dd) – E f – – d = change in Ef  
(ii)
 
Is  = I
I
a
a
1 -
 = change in Ia
It follows from Eq. (i) that 
 
Ef – – (d + Dd) – Ef – – d = – j (I
I
a
a
1 -
) Xs
 
Es = – j Is Xs 
(iii)
where Es  = synchronizing emf and Is  = synchronizing current. 
Synchronizing emf 
 
Es  = Ef – – (d + Dd) – Ef –– d
 
 = Ef – – d [1– – Dd –1] 
(iv) 
 
1– – Dd – 1 = cos Dd – j sin Dd – 1 = [ – (1 – cos Dd) – j sin Dd]
 
Magnitude = [(1– cos Dd)2 + sin2 Dd ]1/2 = 2 (1– cos Dd)
 
 = 2 1
1
2
2
2
1 2
-
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
È
ÎÍ
˘
˚˙
sin
/
Dd
 = 2 sin Dd
2
 
Angle = tan–1
-
-
-
sin
(
cos
)
D
D
d
d
1
 = tan–1
-
-
2
2
2
2
2
2
sin
cos
sin
D
D
D
d
d
d
 = tan–1
-
-
cos
sin
D
D
d
d
2
2
 
 = – 90º – Dd
2
From Eq. (iv) 
Es  = 2Ef sin Dd
2
– – d – 90º – Dd
2
 
(v) 
Synchronizing current 
 
Is  = 
E
jX
s
s
-
 = 
2
2
2
E
X
f
s
sin D
D
d
d
d
– -
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  
(iv)
Alternative
Let us evaluate (1– – Dd – 1) by the phasor method. The phasor diagram is drawn in Fig. 8.92.
 
(1– – Dd – 1) = AB  = 2 sin D
D
d
d
2
90
2
– -
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
0
Dd
2
Dd/2
1–0∞
B
(90 +
/2)
Dd
Dd
2
A
1
–
– Dd
C
Fig. 8.92

542 Electric Machines
Magnitude-wise
 
Es = 2Ef sin Dd
2   Is = E
X
s
s
 = 2
E
X
f
s
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ sin Dd
2
 
Es  lags E f  by 90º  
Is  lag Vt  by angle d
d
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
D
2
Synchronizing power
 
Ps = Vt Is cos d
d
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
2
; per phase
or 
Ps = 2
V E
X
t
f
s
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
sin
cos
D
D
d
d
d
2
2
 
(8.113)
For small variation of d
Then 
Ps = 
V E
X
t
f
s
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
cosd Dd = Psyn Dd 
(8.114)
a result already obtained.
EXAMPLE 8.33 A 400 V, 8 pole, 50 Hz synchronous motor has a shaft load of  12 kW, 0.8 leading pf. Its 
saturated synchronous resistance Xs = 2.5 W.
A mechanical load disturbance causes the rotor angle to slip by 1 mech. degree. Calculate the 
synchronizing current, power and torque. 
SOLUTION 
Load 12 kW, 0.8 pf leading 
 
Ia = 
12
10
3
400
0 8
3
¥
¥
¥ .
 = 21.65 A, f = 36.9º leading
 
Vt = 400/
3  = 231 V, Xs = 2.5 W
 
Ef = 231–0º– j ¥ 21.65–36.9º ¥ 2.5
 
 = 231 + 54.125– – 53.1° = 263.5 + j 43.28 
 
 = 267 – – 9.3º V 
 
Ef = 267 V, d = 9.3° elect. 
Mechanical disturbance 
 
Dd = 1 deg mech = 1 ¥ 4 = 4° elect. 
 
Es = 2Ef sin Dd
2
 = 2 ¥ 267 sin 2°
 
 = 18.6 V (phase) 
 
Is = 18 6
2 5
.
.
 = 7.45 A
 
Ps = 3 Vt Is cos d
d
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
D
2
 = 3 ¥ 231 ¥ 7.45 cos(9.3° + 2°)
 
 = 5.163 kW
 
n¢s = 25 p rad mech/s

Synchronous Machines 
543
 
Ts = 5163
25p
 = 65.74 Nm
Remark We see from Example 8.24 that saliency effect can be ignored without causing serious errors. However under 
condition of low excitation saliency must be taken into account (8.103)
8.16 
DETERMINATION OF XD AND XQ
Direct and quadrature-axis reactances of a salient-pole synchronous machine can be estimated by means of 
a test known as the slip test. The machine armature is connected to a 3-phase supply whose voltage is much 
less than the rated voltage of the machine, while the rotor is run at speed close to synchronous with the ﬁeld 
winding left open  circuited (unexcited) as shown in Fig. 8.93(a). Since the excitation emf is zero, heavy 
currents would be drawn by the armature if connected to the rated voltage supply. 
The currents drawn by the armature set up an mmf wave rotating at synchronous speed as shown in 
Fig. 8.93(b). Since the rotor is being run at a speed close to synchronous, the stator mmf moves slowly past the 
ﬁeld poles at slip speed (ns ~ n). When the stator mmf is aligned with the d-axis (ﬁeld poles), ﬂux Fd/ pole is 
set up so that effective reactance offered by the machine is Xd. Similarly when the stator mmf aligns with the 
q-axis, the ﬂux set up is Fq/pole and the machine reactance is Xq. The current drawn by the armature therefore 
varies cyclically at twice the slip frequency as shown by the current waveform drawn in Fig. 8.93(c)—the rms 
current is minimum when machine reactance is Xd and is maximum when it is Xq. Because of cyclic current 
variations and consequent voltage drop in the impedance of supply lines (behind the mains), the voltage 
at machine terminals also varies cyclically and has a minimum value at maximum current and maximum 
value at minimum current as shown by the voltage waveform of Fig. 8.93(c). The machine reactances can be 
found as 
 
Xd = 
V
I
I
t
a
a
(
(min)
at 
(min)(line)
3
 
(8.115)
and 
Xq = 
V
I
I
t
a
a
(
(max)(
)
(max)
at 
line
3
 
(8.116)
The phenomenon of armature current going through maximum and minimum values during the slip test is 
also easily seen from Eqs. (8.101) and (8.102) with Ef = 0
 
Id = V
X
b
d
cos d,  Iq = V
X
b
q
sin d
At d = 0° (air-gap ﬁeld axis oriented along d-axis), 
 
Ia (min) = Id = V
X
b
d
;  Iq = 0 
and at d = 90° (air-gap ﬁeld axis oriented along q-axis) 
 
Ia (max) = Iq = V
X
b
q
;  Id = 0 
Of course during the slip test Vb = Vt (line/
3 ). 

544 Electric Machines
V
Open
n
ns
c¢
b
a¢
S
c
N
a
b¢
n
Supply
low voltage
(b) The principle
V
A
Supply
(a) Connection diagram
l
t
t
t
Reactance
Xq
Reactance
Xd
Reactance
Xq
Line current
Terminal voltage
Voltage across
open field
q-axis
q-axis
d-axis
(c) Current and voltage wave forms
Fig. 8.93 Slip test

Synchronous Machines 
545
Observation of the voltage induced in the ﬁeld during the slip test is helpful in location of maxima/minima 
on current and voltage wave shapes. As the ﬂux set up by armature currents moves past the rotor ﬁeld, the ﬂux 
linkage of the ﬁeld vary and an emf of twice the slip frequency is induced in it. When the rotor ﬁeld is aligned 
with the armature mmf, its ﬂux linkages are maximum while the rate of change of ﬂux linkage is zero, i.e. the 
voltage across the open ﬁeld goes through zero at this instant which identiﬁes  Xd of the machine. It similarly 
follows that Xq is identiﬁed with the voltage maximum in the ﬁeld. The wave of voltage across the open-ﬁeld 
with reference to current and voltage waves at the armature is also shown in Fig. 8.93(c).
Since current and voltage meters as connected in Fig. 8.93(a) would oscillate twice the slip frequency, 
the slip must be kept very small so that dynamics of the meters do not introduce errors in reading maximum/
minimum values. Greater accuracy is achieved by using a recording oscillogram. 
To improve the accuracy, ﬁnd the ratio Xq/Xd from the slip test. From the OC and SC tests determine Xd 
(Eq. 8.106), Xq is then found from the ratio.
The operation considered in Sec. 8.17 is that of a synchronous machine connected to inﬁnite bus-bars. Here 
the parallel operation of two ﬁnite size synchronous generators will be considered, which is the way large 
practical size generators are used. In a power system the generators are connected to the nodes of a grid 
composed of a network of transformers and transmission lines. A national level grid* may comprise even 
hundreds of generators and hundreds of kilometers of the transmission line. The grid formation is dictated by 
reasons of reliability (continuity of supply) and by investment and operating economics of the power plant. 
Figure 8.94 shows two synchronous generators 
along with their primemovers to be operated in 
parallel. After the two generators are brought to 
their respective synchronous speeds and their ﬁeld 
currents adjusted to give nearly equal terminal 
voltages, switch S is closed in accordance with 
the synchronizing procedure described in Sec. 8.9. 
Active and reactive powers, supplied to the common 
load by each generator, are controlled respectively 
by their primemover throttles and ﬁeld currents as 
was observed in Sec. 8.10. 
The active power-sharing between paralleled generators is dependent upon the droop of the frequency 
(speed)-power characteristics of the primemovers and their governors. These characteristics are nearly linear 
for small changes in the operating (rated) frequency and power as shown in Fig. 8.95. These characteristics 
can be slided up or down by adjustment of the set points of their governors. Drooping* frequency-power 
characteristics are essential for proper loading between generators and the adjustment thereof. 
For the solid-line characteristics shown in Fig. 8.96, load PL = AB at frequency f (rated) load is shared as 
P1 and P2 such that P1 + P2 = PL. In order to increase the load on G2 and to correspondingly reduce the load 
 
* India is working towards the formation of a national grid. This will result from interconnection of ever-expanding 
regional grids.
 
* Speed governors belong to the class of regulating systems which are type zero, As the machine is loaded, the 
frequency (speed) droops to generate the error signal with respect to the reference frequency. This error signal is 
employed to open the throttle for regulating the turbine speed. Adjustment of the governor setting alters the refer-
ence frequency.
Load
IL
Ia2
Ia1
Ef1
PM1
Vf
Ef2
S
G2
PM2
Fig. 8.94 
Parallel operation of synchronous generators 

546 Electric Machines
on G1, the frequency-power characteristic of G2 must be raised by adjustment of the governor setting, and 
to keep the frequency constant the characteristic of Gl must be simultaneously lowered. It is seen from the 
ﬁgure that with this adjustment, PL = P¢1 + P¢2 where (P1 – P¢1) = (P¢2 – P2) = DP, the load amount which is 
transferred from G1 to G2 by adjustment of governors. It also follows that if the governor setting of only one 
of the primemovers is adjusted, the system frequency would change. During the process of governor setting 
adjustment, the system undergoes load-frequency transient which would soon die out (provided the governors 
are properly damped) and steady load-frequency conditions established with new load sharing.
Changes in excitation of parallel-operating generators affect the terminal voltage and reactive-power 
loading with active power sharing remaining unchanged (primemover governor settings are not disturbed). 
This was clariﬁed with respect to a single machine connected to inﬁnite bus-bars in Sec. 8.10, Fig. 8.35(a). For 
the system of two generators as in Fig. 8.94, assume that the two generators are identical, their primemover 
governors are adjusted for equal load sharing and their excitations are equal; so that they operate with identical 
currents and power factors (i.e. both active and reactive powers are equally shared). The phasor diagram under 
these operating conditions, identical for each generator, is shown in Fig. 8.96 in thick line. For the given total 
load and equal sharing of real load, let the excitation of G1 be now increased and that of G2 simultaneously 
reduced in such a manner as to keep the terminal voltage unchanged. Each generator, therefore, behaves as 
if it is connected to inﬁnite bus-bars, i.e., Ef sin d will remain constant. With active power on each generator 
ﬁxed (at half the total), the projection of generator (each) current on Vt (active current component) will also 
remain constant and as a result the power factor of G1 goes down and that of G2 improves (ﬁgure is drawn 
for upf ). Thus G1 supplies more kVAR to load and G2 supplies an equal amount less. This is how reactive-
load sharing between generators can be controlled. If, however, the excitation of only one of the generators 
is raised (or lowered), the terminal voltage will increase (or decrease) while this generator shares a larger 
(or smaller) part of load kVAR. For raising (lowering) the terminal voltage without modifying the kVAR 
sharing, the excitation of both the generators must be raised (or lowered). Excitation is automatically 
controlled by voltage regulators acting on the ﬁeld circuits of generators. All that is needed to be done is to 
change the set-points of voltage regulators.
PL
PL
Frequency
A¢
PM¢2
PM2
Power G2
P¢2
P2
P¢1
0
A
f
B
B¢
PM¢1 PM1
P1
Power G1
Fig. 8.95 Primemovers’ frequency (speed)-power characteristics and load sharing

Synchronous Machines 
547
f1
fL
d
Ia2
d1
d2
Vt
jI
X
a
s
2
jI X
a s
jI
X
a
s
1
F
E
E
f
f
f
2
1
<
<
Ia
IL
Ia1
f1
2
1
2
>
=
>
= 0
<
=
<
= 1
L
L
f
f
f
pf
pf
pf
pf
Fig. 8.96
The primemover governor and generator voltage regulator control loops are assumed independent in the 
above. They are, however, weakly coupled because of losses in generators. Independence of control loops is 
a good working assumption.
EXAMPLE 8.34 Calculate the value of synchronizing power in kW for one mech degree of displacement 
for a 3f, 20000 KVA, 6600 V, 50 Hz, 12 pole machine having Xs = 25% and negligible resistance. 
SOLUTION 
emf per phase = 6600
3
 = 3810.6 volts 
 
rotor displacement = d = 1 ¥ P
2
 
 = 1 ¥ 12
2  = 6° elect
 
I = 2000
10
6600 3
3
¥
 = 0.577 kA = 577.3 A
 
Psy = dE
Xs
2
 = 6
3810 6
180
1 65
2
¥
¥
¥
p
(
. )
.
 = 921.1 kW
EXAMPLE 8.35 Two 6600 V, star connected alternators in parallel supply the following loads 
 
400 kW at 0 pf lag 
- I
 
400 kW at 0.85 pf lag  
- II
 
300 kW at 0.8 pf lag  
- III
 
800 kW at 0.7 pf lag  
- IV
One alternator supplies Ia = 100 A at 0.9 pf lag. Determine output current and power factor of other 
machine. 

548 Electric Machines
SOLUTION 
Phase angle of I load f1 = cos–1 (1) = 0° (lag) 
 
Phase angle of II load f2 = cos–1 (0.85) = 31.78° (lag)
 
Phase angle of III load f3 = cos–1 (0.80) = 36.86° (lag)
 
Phase angle of IV load f4 = cos–1 (0.7) = 45.57° (lag) 
 
Total real load = 400 + 400 + 300 + 800 = 1900 kW 
 
Reactive power of I load Ql = Pl tan f1 = 400 tan 0o = 0
 
Reactive power of II load Q2 = P2 tan f2 = 400 tan (31.78) = 247.6 kVAR
 
Reactive power of III load Q3 = P3 tan f3 = 300 tan (36.86) = 224.91 kVAR
 
Reactive power of IV load Q4 = P4 tan f4 = 800 tan (45.57) = 816 kVAR 
Total reactive power 
Q = Q1 + Q2 + Q3 + Q4 = 1288.51 kVAR 
Output of one machine 
PA = 
3  ¥ 6600 ¥ 100 ¥ 0.90 = 1028.8 kW 
Output of second machine 
PB =1900 – 1028.8 = 871.2 kW 
Reactive power of I machine 
 
QA = PA tan (cos–1(0.9))
 
 = 1028.8 tan (25.84) 
 
 = 1028.8 ¥ 0.485 = 498.96 kVAR 
Reactive power of II machine 
 
QB = Q – QA
 
 = 1288.51 – 498.96
 
 = 789.55 kVAR 
 
f = tan–1 Q
P
B
B
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = tan–1 789 55
871 2
.
.
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = tan–1 (0.906) = 42.176
 
cos fB = 0.741 (lag)
 
IB = 
871 2
10
3
600
0 741
3
.
.
¥
¥
¥
 = 102.85 A
EXAMPLE 8.36 Two similar 400 V, 3 phase alternators share equal kW power delivered to a balanced 
three phase, 50 kW, 0.8 pf lag load. If the power factor of one machine is 0.9 lag, ﬁnd the power factor and 
current supplied by the other machine. 
SOLUTION 
Total load 
P = 50 kW
 
cosf = 0.8; f = cos–1 (0.8) = 36.87°, lag 
Reactive power of load 
Q = P tanf 
 
 = 50 tan36.87º 
 
 = 37.5 kVAR 
 
Real power supplied by machine 1, P1 = P
2  = 50
2  = 25 kW
Phase angle of machine 1 
f1 = cos–1 (0.9) = 25.84°, lag 
Reactive power supplied by machine 1 
Q1 = P1 tanf1
 
 = 25 tan(25.84°) = 12.10 RVAR
Real power supplied by machine 2 
P2 = P
2  = 50
2  = 25 kW 

Synchronous Machines 
549
Reactive power supplied by machine 2 
Q2 = Q – Q1
 
 = 37.5 – 12.10 
 
 = 25.391 RVAR
Phase angle of machine 2 
Q2 = tan–1 Q
P
2
2
= tan–1 25 391
25
.
 
f2 = tan–1 (1.015)
 
 = 45.44°
power factor of machine 2 
cos f2 = cos (45.44°) = 0.701, lag
Current supplied by machine 2 
I2 = 
P
VL
3
2
cosf
 
 = 
25
1000
3
400
0 701
¥
¥
¥ .
 
 = 25000
485 652
.
 = 51.4 A
When a synchronous machine is operating at steady load indicated by point Q (P0, d0) on the P – d characteristic 
shown in Fig. 8.97, certain limited amplitude disturbances are bound to occur on electrical and mechanical 
parts of the machine. These disturbances are:
As is seen from Fig. 8.97 a change in rotor angle Dd caused by a disturbance produces synchronizing 
power  (and associated synchronizing torque) given by 
 
Ps = [P(max) cosd ] Dd 
d-oscillation
Pe-oscillation
O
Pmax
Pe
P0
Dd
d0
d
Fig. 8.97

550 Electric Machines
which is proportional to Dd, a spring like action. The synchronizing torque acts on the drive machine or 
machine-mechanical load inertia to counter the change Dd. This synchronous link-inertia system is set 
into oscillations of d and Pe about (P0, d0) as shown in Fig. 8.97. Physically these oscillations are parasitic 
variations in rotor speed about the synchronous speed and the same frequency variation of shaft torque and 
electrical power (synchronizing power) exchange with bus-bars. The d-variations are integral of the speed 
variations. 
As the system friction is quite small these oscillations are slow to decay out. These get again triggered by 
another disturbance. These oscillations must be damped out fast enough as we shall see after the analytical 
study which follows under steady state conditions at 
constant (synchronous) speed 
 
Pe = Pm 
(8.117)
where 
Pe = electrical power output of the machine 
 
Pm = mechanical power input to the machine 
the machine losses having been assumed negligible. 
These power ﬂows* are indicated in Fig. 8.98. If 
this power balance is disturbed, say for example, the 
electrical power output slightly decreases, the machine 
undergoes electromechanical dynamics wherein 
 
Pm – Pe = Pa = accelerating power 
In the absence of losses this power is absorbed in accelerating the rotor inertia, i.e. 
 
Pm – Pe = 1
2 Ia¢ 
(8.118)
where 
I = moment of inertia of rotor (all rotating members) in kg m2 
 
a¢ = rotor acceleration in rad (mech)/s2 
If powers are expressed in MW, Eq. (8.118) can be written as 
 
Pm – Pe = Ma = M d
dt
2
2
q  
(8.119)
where 
a = d
dt
2
2
q  = rotor acceleration in elect. deg/s 
 
M = inertia constant in MJ s/elect. deg; Pm, Pe are in MW 
It is convenient to measure the rotor angle with respect to a synchronously rotating reference frame. Let 
 
d = q – wst 
(8.120)
where ws = synchronous speed in elect. deg/s 
 
d = rotor angular displacement from the synchronously rotating reference frame; this in fact is the 
angle by which Ef leads Vt  
Taking the second derivative of Eq. (8.120),
 
d
dt
2
2
d  = d
dt
2
2
q  
(8.121) 
Pe
Pm
w¢
(rad/s)
Fig. 8.98 
Power flows in synchronous machine 
(generator)
 
* Power ﬂows will reverse in a motoring machine. 

Synchronous Machines 
551
Equation (8.118) therefore takes the form 
 
Pm – Pe = M d
dt
2
2
d  
(8.122) 
It has already been shown that Pe is governed by the power-angle characteristic of the machine, i.e. 
 
Pe  = V E
X
t
f
s
sin d = Pe,max sin d  
(8.123) 
Therefore, 
Pm  – Pe,max sin d = M d
dt
2
2
d  
(8.124) 
It is a nonlinear second-order differential equation known as the swing equation. 
Let the machine be operating under steady conditions of 
 
Pmo = Peo = Pe,max sin d0 
(8.125) 
With the mechanical input power remaining constant at Pmo, let the angle d be disturbed from d0 to d0 + 
Dd. Then
 
Pe = Pe,max sin (d0 + Dd) 
 
 ª Pe,max sin d0 + ∂
∂
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
Pe
d
0
Dd 
or 
Peo + DPe = Pe,max sin d0 + ∂
∂
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
Pe
d
0
Dd
or 
DPe = ∂
∂
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
Pe
d
0
Dd (incremental machine model) 
(8.126)
where 
∂
∂
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
Pe
d
0
 = slope of the power-angle characteristic at the operating point. 
∂
∂
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
Pe
d
0
 is known as the 
synchronizing power coefﬁcient or stiffness* of the machine.
Substituting in Eq. (8.124) 
 
– DPe = –
∂
∂
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
Pe
d
0
Dd = M d
dt
2
0
2
(
)
d
d
+ D
or 
 M d
dt
Pe
2
2
0
Dd
d
+ ∂
∂
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ Dd  = 0
or 
 Mp
Pe
2
0
+ ∂
∂
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
È
Î
ÍÍ
˘
˚
˙˙
d
Dd = 0; p = differential operator 
(8.127)
The incremental change Dd = d – d0 is governed by the linear second-order differential Eq. (8.127) whose 
characteristic roots are 
 
p = ± - ∂
∂
È
ÎÍ
˘
˚˙
(
/
)
/
P
M
e
d 0
1 2
 
(8.128)
* Because of the reluctance power term, a salient-pole machine is stiffer than a cylindrical-rotor machine.

552 
Electric Machines
Now 
∂
∂
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
Pe
d
0
 = Pe,max cos d0 
(8.129)
From Eq. (8.127), (∂Pe/∂d)0 > 0 for d < 90°, i.e. in the stable** operating zone of the machine, the roots of 
the characteristic Eq. (8.127) are a complex conjugate pair indicating sinusoidal oscillatory behaviour about 
the operating point (Pe0, d0).
Oscillatory behaviour of the synchronous machine about the operating point has its origin in machine 
stiffness (or the synchronous link between rotor and stator ﬁelds which has a spring-type action). This 
oscillatory behaviour known as hunting is highly undesirable—the electrical power fed to the mains and shaft 
torque oscillate, which in turn causes shaft fatigue. The frequency of oscillation is given by 
 
w0 = (
/
)
/
∂
∂
È
ÎÍ
˘
˚˙
P
M
e
d 0
1 2
 
(8.129a)
If the machine stiffness is excessive, the frequency of the shaft torque variation is higher and the shaft fatigue 
occurs faster. To minimize hunting to a tolerable level the oscillations must be damped out by introducing a 
damping term (proportional to dd/dt) in the swing equation (Eq. (8.124)). In fact a small amount of damping, 
contributed by system losses (both mechanical and electrical), is always present in the machine but this is 
insufﬁcient to kill hunting. Additional damping must therefore be introduced in the machine. 
Damper Winding 
Additional damping is provided in the salient pole synchronous machine by means of damper bars located in 
the main poles of the machine and short-circuited through round rings at both ends as shown in Fig. 8.99. As 
the rotor oscillates, the damper bars have a relative movement with respect to the air-gap ﬂux pattern which 
causes induction of emfs and ﬂow of currents in these bars. The torque created by the bar currents as per 
Lenz’s law always opposes the relative motion. This is how a positive damping term is brought into play so 
that the oscillatory motion of the rotor about the operating point is considerably reduced in amplitude and 
the rotor quickly returns to the steady position. These short-circuited bars are known as damper winding or 
ammortisseur winding. These act like a squirrel cage induction motor (refer Sec 5.6) thereby providing a 
starting  torque for the motor which otherwise being of synchronous kind is not self-starting. Therefore, the 
damper winding  serves the dual purpose.
Fig. 8.99 
Damper windings for salient-pole machine 
 
** If d0 > 90°, (Pe/∂d)0 < 0, so that Eq. (8.122) yields two real roots—one positive and the other negative. Therefore, 
Dd will increase without bound—an unstable system as is already known.

Synchronous Machines 
553
Transient Stability
In the hunting of the synchronous machine discussed above, we examine the oscillations about the steady 
operating point. We shall now consider the machines dynamic response to sudden change in accelerating 
power caused by change in electric power (Pe) fed to the busbars. As it is a fast transient it can be assumed 
that during this period the primemover input (Pm) remains constant. 
Recalling the swing equation (Eq. [8.124]), we rewrite
 
Pe – Pe,max sin d = M d
dt
2
2
d  = Pa; swing equation 
(8.130 (a))
where Pa is the accelerating power 
Let a synchronous generator be operating at steady value of d = d0 such that 
 
Pm = Pe,max d0 = 0, i.e, Pa = 0 
(8.130(b))
where 
Pe,max = E V
X
f
Pe,max can change suddenly due to change in V and X caused by changes in the system being fed by the 
generator. This will result in variations in d governed by the non-linear swing equation (Eq. 8.130(a)) The d 
dynamics can end in two conditions:
 
1. The machine returns to steady operation at a new value of d = d0 (new) and operates stably. 
 
2. d may increase without bound and the generator falls out of step (loses synchronism). This is the 
unstable transient. 
For illustration consider a simple power system wherein a generator is feeding an inﬁnite bus through a 
transmission line with circuit breaker at each end as shown in Fig. 8.100.
G
Infinite
bus bar
Fig. 8.100 A simple power system 
An arcing fault (to ground) occurs near generator bus as indicated. As a result, Vb (gen) = 0 and so Pe = 0. 
The machine undergoes a transient as per the swing equation. Being non-linear the equation has to be solved 
numerically. 
The circuit breaker opens but Pe remains zero as the generator is now open circuit. After a short wait 
during which the fault vanishes, the circuit breaker closes automatically. The system is now healthy with Pe 
= Pe,max d. 
During this kind of circuit switching d varies as shown in Fig. 8.101. The following conclusions can be 
drawn from this ﬁgure. 
 
ﬁ d increases without bound; the system is unstable 
 
ﬁ d goes through a maximum and then decreases. It then decays in oscillatory manner settling at steady 
value. The system is thus stable having undergone the transient operation. 

554 Electric Machines
d (steady state)
d (max)
Unstable
d
dt
d = 0
Stable
t
Fig. 8.101 Plot of d vs t for stable and unstable systems 
The stability will depend upon the initial value d0. For large value of d0 there is a stronger possibility 
of system instability. As the steady-state limit of d is 90° (some what less for salient pole machine), the 
operating value of d should be much less than 90°, usually about 20º to 30° in view of the transients that are 
likely to occur in the system. 
Condition for Transient Stability 
It is concluded from Fig. 8.100 that the system is stable if d
dt
d  = 0 at some short time. On the other hand the 
system is unstable if d
dt
d  > 0 for sufﬁciently long time (usually about 1 second). The swing equation need to 
be solved for this period of time.
The starting of a synchronous motor has been discussed brieﬂy in Section 8.9 on synchronization. With the 
rotor ﬁeld switched on if the stator is connected to the mains, the stator ﬁeld rotates with respect to the rotor 
ﬁeld producing alternating torque with zero average value. The motor, therefore, would not start. It has been 
stated in Section 5.6 that the condition for an electric machine to produce steady torque is the stator and rotor 
ﬁelds must be relatively stationary. The synchronous motor must therefore be run as a generator brought 
up close to synchronous speed and then synchronized to main and loaded as a motor. For this purpose an 
auxiliary motor is coupled to the synchronous motor. 

Synchronous Machines 
555
Auxiliary Motor Starting 
It is a small dc or induction motor (much smaller in size than the synchronous motor). Because of the universal 
availability of ac supply induction motor is preferred choice. It should have the same number of poles as the 
synchronous motor and run from the same ac supply, i.e., same frequency and so same synchronous speed. 
Starting Procedure
With synchronous motor disconnected from supply, the induction motor is switched on. As it reaches steady 
speed slightly less than the synchronous speed, the synchronous motor ﬁeld is switched on to dc supply 
– exciter or SCR source. The torque developed by interaction of stator and rotor ﬁelds alternates at slip 
frequency (sf ). As this frequency is very small (about 2 cycles/s), during the forward torque half cycle (pull-
in torque), enough time is available for the rotor to accelerate and the rotor ﬁeld to lock up with stator; the 
rotor thus acquires the synchronous speed. The auxiliary motor is now switched off. 
Synduction Motor 
A synchronous motor starting on induction principle by means of damper winding is called a synduction 
motor. The damper windings act like the squirrel-cage rotor producing the starting torque; see Section 5.6 
Fig. 5.43.
In the starting operation of a synduction motor the ﬁeld is kept shorted while the stator is switched on to 
3-phase ac supply. As the motor reaches close to synchronous speed, the ﬁeld is energized from dc supply. 
The rotor now gets synchronized automatically as explained in auxiliary motor starting. 
It is essential to keep the ﬁeld shorted at start otherwise in the initial part of the starting time when the slip 
is close to unity, high voltage would be induced in the ﬁeld winding it has normally large number of turns 
which can damage it. In fact to avoid high current in the ﬁeld, it is shorted through resistance several times 
the ﬁeld resistance. The ﬁeld shorted through high resistance adds to the motor starting torque. 
The above methods of starting synchronous motors can be employed when the starting torque requirement 
is low; may be no-load starting. The machine is loaded after it has synchronized. 
Starting against High Torque 
As it has been mentioned in Section 5.7 that wound rotor slip-ring induction motor provides a high starting 
torque by adding external resistance to rotor winding (3-phase) through slip rings. This will be elaborated 
in Chapter 9 on Induction Machine (see Fig. 9.3). A high starting torque synchronous motor is combination 
of synchronous and slip-ring induction motor into one machine. The damping winding is made in form of 
3-phase  winding with connection brought out through slip-ring. On starting high resistance is included.
The short-circuit transient in a synchronous machine being electrical in nature is much faster than the 
electromechanical dynamics discussed in Sec. 8.18. It will, therefore, be assumed that by the time the major 
features of the short-circuit phenomenon are over, the rotor speed remains constant at the synchronous value. 
The short-circuit transient in a synchronous machine is a highly complex phenomenon as a number of 
coupled circuits are involved and further their self-and mutual-inductances are functions of the angle and 
therefore of time. The detailed mathematical model of this phenomenon is beyond the scope of this book. The 
treatment here will be qualitative based on physical reasoning. 

556 Electric Machines
 
* The initial current and therefore the ﬂux linkage of the inductance are assumed zero here. These could, however, 
have a ﬁnite value.
To understand the physical reasoning, which will be advanced soon, let us examine the physical picture 
of the transient phenomenon in an inductor switched onto a source of sinusoidal voltage as shown in Fig. 
8.102(a). The resistance associated with the inductance is assumed to be negligible (as is the case in a 
synchronous machine) and would at the ﬁrst instant be neglected. While a simple analytical approach would 
immediately give the quantitative answer to this problem, physical reasoning will however be followed. 
Figure 8.102(b) shows the waveforms of voltage, current and ﬂux linkages in the circuit under steady-state 
conditions wherein the current and ﬂux linkages lag the voltage by 90°. At the instant switch S is closed, the 
steady-state conditions demand that circuit current and associated ﬂux linkages instantaneously acquire a 
speciﬁc value, is (t = 0). Since the ﬂux linking the circuit has associated stored energy which cannot change 
instantaneously, the current and ﬂux linkages must remain constant (at zero* in the present case) at the 
instant of switching. This requires the appearance of a current Idc, called the dc off-set current in the circuit 
such that 
 
is(t = 0) + Idc = 0 
or 
Idc = – is (t = 0) 
(8.131) 
The fact that the ﬂux linkages of an inductive circuit cannot change instantaneously is known as the 
theorem of constant ﬂux linkages. It greatly aids in determining the current Idc which must immediately 
ﬂow in the circuit. The maximum value of Idc occurs when the switch is closed at the instant where the is 
demanded is maximum which in the case of pure inductance is at the instant of voltage zero. Thus 
 
Idc (max) = – is (max)  
(8.132a) 
If the circuit resistance is negligible, Idc remains constant. The net current in the circuit is 
 
i = dc off-set current + steady-state current
 
 = Idc + is
whose waveform is drawn in Fig. 8.102(c). Because of the presence of the dc off-set current 
 
i (max) = Idc + is (max) 
(8.132b) 
whose maximum possible value is 
 
i (max) = 2 is (max) (switch closed when voltage is zero) 
(8.133)
This is known as the current doubling effect. 
If the small amount of resistance present is accounted for, the dc off-set current will decay as
 
idc = Idce–t/p 
(8.134) 
when t = R/L = circuit time-constant 
The current waveforms in this case are drawn in Fig. 8.102(d). The net current ﬁnally settles to the steady-
state current is after idc has died out (it will require time of the order of a few time-constants). The steady-
state component of the net current is known as the symmetrical current, while the net current initially lacks 
symmetry due to the presence of the dc off-set current.
Now the problem of short-circuit on a synchronous machine whose cross-sectional view is shown in 
Fig. 8.102(e) will again be considered. The following assumptions will be made:

Synchronous Machines 
557
i
is
idc
ldc
0
i
is
DC off-set
ldc
0
i
t
s (  = 0)
t
(c)
i
t
s (  = 0)
0
t
v
is
ls
i
V
L
s (max) =
2
/
÷
w
t = 0
switch on
(b)
L R
,
(negligible)
S
i
v
V
t
=
2
sin
÷
w
+
–
(a)
(d)
Fig. 8.102 Switching transient in inductance

558 Electric Machines
1
Damper bars
b
a¢
Axis of
coil aa¢
d-axis
Field collar
c¢
ws
a
2
3
3¢2¢
q
1¢
q-axis
b¢
Fig. 8.102(e) Cross-sectional view of salient-pole synchronous machine
 
(i) Armature resistance is negligible. 
 (ii) All the three phases are short-circuited simultaneously (symmetrical 3-phase short-circuit). 
 (iii) Before the short-circuit, the machine is operating under no-load (open-cir cuit) condition. 
Since the ﬂux linkages of each stator phase (caused by the direct-axis ﬂux set up by the ﬁeld current) cannot 
change instantaneously, dc off-set currents appear in all the three phases. These currents are proportional to 
the ﬂux linkages of each phase at the instant of short-circuit, i.e. these are proportional to the cosine of the 
angle between the phase axis and d-axis. For example, if the d-axis is oriented along the a phase axis at the 
instant of short-circuit, the dc off-set current in phase a has a certain positive value while negative dc off-set 
currents of half this value would appear in phases b and c. 
For short circuit at this instant the wave forms of short circuit currents in the three phases are shown in 
Fig. 8.103 which also indicates the dc off-set currents in dotted line. If the dc off-set currents are removed 
from the short circuit currents, we are left with the symmetrical short circuit current which is the same in all 
the three phases but for a phase difference of 120°. 
The symmetrical short-circuit current (in each phase) is 90° lagging current, constituting the d-axis 
current, the q-axis current being zero (see Fig. 8.103). It establishes a demagnetizing armature reaction along 
the d-axis. By the theorem of constant ﬂux linkages the ﬂux Ff linking the ﬁeld winding and damper winding 
(in Fig. 8.103 damper bars* form coils as 11¢, 22¢ and 33¢ whose axis is along the d-axis) must be maintained 
by appearance of induced (unidirectional) currents on the ﬁeld winding (over and above the normal excitation 
current) and damper winding. As a result the air-gap emf, Er initially equals Ef = VOC (no-load voltage). The 
short -circuit current is then (Er = Ef)/Xl, a very large value. The phasor diagram under these conditions is 
drawn in Fig. 8.104.
 The induced currents in the damper and ﬁeld windings decay at rates determined by their respective time-
constants. The damper winding comprising a few thick bars has a much lower time-constant than that for 
 
* The axis of the damper winding AT is along the d-axis for currents induced in it because of time rate of change of 
the d-axis ﬂux. The damping effect of damper winding is caused by the relative spatial movement between them 
and d-axis air -gap ﬂux; the axis of the corresponding induced AT is along the q-axis of the machine. It was the 
latter induction which was considered in Sec. 8.13.

Synchronous Machines 
559
the ﬁeld winding and its induced current is the ﬁrst to vanish. 
As the induced current of the damper winding decays, the net 
d-axis ﬂux and therefore the air-gap emf (Er) reduces and the 
symmetrical short-circuit current decays accordingly as shown 
in Fig. 8.105. This initial period of decay of the short-circuit 
current is called the subtrasient period in which the current 
decay is governed mainly* by the damper winding time-
constant. 
As time progresses the induced ﬁeld current continues to 
decay governed by its own time-constant. As a consequence the 
net d-axis ﬂux continues to decay and so does the symmetrical 
short-circuit current till the steady-state short-circuit current 
(Ef /Xd) is established after the induced current in the ﬁeld 
winding has died out. This period of the short-circuit transient 
is called the transient period as indicated in Fig. 8.105. 
–
(
)
jl
SC X
a
l
E
E
V
r
f
oc
=
=
Vt = 0
l
SC
l
a
d
(
) =
Ff
Fig. 8.104 
Phasor diagram upon initia tion of 
3-phase fault (Arma ture reaction 
the damper winding current)
 
* Some of the decay of the short-circuit current is contributed by the slowly-decay ing ﬁeld current.
dc component
Phase-
current
a
0
Time
dc component
Phase-
current
b
0
Time
Time
dc component
Phase- current
c
0
Fig. 8.103 Short circuit current wave forms in the three phases of a synchro nous generator

560 Electric Machines
Extrapolation of
transient envelope
Extrapolation of
Steady-state envelope
Actual envelope
Subtransient period
Transient period
Steady-state period
t
C
b
a
O
SC
current
Fig. 8.105 Symmetrical short circuit current in synchronous generator
Figure 8.104 shows the complete waveform of the symmetrical short-circuit current in a synchronous 
machine. This plot can be obtained from the oscillogram of the short-circuit current in one of the phases 
after the dc off-set value has been subtracted from it. The three periods—substransient, transient and steady-
state–are indicated on the current envelope. The decaying envelope is clearly indicative of the fact that the 
equivalent d-axis reactance offered by the machine continuously increases as time progresses and ﬁnally 
settles to the steady value Xd when the armature reaction demagnetizing effect becomes fully effective. 
Extrapolation of the subtransient, transient and steady-state current envelopes identiﬁes the ordinates Oa, Ob, 
and Oc on the current coordinate. The machine presents three different reactances, during the short circuit, 
as deﬁned below: 
Subtransient reactance, 
X¢¢d = 
E
Oc
f
/
2  = E
I
f
¢¢  
(8.135) 
Transient reactance, 
X¢d = 
E
Ob
f
/
2  = E
I
f
¢  
(8.136)
Steady-state reactance, 
Xd = 
E
Oa
f
/
2  = E
I
f  
(8.137) 
where 
Ef = excitation emf (open-circuit voltage) (rms phase value)
 
I≤ = subtransient SC current (rms) 
 
I¢ = transient SC current (rms) 
 
I = steady SC current (rms) 
Obviously 
 
X≤d < X ¢d < Xd 
(8.138) 

Synchronous Machines 
561
In fact as stated earlier, X¢¢d almost equals the leakage reactance of the machine.
The variation of the rms SC current with time can be expressed as below following the physical arguments 
presented earlier 
 
ISC = (I≤ – I¢) e–t/tdw + (I¢ – I) e–t/tf + I  
(8.139) 
where 
tdw = damper winding time-constant
 
tf = ﬁeld winding time-constant 
The effect of the dc off-set current on the symmetrical SC current can be accounted for by means of 
a suitable multiplying factor which depends upon the number of cycles that have elapsed after the short-
circuit. 
Certain Details 
In the above physical picture certain ﬁner points were purposely left out. The dc off -set stator currents 
establish a ﬁxed axis ﬂux in air-gap which gradually decays. This ﬂux induces fundamental frequency 
currents in the ﬁeld and damper winding which contribute a d-axis oscillating ﬁeld. This oscillating ﬁeld can 
be split into two ﬁelds* rotating at synchronous speed in opposite directions with respect to the rotor. One of 
these components is stationary with respect to the stator and reacts back on the dc off-set currents. The other 
component travels with respect to the stator at twice the synchronous speed and therefore induces the second 
harmonic in it. 
The plot of the ﬁeld current after the short-circuit on the stator exhibiting the dc and fundamental frequency 
transient current is shown in Fig. 8.106.
if
if 0
0
t
Fig. 8.106
Short-Circuit under Loaded Conditions 
Short-circuit analysis of a loaded synchronous machine is quite involved and is beyond the scope of this 
book. The method of calculating short-circuit currents during the subtransient and transient periods will 
be presented here, without proof. The circuit models of the machine to be used in computing subtransient 
and transient currents are given in Figs 8.107(a) and (b) wherein in place of excitation emf, voltages behind 
subtransient and transient reactances are used. These are given as: 
 
Voltage behind subtransient reactance, E¢¢f = V0 + jX¢¢d I0  
(8.140) 
 
Voltage behind subtransient reactance, E¢f = V0 + jX¢d I0 
(8.141) 
 
* See Sec. 10.2 on single-phase induction motor.

562 Electric Machines
where V0 is the machine terminal voltage and I0 is the machine current prior to occurrence of the fault. 
V0
E¢¢f
+
–
X¢¢d
I0
+
E¢f
–
(a) Circuit model for computing
subtransient current
V0
X¢d
l0
+
–
+
–
(b) Circuit model for computing
transient current
Fig. 8.107
The subtransient and transient currents during short circuit are given by 
 
I≤ = 
¢¢
¢¢
E
X
f
d
 
(8.142) 
and 
I ¢ = 
¢
¢
E
X
f
d
 
(8.143) 
Of course the steady-state short circuit current is given by 
 
I = 
E
X
f
d
 
(8.144) 
where Ef  is the excitation emf and Xd, the steady-state d-axis reactance. 
EXAMPLE 8.37 A 100-MV A, 22-kV, 50-Hz synchronous generator is operating open circuited and is 
excited to give rated terminal voltage. A 3-phase (symmetrical) short circuit develops at its terminals. 
Neglecting dc and double frequency components of current.
 (a) ﬁnd the initial current, and 
 (b) ﬁnd the current at the end of two cycles and at the end of 10s. 
Given: 
Base 100 MVA 
 
Xd = 1.0 pu, X¢d = 0.3 pu, X≤d = 0.2 pu 
 
tdw = 0.03 s, tf = 1 s 
SOLUTION
 
(a) Initial current, 
I≤ = E
X
f
d¢¢  = 1
0 2.
 = 5 pu 
 
  
IBase = 100
1000
3
22
¥
¥
 = 2624 A 
 
  Then 
I≤ = 5 ¥ 2624 = 13120 A
 
(b)  
I¢ = E
X
f
d¢  = 1
0 3.
 = 3.33 pu 

Synchronous Machines 
563
 
  
I = E
X
f
d
 = 1
1
 = 1 pu
 
  
ISC (t) = (5 – 3.33)e–t/0.03 + (3.33 – 1)e–t/1 +1
 
  
 = 1.07e–t/0.03 + 2.33e–t + 1
 
  
t(2 cycles) = 1.67e–0.04/0.03 + 2.33e–0.04 + 1
 
  
 = 3.68 pu or 9656 A 
 
  
ISC (10 s) = 1.67e–10/0.03 + 2.32e–10 + 1
 
  
 = 1.0001 pu or 2624 A (steady-state is practically reached)
Certain applications, usually restricted to less than 10 kVA are better served by a single-phase synchronous 
generator. Examples are emergency, domestic/ofﬁce supply, portable power for construction tools etc. 
Because of simplicity of distribution wiring, these loads are better served by a single-phase arrangement. 
Single-phase generator stator winding can be arranged in two ways. 
In the ﬁrst arrangement several connections are possible but all have to be derated compared to normal 
three-phase connection. Two connections are indicated in Fig. 8.108 and are compared to three-phase series 
star in terms of voltage and pu kVA rating. 
1
4
7
10 11
12
9
6
8 5
2
3
Voltage 400/231 V
Rating 1 pu
(a) Series star; 3-phase
7
10
5
2
8
11
6
3
9
12
4
Voltage 200 V
Rating 0.5 pu
(b) Parallel star
1-phase
supply
1-phase
supply
3
6 9
12 1
4
7
10
2
5
8
11
Voltage 231 V
Rating 0.5 pu
(c) Series delta
Fig. 8.108 Three phase synchronous generator used for single-phase load
In a single-phase generator, while rotor is similar to that of a three-phase, stator is wound single phase with 
short-pitched coils (short pitch g  (= SPP) slots). Thus one  third of stator slots are left unwound and winding 
has to be single layer. Obviously the rating of the machine is 2/3rd that of three-phase wound generator. 
While the rotor has salient poles and produces a ﬁeld distributed sinusoidally in space (because of shaping of 
pole faces), the stator which is single phase produces an oscillating ﬁeld along a ﬁxed axis. The expression 
for the fundamental component of stator ﬁeld is as given in Eq. (5.36). 
 
F1 = Fm cos w t cos q; w = frequency in rad/s  
(8.145)
 
q = space angle in rad (elect)

564 Electric Machines
where 
Fm = 
4 2
p
K
N
P
w
ph
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ I cos wt cos q;  I = rms stator current 
Equation (8.145) can be trigonometrically split as 
 
F1 = (1/2)Fm cos (wt – q) + (1/2 Fm) cos (wt + q);  w = synchronous speed rad (elect)/s 
 
 = F1f  + F1b 
(8.146) 
when F1f is a sinusoidally distributed ﬁeld rotating 
in positive direction of q (forward rotating) and F1b 
is a backward rotating ﬁeld. Both these ﬁelds rotate 
at synchronous speed as shown in Fig. 8.109 where 
ﬁelds are represented as rotating vectors 

F f
1  and 

F b
1  while the resultant ﬁeld is an oscillating vector 

F1 ﬁeld in space. 
The forward rotating stator ﬁeld locks into 
the rotor ﬁeld and both move together producing 
electromagnetic torque and causing conversion 
of energy from mechanical to electrical. Figure 
8.110(a) shows the rotor and stator ﬁelds at the instant I1 (max). The corresponding phasor diagram is drawn 
in Fig. 8.110(b) wherein only those phasors which are stationary w.r.t. each are indicated. Assuming Xq to be 
small, the terminal voltage can be related to excitation emf Ee (sufﬁx e is used to avoid confusion that would 
be caused by sufﬁx f used so far) by Xd as obtained by OC and SC test. The effects caused by 

F b
1  which 
rotates at w w.r.t. stator and at speed 2 w w.r.t. to rotor in opposite direction is discussed below. 
Backward rotating ﬁeld F1b induces second harmonic current in the ﬁeld winding (and also damper 
winding) and fundamental frequency voltage in stator winding. The second harmonic current in the ﬁeld 
winding causes an oscillating ﬁeld along the d-axis at the same frequency. By the argument presented earlier 
this ﬁeld can be split into two rotating ﬁelds rotating at ± 2w w.r.t. rotor or 3w and –w w.r.t. stator. Thus 
the stator winding has induced in it third harmonic and fundamental frequency voltages. The fundamental 
frequency voltages induced in stator due to 

F f
1  and 

F b
1  are both accounted for in Xd. The third harmonic 
voltages induced in stator cause third harmonic current in the line. Unlike slot harmonics these cannot be 
eliminated (or attenuated) by chording. But their amplitude is reduced by self-inductance of the ﬁeld winding, 
eddy currents in rotor and second harmonic currents in the damper bars.
EXAMPLE 8.38 For a single-phase synchronous generator the peak value of rotor and stator mmfs are 
F2, F1f, and F1b. Fundamental frequency is w rad( elect)/s. Using other appropriate symbols, derive an 
expression for the emfs induced in the stator winding by d-axis ﬂux. Take t = 0 when F2 is directed along 
the stator axis. Refer Fig. 8.110(a).
SOLUTION 
At any time the rotor has rotated by an angle q = wt. The angle between 
F2  and 

F f
1  remains ﬁxed at bf 
independent of t. Let us ﬁnd the angle between 
F2  and 

F b
1 . At time t = 0, 
F b
1  makes an angle of bf from 

F2. 

F b
1  and 

F2  are rotating in opposite direction at speed w, so the angle between them at time t is 
 
bf + 2g = 2wt + bf
The net mmf along d-axis (axis of F2) is in terms of peak values is 
w
w
F1f
F1
F1b
F1(max)
a-axis
Æ
Æ
Æ
Fig. 8.109 
Stator mmf of single-phase synchronous 
generator 

Synchronous Machines 
565
 
Fd = F2 + F1f cos bf + F1b cos (2wt + bf) 
 
  
Oscillating component 
Direct axis, ﬂux/pole 
f = Pd [F2 + F1f cos b1+ F1b cos (2wt + bf)]
 Angle between f and stator winding axis = wt 
Flux linkage of stator coil 
 
l = fN1Kw cos wt
 
 = PdN1Kw[F2 + F1f cos bf + F1b cos (2wt + bf)] cos wt
where 
N1Kw = effective stator turns 
Reorganizing 
 
 = Pd N1Kw[(F2 + F1 cos bf) cos wt + (1/2)Flb cos (3wt + bf) + (1/2)F1b cos (wt +bf)] 
Induced emf, 
er = dl/dt 
 
 = Pd N1Kw[F2 + F1f cos bf) sin wt + (3/2) F1b sin (3wt + bf) + (l/2)F1b sin (wt + bf)] 
Leaving out third harmonic induced emf 
 
er = 
2 Ee sin wt + 
2 E1f cos bf sin wt + 
2 E1b sin wt
or 
Er (rms) = 
E
E
E
e
f
f
b
X d
Excitation emf
Accounted for in 
assum
 



+
+
1
1
cosb
ing X q =0





This phasor diagram is drawn in Fig. 8.110(b).
EXAMPLE 8.39 A 1000 kVA, 6.6 kV, 50 Hz, Y-connected synchronous generator has a no-load voltage of 
11.4 kV at a certain ﬁeld current. The generator gives rated terminal voltage at full load 0.75 lagging power 
factor at the same ﬁeld current. Calculate:
 (a) The synchronous reactance (armature resistance being negligible);
 (b) the voltage regulation; 
bf
F1(max)
F1
F1f
F1b
a-axis
q-axis
I1(max)
F2
d-axis
w
w
w
a¢
a
(a)
d-axis
a-axis
Ee
F2
bf
y
F1f
I1
(b)
Fig. 8.110

566 Electric Machines
 (c) the torque angle; 
 (d) the electrical power developed; and 
 (e) the voltage and kVA rating, if the generator is reconnected in delta. 
SOLUTION 
Ia ( fl) = 
1000
3
6 6
1000
¥
¥
.
 = 0.0875 kA
 
f = – cos–1 0.75 = – 41.4º
 
Vt  = 6.6/
3 – 0º = 3.81 – 0º kV
 
Ef = Voc = 11.4/
3  = 6.58 kV 
 
E f  = 6.58 – d  kV 
Refer to circuit diagram of Fig. 8.111 from which we can write 
 
6.58 – dº = 3.81 – 0° + j Xs 0.0875– – 41.4° (i) 
Equating real and imaginary parts of this equation yields
 
6.58 cos d = 3.81 + 0.058 Xs  
(ii)
 
6.58 sin d = 0.0656 Xs 
(ii) 
Eliminating Xs between Eqs (ii) and (iii), we get 
 6.58 cos d – 5.82 sin d = 3.81 
(iv) 
or 
cos (d + 41.4°) = 0.434 ﬁ d = 22.8° 
 
(a) From Eq. (iii) using the value of d as obtained above
 
  
Xs = 6 58
22 8
0 0656
.
sin
.
.
∞ = 38.9 W
 
(b)  
Voltage regulation = 11 4
6 6
6 6
.
.
.
-
 ¥ 100 = 72.7%
 
(c)  
Torque (power) angle d = 22.8º
 
(d)  
Electrical power developed = 3 Ef Ia cos (d – f)
 
  
 = 3 ¥ 6.58 ¥ 0.0875 cos (22.4° + 41.4°)
 
  
 = 763 kW
 
 Also directly
 
  
electrical power developed = 3Va Ia cos f
 
  
 = 3 ¥ 3.81 ¥ 0.0875 ¥ 0.75 = 750 kW
 
 This checks the result as there are no losses in armature resistance (Ra ª 0)
 
(e) Machine reconnected in delta
 
  
Voltage rating = 6.6/
3  = 3.81 kV
 
  
Current rating = 0.0875 
3 kA 
 
  
kVA rating = 
3  ¥ 3.81 ¥ 0.0875 
3  ¥ 1000 = 1000 kVA (same as in star connection)
EXAMPLE 8.40 A 22 kV, 3-phase, star-connected turbo-alternator with a synchronous impedance of 
j 1.2 W/phase is delivering 230 MW at UPF to 22 kV grid. With the turbine power remaining constant, 
the alternator excitation is increased by 30%. Determine machine current and power factor based upon 
linearity assumption. 
+
–
6.58
kV
–d
0.0875
–4.14° kA
–
jXs
3.81
°kV
–0
Fig. 8.111 

Synchronous Machines 
567
At the new excitation, the turbine power is now increased till the machine delivers 275 MW. Calculate 
the new current and power factor. 
SOLUTION 
230 MW at UPF 
 
Ia = 
230
3
22
1
¥
¥
 = 6.04 kA, Ia  = 6.04 –0º kA
 
Vt  = (22/
3 ) –0º = 12.7 –0º kV
With reference to Fig. 8.112(a) 
 
E f  = 12.7 –0° + j 1.2 ¥ 6.04 –0°
 
 = 12.7 + j 7.25 
or 
Ef = 14.62 kV
Excitation increased by 30%; turbine power input constant at 230 MW, refer Fig. 8.112(b) 
 
E¢f = 14.62 ¥ 1.3 = 19 kV
 
230
3  = 19
12 7
1 2
¥
.
.
sin d¢
or 
d ¢ = 22.4°
+
–
Ef –d
6.04
°kA
–0
j1.2W
12.7
°kV
–0
+
–
(a)
+
–
E¢f –d
Ia¢ – f
j1.2W
12.7
°kV
–0
+
–
(b)
Fig. 8.112
 
¢Ia  = 19
22 4
12 7
0
1 2
–
∞-
– ∞
.
.
.
j
 = 7.275 – – 33.9º kA
 
Ia = 7.275 kA
 
pf = cos 33.9º = 0.83 lagging
Excitation constant at new value; turbine power increased to 275 MW 
 
275
3  = 19
12 7
1 2
¥
.
.
sin d≤
or 
d ≤ = 27.1° 
 
¢¢
Ia  = 19
27 1 12 7
0
1 2
–
-
– ∞
.
.
.
j
 = 8.03 – – 25.9º kA
 
Ia = 8.03 kA, pf = cos 25.9º = 0.9 lagging
EXAMPLE 8.41 The full-load current of a 3.3 kVA, star-connected synchronous motor is 160 A at 0.8 pf 
lagging. The resistance and synchronous reactance of the motor are 0.8 W and 5.5 W per phase respectively. 
Calculate the excitation emf, torque angle, efﬁciency and shaft output of the motor. Assume the mechanical 
stray load loss to be 30 kW. 

568 Electric Machines
SOLUTION 
Refer Fig. 8.113. 
 
Xs = 0.8 + j 5.5 = 5.56  –81.7º W 
 
E f  = 1.905 – 5.56 –81.7º ¥ 160 – – 36.9° ¥ 10–3
 
 = 1.42 – – 26.2° 
or 
Ef = 1.42 kV (phase) or 2.46 kV (line) 
 
Pmech (dev) = 3 ¥ 1.42 ¥ 160 cos (– 36.9° + 26.2°) 
 
 = 670 kW 
 
Shaft output = 670 – 30 = 640 kW
 
Torque angle = – 26.2° (motor)
 
Power input = 
3  ¥ 3.3 ¥ 160 ¥ 0.8 = 731.5 kW 
 
h = 640/731.5 = 87.5% 
EXAMPLE 8.42 A 4-pole, 50 Hz, 22 kV, 500 MV A synchronous generator having a synchronous reactance 
of 1.57 pu is feeding into a power system, which can be represented by a 22 kV inﬁnite bus in series with 
a reactance of 0.4 W. The generator excitation is continually adjusted (by means of an automatic voltage 
regulator) so as to maintain a terminal voltage of 22 kV independent of the load on the generator.
 (a) Draw the phasor diagram, when the generator is feeding 250 MVA into the power system. Calculate 
the generator current, its power factor and real pow er fed by it. What is the excitation emf of the 
generator?
 (b) Repeat part (a) when the generator load is 500 MVA. 
SOLUTION 
The circuit diagram of the system is drawn in Fig. 8.114(a).
 
Ia (rated) = 
500
3
22
¥
 = 13.12 kA 
 
Vt (rated) = 22/
3  = 12.7 kV 
 
Zb = 12.7/13.12 = 0.968 W 
 
(MVA)B = 500, (MW)B = 500
 
Xsg = 1.57 pu (given) 
 
Xb = 0.4/0.968 = 0.413 pu 
 
(a)  
Load = 250 MVA or 0.5 pu 
 
  
Vt = 1 pu,  Ia = 0.5 pu 
 
  
Vb = 1pu
 
  
XbIa = 0.413 ¥ 0.5 = 0.207 pu
 
 The phasor diagram is drawn in Fig. 8.114(b) 
 
  
sin f = ( .
/ )
0 207 2
1
 as Ia  is at 90º to Ia Xb
 
 or 
f = 5.9º 
 
  
pf = cos f = 0.995 lagging
 
  
Pe = 0.5 ¥ 0.995 = 0.4975 pu ﬁ 124.4 MW 
 
  
Eg = 1–0° + j 1.57 ¥ 0.5 – – 5.9° = 1.333 –35.9∞
 
 or 
 Eg = 1.333 ¥ 22 = 29.32 kV (line) 
+
–
Ef
160A
0.8 W
5.5 W
3.3/ 3= 1.905kV
÷
+
–
Fig. 8.113

Synchronous Machines 
569
 
(b)  
MVA load = 1 pu, Ia = 1 pu 
 
  
XbIa = 0.413 ¥ 1 = 0.413 pu 
 
  
sin f = ( .
/ )
0 143 2
1
 ﬁ f = 11.9°
 
  
cos f = 0.98 lagging 
 
  
Pe = 1 ¥ 1 ¥ 0.98 = 0.98 pu or 490 MW 
 
  
Eg  = 1–0º + j 1.57 ¥ 1 – – 11.9° = 1.324 + j 1.536 
 
 or 
Eg = 2.028 pu or 44.62 kV (line) 
+
–
Eg
+
–
+
–
Xsg
Xb
Ia
+
–
+
–
Pe
Vt = 1 pu
Vb = 1 pu
Eg
Ia b
X = 0.207
Ia
Vb
Vb =
°
1 0
–
f
(b)
(a)
Fig. 8.114
EXAMPLE 8.43 A 25 MVA, 13 kV, 50 Hz synchronous machine has a short-circuit ratio of 0.52. For rated 
induced voltage on no-load, it requires a ﬁeld current of 250 A.
 (a) Calculate the adjusted (saturated) synchronous reactance of the machine. What is its pu value? 
 (b) The machine is connected to 13-kV inﬁnite mains and is running as a motor on no-load. 
 
(i) Its ﬁeld current is adjusted to 200 A. Calculate its power factor angle and torque angle. Ignore 
machine losses. Draw the phasor diagram indicating terminal voltage, excitation emf and 
armature current. 
 
(ii) Does the machine act like a capacitor or an inductor to the 13 kV sys tem? Calculate the equivalent 
capacitor/inductor value. 
 
(iii) Repeat part (i) for a ﬁeld current of 300 A.
SOLUTION
 
(a) Refer Fig. 8.15
 
  
SCR = of ¢/of ¢¢
 
  
of ¢ = 250 A ﬁ of ¢¢= 250/0.52 = 481 A 
 
 This is the ﬁeld current needed to produce short-circuit current equal to rated value. 
 
  
Ia (rated) = 25/(
3  ¥ 13)  ¥ 103 = 1110 A
 
  
ISC (at If = 250 A) = 1110 ¥ 250/481 = 577 A
 
  
Xs (adjusted) = 13
1000
3
577
¥
/
 = 13 W 
 
  
X (Base) = (
)/
13
1000
3
1110
¥
 = 6.76 W
 
  
Xs (adjusted) = 13/6.76 = 1.92 pu 
 
  
 = 1/SCR (checks) 

570 Electric Machines
 
(b) The circuit model of the machine is drawn in Fig. 8.115(a)
 
(i)  
If = 200 A 
 
 From the modiﬁed air-gap line 
 
  
Ef = 13 ¥ (200/250) = 10.45 kV (line) or 6.0 kV (phase)
 
  
Ia = V
E
X
t
f
s
-
 = 7 51
6 0
13
.
.
¥
 ¥ 1000
 
  
 = 116 A
 
  
d = 0; no load; no losses
 
  
pf = cos 90º = 0; lagging (as Vt >Ef)
 
 The phasor diagram is drawn in Fig. 8.115(b)
+
–
Ef
Vt = 13/ 3
= 7.51kV
÷
+
–
Xs
Ia
(a)
Ia
Ef
Vt
j X
Ia s
(b)
Ia
Vt
j X
Ia s
(c)
Ef
Fig. 8.115
 
 The machine appears as an inductor
 
  
wL = 13
1000
3
116
¥
¥
 = 2 p ¥ 50 L
 
 or 
L = 0.206 H
 
(ii)  
If = 300 A
 
  
Ef = 13
300
250
¥
 = 15.6 kV (line) or 9.0 kV (phase)
 
  
Ia  = 9
6
13
-
 = 231 A
 
  
d = 0; no load, no losses 
 
  
pf = 90º = 0; leading (as Vt < Ef)
 
 The machine appears like a capacitor.
 
  
1
wC  = 13
1000
231
¥
 = 
1
2
50
p ¥
C
 
 or 
C = 56.6 mF
EXAMPLE 8.44 A 400 MVA, 22 kV synchronous generator is tested for OCC and SCC. The following 
data are obtained from these characteristics extrapolated where needed.
 
If = 1120 A, VOC = 22 kV, ISC = 13.2 kA 
At If corresponding to ISC = Irated it is found that VOC (air-gap line) = 24.2 kV (line).
 (a) Determine Xs (saturated) in ohms and in pu. 

Synchronous Machines 
571
 (b) Determine SCR. 
 (c) Determine Xs (unsaturated) and If corresponding to VOC = 22.4 kV on air gap line. 
 (d) The generator when operating on no-load rated terminal voltage, ﬁnd the value of the generator 
current if it is short circuited. 
SOLUTION 
Base 
(MVA)B = 400, (kV)B = 22 (line) or 12.7 (phase) 
 
IB = 400
22 3  = 10.49 kA  
 
(Ohm)B = 22 3
10 49
.
 = 1.21 W 
 
(a)  
If = 1120 A
 
  
VOC  = Vrated = 22
3  = 12.7 kV (phase) 
 
  
ISC = 13.2 kA 
 
 Then 
Xs (sat) = 12 7
13 2
.
.
 = 0.962 W
 
 or 
0 962
1 21
.
.
 = 0.795 pu
 
(b)  
SCR = 
1
Xs(
)(
)
sat
pu
 
  
 = 
1
0 795
.
 = 1.258 
 
(c)  
ISC = Irated = 10.49 kA
 
  
VOC (air gap line) = 24.2 kV (line)
 
  
 = 13.97 kV (phase)
 
  
Xs (unsat) = 13 97
10 49
.
.
 = 1.33 W
 
  
 = 1 33
1 21
.
.
 = 1.1 pu
 
 For ﬁnding If  
SCR = of
of
¢
¢¢   (Fig. 8.15)
 
  
1.258 = of ¢
1120
 
 or 
If = of ¢ = 1120 ¥ 1.258 =1409 A
EXAMPLE 8.45 A 6.6 kV, Y-connected, 3-phase, synchronous motor operates at constant voltage and 
excitation. Its synchronous impedance is 2 + j 20 W/phase. The motor operates at 0.8 leading power factor 
while drawing 800 kW from the mains. Find the motor power factor when it is loaded to draw increased 
power of 1200 kW. 
SOLUTION 
Vt  = 6.6/
3  –0° = 3.81 –0° kV 
 
Ia = Ia –36. 9°

572 Electric Machines
 
Ia = 
800
3
6 6
0 8
¥
¥
.
.
 = 87.5 A 
 
Zs = 2 + j 20 = 20.1 –84.3º W , cos 84.3º = 0.1
 
E f  = 3.81 – 20.1 –84.3° ¥ 0.0875 –36.9° 
 
 = 4.724 – j 1.504 
or 
Ef = 4.96 kV (phase) 
Power input increases to 1200 kW; no change in excitation 
 
Ia = 
V
E
Z
t
f
s
– ∞-
– -
–
0
d
q
 = V
Z
t
s
– – q  – E
Z
f
s
– – (d + q)
 
Pe (in) = 3 Re [Vt –0º Ia* ]
 
 = 3 V
Z
V E
Z
t
s
t
f
s
2
cos
cos(
)
q
d
q
-
+
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
Substituting values 
 
1200
1000
3
¥
  = ( .
)
.
.
.
.
.
3 81
0 1
20 1
3 81
4 96
20 1
2 ¥
-
¥
 cos (d + 84.3º)
Solving we get 
 
d = 26.1º
 
Ia = 3 81
4 96
26 1
20 1 84 3
.
.
.
.
.
-
– -
∞
–
 = 113–22.1º
 
pf = cos 22.1º = 0.9265 leading
EXAMPLE 8.46 A 440 V, 50 Hz, D-connected synchronous generator has a direct-axis reactance of 
0.12 W and a quadrature-axis reactance of 0.075 W/phase; the armature resistance being negligible. The 
generator is supplying 1000 A at 0.8 lagging pf. 
 (a) Find the excitation emf neglecting saliency and assuming Xs = Xd.
 (b) Find the excitation emf accounting for saliency. 
Compare and comment on the results of parts (a) and (b). 
SOLUTION 
On equivalent star basis
 
Xd = 0.12/3 = 0.04 W, Xq = 0.075/3 = 0.025 W
 
(a) Saliency ignores; 
Xs = Xd
 
  
E f = (440/
3 ) –0º + j 0.04 ¥ 1000 – – 36.9º
 
  
 = 279.8 –6.6º
 
 or 
Ef = 279.8 V or 484.6 V (line)
 
(b)  
Ia = 1000 A, f = + 36.90º (lagging)
 
  
tan y = 
V
I X
V
I R
t
a
q
t
a
a
sin
cos
f
f
+
+
 
  
 = 254
0 6
1000
0 025
254
0 8
¥
+
¥
¥
.
.
.
 ;Vt = 440/
3  = 254 V
 
  
 = 0.873

Synchronous Machines 
573
 
 or 
y = 41.1º 
 
  
d  = y – f = 41.1º – 36.9º = 4.2º
 
  
Ef = Vt cos d + Id Xd; Id = Id sin y = 1000 sin 4.2 º
 
  
 = 254 cos 4.2º + 73.2 ¥ 0.04
 
  
 = 256.3 V or 444 V (line) 
EXAMPLE 8.47 A 1500 kVA, star-connected, 6.6-kV salient-pole synchronous motor has Xd = 23.2 W 
and Xq = 14.5 W/phase respectively; armature resistance being negligible. 
Calculate the excitation emf when the motor is supplying rated load at 0.8 leading pf. 
What maximum load the motor can supply without loss of synchronism, if the excitation is cut off? What will 
be the value of torque angle under this condition. 
SOLUTION 
f = – cos–1 0.8 = –36.9° (leading)
 
Ia = 
1500
3
6 6
¥ .  = 131 A; Vt = 6 6
3
.
 = 3.81 kV
 
tan y = V
I X
V
I R
t
a
q
t
a
a
sin
cos
f
f
-
+
 
 = -
¥
-
¥
¥
+
3 81
0 6
0 131
14 5
3 81
0 8
0
.
.
.
.
.
.
 = – 1.373
or 
y = – 53.9º 
 
d = f – y = – 36.9º – (– 53.9º) = 17º
 
Ef = Vt cos d – IdXd;  Id = Ia sin y = 0.131 ¥ sin – 53.9º = –  0.106
 
 = 3.81 cos 17º + 0.106 ¥ 23.2
 
 = 6.1 kV or 10.57 kV (line)
With excitation cut off, output is only reluctance power
 
Pe = V 2
t
X
X
X
X
d
q
d
q
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
2
sin 2d
 
 = (6.6)2 ¥ 
23 2
14 5
2
23 2
14 5
.
.
.
.
-
¥
¥
 = 5 63 kW
EXAMPLE 8.48 Figure 8.115 shows speed (frequency)-load characteristics of two generators supplying 
in parallel a load of 2.8 MW at 0.8 pf lagging:
 (a) At what frequency is the system operating and what  is the load supplied by each generator?
 (b) If the load is now increased by 1 MW, what will be the frequency and the load sharing?
 (c) In part (b) which should be the set point of G2, for the system frequency to be 50 Hz?
 What would be the load sharing now? 
SOLUTION 
The speed-load characteristics of the two generators are drawn in Fig. 8.116 on the sides of the load axis. 
These being linear can the repreoenited by the equation of a line as
 
y = mx + c

574 Electric Machines
where 
 
x = generator load, it is taken positive on both sides
 
y = system frequency, same for both generators
 
c = set frequency (on frequency axis)
 
m = slope, Hz/MW
On the ﬁgure 
 
AB = total load, (x1 + x2)
 
AC = x1, load supplied by G1 
 
BC = x2, load supplied by G2
 
OC = system frequency
 
(a) Substituting values.
G1 
y = – x1 + 51.8 (i) 
m = – 1 Hz/MW
G2 
y = – x2 + 51 (ii) 
m = – 1 Hz/MW
It follows
 
– x1 + 51.8 = – x2 + 51
or  
(x1 – x2) = 0.8  
(iii)
Solving 
x1 + x2 = 2.8 MW (total load, AB)
Load supplied by G1:  
x1 = 1.8 MW
Load supplied by G2:  
x2 = 1 MW
System frequency.  
f = y = – 1.8 + 51.8 = 50 Hz
 
(b) Load increased by 1 MW
 
x1 + x2 = 2.8 + 1 = 3.8 MW 
(iv) 
Solving Eqs (iii) and (iv) 
Load G1:  
x1 = 2.3 MW; increase 2.3 – 1.8 = 0.5 MW
Load G2:  
x2 = 1.5 MW; increase 1.5 – 1 = 0.5 MW
Note:  Additional load equally divided as the two charactertericties have the same slope
system frequency  
f = y = – 2.3 + 51.8 = 49.5 Hz
 
(c) The G1 can supply the load of 1.8 MW at the frequency of 50 Hz. The remaining power must be shared by G2. So 
the new load of G2 is 2 MW. For the new load, the set point of G2 must be
 
50 = – 1 ¥ 2 + set frequency
 
Set frequency = 52 Hz.
EXAMPLE 8.49 A generating station comprises four 125 MVA, 22 kV, 0.84 pf lagging synchronous 
generators with a frequency drop of 5 Hz from no-load to full. At a frequency of 50 Hz, three generators  
supply a steady load of 75 MW each while the balance is shared by the fourth generator (called swing 
generator)
 (a) For a total load of 260 MW at 50 Hz, ﬁnd the no-load frequency setting of the generators. 
 (b) With no change in governor setting as in part (a), ﬁnd the system frequency if the system load rises to 
310 MW.
 (c) Find the no-load frequency of the swing generator for the system frequency to be restored to 50 Hz for 
the load in part (b).
 (d) If the swing generator trips off what will be system frequency
SOLUTION 
 
(a) Total load = 260 MW; full load each generator = 125 ¥ 0.84 = 105 MW
 
  3 generators can supply a load of each 75 MW at 50 Hz.
 
  
So load shared by swing generator = 260 – 3 ¥ 75
1 Hz
MW
Slope =
A
B
C
D
E
MW
MW
1 MW
G1
G2
1 Hz
MW
Slope =
51.8
51
f
O
Fig. 8.116

Synchronous Machines 
575
 
  
 = 260 – 225 = 35 MW
 
  
Slope m = – 5
105  = .0476 Hz/MW = m
 
 At 75 MW fall in frequency for ﬁrst three generators = 75 ¥ .0476 = 3.57 Hz
 
 The system frequency = 50 Hz. By applying straight line equation y = mx+c; y = system frequency, m = slope,  x= 
load share and c = set frequency.
 
 So set frequency of G1, G2 and G3  
  
c = y – mx
 
  
 
  
 = 50 + 3.57 = 53.57 Hz = 53.6 Hz
 
 For 35 MW load supplied from swing generator, the set frequency 
 
  
 = 50 – 35 ¥ (– 0.0476) = 51.7 Hz
 
(b) Since all the four generator are having same slope, the load will be shared equally.
 
 \ 
New load sharing of each (G1, G2 and G3) = 75 + 50
4  = 87.5 MW
 
  
So new system frequency = 53.6 + (– 0.0476) ¥ 87.5 
 
  
 = 49.43 Hz
 
(c) If the system frequency is 50 Hz, then the three generators can supply only 75 MW each. So the remaining power 
is shared by swing generator 
 
  
New load of swing generator = 310 –3 ¥ 75 = 310 – 225 = 85 MW
 
  
So set frequency of swing generator = 50 – (–0.0476) ¥ 85 = 54.04 Hz
 
(d) The new system frequency after the swing generator trips off.
 
  
New load sharing = 310
3
 = 103.33 MW
 
  
New system frequency = 53.6 + (–0.0476) ¥ 103.33 
 
  
 = 48.68 Hz
8.22 
BRUSHLESS DC MOTORS 
The term brushless dc motors is applied to many conﬁgurations of ac synchronous motors in which 
semiconductor control is used to control stator currents such that maximum torque is obtained at a given 
speed. In a conventional motor the mechanical contactor, the commutator, maintains 90° elect degrees space 
displacement between the rotor and stator magnetic ﬁelds to provide for the required torque. 
Theoretically, the stator and rotor functions of a machine can be inverted, putting the ﬁeld system on the 
rotor. There is no advantage to be gained if conventional commutation is used, as the commutator sections 
are ﬁxed and the brush gear must rotate at the speed of the rotor ﬁeld. Solid-state switching by transistors or 
thyristors, triggered by position sensors can, however, replace the brush gear by fully electronic commutation, 
endowing small machines with a valuable control facility. In this method, each phase of stator winding is 
energized sequentially by a power transistor (or thyristor) by means of a signal from position sensor placed 
on the rotor. Because of rotor position feedback triggering of thyristors/transistors, the stator and rotor ﬁeld 
always remain in synchronism as the frequency of triggering automatically adjusts to motor speed. The 
length of on-time of the transistors determines motor torque magnitude. Thus by means of electronic circuitry 
brushless motors can be controlled for both constant and variable torque operation. 
The brushless dc motors, while being generally more expensive for the same kW rating, than commutator 
and brush motors possess certain advantages over conventional motors. These are: 

576 Electric Machines
 (a) They require little or no maintenance.
 (b) They have a much longer operating life. 
 (c) There is no risk of explosion or possibility of RF radiation due to arcing.
 (d) They produce no brush or commutator particles or gases as by -products of operation. 
 (e) They are capable of operation submersed in ﬂuids, combustible gases and may even be hermetically 
sealed.
 (f ) They are generally more efﬁcient than brush-type dc servomotors or con ventional dc motors. 
 (g) They provide a more rapid response and a fairly linear output torque vs input current characteristic, 
which lends itself to servo applications.
Schematic and Operation
The schematic diagram of a brushless dc motor is shown in Fig. 8.117. It also shows the three phases of the 
stator (armature) and rotor with d- and q-axes indicated therein. The stator is connected to a variable voltage 
 
* Inverter operation will be explained in details in Chapter 12. For the time being an SCR can be considered as 
a controlled switch. It goes ‘ON’ upon receiving ‘trig gering’ pulse and as another SCR is triggered, the circuit 
facilitates the current to commute to the newly ﬁred SCR. For conducting sequence of SCR pairs see Fig. 8.117. 
S1
S2
S5
S4
S3
S6
Sensor
Decoder
Gate drivers
If
d
N
S
q
a
b¢
b
c¢
c
+
–
VR
V1
II
RR
L
Current source inverter (CSI)
DC supply
(variable
voltage)
To SCR gates
Synchronous motor
a-axis
H1
H2
H3
a¢
+
–
Fig. 8.117 
Brushless dc motor; schematic and operation
current source through an inductor and an inverter* comprising six SCRs (S1 to S6). In place of SCRs, power 
transistor or FETs could be used according to power rating of the motor. Diodes are connected across SCRs 
to protect these from the L(di/dt) voltage induced in the armature coil undergoing commutation. Position 
sensors placed on the rotor provide signal to the sensor decoders and gate drivers which cause the SCRs to be 
ﬁred in sequence so as to be in synchronism with the rotor’s mechanical position. The stator and rotor ﬁelds 
thus get locked into each other and remain in synchronism at any rotor speed. 

Synchronous Machines 
577
Ideal phase currents are pulses of ± 1 lasting 120° elect each half and displaced from each other 120° elect 
phase to phase as shown in Fig. 8.118. Actual current wave forms differ from the ideal rectangular current 
waves by gradual rises and falls. Such an inverter where ac current ﬂows in form of constant current pulses is 
known as Current Source Inverter (CSI).
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
H1
H2
H3
H1
H2
H3
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1,5
1,6
2,6
2,4
3,4
3,5
Sensor
codes
120° elect
spacing
60° elect
spacing
SCRs
conducting
Ib
Ia
Ic
+I
–I
+I
–I
+I
–I
0°
60°
120°
180°
240°
300°
360°
wt
Fig. 8.118 Current wave forms, SCRs conducting sequence and sensor codes 
Sequence of inverter ﬁring as shown in Fig. 8.118 immediately follows from the phase current wave 
forms. For this sequence of SCR ﬁring 120° or 60° elect spaced sensor codes are generated by means of 
light sensitive or Hall effect sensors. Figure 8.118 illustrates the case of 120° spacing wherein these light 
sensitive sensors are shown ﬁxed 120° apart receiving light from a ﬁxed light source. The rotor carries a 
commutating disc with 180° cut-out so that as it rotates with the rotor the light sensors receive light for 180° 
and are dark for 180°. Sensors produce logic ‘1’ while receiving light and logic ‘0’ when dark. It is easily 
seen that the three sensors (ﬁxed) and commutating disc (rotating with rotor) produce sensor code sequence 
as given in Fig. 8.118 from which electronic circuitry generates gating pulses for ﬁring SCRs in the sequence 
as indicated in the ﬁgure. 
The relative position of the commutating disc can be adjusted w.r.t. the rotor poles (i.e. w.r.t. d- and 
q-axis). For the instantaneous rotor position (with discs ﬁxed as indicated) it is seen that the sensor code is 
just going to change from 101 to 100. The phase ‘a’ is in the middle of its current pulse when the current is 
commuting from phase b to c. At this instant the resultant stator ﬁeld 

F1  is oriented along the a-axis as shown in
Fig. 8.119 (motoring current’s positive direction is opposite to the positive direction of induced emf ); check 

578 Electric Machines
in phase ‘a’ by applying Fleming’s right hand rule. North pole on stator is thus oriented along the a-axis. 
This north pole pushes the rotor north to create motoring torque (angle between rotor and stator N-poles is 
b). An index marker can be made on the commutating disc which always points to stator north as the stator 
ﬁeld rotates in synchronism with the rotor. This index makes an angle g with the q-axis of the rotor (lagging 
d-axis by 90°). Obviously (b + g) = 90°. The angle may be adjusted by moving the commutating disc on the 
shaft related to the rotor poles.
A permanent magnet brushless dc motor using Hall effect sensors with 60° elect spacing is shown in 
Fig. 8.120. Sensors generate logic’ l’ when exposed to N-pole and ‘0’ otherwise. The sensor code sequence 
for this arrangement is easily visualized and is given in Fig. 8.117. With H3 located along a-axis, the sensor 
code at the rotor position shown is switching from 000 to 001, which means the current is in the middle of 
conduction for phase ‘a¢and it is changing over from b to c. Thus F1 is directed along a-axis or stator N-pole 
is along q-axis i.e. g = 0 (see Fig. 8.118). Permanent magnet motors are usually adjusted for this value of g 
(this corresponds to b = 90°, best for torque production). 
Circuit Model 
Novotny-Abbas circuit model of a CSI fed brushless dc motor is drawn in Fig. 8.120. Currents (balanced) 
ﬂowing in the synchronous machine of the brushless dc machine set up of Fig. 8.116 are rectangular pulses ac 
as shown in the wave forms of Fig. 8.118. Actual currents are somewhat rounded pulses. Our analysis will be 
based on the fundamental ac current and harmonic currents will be ignored. These produce space harmonic 
air-gap ﬁelds which being nonstationary w.r.t. the rotor ﬁeld produce net zero torque. Let 
S
ws
F1
H1
H2O
F2
ws
Index
Commutating
disc
H3
ws
d-axis
a-axis
q-axis
H
H
H
1
2
3
,
,
light sensors
North pole
of F1
a
b¢
b
a¢
c
b
g
N
S
ws
N
c¢
Fig. 8.119 Brushless dc motor arrangement of sensors; 120° elect sensor code switching from 101 to 100 

Synchronous Machines 
579
 
II = current fed to the inverter by dc source 
Then 
Im (rms phase current) = fundamental current 
 
 = ( 6 /p )II ; can be shown by Fourier series
In Fig. 8.121(a) the synchronous machine model is the usual one characterized by direct-axis synchronous 
reactance Xd and excitation emf Ef where Xd and Ef both vary directly with speed which governs the frequency 
of operation. Ef magnitude is of course related to the rotor ﬁeld current by the magnetization characteristic. 
The corresponding phasor diagram is drawn in Fig. 8.121(b) where Im, the phase current, is drawn leading 
V (ac output voltage/terminal voltage of synchronous machine) by angle f. Leading current operation is 
performed as it helps in extinction of current in SCR commutation. 
We shall now create the ac model of CSI with the conditions: 
 
(i) Iae  = Im
 (ii) Circuit parameter of model is resistance Rae. 
 (iii) Ege  and Iae  are in phase. 
These conditions will assure that this part of the model indeed represents the equivalent dc machine.
a¢
b
c
a
b¢
a
c¢
a
b
a¢
c
b¢
d
t
-axis
= 60°
we
d
t
-axis at   = 0
a-axis axis
q
d
–d
–q
d
q
ws
H2
H1
H3
S
N
N
S
–a
c¢
N
N
30°
30°
S
S
N
S
S
N
a
Fig. 8.120 
Permanent magnet brush less dc motor; 4 poles, 60° elect spacing, g = 0, sensor code switching from 
000 to 001 

580 Electric Machines
It is also seen from Fig. 8.119 that the phase angle between Im  = Iae  and Ef is indeed angle g . Now 
equating the converted power per phase of synchronous machine to that of equivalent dc machine we have
 
Im Ef cos g = Iae Ege;  Im = Iae
or 
Eag = Ef cos g  
(8.147)
Translating this result to the phasor diagram (Fig. 8.120(b)), it becomes clear that V and Ege are related by 
a ﬁctitious reactance Xe as shown in the circuit of Fig. 8.120(a). 
We shall now obtain the relationship for VTe and Rae. Neglecting inverter losses 
 
VRII = 3VTe Im = 3VTe (
6 /p)II
or 
VTe = VR (p/3
6 )
Imagining a short circuit at Ege i.e. Ege = 0, we have
 
Iae (SC) = V
R
Te
ae
or 
Rae = 
V
I
Te
ae(
)
SC  = 
V
I
R
I
( /
)
(
/ )
(
)
p
p
3 6
6
SC  = (p2/18)
V
I
R
I (
)
SC
But 
V
I
R
I (
)
SC  = RR; internal resistance of the rectiﬁer feeding the inverter
Then 
Rae = (p2/18)RR 
(8.148)
VTe
+
–
Iae
Im
Xd
Xe
Rae
+
–
+
–
+
–
Ef
(a) Ac Model
Ege
V
CSI
Syn
machine
Iae
ae
R
j
X
Iae e
j
X
Im d
F2
Ege
d
g
f
V
Ef
q-axis
F1
d-axis
Im
Iae =
VTe
b
(b) Phasor diagram
Ea
+
–
Ege
Rae
Iae
VTe
+
–
(c) Equivalent dc machine
Fig. 8.121 Circuit model of brushless dc machine

Synchronous Machines 
581
Characteristics of Brushless DC Motors 
With reference to Fig. 8.121(c) 
 
Ege = VTe – IaeRae 
(8.149) 
As already shown in Eq. (8.147) 
 
Ege = Ef cos g  
(8.150)
But Ef can be written as 
 
Ef = Kf Ff ws cos g  
(8.151)
where  
Ff = ﬂux/pole caused by If acting alone. 
Substituting values in Eq. (8.149) 
 
Kf Ff ws cos g = VTe – IaeRae 
or 
ws = V
I
R
K
Te
ae
ae
f
f
-
F cosg  
(8.152)
Except for the effect of cos g, this equation is the same as in conventional dc machine.
The torque developed is given by
 
T = P
s
out
w
 = 3V Iae
s
cosf
w
;
 
 = 3I
E
ae
ge
s
w
;  Vcos f = Ege 
(8.153)
Using Eq. (8.151), we get
 
T = 3Kf Ff Iae cos g 
(8.154)
If the magnetisation characteristic is assumed liner
 
Ef = K¢f If ws cos g 
(8.155)
The speed and torque equation then are 
 
ws = 
V
I
R
K I
Te
ae
ae
f
f
-
¢
cosg  
(8.156)
 
T = 3K¢ If Iae cos g 
(8.157)
In a synchronous motor as the ﬁeld current is reduced its pf becomes more lagging. But in a bruhsless 
dc motor (which is a synchronous motor with rotor position feedback) the decrease of ﬁeld current If causes 
increase in speed as per Eq. (8.156) like in a conventional dc motor. This can be qualitatively explained by 
the reasoning that follows. With reference to Fig. 8.121 as If is decreased, Ef and so Ege reduce and as Rae is 
very small, this causes a disproportionate increase in Iae = Im. The result is rotor acceleration. Increased rotor 
speed counters Ef reduction and Im increases as the voltage drop ImXd increases with increase in frequency 
of operation. The result is a steady operation at a new and higher speed at a less leading or even lagging pf. 
PM Brushless DC Machine 
Small size brushless dc machines are usually PM kinds. In such a motor rotor mmf F2 remains ﬁxed and also 
the angle g in these machines is set to zero which mean that F2 and F1 (armature mmf ) are displaced by an 
angle of 90° (best for torque developed). Further, the phase winding resistance R1 is not negligible so must 

582 
Electric Machines
be added to Rae in the dc model. The phasor diagram for g = 0 is drawn in Fig. 8.122 wherein the following 
observations are made: 
VTe
q-axis
b = 90°
d
f
=
I
I
m
ae
=
j
X
Im d
j
X
Iae e
ImR1
Ege
Ef
d-axis
V
F2
 
Fig. 8.122 
Phasor diagram of PM brushless motor
 
1. Xc = capacitive reactance = Xd (in magnitude). 
 
2. PF angle is lagging. 
The relationship of Eqs (8.152) and (8.154) for speed and torque apply except that Eq. (8.124) now modiﬁes 
as
 
Ege = VTe – Iae (Rae + R1) 
(8.158)
 
 Synchronous machine – 3-phase balanced stator currents produce a ﬁeld rotating at synchronous speed 
(corresponding to frequency of stator currents and number of stator poles). Rotor with dc excited 
poles, same number as stator poles, when rotating in same direction as stator ﬁeld and same speed lock 
into stator ﬁeld (synchronizes) producing a torque proportional to sine of the electrical angle between 
resultant air-gap ﬂux (poles) and rotor poles.
 
 Synchronous speed, ns = 120 f
P
rpm, ws = 4p f
P
rad (mech)/s; in general ns = 60
2p ws
 
 Excitation emf (Ef) is the emf induced in the armature winding due to ﬁeld current (If) only. At no-
load, Ef = Vt (terminal voltage)
 
 Synchronous generator ( Ia  in the direction of E f)
 
(i) When Ia lags Ef  by 90°, the armature reaction ﬁeld 

Fa  is demagnetizing. It is in direct opposition 
to the rotor ﬁeld 

Ff .
 
(ii) Ia in phase with Ef, 

Fa  is cross-magnetizing, at 90 to 

Ff .
 
(iii) Ia leads Ef by 90°, 

Fa  is magnetizing in the same direction as 

Ff .
 
 In a synchronous motor, the direction of Ia  reverses and so do the conclusions (i) and (ii) above 
interchange magnetizing and de-magnetizing.

Synchronous Machines 
583
 
 The armature reaction effects can be simulated by an armature reactance Xa in series with Ia. Further, 
Xa when combined with armature leakage reactance is called the synchronous reactance (Xs = Xa + Xl) 
of the machine. Its value is of the order of 0.5 to 1 pu; far larger than in a transformer.
 
 To ﬁnd the characteristics, the synchronous machine is run as generator at synchronous speed ns by a 
prime mover.
 
 OCC – Open Circuit Characteristic – plot of VOC (line) vs If. It is the magnetizatic characteristic of the 
machine. A line from the origin tangential to the linear part of OCC is called the air-gap line.
 
 SCC – Short Circuit Characteristic – plot of short circuit current ISC vs If ; it is linear as If is very small.
 
 By measuring the mechanical input to generator, we ﬁnd machine losses – I2R loss, local core loss 
and windage and friction loss. Windage and friction loss is found for OCC with ﬁeld unexcited. The 
remaining loss is short circuit load loss.
 
  
Ra (eff ) = 
short circuit load loss/phase
(short circuit armature current)2
 
 Determination of synchronous reactance from OCC and SCC
 
  
Xs (unsaturated) = V
I
OC
SC
/ 3  at any point on air-gap line
 
  
Xs (adjusted) = V
I
OC
SC
/ 3 , If corresponding to Vt (rated) on OCC
 
 Voltage regulation 
 
  
 = 
V
V
V
t
I
t
t
f
(
)
(
)
(
)
no load
rated
rated
same as at full load -
speciﬁed pf
 
 ZPFC (Zero pf Characteristic) The synchronous generator is loaded with purely inductive load (zero 
pf  lagging). The load is adjusted such that rated current is drawn from generator, while the ﬁeld 
current is adjusted to give various terminal voltages. The plot of Vt vs If is the ZPFC.
 
 By the Potier Triangle method, the armature reaction ampere-turns (ATa) and leakage reactance of 
the machine can be determined from OCC and ZPFC. The voltage regulation can then be found more 
accurately than by the synchronous reactance method.
 
 The voltage regulation can be found accurately by the MMF method and ASA method.
 
 Circuit model (equivalent circuit) of the synchronous machine – armature resistance negligible
 
 Governing equations
 
 Generating 
 
  
Vt  = E f  – jXs Ia
 
 E f  lead Vt  by angle d (power or torque angle)
 
 Motoring 
 
  
Vt  = E f  + jXs Ia
 
 E f  lead Vt  by angle d 
 
 Starting – synchronous motor is non-self starting, started by an auxiliary motor (induction motor) and 
then synchronized to mains. Before loading, it is ﬂoating on the mains; drawing or delivering almost 
zero current.

584 Electric Machines
 
 Operating characteristic
 
  
Pe = V E
X
t
f
s
 sind ; power-angle characteristic
 
 where 
Pe = Vt Ia cosq ; cosq = pf
 
  
Pe (max) = V E
X
t
f
s
 
 If Pe > Pe (max), the machine loses synchronism or motor falls out of step 
 
 Fixed load variable excitation
 
 If controls the power factor
 
  Normal excitation – unity power factor
 
  
Over-excitation – leading pf in motoring mode
 
  
 lagging pf in generating mode
 
  
Under-excitation – lagging pf in motoring mode
 
  
 Leading pf in generating mode
 
 Salient-pole synchronous generator/motor – Two reaction theory 
 
  Armature reaction mmf Fa  is divided into two components. One along d-axis (high permeance) and 
other along q-axis (low permeance). It leads to the concept of direct axis reactance Xd and quadrature 
axis reactance Xq (Xd > Xq). Accordingly, Ia  is divided into two components, Iq in phase with E f  
(excitation emf ) and Id  in quadrature to E f . The phasor equation of the generator is then
 
  
E f = V
I
t
a
+
Ra + jXd Id  + jXq Iq
 
 Angle between E f  and Ia  is given by
 
  
tan y = 
V
I X
V
I X
t
a
q
t
d
q
sin
cos
f
f
+
+
(generating)
 
tan y = V
I X
V
I R
t
a
q
t
a
a
sin
cos
f
f
-
-
 (motoring)
 
  
f = pf angle, angle between Vt  and Ia
 
  
 = positive for lagging, negative for leading
 
  
d = y – f (generating)
 
  
d = f – y (motoring)
 
 Excitation emf is found scalar equation
 
  
Ef = Vt cos d + IqRa + Id Xd (generating)
 
  
Ef = Vt   cos d – IqRa – Id Xd (motoring)
 
 Power angle characteristic
 
  
Pe = E V
X
V
X
X
X X
f
b
d
b
d
q
d
q
sin
(
) sin
d
d
+
-
2
2
2
Reluctance power





 
 Hunting – as electrical power exchange of a synchronous machine with bus bar is governed by
sin d, the machine electromagnetic torque T μ sin d or T μ Dd for small changes. This is a spring-
like action which combined with rotor inertia causes the rotor to oscillate whenever there is electrical 

Synchronous Machines 
585
 8.1 The open- and short-circuit tests data on a 
3-phase, 1 MVA, 3.6 kV, star-con nected syn-
chronous generator is given below: 
 
 If (A) 
60 
70 
80
 
  
90 
100 
110
 
 VOC (line) (V) 
2560 
3000 
3360
 
  
3600 
3800 
3960
 
 SC (A) 
180
 
 Find: 
 
(a) The unsaturated synchronous reactance.
 
(b) The adjusted synchronous reactance.
 
(c) The short-circuit ratio.
 
(d) The excitation voltage needed to give 
rated voltage at full-load, 0.8 lagging pf. 
Use adjusted synchronous reactance. 
 
(e) Voltage regulation for the load speciﬁed in 
part (d). 
 8.2 A 3-phase 2.5 MVA, 6.6 kV synchronous 
generator gave the following data for OCC at 
synchronous speed: 
 
 If (A) 
16 
20 
25
 
  
32 
45 
 
 VOC (line) (V) 
4400 
5500 
6600
 
  
7700 
8800
 
 With the armature short-circuited and full-
load current following, the ﬁeld cur rent is 
18 A. When the machine is supplying full-
load current at zero pf at rated voltage, the 
ﬁeld current is 45 A. 
 
  Determine the leakage reactance in W per 
phase and the full-load armature reactance in 
terms of equivalent ﬁeld amperes. Find also 
the ﬁeld current and voltage regulation when 
the machine is supplying full-load at 0.8 pf 
lagging at rated voltage. Neglect armature 
resistance.
 8.3 In Prob. 8.1 the armature leakage reactance is 
estimated to be 0.15 pu. Solve for part (d) by 
drawing the mmf phasor diagram.
 8.4 A 1 MVA, 11 kV, 3-phase star-connected syn-
chronous machine has the follow ing OCC test 
data: 
 
 If (A) 
50 
110
 
  
140 
180 
 
 VOC (line) (V) 
7000 
12500
 
  
13750 
15000
 
  The short-circuit test yielded full-load 
current at a ﬁeld current of 40 A. The ZPF 
test yielded full-load current at rated terminal 
voltage for a ﬁeld current of 150 A. The 
armature resistance is negligible.
 
  Calculate the ﬁeld current needed for the 
machine to draw full-load 0.8 pf leading 
current when operated as the motor connected 
to an 11 kV supply. 
 8.5 A synchronous motor is drawing power from 
a large system (assumed inﬁnite) with its 
ﬁeld current adjusted so that the armature 
current has unity power factor. Assume the 
armature resistance and leakage reactance to 
be negligible. 
 
  With the load torque remaining constant, 
the ﬁeld current of the motor is raised by 10%. 
 
or mechanical disturbance. These oscillations appear both on electrical and mechanical parts of the 
machine. It results in shaft fatigue and unacceptable voltage oscillation. This phenomenon is called 
hunting and must be prevented.
 
  Damper winding called amortisseur windings in form of short circuited copper bars are placed in 
rotor pole faces which provides damping to quickly damp and the oscillation.
 
 Synduction motor The damping winding at start produce an induction torque which makes the 
synchronous motor self-starting.

586 Electric Machines
Discuss by means of mmf phasor diagrams 
the changes that occur in the power output, 
magnitude and phase angle of the armature 
current and torque angle. 
 
 If, instead of the ﬁeld current, the load torque 
is increased by 10%, what changes will occur? 
 8.6 Discuss the problem posed in Prob. 8.5 by 
using the circuit model of the motor. 
 8.7  The full-load torque angle of a synchronous 
motor at rated voltage and frequency is 
30° elect. The stator resistance is negligible. 
How would the torque angle be affected by 
the following changes? 
 
(a) The load torque and terminal voltage 
remaining constant, the excitation and 
frequency are raised by 10%. 
 
(b) The load power and terminal voltage 
remaining constant, the excitation and 
frequency are reduced by 10%. 
 
(c) The load torque and excitation remaining 
constant, 
the 
terminal 
voltage 
and 
frequency are raised by 10%. 
 
(d) The load power and excitation remaining 
constant, 
the 
terminal 
voltage 
and 
frequency are reduced by 10%. 
 8.8 A 1000 kVA, 3-phase, 11 kV, star-connected 
synchronous motor has negligible resistance 
and a synchronous reactance of 35 W per 
phase. 
 
(a) What is the excitation emf of the motor if 
the power angle is 10º and the motor takes 
rated current at (i) lagging power factor, 
and (ii) leading power factor. 
 
(b) What is the mechanical power developed 
and the power factor in part (a)? 
 
(c) At what power angle will this motor 
operate if it develops an output of 500 kW 
at the rated line voltage and with an 
excitation emf of 10 kV (line)? What is 
the corresponding power factor? 
 
(d) What is the minimum excitation at which 
the motor can deliver 500 kW at the rated 
line voltage without losing synchronism? 
 8.9 A 1000 kVA, 6.6 kV, 3-phase star-connected 
synchronous generator has a syn chronous 
reactance of 25 W per phase. It supplies full-
load current at 0.8 lagging pf and a rated 
terminal voltage. Compute the terminal 
voltage for the same excitation when the 
generator supplies full-load current at 0.8 
leading pf. 
 8.10 A 750 kW, 11 kV, 3-phase, star-connected 
synchronous motor has a synchronous reac-
tance of 35 W/phase and negligible resistance. 
Determine the excitation emf per phase when 
the motor is operating on full-load at 0.8 pf 
leading. Its efﬁciency under this condition is 
93%. 
 8.11 A synchronous generator having a synchro-
nous reactance of 1.0 pu is connected to in-
ﬁnite bus-bars of 1.0 pu voltage through two 
parallel lines each of 0.5 pu reactance. 
 
(a) Calculate the generator excitation, ter-
minal voltage and power output when 
it delivers rated current (1.0 pu) at unity 
power factor at its terminals. What active 
and reactive power are delivered to the 
inﬁnite bus-bars? 
 
(b) Calculate the generator excitation and 
terminal voltage when the generator is 
delivering zero active power and 0.5 pu 
lagging reactive power to the inﬁnite bus-
bars. 
 
(c) With one line disconnected, can the 
generator deliver the same active power to 
the inﬁnite bus-bars at the same excitation 
as in part (a)? Explain. 
 8.12 Consider the synchronous generator-motor set 
of Ex. 8.7 whose data are repeated below. 
 
 Generator: 1200 kVA, 3-phase, 3.3 kV, 
2-pole, 50 Hz star-connected, Xs = 4.55 W/ph
 
 Motor: 1000 kW, 3-phase, 3.3 kV, 24-pole, 
50 Hz, star-connected, Xs = 3.24 W/ph 
 
(a) The set is operating at rated terminal 
voltage and frequency with the motor 
drawing 800 kW at upf Compute the 

Synchronous Machines 
587
excitation emfs of both the machines. 
 
 With the excitation emfs held ﬁxed at 
these values, what maximum torque can 
the motor supply? Also determine the 
armature current, terminal, voltage and 
power factor under this condition. 
 
(b) The motor shaft load is now gradually 
increased while the ﬁeld currents of both 
the generator and motor are continuously 
adjusted so as to maintain the rated 
terminal voltage and upf operation. What 
maximum torque can the motor now 
deliver without losing synchronism?
 8.13 A 2500 V, 3-phase, star-connected motor has a 
synchronous reactance of 5 W per phase. The 
motor input is 1000 kW at rated voltage and 
an excitation emf of 3600 V (line). Calculate 
the line current and power factor. 
 8.14 Repeat Prob. 8.13 considering a motor resis-
tance per phase of 0.1 W. 
 8.15 A 20 MVA, 11 kV, 3-phase, delta-connected 
synchronous motor has a synchro nous imped-
ance of 15 W/phase. Windage, friction and 
iron losses amount to 1200 kW. 
 
(a) Find the value of the unity power factor 
current drawn by the motor at a shaft load 
of 15 MW. What is the excitation emf 
under this condition? 
 
(b) If the excitation emf is adjusted to 15.5 kV 
(line) and the shaft load is adjusted so 
that the motor draws upf current, ﬁnd the 
motor output (net). 
 8.16 A 600 V, 6-pole, 3-phase, 50 Hz, star-connected 
synchronous motor has a resis tance and 
synchronous reactance of 0.4 W and 7 W 
respectively. It takes a current of 15 A at upf 
when operating with a certain ﬁeld current. 
With the ﬁeld current remaining constant, the 
load torque is increased until the motor draws 
a current of 50 A. Find the torque (gross) 
developed and the new power factor. 
 8.17 A 500 V, 3-phase, mesh-connected motor 
has an excitation emf of 600 V. The motor 
synchronous impedance is (0.4 + j5) W while 
the windage, friction and iron losses are 
1200 W. What maximum power output can 
it deliver? What is the corresponding line 
current, pf and motor efﬁciency?
 8.18 A 3-phase synchronous generator has a direct-
axis synchronous reactance of 0.8 pu and a 
quadrature-axis synchronous reactance of 
0.5 pu. The generator is supplying full-load 
at 0.8 lagging pf at 1.0 pu terminal voltage. 
Calculate the power angle and the no-load 
voltage if excitation remains unchanged. 
 8.19 A 3.5 MVA, slow-speed, 3-phase synchronous 
generator rated at 6.6 kV has 32 poles. Its 
direct- and quadrature-axis synchronous 
reactances as measured by the slip test are 
9.6 and 6 W respectively. Neglecting armature 
resistance, determine the regulation and the 
excitation emf needed to maintain 6.6 kV 
at the terminals when supplying a load of 
2.5 MW at 0.8 pf lagging. What maximum 
power can the generator supply at the rated 
terminal voltage, if the ﬁeld becomes open-
circuited? 
 8.20 A salient-pole synchronous motor has Xd = 
0.85 pu and Xq = 0.55 pu. It is connected to 
bus-bars of 1.0 pu voltage, while its excitation 
is adjusted to 1.2 pu. Calculate the maximum 
power output, the motor can supply without 
loss of synchronism. 
 
 Compute the minimum pu excitation that 
is necessary for the machine to stay in 
synchronism while supplying the full-load 
torque (i.e. 1.0 pu power). 
 8.21 From the phasor diagram of the salient-pole 
synchronous machine given in Fig. 8.73 prove 
that 
 
 
tan d = 
I X
I R
V
I X
I R
a
q
a
a
t
q
q
a
a
cos
sin
sin
cos
f
f
f
f
-
-
-
 8.22 Two star-connected generators are connected 
in parallel and supply a balanced load of 
1500 kVA at 11  kV line voltage and 0.8 lagging 
power factor. The synchronous reactances of 
the two machines respectively are: 35 W and 

588 Electric Machines
40 W. The primemover governors of the two 
machines are adjusted so as to equally share 
the power load. The phase current in one 
machine is 43 A, at a lagging power factor. 
Calculate: 
 
(a) the phase current in the second machine, 
 
(b) the induced emf of each machine, and 
 
(c) the power factor at which each machine 
operates. 
 8.23 Calculate the synchronizing coefﬁcient (in kW 
and Nm per mechanical degree) at full-load 
for a 1000 kVA, 0.8 pf (lag), 6.6 kV, 8-pole, 
star-connected cylindrical rotor generator 
of negligible resistance and synchronous 
reactance of 0.8 pu.
 8.24 A 3-phase hydroelectric synchronous genera-
tor is read to be 110 MW, 0.8 pf lagging, 6-kV, 
Y- connected, 50 Hz, 100-rpm. Determine: 
 
(a) the number of poles 
 
(b) the kVA rating 
 
(c) the prime-mover rating if the full-load 
generator efﬁciency is 97.1 % (leave out 
ﬁeld loss). 
 
(d) the output torque of the prime-mover.
 8.25 1000 kV A, 50 Hz, 2300 V, 3-phase 
synchronous generator gave the following test 
data:
 
 Field current (A) 40 
80 
100 
120
 
  
140 
170 
240
 
 VOC (Line)(V) 
1000 1900 
2200 
2450
 
  
2600 2750 
3000
 
 ISC (A) 
2000 
 
(a) Find the ﬁeld current required to deliver 
rated kVA at 0.8 lagging pf at rated 
terminal voltage.
 
(b) The OC voltage at this ﬁeld current. 
 
(c) The maximum kVAR that the machine 
can deliver as a synchronous condenser at 
rated voltage, if the rotor heating limits the 
ﬁeld current to 240 A.
 8.26 A 3-phase synchronous generator feeds into 
a 22 kV grid. It has a synchronous reactance 
of 8 W/ phase and is delivering 12 MW and 
6 MVAR to the system. Determine:
 
(a) the phase angle of the current 
 
(b) the power angle 
 
(c) the generated emf.
 8.27 A 6.6 kV, 3-phase synchronous machine has 
an open circuit characteristic given by:
 
 Field current (A)  60  
80  
100  120
 
  
140  
160  
180
 
 Armature emf 
5.3  
6.2  
6.8  7.2
 
 (kV) (line) 
7.5  
7.7  
7.9 
 
  In short-circuit a ﬁeld current of 80 A gave 
an armature current of 360 A. Determine the 
saturated synchronous reactance.
 
  When developing 400 kW of mechanical 
power as a motor calculate the ﬁeld current 
for pfs of 0.8 lagging, unity and 0.8 leading. 
 8.28 A 200 kV A, 3.3 kV, 50 Hz three-phase 
synchronous generator is star-connected. The 
effective armature resistance is 5 W/phase and 
the synchronous reactance is 29.2 W/phase. At 
full-load calculate the voltage regulation for 
the following power factors:
 
(a) 0.707 leading 
(b) unity
 
(c) 0.707 lagging
 8.29 A 3-phase, 4-pole star-connected synchronous 
motor has a resistance of 0.25 W/phase and 
a synchronous reactance of j 2.5 W/phase. 
The ﬁeld is excited such that the open-
circuit voltage of the machine is 25 kV. 
The motor is synchronized to 22 kV mains. 
Calculate the maximum load on the motor 
(including rotational loss) before it could 
lose synchronism. What is the correspond ing 
current and power factor?
 8.30 A 6-pole, 3-phase, 50 Hz synchronous motor 
is supplied from 6.6 kV busbars. Its open-
circuit voltage is 3.3 kV/phase. The per phase 
resistance and synchronous reactance are 
0.6 W and 4.8 W respectively. Calculate the 
current, power factor and torque developed, 
when the excitation emf lags the busbar 
voltage by 15°, 25°, and 35° (elect).

Synchronous Machines 
589
 8.31 A 25 kVA, 400 V, 3-phase synchronous gen-
erator delivers rated kVA at rated voltage 
at 0.8 pf lagging. The per phase (star basis) 
armature resistance and synchronous reac-
tance respectively are 0.66 W and 7.1 W. The 
ﬁeld winding is supplied 10.6 A at 110 V. The 
friction and winding loss is estimated to be 
480 W and iron loss as 580 W. Calculate:
 
(a) the full-load efﬁciency.
 
(b) the terminal voltage when the load is 
thrown off.
 8.32 A 15 kW. 400 V, 3-phase, star-connected 
synchronous motor has a synchronous 
impedance of 0.4 + j4 W. Find the voltage to 
which the motor should be excited to give a 
full-load output at 0.866 leading pf. Assume 
an armature efﬁciency of 93%. Also calculate 
the mechanical power developed.
 8.33 A 
3-phase, 
star-connected 
synchronous 
generator is rated at 1200 kVA, l l kV. On 
short-circuit a ﬁeld  current of 55 A gives 
full-load current. The OC voltage with the 
same excitation is 1580 V/phase. Calculate 
the voltage regulation at (a) 0.8 lagging and 
(b) 0.8 leading pf. Neglect armature resistance.
 8.34 A 1500 kW. 3-phase, star-connected 2300 V, 
50 Hz synchronous motor has a synchronous 
reactance of 2 W/phase. The motor is supplied 
from a 3-phase, star-connected, 2300 V, 
1750 kVA turbo generator whose synchronous 
reactance is 2.8 W/phase. When the motor is 
drawing full-load power, at upf, calculate: 
(a) the induced emf of the generator, and (b) 
emf of the motor. What maximum power can 
ﬂow from the generator to the motor With 
machine excitations held ﬁxed?
 8.35 A 13.8 kV 1250 kVA 3-pahse, star-connected 
synchronous generator has a resistance of 
2.1 W/phase. Data for Its OCC and ZPFC 
characteristics is given below:
 
 Field current (A) 
40  
50  
110
 
  
140  
180
 
 Open circuit 
7.28  
8.78  
15.68
 
 volts (line) 
17.25  
18.82
 
 Zero pf volts 
0  
1.88  
10.66
 
 (line) 
13.17  
15 68
 
 Find the voltage regulation of the generator 
for full-load 0.8 pf lagging.
 8.36 A 440 V, 50 Hz, Y-connected salient-pole 
synchronous generator has a direct-axis 
reactance of 0.12 W and a quadrature-axis 
reactance of 0.075 W per phase, the armature 
resistance being negligible. The generator is 
supplying 1000 A at 0.8 lagging pf.
 
(a) Find the excitation emf, neglecting 
saliency and assuming Xs = Xd.
 
(b) Find the excitation emf accounting for 
saliency.
 8.37 Figure P.8.36 shows two generators supplying 
in parallel a load of 2.8 MW at 0.8 pf lagging:
 
(a) At what frequency is the system operating 
and what is the load supplied by each 
generator? 
Slope 1 Hz/MW
Slope 1 Hz/MW
51.8
51
G1
G2
1MW
MW
Fig. P. 8.36
 
(b) If the load is now increased by 1 MW, 
what will be the new frequency and the 
load sharing? 
 
(c) In part (b) which should be the set point of 
G2 for the system frequency to be 50 Hz? 
What would be the load sharing now?
 8.38 A generating station comprises four 125 kVA, 
22 kV, 0.84 pf lagging synchronous generators 
With a frequency drop of 5 Hz from no-load 
to full-load, at a frequency of 50 Hz, three 
generators supply a steady load of 75 MW 
each while the balance is shared by the fourth 

590 Electric Machines
generator (called swing generator).
 
(a) For a total load of 260 MW at 50 Hz, 
ﬁnd the no-load frequency setting of the 
generators.
 
(b) With no change in governor setting as in 
part (a), ﬁnd the system frequency if the 
system load rises to 310 MW.
 
(c) Find the no-load frequency of the swing 
generator for the system frequency to be 
restored to 50 Hz for the load in part (b). 
 
(d) Find the system frequency if the swing 
generator trips off with the load as in 
part (b), the governor setting remaining 
unchanged as in part (a).
 8.39 An 11 kV, 3-phase alternative has Xd and Xq of 
0.6 pu and 0.1 pu respectively and negligible 
armature resistance. It is delivaring rated kVA 
at 0.8 pf lag. Determine its generated emf.
 8.40 Compute the distribution factor and coil span 
factor for a 3 phase winding with 4 slots per 
pole per phase and with coil span of 10 slot 
pitch.
 8.41 A 3.3 kV, 3 phase star connected synchronous 
generator has full load current of 100 A. Under 
shot circuit condition, it takes 5 A ﬁeld current 
to produce full load short circuit current. The 
open circuit voltage is 900 V (line to line). 
Determine synchronous reactance per phase 
and voltage regulation for 0.8 pf lagging. 
Assume armature resistance was 0.9 ohms/
phase. 
 8.42 Two similar 6.6 kV synchronous generators 
supply a total load of 1000 kW at 0.8 pf 
lagging so that power supplied by each 
machine is same. Determine the load current 
of second synchronous generator and power 
factor of each machine, when excitation of 
ﬁrst synchronous generator is decreased so 
that load current reduces to 100 A.
 8.43 A 3-phase, 2.5 MVA, 6.6 kV synchronous 
generatar gave the following test.
 
 OCC
 
 If (A)  
16 
20 
25 
32 
45
 
 VOC (line) (V)  4400 5500 6600 7700 8800
 
 SC test
 
 If  = 18A for rated armature current.
 
 ZPF test
 
 If = 20 A for rated armature current at rated 
voltage.
 
 Determine the ﬁeld current and voltage 
regulation when the generator is supplying 
rated current at 0.8 pf lagging and rated 
voltage, Ra = 0
 
 Use the following methods and compare the 
results and draw conclusions:
 
(a) Unsaturated synchronous reactance.
 
(b) Saturated synchyranous reactance
 
(c) mmf method
 
(d) ASA method
  
1. A synchronous generator is supplying zero 
power factor (i) lagging and (ii) leading 
current. Show that the terminal voltage Vt and 
the excitation emf Ef are in phase.
 
2. In a synchronous motor drawing leading 
current at pf = cos q. Draw the phasor diagram 
and ﬁnd there from the phase and magnitude 
relationships between Vt and Ef . Here phase 
relationship means lag/lead and magnitude 
relationship means greater than/less than.
 
3. Show that in a generating synchronous 
machine the phase relationship (lag/lead) 
between Vt and Ef is independent of the power 
factor (lag/lead). Draw the phasor diagrams to 
discover your answer.
 
4. In a generating synchronous machine con-
nected to inﬁnite bus the mechanical power 
input is maintained constant, while its ﬁeld 
current is increased from a low to a high 
value. Draw the phasor diagram to show how 
 

Synchronous Machines 
591
the magnitude of the armature current will 
change. Make a sketch of Ia vs If .
 
5. A synchronous motor with terminal voltage Vt 
is drawing zero pf current. Write the phasor 
expression for the excitation emf, Ef . Is Ef 
more or less than Vt, magnitude-wise. What is 
the value of the power angle?
 
6. What is a distributed winding and what is 
distribution factor?
 
7. What are the factors affecting the synchronous 
generator terminal voltage?
 
8. Under what conditions does the voltage 
regulation of a synchronous generator become 
negative?
 
9. Explain why the SCC is linear.
 10. Distinguish between Xs (unsaturated) and 
Xx (saturated). Which one should be used 
for higher accuracy in predicting the voltage 
regulation of a synchronous generator.
 11. The synchronous reactance of an alternator is 
not constant over the entire operating range. 
What is this so? What value would you use?
 12. In what manner does an synchronous motor 
adjust itself to an increasing shaft load?
 13. State the assumptions made in the Potier 
method and the effect they have on the 
accuracy of voltage regulation as calculated 
by this method.
 14. How can the speed of an synchronous motor 
be varied?
 15. What is a damper winding? What is the 
function of it and where it is located?
 16. In what operating condition is a synchronous 
motor referred to as a synchronous condenser? 
How is this condition achieved?
 17. Why is it desirable to short circuit the dc ﬁeld 
when a synchronous motor is started?
 18. Brieﬂy describe the phenomenon of “hunting” 
in a synchronous motor. How is it rectiﬁed?
 19. Explain brieﬂy the process of synchronizing 
a synchronous motor to the bus-bars. 
What conditions determine the instant of 
synchronization?
 20. What is meant by the statement that a 
synchronous machine is ‘ﬂoating’ on the bus-
bars?
 21. Elaborate the statement that an unloaded 
synchronous motor can be made to act as a 
capacitor or as an inductor.
 22. Explain what is modiﬁed air-gap line 
withreference to OCC.
 23. Explain what is modiﬁed air-gap line with 
reference to OCC.
 
 8.1 In a synchronous machine, the induced emf 
phasor:
 
(a) leads the ﬂux phasor by 90º
 
(d)  is in phase with the ﬂux phasor 
 
(c) lags behind the ﬂux phasor by 90
 
(d) is in phase opposition to the ﬂux phasor  
 8.2 Synchronous motor speed is controlled by 
varying:
 
(a) ﬁeld excitation  
 
(b) supply voltage
 
(c) supply frequency only 
 
(d) both supply voltage and frequency
 8.3 In a generating synchronous machine carrying 
load (usual symbols are used):
 
(a) Ef leads Vt by angle d 
 
(b) Ef lags Vt by angle d 
 
(c) Ef and Vt are in phase
 
(d) Ef and Vt are in phase opposition
 8.4 Potier’s method uses OCC and ZPFC to yield 
information about:
 
(a) synchronous reactance 
 
(b) leakage reactance only 
 
(c) ﬁeld current equivalent of armature 
reaction only 

592 Electric Machines
 
(d) leakage reactance and ﬁeld current 
equivalent of armature reaction
 8.5 The maximum electrical power output of a 
synchronous generator is (usual symbols are 
used):
 
(a) V E
X
t
f
s
 
(b) V
X
t
s
2
 
(c) E
X
f
s
2
 
(d) 
X
V E
s
t
f
 8.6 Synchronous generator voltage obtained by 
the synchronous impedance method is: 
 
(a) higher than actual as it does not account 
for magnetic saturation. 
 
(b) lower than actual as it does not account for 
magnetic saturation. 
 
(c) nearly accurate as it accounts for magnetic 
saturation. 
 
(d) nearly accurate as the generator is 
normally operated in the unsaturated 
region of magnetization.
 8.7 A synchronous motor is running from busbars, 
and has a torque angle of d = 15º. The bus 
voltage and frequency are reduced by 10% 
while ﬁeld current and load torque are held 
constant (all losses are negligible). The new 
torque angle will:
 
(a) remain the same 
 
(b) increase slightly
 
(c) decrease slightly  
 
(d) the motor will lose synchronism
 8.8 A synchronous motor is operated from a bus 
voltage of 1.0 pu and is drawing 1.0 pu zero 
power factor leading current. Its synchronous 
reactance is 0.5 pu. The excitation emf of the 
motor will be:
 
(a) 2.0 
(b) 1.5
 
(c) 1.0 
(d) 0.5
 8.9 It the excitation of a salient pole motor is 
reduced to zero:
 
(a) it will lose synchronism
 
(b) it will remain synchronized
 
(c) it will remain synchronized provided the 
load is less than a certain value
 
(d) it will remain synchronized provided it is 
operating at no load.
 8.10 The armature current upon symmetrical 
3-phase short-circuit of a synchronous 
machine (armature resistance is negligible):
 
(a) Constitutes q-axis current only 
 
(b) Constitutes d-axis current only 
 
(c) has both d-axis q-axis components
 
(d) short circuit current cannot be divided into 
d- and q-axis components.

Induction Machine 593
9.1 
INTRODUCTION
The induction machine is an important class of electric machines which ﬁnds 
wide applicability as a motor in industry and in its single-phase form in several 
domestic applications. More than 85% of industrial motors in use today are in 
fact induction motors. It is substantially a constant-speed motor with a shunt 
characteristic; a few per cent speed drop from no-load to full-load. It is a singly-
fed motor (stator-fed), unlike the synchronous motor which requires ac supply on 
the stator side and dc excitation on the rotor. The torque developed in this motor has its origin in current 
induction in the rotor which is only possible at non-synchronous speed; hence the name asynchronous 
machine. Torque in a synchronous machine on the other hand, is developed only at synchronous speed 
when the “locking” of the two ﬁelds takes place. Therefore, the induction motor is not plagued by the 
stability problem inherent in the synchronous motor. Since it is a singly-fed machine, it draws its excitation 
current* from the mains to set up the rotating ﬁeld in the air-gap which is essential for its operation. As 
a consequence it inherently has a power factor less than unity which usually must be corrected by means 
of shunt capacitors at motor terminals. There is no simple and inexpensive method of controlling the 
induction motor speed as is possible in a dc shunt motor. A wide range of speed control is possible only 
by expensive circuitry using silicon-controlled rectiﬁers (SCRs). It still ﬁnds stiff competition from the de 
shunt motor in such applications.
9
9.2 CONSTRUCTION 
The stator of an induction motor is similar to that of a synchronous machine and is wound for three phases, 
modern practice being to use the two-layer winding. Figure 9.1 shows the stator of an induction motor. Two 
types of constructions are employed for the rotor—wound-rotor and squirrel-cage rotor. The rotor core is of 
laminated construction with slots suitably punched in for accommodating the rotor winding/rotor bars. The 
punched laminations are stacked and ﬁtted directly onto a shaft in the case of small machines, while in the 
case of large machines a stack of annular punchings of a suitable cross-sectional area are ﬁtted onto a spider-
web arrangement on the shaft.
The winding of a wound-rotor is polyphase with coils placed in the slots of the rotor core, It is similar to 
that of the stator except that the number of slots is smaller and fewer turns per phase of a heavier conductor 
are used, The rotor is wound and connected in star with three leads brought out of the machine via slip-rings 
placed on the shaft, The slip-rings are tapped by means of copper-carbon brushes, Wound- rotor construction 
 
* Because of the air-gap the excitation current is far larger in an induction motor than in a transformer for the same 
VA rating.

594 Electric Machines
is generally employed for large size machines to be used where the starting torque requirements are stringent. 
Figure 9.2(a) shows the view of a slip-ring rotor. External resistance can be included in the rotor circuit 
through slip-rings for reducing the starting current and simultaneously improving the starting torque. 
The squirrel-cage rotor has solid bars of conducting material placed in rotor slots and shorted through 
end-rings on each side, Figure 9.2(b) shows the view of the squirrel-cage rotor of a small-size motor. In 
large machines alloyed copper bars are driven in the slots and are brazed onto copper end-rings. Rotors up to  
50 cm diameter usually have diecast aluminium bars wherein the end-rings are also cast simultaneously with 
the same material by using a suitable mould. This is an economical process and is generally employed in 
mass production of small size induction motors.
The rotor circuit of a squirrel-cage machine cannot be tempered with and the machine has a low starting 
torque, while it has excellent running performance. Therefore, it cannot be used where a high starting torque 
is required. The starting torque of a squirrel-cage motor can be improved by employing either a double-
cage rotor or a deep-bar rotor. Such type of construction serves the purpose of a medium starting torque 
requirement. 
As already mentioned, the rotor has a smaller number of slots than the stator and these must be a 
nonintegral multiple of stator slots so as to prevent magnetic locking of rotor and stator teeth at the time of 
starting. Further for the same purpose rotor teeth are skewed (twisted) slightly. The slots in the induction 
machine are semi-enclosed so as to increase the permeance per pole so that the magnetization current, which 
is responsible for less than unity power factor of this motor, is kept within limits.
Fig. 9.1 Induction motor stator with partially wound double-layer winding 

Induction Machine 595
(a)
(b)
 
Fig. 9.2 
(a) Wound rotor for induction motor
 
 
(b) Squirrel-cage rotor showing cast aluminium bars and end rings
The connection diagram of a 3-phase slip-ring induction motor with delta-connected stator and star-
connected rotor is drawn in Fig. 9.3. The rotor winding is connected to slip rings which are shorted through 
external resistances at the time of starting; the resistances are cut-out as the motor attains full speed.
The rotor of a squirrel-cage motor has permanently shorted bars, as stated earlier. These can be replaced 
from a circuit point of view by an equivalent wound rotor.

596 Electric Machines
w
w
Rotor
winding
sE2
To be shorted
(through resistance
at the time of starting)
Stator winding
3-phase
supply
E1
Fig. 9.3 3-phase, slip-ring induction motor—connection diagram 
The principle of operation of the induction motor has already been discussed in Sec. 5.7. It will now be revised 
here and further elaborated leading to the circuit model of the motor from which performance calculations 
can be easily carried out.
Figure 9.4 shows the cross-sectional view of an induction motor. The stator is fed from a 3-phase supply 
of voltage V/phase and frequency f Hz. The rotor is wound* 3-phase for as many poles as the stator and is 
short-circuited. It is assumed that the stator resistance and leakage reactance are both negligible so that 
 
V = E1 = p
2 kw1Nph1 (series) fFr 
(9.1)
where  
E1 = stator induced emf/phase 
 
kw1 = stator winding factor 
 
Nph1 (series) = stator series turns/phase 
 
Fr = resultant air-gap ﬂux/pole
It is seen from Eq. (9.1) that irrespective of the load conditions existing on the rotor, Fr the ﬂux/pole 
established in the air-gap is constant, related to the applied voltage in view of the assumption made. The 
mmf vector 

Fr  with associated ﬂux density vector 

Br  which is responsible for production of Fr rotates at 
synchronous speed as it is associated with balanced 3-phase currents drawn by the stator. The relative speed 
between 

Br  and the rotor causes induction of a current pattern in the shorted rotor. The torque produced by 
interaction of 

Br  and the rotor currents would by Lenz’s law tend to move the rotor in the direction of rotation 
of 

Br  so as to reduce the relative speed. The motor is thus self-starting and the rotor acquires a steady speed 
 
* The rotor can be wound for any number of phases but the same number of poles as the stator. In practice it is 
wound 3-phase.

Induction Machine 597
n < ns depending upon the shaft load. It may be noted that no torque is produced at n = ns because the relative 
speed between 

Br  and rotor being zero, no currents are induced in the rotor.
Figure 9.4 shows the relative location of vectors 

Fr, 

Br  (air-gap mmf and ﬂux density), 
F2  (rotor mmf ) 
wherein 

Fr  leads 

F2  by angle d = 90° + q2 (motoring action), q2 is the angle by which rotor currents lag 
rotor emfs. The angle q2 however, is very small as rotor reactance is far smaller than rotor resistance (Reader 
should at this point reread Sec. 5.6 sub section Induction Machine). The stator mmf vector is then given by 

F1  = 

Fr  – 

F2
is located on the vector diagram. At the instant at which the diagram is drawn, the stator and rotor phase a 
(shown as single coil) currents are maximum. The reader may verify the location of vectors from the phase a 
currents applying the right hand rule.
It must be noted that the sign convention in an induction motor is same as that of a transformer. The stator 
current is in opposite direction to that of induced emf (like transformer primary), while the rotor current is in 
same direction as the induced emf (like transformer secondary). 
Slip and Frequency of Rotor Currents
With reference to Fig. 9.4, it is easily observed that 

Br  moves at speed (ns – n) with respect to rotor conductors 
(in the direction of 

Br). This is known as slip speed. The slip is deﬁned as 
 
s = 
slip speed
synchronous speed  = n
n
n
s
s
-
 = 1 -
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
n
ns
 
(9.2)
Obviously s = 1 for n = 0, i.e. for the stationary rotor and s = 0 for n = ns, i.e. for the rotor running at 
synchronous speed. 
Axis of
coil AA¢
F
F
m
r
=
V f
,
I1
Current
EMF
Current
EMF
Stator
a
d
F
F
¢2
2
= –
F2
b
n
A
c¢
ns
a¢
c
b¢
Br
Fr
(
–
) +
=
(wrt stator)
n
n
n
n
s
s
Axis of
coil aa¢
Rotor
F1
n
q2
n
A¢
,
Fig. 9.4

598 Electric Machines
The frequency of currents induced in the rotor is 
 
f2 = (
)
n
n P
s -
120
 
 = n
n
n
n P
s
s
s
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ ¥ Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
120
 
 = sf 
(9.3)
The normal full-load slip of the induction motor is of the order of 2% – 8%, so that the frequency of the 
rotor currents is as low as 1 – 4 Hz. 
The per phase rotor emf at s = 1 (standstill rotor) is given by 
 
E2 = p
2 kw2Nph2 (series) fFr 
(9.4) 
At any slip s, the rotor frequency being sf, the rotor induced emf changes to sE2. Consider now the 
impedance of the rotor circuit 
 
Z2  = R2 + j X2 (at standstill) 
where X2 = leakage reactance of rotor at standstill (rotor frequency = stator frequency, f ) 
When the rotor runs at slip s, its frequency being sf, its impedance changes to 
 
Z2  = R2 + js X2  
(9.5) 
It is, therefore, seen that the frequency of rotor currents, its induced emf and reactance all vary in direct 
proportion to the slip. Figure 9.5 shows the rotor circuit at slip s. 
The phase angle of the circuit is
 
q2 = tan–1 sX
R
2
2
(lagging) 
(9.6) 
It is also observed that
 
E
E
1
2
 = k
N
k
N
w
ph
w
ph
1
1
2
2
 = N
N
e
e
1
2
 = a  
(9.7)
where Ne1, Ne2 = effective stator and rotor turns/phase 
In Fig. 9.4 as the resultant ﬂux density vector 

Br  rotates at speed (ns – n) with respect to rotor, maximum 
positive emf is induced in the rotor coil aa¢ (indicated by dot in conductor a and cross in conductor a¢) when 

Br  lies 90° ahead of the axis of the coil. Since the current in the rotor lags the emf by q2, the current in coil 
aa¢ will be maximum positive when 

Br  has moved further ahead by angle q2. It is at this instant of time that 
the rotor mmf vector 

F2  will lie along the axis of coil aa¢. It is, therefore, seen that 

Br  (or 

Fr) lies at an angle 
d = (90 + q2) ahead of 

F2. Further, 

F2  caused by the rotor currents of frequency f2 = sf rotates with respect 
to the rotor conductor at speed (ns – n) and at speed ns with respect to the stator as the rotor itself is moving
in the same direction at speed n with respect to the stator. Thus 

Fr  and 

F2  both move at synchronous speed 
ns with respect to the stator and are stationary relative to each other with 

Fr  lying ahead of 

F2  by angle
R2
sX2
+
–
I2
sE2
Fig. 9.5 
Rotor circuit ( frequency sf ) 

Induction Machine 599
(90° + q2). The interaction of the rotor ﬁeld and the resultant ﬁeld as per Eq. (5.58) creates a torque 
 
T = p
2
2
2
P
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ Fr F2 sin (90° + q2)
 
 = p
2
2
2
P
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ Fr F2 cos q2 
(9.8) 
in the direction of rotation of 

Fr .
Consider now the case of the squirrel-cage rotor with conductors spread uniformly around the rotor 
periphery. The rotor reaction mmf F2 is better visualized from the developed diagram of Fig. 9.6 wherein the 
rotor is imagined to be stationary and the Br-wave moving with respect to it at slip speed (ns – n). Let the rotor 
reactance be considered negligible so that the conductor (shorted) currents are in-phase with the conductor 
emfs. The conductor current pattern is, therefore, sinusoidally distributed and is in space phase with Br-wave 
and moves synchronously with it. The rotor mmf-wave is a stepped-sinusoidal with the same number of 
poles as the Br-wave moving synchronously with it. Its fundamental (F2) shown in Fig. 9.6 lags Br-wave by 
90°. If the rotor reactance is now brought into picture, the conductor current-wave and, therefore, the rotor 
mmf-wave would lag behind by angle q2, Thus the angle between the Br-wave and F2-wave would be (90° + 
q2), the same as in the wound rotor. A squirrel-cage rotor, therefore, inductively reacts in the same way as a 
wound rotor except that the number of phases is not obvious—one can consider it to have as many phases as 
bars/pole. A squirrel-cage rotor can always be replaced by an equivalent wound rotor with three phases. The 
quantitative relationships involved are beyond the scope of this book. Further examination of the induction 
motor theory in terms of wound rotor only will be undertaken. 
Conductor
current-wave
F2
Br
(
–
)
n
n
s
d = 90°
(
–
)
n
n
s
Fig. 9.6 Rotor mmf in squirrel-cage rotor assuming negligible rotor reactance 
It is seen from Eq. (9.8) that a low-reactance rotor (low q2 = tan–1 jsX2/R2) will generate a larger torque for 
given Fr, F2 and s. A squirrel-cage motor is superior in this respect as compared to a wound-rotor motor as 
the cage rotor has lower reactance since it does not have winding overhang. 
One very important observation that can be made here is that while the rotor currents have a frequency 
sf, the mmf (F2) caused by them runs at synchronous speed with respect to the stator. In other words, the 
reaction of rotor currents corresponds to the stator frequency (  f ) currents ﬂowing on an equivalent stationary 

600 Electric Machines
cylindrical structure placed inside the stator in place of the rotor. Or, to put in another way, the rotor currents 
as seen from the stator have frequency f but have the same rms value. 
The stator mmf vector 

F1  is located on Fig. 9.4 from the vector equation 
 

F1  = 

Fr  – 

F2  
(9.9)
Further, 

F1  can be divided into components as 
 

F1  = 

Fm  + 

¢
F2  
(9.10)
where 

¢
F2  is in opposition to 

F2  and equal in magnitude and
 

Fm  = 

Fr  
(9.11) 
The stator current* which causes 

F1  can, corresponding to vector Eq. (9.10), be divided into components 
 
I1 = Im  + ¢I2  
(9.12) 
Here Im  can be recognized as the magnetizing current which causes the resultant mmf Fr and the resultant 
ﬂux/pole, Fr, while I¢2 is that component of the stator current which balances the reaction F2 of the rotor 
current I2. 
Figure 9.4 also shows the relative location of stator coil AA¢ and the positive direction of current in it. 
This instantaneous vector picture holds when I2 has maximum positive value. For F¢2 to cancel F2, the stator 
current component which balances the rotor mmf must be in phase with the rotor current as seen from the 
stator. In terms of magnitudes
 
F¢2 = F2
Using the result of Eq. (5.37) 
 
4 2
1
1
2
p
K
N
P
I
w
ph
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ ¢  = 4 2
2
2
2
p
K
N
P
I
w
ph
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
or  
I ¢2 = N
N
I
e
e
2
1
2  = 1
2
a I  
(9.13) 
F¢2 is oppositely directed to F2, for them to cancel out while I¢2 and I2 must obey the proportionality of 
Eq. (9.13) and must be in phase. 
Further, by reference to Fig. 9.4, it can easily be seen that in the stator the positive direction of emf E1 
opposes the positive direction of I1, while in the rotor the positive direction of I2 is in the positive direction of 
sE2. This is analogous to the transformer case.
With the direction of positive current in the stator coil AA¢ marked as in Fig. 9.4 and the direction of the 
coil axis indicated, the law of induction which will give positive emf in opposition to current is 
 
e = + d
dt
l
(The reader should verify this.) This has the same sign as used in the transformer case so that the ﬂux 
phasor Fr and magnetizing current which creates it lags E1 by 90°. In the circuit model Im would therefore be 
drawn by the magnetizing reactance Xm across E1. 
Remark The reader is reminded here that all the vectors (ﬁelds) are stationary with respect to one another 
and are rotating at ns with respect to the stator while the rotor is rotating at n with respect to the stator. 
 
* Current is always meant to be understood as the phase current of a balanced set of 3-phase currents.

Induction Machine 601
Note: As we shall be mostly dealing with phasor magnitudes the superbar on phasor symbols would only be 
used for phasor equations. 
In Sec. 9.3 the behaviour of the induction machine was studied in terms of the basic ﬁeld phenomenon. The 
attempt here was purposely focussed on the transformer analogy of induction motor. Certain facts established 
so far are summarized below: 
 
1.  
E
E
1
2
 = a; 
¢I
I
2
2
 = 1
a
 
 where E2 = standstill rotor emf. 
 
 Further I¢2 ﬂows into the positive terminal of E1 and I2 ﬂows out of the positive terminal of E2. Also, 
I2 as seen from the stator is the current of stator frequency f and is in phase with I ¢2, the component of 
current drawn by the stator to balance the rotor mmf F2. 
 
2. Like in a transformer, the magnetizing current component Im of the stator current lags the stator 
induced emf E1 by 90°. 
 
3. The induction motor is not merely a transformer which changes voltage and current levels. It in fact 
behaves like a generalized transformer in which the frequency is also transformed in proportion to slip 
such that the rotor induced emf is sE2 and rotor reactance is sX2. 
The circuit model of the induction motor can now be drawn on a per phase basis as in Fig. 9.7(a) wherein 
the series elements (lumped) of the stator resistance and leakage reactance have been included in the model. 
The transformer linking the stator and rotor circuits is an ideal generalized transformer in which the standstill 
rotor voltage E2 and rotor current I2 are linked to the stator quantities via transformation ratio a, while the 
frequency parameter appears in the rotor circuit through the slip s, a mechanical parameter. The mechanical 
power output appears at the shaft indicated in the ﬁgure. 
The rotor circuit can be referred to the stator side by a two-step process—modifying the rotor circuit so 
that the turn-ratio becomes unity and then carrying out a frequency transformation resulting in an equivalent 
rotor circuit at the stator frequency. 
By multiplying the rotor voltage by a and the rotor current by 1/a, the rotor impedance gets modiﬁed to 
 
¢
Z2  = a2R2 + jsa2X2
or 
¢
Z2  = R¢2 + jsX2¢; R¢2 = a2R2, X2¢ = a2X2 
(9.14)
In this transformation power remains invariant. The rotor circuit, after carrying out this step, is drawn in 
Fig. 9.7(b). This reduces the rotor to an equivalent rotor having a unity turn-ratio with the stator. 
From the equivalent rotor circuit of Fig. 9.7(b) 
 
¢I2  = 
sE
R
jsX
1
2
2
¢ +
¢  
(9.15a) 
Dividing both numerator and denominator by s
 
¢I2  = 
E
R s
jX
1
2
2
¢
+
¢
/
 
(9.15b) 
This simple trick refers the rotor circuit to the stator frequency. The modiﬁed rotor circuit is now drawn in 
Fig. 9.7(c) wherein since both the rotor and stator circuit have the same frequency, the ideal transformer is now 

602 Electric Machines
+
–
sE2
R2
I2
sX2
Ideal
generalized
transformer
+
–
E1
a : 1
+
–
V
R1
I¢2
X1
I1
Pm/3
Frequency f
Frequency
=
f
sf
2
(a)
Xm
+
–
saE2 = sE1
R
a R
2
2
2
=
¢
I¢2
2
= I la
sX
sa
¢2
2
2
=
X
+
–
E1
1 : 1
+
–
V
R1
I¢2
X1
I1
Pm/3
Frequency f
Frequency
=
f
sf
2
(b)
Xm
n
n
+
–
E1
X¢2
R¢2/s
Ideal (ordinary)
transformer
+
–
E1
1 : 1
+
–
V
R1
I¢2
X1
I1
Frequency f
(c)
Xm
lm
lm
lm
I¢2
a stationary unit-ratio transformer. It is also noticed that in referring the rotor circuit to the stator frequency 
the reactance becomes constant (X2¢) and the resistance becomes variable (R¢2/s). The transformation of 
Eq. (9.15b) is not power-invariant (voltage changes while current remains the same). The power transferred to 
the secondary now accounts for both the rotor copper-loss and mechanical power output (in electrical form). 
This is in contrast to Fig. 9.7(a) where mechanical power is taken off via a shaft. 

Induction Machine 603
As a last step in equivalent circuit development, the ideal (ordinary) unit-ratio transformer can now be 
dispensed with resulting in the circuit model of Fig. 9.7(d).
The representation of iron-loss in the stator can be heuristically introduced in the circuit model of 
Fig. 9.7(d) by placing a resistance Ri in parallel with Xm as in the transformer circuit model. This circuit is 
drawn in Fig. 9.7(e).
If R¢2 is separated from R¢2/s to represent the rotor copper-loss as a separate entity, the circuit model can 
be drawn as in Fig. 9.8(a) in which the variable resistance R¢2 (1/s – 1) represents the mechanical output in 
electrical form as will be shown in Sec. 9.5. Alternatively the circuit model of Fig. 9.8(b) could be used (this 
corresponds to Fig. 9.7(d) wherein the iron loss resistance Ri is omitted and this loss would be subtracted 
from the gross mechanical output (power absorbed by R¢2 (1/s – 1)). This amounts to certain approximation 
which is quite acceptable in the normal range of slip in an induction motor. Further the parameters of this 
circuit (which does not need the value of Ri) can be easily obtained by two non-loading tests to be described 
in Section 9.6. 
The circuit model of Fig. 9.8(b) would be used for most of the discussion that follows. It may be noted here 
that the power dissipated in R¢2 (1/s – 1) includes the core loss, which must be subtracted from it to obtain 
the gross mechanical power. For getting net mechanical power output, the windage and friction loss must 
be further subtracted from it. The core loss and windage and friction loss together are lumped as rotational 
loss as both these losses occur when the motor is running. The rotational loss in an induction motor is 
substantially constant at constant applied voltage and motor speed varies very little from no-load to full load. 
Note: Net mechanical power = shaft power 
Approximate Circuit Model
An approximate circuit model of an induction motor, which results in considerable computational ease in 
analysis, is obtained by shifting the shunt branch in Fig. 9.8(a) to the input terminals as shown in Fig. 9.9. 
+
–
V
R1
X¢2
X1
I1
(d)
Xm
lm
–
R /s
¢2
E1
I¢2
+
–
V
R1
X¢2
X1
I1
(e)
Xm
l0
–
R /s
¢2
E1
I¢2
Ri
Fig. 9.7

604 Electric Machines
This step is not so readily justiﬁed as in a transformer owing to the relative magnitude of the exciting current 
(also referred to as the magnetizing current) which, because of the presence of the air-gap, may be as large 
as 30 – 50% of the full-load current. Further, the primary leakage reactance is also necessarily higher in an 
induction motor compared to a transformer and so ignoring the voltage drop in primary reactance is not quite 
justiﬁed. It is, therefore, pointed out here that the results obtained by this model are considerably less accurate 
than that obtained from the models of Fig. 9.8(a) and (b). 
+
–
V
R1
X¢2
X1
I1
(a)
Xm
l0
R¢2
I¢2
Ri
R
s
¢2(1/ – 1)
Mechanical output (gross)
+
–
V
R1
X¢2
X1
I1
(b)
Xm
lm
R¢2
I¢2
R
s
¢2(1/ – 1)
(Core loss to be subtracted)
Fig. 9.8
The parameters of the induction motor models as presented above are obtained from no-load and blocked-
rotor tests which will be taken up in Section 9.6. 
It is easily seen from Fig. 9.9 that because 
of the magnetizing shunt branch which 
draws current I0 at almost 90° lagging, the 
pf at which the motor operates at full -load 
is low—about 0.8. At light load (small I¢2) 
the machine power factor is much lower. 
This is the inherent problem of the induction 
motor because of the presence of the air-gap 
in the magnetic circuit and the fact that the 
excitation current must be drawn from the 
mains (stator side). 
+
–
V
X
X
X
=
+
1
2¢
I1
Xm
l0
I¢2
Ri
R¢2 1
s –1
(Mechanical
output, gross)
R
R
R
=
+
1
2¢
Fig. 9.9

Induction Machine 605
The circuit model of Fig. 9.7(e) is redrawn in Fig. 9.10. 
The power crossing the terminals ab in this circuit is 
the electrical power input per phase minus the stator 
loss (stator copper-loss and iron-loss) and hence is the 
power that is transferred from the stator to the rotor via 
the air-gap magnetic ﬁeld. This is known as the power 
across the air-gap and its 3-phase value is symbolized 
as PG. It is easily seen from the circuit model that 
 
PG = 3 I¢ 2
2 (R¢2/s)
 
 = 3 2
2
2
¢
¢
I
R
s
 = 3 2
2
2
I R
s
 
(9.16)
or 
Power across air-gap = rotor copper - loss
slip
It also follows from Eq. (9.16) that 
Rotor copper loss, 
Pcr = 3I¢2
2 R¢2 = sPG  
(9.17) 
Substracting the rotor copper loss from PG gives the mechanical power output (gross), i.e. 
 
Pm = PG – 3I¢2
2 R¢2
 
 = 3
1
1
2
2
2
¢
¢
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
I
R
s
 = (1 – s) PG 
(9.18)
This means that the gross mechanical power output is three times (3-phase) the electrical power absorbed 
in resistance 
¢
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
R
s
2
1
1 . Figure 9.10 can therefore be drawn as in Fig. 9.11 where R¢2/s is represented as
 
 R¢2/s = 
¢ +
¢
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
R
R
s
2
2
1
1
Load resistance
 



+
–
V
R1
X¢2
X1
I1
Xm
lO
R¢2
Ri
I¢2
R¢2 1
s –1
Load resistance
(1/3 mechanical
power output (gross))
R¢2 1
s –1
R
R
¢
¢
2
2
/s =
+
Load resistance
Fig. 9.11 
It is noticed from Eq. (9.18) that the mechanical power output is a fraction (1 – s) of the total power 
+
–
V
R1
X¢2
X1
I1
Xm
l0
R /s
¢2
a
Ri
PG/3
I¢2
b
Fig. 9.10

606 Electric Machines
delivered to the rotor, while as per Eq. (9.17) a fraction s of it is dissipated as the rotor copper-loss. It is then 
evident that high-slip operation of the induction motor would be highly inefﬁcient. Induction motors are, 
therefore, designed to operate at low slip (2–8%) at full-load. 
Rotor speed is 
 
w = (1 – s)ws  rad (mech.)/s
The electromagnetic torque developed is then given by 
 
(1 – s)wsT = Pm = (1 – s) PG 
or 
T = PG
s
w  = 3 2
2
2
¢
¢
I
R s
s
(
/ )
w
 Nm, I¢2
2R¢2 = I2
2R2 
(9.19)
This is an interesting and signiﬁcant result according to which torque is obtained from the power across 
the air-gap by dividing it with synchronous speed in rad/s as if this power was transferred at synchronous 
speed. It is because of this fact that PG, the power across the air-gap, is also known as torque in synchronous 
watts. 
The net mechanical power output and torque are obtained by subtracting losses— windage, friction and 
stray-load loss. 
When dealing with power ﬂows in the induction 
motor, it is common practice to employ the circuit 
model of Fig. 9.7(d) redrawn in Fig. 9.12 wherein 
the net mechanical output and torque are obtained 
in the end by subtracting losses—core loss, 
windage, friction loss and stray-load loss. The error 
introduced is negligible and the simpliﬁcation is 
worthwhile. 
A convenient computational procedure for a given slip is to calculate
 
Z f  = j Xm || (R¢2/s + j X2¢)
 
 = Rf + jXf 
in the circuit model of Fig. 9.12. Then 
 
PG = 3 2
2
2
¢
¢
I
R
s
 = 3I2
1Rf , T = 3 1
2
I Rf
s
w
 
 (9.20)
because there is no power loss in Xm
It is always convenient to calculate on a per-phase basis and convert to 3-phase values in the end.
 A 6-pole, 50 Hz, 3-phase induction motor running on full load develops a useful torque of 
160 Nm when the rotor emf makes 120 complete cycles per minute. Calculate the shaft power output. If the 
mechanical torque lost in friction and that for core-loss is 10 Nm. Compute
 (a) the copper-loss in the rotor windings,
 (b) the input to the motor, and
 (c) the efﬁciency 
The total stator loss is given to be 800 W. 
+
–
V
R1
X¢2
X1
I1
lm
I¢2
Zf
Xm
a
b
R
s
¢2/
Fig. 9.12

Induction Machine 607
SOLUTION 
f2 = sf = 120
60  = 2 Hz 
\ 
s = 2
50  = 0.04 or 4%
 
ns = 1000 rpm 
 
n = (1 – 0.04) ¥ 1000 = 960 rpm
 
w = 960
2
60
¥ p  = 100.53 rad/s 
 
Shaft power output = 160 ¥ 100.53 
 
 = 16.085 kW
Mechanical power developed, 
Pm = (160 + 10) ¥ 100.53 
 
 = 17.09 kW
Note that torque of rotational loss is added to shaft power 
 
(a)  
Pm = 3
1
1
2
2
2
¢
¢
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
I
R
s
 
  
Rotor copper-loss = 3I¢2
2 R2 = P
s
s
m 1 -
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
  
 = 17.090 ¥ 
0 04
1
0 04
.
.
-
 = 712 W 
 
(b)  
Input to motor = 17.09 + 0.712 + 0.8 = 18.602 kW 
 
(c)  
h = 16 084
18 602
.
.
 = 86.47%
Torque-Slip Characteristic
The expression for torque-slip characteristic (T(s)) is easily obtained by ﬁnding the Thevenin equivalent of 
the circuit to the left of ab in Fig. 9.12.
 
ZTH  = (R1 + j X1) || j Xm = RTH + j XTH
 
VTH = V
jX
R
j X
X
m
m
1
1
+
+
È
ÎÍ
˘
˚˙
(
)
The circuit then reduces to Fig. 9.13 in which it is convenient to take VTH as the reference voltage. 
From Fig. 9.13 
+
–
VTH
RTH
X¢2
XTH
R¢2
I¢2
R¢2 1
s –1
a
b
I¢2
Fig. 9.13
 

608 Electric Machines
 
I¢2
2  = 
V
R
R s
X
X
TH
TH
TH
2
2
2
2
2
(
/ )
(
)
+
¢
+
+
¢
 
(9.21)
 
T = 3
2
2
2
ws
I
R s
◊¢
¢
(
/ )
  
 = 3
2
2
2
2
2
2
ws
TH
TH
TH
V
R s
R
R s
X
X
◊
¢
+
¢
+
+
¢
(
/ )
(
/ )
(
)
 
(9.22)
Equation (9.22) is the expression for torque* developed as a function of voltage and slip. For a given value 
of slip, torque is proportional to the square of voltage. The torque-slip characteristic at ﬁxed (rated) voltage 
is plotted in Fig. 9.14. Certain features of the torque-slip characteristic are listed below:
Braking mode
Motoring mode
Generating mode
smax,T
ns
0
0
–ns
1
2
T
Tmax
(Breakdown torque)
Starting
torque, Ts
Full-load
operating point
Speed
Slip
( > 1)
s
(0
1)
£ s £
( < 0)
s
Fig. 9.14 Torque-slip characteristics
1. Motoring mode: 0 £ s £ 1 For this range of slip, the load resistance in the circuit model of Fig. 9.13 is 
positive, i.e. mechanical power is output or torque developed is in the direction in which the rotor rotates. 
Also:
 (a) Torque is zero at s = 0, as expected by qualitative reasoning advanced in Sec. 9.3.
 
* In terms of the rotor circuit (Fig. 9.7(a))
 
  
PG = 3 2
2
2
I R
s
 = 3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
(
) (
/ )
(
)
sE
R s
R
sX
+
 
  
 = 3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
E
R s
R s
X
(
/ )
(
/ ) +
 
\  
T = 3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
ws
E
R s
R s
X
◊
+
(
/ )
(
/ )

Induction Machine 609
 (b) The torque has a maximum value, called the breakdown torque, (TBD) at slip smax,T. The motor would 
decelerate to a halt if it is loaded with more than the breakdown torque.
 (c) At s = 1, i.e. when the rotor is stationary, the torque corresponds to the starting torque, Ts. In a normally 
designed motor Ts is much less than TBD. 
 (d) The normal operating point is located well below TBD. The full-load slip is usually 2% to 8%. 
 (e) The torque-slip characteristic from no-load to somewhat beyond full-load is almost linear. 
2. Generating mode: s < 0 Negative slip implies rotor running at super-synchronous speed (n > ns). The load 
resistance is negative in the circuit model of Fig. 9.13 which means that mechanical power must be put in 
while electrical power is put out at the machine terminals. 
3. Braking mode: s > 1 The motor runs in opposite direction to the rotating ﬁeld (i.e. n is negative), absorbing 
mechanical power (braking action) which is dissipated as heat in the rotor copper. 
Maximum (Breakdown) Torque
While maximum torque and the slip at which it occurs can be obtained by differentiating the expression 
of Eq. (9.22), the condition for maximum torque can be more easily obtained from the maximum power 
transfer theorem of circuit theory. As per Eq. (9.19), the torque is maximum when I¢2
2(R¢2/s) is maximum, i.e. 
maximum power is absorbed by R¢2/s in Fig. 9.13. This condition is given as
 
¢
R
s
T
2
max,
 = 
R
X
X
TH
TH
2
2
2
+
+
¢
(
)  (matching of impedance magnitudes)
 
smax,T = 
¢
+
+
¢
R
R
X
X
TH
TH
2
2
2
2
(
)
 
(9.23)
Substituting in Eq. (9.22) and simplifying
 
Tmax = 3
0 5
2
2
2
ws
TH
TH
TH
TH
V
R
R
X
X
◊
+
+
+
¢
.
(
)
 
(9.24)
It is immediately observed that the maximum torque is independent of the rotor resistance (R¢2), while the 
slip at which it occurs is directly proportional to it. 
T
Tmax
T
(full load)
1
0
n = 0
ns
Speed
Slip
R¢2
2
R
R
R
R
¢
¢
¢
¢
2
3
2
2
2
1
2
>
>
>
R¢2
1
R¢2
R¢2
3
Fig. 9.15(a)

610 Electric Machines
The torque-slip characteristic of a slip-ring induction motor can be easily modiﬁed by adding external 
resistance as shown in Fig. 9.15(a) by four such characteristics with a progressively increasing resistance 
in the rotor circuit. It may be seen that as per Eq. (9.24), the maximum torque remains unchanged while as 
per Eq. (9.23) the slip at maximum torque proportionally increases as resistance is added to the rotor circuit. 
Figure 9.15(b) indicates the T-s proﬁle at various supply voltages. Speed can also be controlled in this 
way by changing the stator voltage. It may be noted that the torque developed in an induction motor in 
proportional to the square of the terminal voltage. 
–0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
–1
–800
–600
–200
–200
0
200
400
600
Torque
Torque-Slip curve at variable voltage
Voltage = V
Voltage = V/2
Voltage = 2V
Slip
Generating
mode
Motoring
mode
Braking
mode
Fig. 9.15(b) 
Starting Torque 
Letting s = 1 in Eq. (9.22)
 
Tstart = 3
2
2
2
2
2
2
ws
TH
TH
TH
V
R
R
R
X
X
◊
¢
+
¢
+
+
¢
(
)
(
)
 
(9.25)
The starting torque increases by adding resistance in the rotor circuit. From Eq. (9.23) the maximum 
starting torque is achieved for (smax,T = 1) 
 
R¢2 (total) = 
R
X
X
TH
TH
2
2
2
+
+
¢
(
)  
(9.26) 
At the same time the starting current will reduce (see Eq. (9.21)) with s = 1. This indeed is the advantage 
of the slip-ring induction motor in which a high starting torque is obtained at low starting current. 
An Approximation 
Sometimes for getting a feel (rough answer) of the operational characteristic, it is convenient to assume the 
stator impedance to be negligible which leads to (see Fig. 9.13) 
 
RTH = 0,  XTH = 0

Induction Machine 611
in the Thevenin equivalent circuit of Fig. 9.13 so that VTH = V. It then follows from Eqs (9.21) to (9.26) that 
 
I¢2 = 
V
R s
X
(
/ )
¢
+
¢
2
2
2
2  
(9.27) 
 
T = 3
2
2
2
2
2
2
ws
V
R s
R s
X
◊
¢
¢
+
¢
(
/ )
(
/ )
 
(9.28)
 
smax,T = 
¢
¢
R
X
2
2
 = R
X
2
2
 = 
rotor resistance
standstill rotor reactance  
(9.29) 
 
Tmax = 3
ws
◊
¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
0 5
2
2
. V
X
 
(9.30) 
and 
Tstart = 3
ws
◊
¢
¢ +
¢
V R
R
X
2
2
2
2
2
2  
(9.31)
The maximum starting torque is achieved under the condition 
 
R¢2(total) = X2¢ 
(9.32) 
and 
Tstart(max) = Tmax = 3
ws
0 5
2
2
. V
X ¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  
(9.33) 
Note The above relationships are expressed in rator quantities (I2, R2, X2) by changing V to (V/a).
Some Approximate Relationships at low Slip 
Around the rated (full-load) speed, the slip of the induction motor is so small that 
 
R¢2/s >> X2¢ 
so that X2¢ can be altogether neglected in a simpliﬁed analysis. Equations (9.27) and (9.28) then simplify to 
 
I¢2 = sV
R¢2
 
(9.34) 
and 
T = 3
2
2
ws
sV
R
◊
¢  
(9.35) 
It is immediately observed from Eq. (9.35) that the torque-slip relationship is nearly linear in the region of 
low slip which explains the linear shape of the characteristic as shown in Fig. 9.14. 
Since the speed of the induction motor reduces with load, maximum mechanical power output does not 
correspond to the speed (slip) at which maximum torque is developed. For maximum mechanical power 
output, the condition is obtained from Fig. 9.13 
 
¢
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
R
s
s
1
1  = 
(
)
(
)
R
R
X
X
TH
TH
+
¢
+
+
¢
2
2
2
2  
(9.36)
The maximum power output can then be found corresponding to the slip deﬁned by Eq. (9.36). However, 
this condition corresponds to very low efﬁciency and very large current and is well beyond the normal 
operating region of the motor. 

612 Electric Machines
Limitation of the Circuit Model 
The values of the circuit model parameters must be determined under conditions closely approximating the 
operating condition for which the model is to be used. Circuit model parameters valid for the normal operating 
condition would give erroneous results when used for abnormal values of slip. At starting, the motor draws 
many times the rated current resulting in saturation of core and consequent increase of the stator and rotor 
leakage reactances. Also the rotor frequency being high (same as stator), the rotor conductors present a higher 
resistance. Therefore parameters good for normal operating conditions would give a pessimistic results for 
starting current (smaller than actual value) and starting torque higher than actual value. 
 A 6-pole, 50 Hz, 3-phase induction motor has a rotor resistance of 0.25 W per phase and 
a maximum torque of 10 Nm at 875 rpm. Calculate (a) the torque when the slip is 5%, and (b) the resistance 
to be added to the rotor circuit to obtain 60% of the maximum torque at starting. Explain why two values are 
obtained for this resistance. Which value will be used? The stator impedance is assumed to be negligible. 
SOLUTION 
ns = 120
50
6
¥
 = 1000 rpm; ws = 2
1000
60
p ¥
 = 104.7 rad/s 
 
smax,T = 1000
875
1000
-
 = 0.125
 
smax,T = 
¢
¢
R
X
2
2
 = R
X
2
2
 
X2 = 
R
s
T
2
max,
 = 0 25
0 125
.
.
 = 2W
 
Tmax = 3
0 5
2
2
ws
V
X
◊
¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
.
or 
10 = 
3
104 7
0 5
2
2
.
.
◊
¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
V
X
 = 
3
104 7
0 5
2
2
2
.
.
/
◊
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
V
a
X
or 
V¢ = V/a = 
1396 V
 
(a)  
T = 3
2
2
2
2
2
2
ws
s
V
R s
R s
X
◊
¢
¢
+
¢
(
/ )
(
/ )
 = 3
2
2
2
2
2
2
ws
V
R s
R s
X
◊
¢
+
(
/ )
(
/ )
 
  
s = 0.05 
 
  
T = 
3
104 7
1396
0 25 0 05
0 25 0 05
2
2
2
.
.
/ .
( .
/ .
)
( )
◊
¥
+
 
  
 = 6.9 Nm
 
(b) From Eqs (9.30) and (9.31) 
 
  
T
T
start
max
 = 
(
)
(
)
.
R
R
R
R
X
X
2
2
2
2
2
2
0 5
+
+
+
◊
ext
ext
 
  
0.6 = 
R
R
t
t
2
4
2
0 5
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
.

Induction Machine 613
 
 where 
Rt = R2 + Rext 
 
  
R2
t – 6.67 Rt + 4 = 0
 
  
Rt = 0.667, 6.0 W
 
  
Rext = Rt – r2 
 
  
  = 0.417, 5.75 W
 
 The former value will be used, i.e. 
 
  
Rext = 0.417 W 
 
 It may be noted that Rext = 5.75 W will correspond to Tmax lying in the region. s > 1 as shown in Fig. 9.16.
0.6 Tmax
Tmax
Rext = 5.75 W
Rext = 0.417 W
1
s
0
Fig. 9.16
 A 3-phase induction motor has a starting torque of 100% and a maximum torque of 200% 
of the full-load torque. 
Find:
 (a) slip at maximum torque,
 (b) full-load slip, and
 (c) rotor current at starting in pu of full-load rotor current. 
Neglect the stator impedance.
SOLUTION 
Tfl = 3
2
2
2
2
2
ws
s
fl
fl
V
R s
R s
X
◊
¢
¢
+
¢
(
/
)
(
/
)
(
)
 
(i)
 
Ts = 3
2
2
2
2
2
2
ws
V R
R
X
◊
¢
¢ +
¢
(
)
 
(ii)
 
Tmax = 3
0 5
2
2
ws
V
X
◊
¢
.
 
(iii)
 
(a) Dividing Eq. (iii) by Eq. (ii)
 
  
T
Ts
max  = 0 5
2
2
2
2
2
. ( ¢ +
¢
¢ ¢
R
X
X R
 
(iv)
 
 Let 
R¢2 = kX2¢ 
(v)
 
 Then 
2
1  = 0 5 1
2
2
2
2
2
. (
)
+
¢
¢
k
X
kX

614 Electric Machines
 
 or 
k2 – 4k + 1 = 0
 
 or 
k = 0.268 = s*max,T 
(vi)
 
(b) Dividing Eq. (iii) by Eq. (i)
 
  
T
Tfl
max  = 0 5
2
2
2
2
2
2
. [(
/
)
(
) ]
¢
+
¢
¢
¢
R s
X
X R
fl
sfl
 
  
2 = 
0 5
1
2
. [( /
)
]
k s
k
fl
+
sfl
 
  
s2
fl – 1.072sfl + 0.072 = 0
 
  
sft = 0.072, 1 (rejected)
 
(c)  
I¢2
2 (start) = 
V
R
X
2
2
2 2
2
(
)
¢
+
¢
 
  
I¢2
2 (full-load) = 
V
R s
X
fl
2
2
2
2
2
(
/
)
¢
+
¢
 
  
¢
¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
I
I
2
2
2
(
)
(
)
start
full-load
 = (
/
)
¢
+
¢
¢ +
¢
R s
X
R
X
fl
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
 
  
 = ( /
)
k s
k
fl
2
2
1
1
+
+
 
  
 = ( .
/ .
)
( .
)
0 268 0 072
1
0 268
1
2
2
+
+
 
  
¢
¢
I
I
2
2
(
)
(
)
start
full-load  = 13 86
.
 = 3.72
As the circuit model of an induction motor is similar to that of a transformer, the parameters of the model 
can be obtained by means of nonloading tests as in the case of the transformer—no-load test (corresponding 
to the OC test on the transformer) and the blocked-rotor test (corresponding to the SC test on transformer). 
The No-Load (NL) Test 
In this test the motor is run on no-load at rated voltage and frequency. The applied voltage and current and 
power input to motor are measured by the metering as per Fig. 9.17. 
Let the meter readings be 
 
Power input = P0 (3-phase) 
 
Current = I0 (average of the three meter readings)
 
Voltage = V0 (line-to-line rated voltage) 
 
* The second value of smax,T = 3.73 is rejected as it pertains to an abnormally high-resistance rotor (which would be 
highly inefﬁcient).

Induction Machine 615
Power input at no-load (P0) provides losses only as the shaft output is zero. These losses comprise,
 
P0 (no-load loss) = Pc1 (stator copper loss) + [Pi (iron/core loss)
 
  + Pwf (windage and friction loss) = Rotational loss]
wherein core loss occurs only in the stator as the slip is extremely low (of the order of 0.001) and so the 
frequency of rotor current is as low as 0.05 Hz.
The magnitude of no-load current in an induction motor is about 30-40% of full- load current because of 
the air-gap. So the stator copper loss at no-load needs to be accounted for. This can be estimated by measuring 
dc stator resistance and correcting to ac value (50 Hz) and corrected for temperature (°C).
The mechanical power developed corresponds to Pwf only and so, as already mentioned above the slip is 
very low and the output resistance 
 
R¢2 (1/s0 – 1) = very large 
Also R¢2/s0 >>X2¢ and so X2¢ can be ignored. The corresponding no-load circuit model is drawn in 
Fig. 9.18(a) wherein R¢2/s0 appears in parallel to Ri. By combining the parallel shunt resistances, the ﬁnal 
circuit at no-load is as given in Fig. 9.18(b). Here Riwf accounts for rotational loss, i.e., core loss and windage 
and friction loss. Magnitude-wise Riwf >> Xm. 
R1, the stator resistance, is found by dc testing of the stator winding and correcting the value to ac operation 
(at 50 Hz). X1, the stator leakage reactance, will be found from the blocked-rotor test which follows. We can 
then ﬁnd Xm and Riwf from the no -load (NL) test data. By simpliﬁcation of the circuit of Fig. 9.18(b), we get
 
R0 = R
X
R
X
R
m
ifw
m
iwf
1
2
2
1
+
+
/
(
/
)
 
(9.37)
 
X0 = X
X
X
R
m
m
iwf
1
2
1
+
+ (
/
)
 
(9.38) 
The equivalent circuit is drawn in Fig. 9.18(c). 
It can be justiﬁably assumed that (Xm/Riwf)2 = 0, so we get from the above equations 
 
Riwf = 
X
R
R
m
2
0
1
-
 
(9.39) 
and 
Xm = X0 – X1 
(9.40) 
Rated voltage and
frequency supply
A
A
A
V
W1
W2
n
n
ª
s
Motor on
no-load
Fig. 9.17 
Connection diagram for conducting no-load test on induction motor

616 Electric Machines
+
–
R1
X1
I0
(a)
Xm
Ri
V
P
0
0
/ 3
÷
Æ
R
s
¢2
0
/
R1
X1
(b)
Xm
Riwf
Æ Z0
Rotational loss
R0
X0
(c)
Æ Z0
Fig. 9.18 Circuit model at no-load
From the NL test data (V0, I0, P0) we can ﬁnd from the circuit of Fig. 9.18(c). 
 
Z0 = V
I
0
0
3
/
 
R0 = P
I
0
0
2
3/  
(9.41)
 
X0 = (Z2
0 – R2
0)1/2 
(9.42) 
By substituting the values of R0 and X0 in Eqs (9.39) and (9.40) respectively, we obtain Xm and Riwf. 
Ri, the stator core loss resistance can be found out if the additional test of separating core loss from the 
windage and friction loss, as described below, is carried out. 
Separating Out Core-Loss from Windage and Friction 
Loss 
The separation of these two losses can be carried out by the 
no-load test conducted from the variable-voltage, rated-
frequency supply. As the voltage is reduced below the 
rated value, the core-loss decreases almost as the square 
of voltage. Since the slip does not increase signiﬁcantly, 
the windage and friction loss remains almost constant. 
The voltage is continuously reduced till the machine slip 
suddenly begins to increase and the motor tends to stall. At 
no-load this happens at a sufﬁciently reduced voltage. The 
plot of P0 versus V as shown in Fig. 9.19 is extrapolated to 
V = 0 which gives Pwf as Pi = 0 at zero voltage.
Extrapolation
Pwf
0
P0
V
V(rated)
Fig. 9.19 Separation of Pwf and Pi 

Induction Machine 617
Voltage-Ratio Test
This test can only be conducted on a slip-ring motor by exciting the stator at rated voltage and frequency 
while keeping the rotor open-circuited; the rotor will not rotate. The ratio of rotor to stator voltage can then be 
measured by means of a voltmeter; it may be noted that the rotor-induced emf which appears at the slip-rings 
is of a supply frequency as the rotor is at a standstill. 
Blocked-Rotor (BR) Test
This test is used to determine the series parameters of the circuit model of an induction motor. The circuit 
is similar to that of a transformer short-circuit test. Short circuiting the load resistance in the circuit model 
of Fig. 9.8 corresponds to making s = 1 so that R¢2 (1/s – 1) = 0. This means that the rotor must be stationary 
during this test, which requires that it be blocked mechanically from rotating while the stator is excited with 
appropriate reduced voltage. The circuit model seen under these conditions is given in Fig. 9.20(a). 
+
–
V
Z
BR
BR
/ 3
÷ Æ
IBR
R1
X1
R¢2
X¢2
Xm
(a)
(b)
IBR
RBR
XBR
V
Z
BR
BR
/ 3
÷ Æ
+
–
Fig. 9.20 Circuit model in blocked-rotor test
The current drawn by the motor in the BR test should be close to its rated value as the motor reactances 
are sensitive to saturation effects in the magnetic core. Rated current value is obtained by applying reduced 
voltage to the stator as blocked rotor presents short-circuited condition at the stator terminals (low impedance 
ZBR). The core loss at this reduced voltage can be ignored but as the magnetizing reactance (Xm) is much 
lower in an induction motor compared to a transformer, its effect cannot be ignored. This justiﬁes the BR 
circuit model of Fig. 9.20 presented above. 
In normal operating range of an induction motor the slip is low (2 – 8%). This means low rotor frequency 
and negligible rotor core loss. However, in BR test the rotor frequency is the same as the stator frequency 
which is much higher than rotor frequency in normal operation (it is almost negligible). Though with reduced 
voltage applied to stator the rotor core loss is small, the higher rotor frequency would affect the value of RBR 
and the rotor resistance as determined from the test it will be smaller. (see the last para of this section). So for 
obtaining accurate results for rotor resistance, the BR test needs to be conducted at reduced frequency (25% 
of rated frequency). The reactances thus obtained are then scaled up to the rated frequency (50 Hz). However, 
for motors rated less than 25 kW, reduced frequency test is not warranted. 
Metering and connection diagrams for the BR test are the same as in the connection diagram of Fig. 9.17. 
Of course the motor must be fed from appropriate low voltage (variable) source of frequency as discussed 
above and blocked mechanically (n = 0 i.e. s = 1). The following readings are recorded during this test: 
 
VBR = stator voltage (line-to-line) 
 
IBR = stator current (average of three ammeter readings) 
 
PBR = power fed into stator; this mainly constitutes the copper loss in stator and rotor. At reduced 
voltage core loss (even in stator) is negligible. 

618 Electric Machines
From these test readings we can compute 
 
ZBR = V
I
BR
BR
/ 3  
(9.43) 
 
RBR = P
I
BR
BR
/3
2
 
(9.44)
 
XBR = (Z2
BR – R2
BR)1/2 
(9.45) 
These values constitute the series equivalent of the BR test (Fig. 9.20(b)). 
We, however, need to determine the circuit model parameters R¢2, X1 X2¢, while R1 is known from the dc 
test. From the motor circuit in BR test as given in Fig. 9.20(b) we can write 
 
ZBR  = RBR + jXBR 
 
 = (R1 + jX1) + jXm || (R¢2 + jX2¢) 
(9.46) 
Let 
jXm || (R¢2 + jX¢2) = A + j B
By making certain assumptions certain simpliﬁcations are carried out below:
 
A + jB = jX
R
jX
R
j X
X
m
m
(
)
(
)
¢ +
¢
¢ +
¢ +
2
2
2
2
 = jX
R
jX
R
j X
X
R
X
X
m
m
m
(
)[
(
)]
(
)
¢ +
¢
¢ -
¢ +
¢ +
¢ +
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
 
(9.47)
As Xm >> R¢2, we can neglect R¢2
2 in the denominator giving
 
A + jB = 
jX
X
X
m
m
(
)
¢ +
2
2 [R¢2
2 + X2¢ (X2¢ + Xm) – jR¢2 Xm]
But 
R¢2
2 + X2¢ (X2¢ + Xm) = R¢2
2 + X2¢2 (1 + Xm/X2¢) 
 
 = 
¢
+
¢ +
¢
¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
X
X
X
R
X
m
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
 
 ª X2¢ (X2¢ + Xm); as 
¢
¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
R
X
2
2
2
 << 1
Then 
A + jB = 
¢
¢ +
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
R
X
X
X
m
m
2
2
2
 + j
X X
X
X
m
m
¢
¢ +
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
2
2
Equation (9.46) then takes the form 
 
ZBR  = RBR + j XBR
 
 = (R1 + jX1) + 
¢
¢ +
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ +
¢
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
R
X
X
X
j X
X
m
m
m
2
2
2
2
(
||
)  
(9.48)
The following results can then be written down with the knowledge that
 
X2¢ || Xm = X2¢ as Xm >> X2¢ 
(9.49)
Then 
X1 + X2¢ = XBR
 
R¢2 = (RBR – R1)
X
X
X
m
m
+
¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
2
2
 ª (RBR – R1) as Xm >>X¢2 
(9.50) 

Induction Machine 619
If (Xm + X2¢) > 10 R¢2, which is usually the case, then Eq. (9.50) for R¢2 causes an error of less than 1%. 
At this stage we need to separate out X1 and X2¢, which is not possible by the data of this (BR) test. 
Generally it is fairly accurate to assume that 
 
X1 = X2¢ = XBR/2 
(9.51) 
If the BR test is conducted at rated frequency, two factors affect the value of R¢2 as observed above. Firstly 
the rotor (winding) resistance increases as the frequency of rotor currents is the same as the rated frequency, 
while under normal operating conditions it is very small; few hertz or so. Secondly the frequency of rotor 
ﬂux alterations is also at rated frequency. The rotor core then presents an effective resistance in parallel to R¢2 
thereby reducing effective R¢2 as measured. These two effects tend to cancel each other out. So no reduced 
frequency testing is needed for small size motors (less than 25 kW).
Circuit Model as Obtained from NL and BR Tests 
With the circuit parameters obtained as above, circuit model in two alternative forms are drawn in Figs 9.21(a) 
and (b). 
 
(1) Circuit Model of Fig. 9.21(a) Here Riwf  represents core loss and windage and friction loss. Approximation 
lies in the fact that actual windage and friction is taken off the shaft in mechanical form. A more exact 
circuit would be possible if these two losses are separated out by the test described above. Usually such 
accuracy is not needed. 
 
  It may be noted here that power absorbed by the output resistance R¢2 (1/s – 1) is the net mechanical 
output. 
+
–
V
R1
X¢2
X1
I1
(a)
Xm
l0
R¢2
I¢2
Riwf
R
s
(1/ – 1)
Net mech output
¢2
≠
+
–
V
R1
X¢2
X1
I1
(b)
Xm
lm
R¢2
I¢2
R
s
(1/ – 1)
Gross mech. output (rotational
loss to be subtracted for net
mech. output)
¢2
≠
Fig. 9.21

620 Electric Machines
 
(2) IEE Circuit Model - Fig. 9.21(b) Here Riwf is removed so that only shunt reactance is the magnetizing 
reactance Xm. Core loss and windage and friction loss must now be subtracted from the mechanical 
output (power in R¢2(1/s – 1). This is a different type of approximation and is found more accurate than 
the approximation made in model of Fig. 9.21(a). This circuit is simpler to analyze and therefore, as 
mentioned already, is commonly adopted. 
Approximate Circuit Model 
The approximate circuit model has been given in Fig. 9.9. With reference to this circuit, the circuit model 
seen during NL test is as given in Fig. 9.22(a) where the rotor is regarded as open circuit. The circuit model 
during BR test is as given in Fig. 9.22(b) wherein the shunt branch is ignored. 
VBR/ 3
÷
IBR
R1
X1
R¢2
X¢2
(b)
+
–
(a)
I0
V / 3
÷
0
P0
Xm
Im
Iiwf
PBR
+
–
Riwf
Fig. 9.22
NL test 
 
Riwf = (
/
)
(
/ )
V
Pr
0
2
3
3
 = V
Pr
0
2
; Pr = P0 – 3I2
0 R1
 
 = stator core loss + windage and friction loss (rotational loss)
 
Iiwf = V
Riwf
0
3
/
; Im = (I2
0 – I2
iwf)1/2
 
Xm = V
Im
0
3
/
BR test
 
ZBR = V
I
BR
BR
/ 3  and RBR = P
I
BR
BR
/3
2
 = R1 + R¢2
 
XBR = (Z2
BR – R2
BR)1/2 = X1 + X2¢
with usual assumption 
 
X1 = X2¢ = XBR/2
R1 is obtained from dc test and is corrected to operating temperature (75 °C). No ac resistance correction 
is normally needed for induction motors. 
The approximate circuit model as obtained from NL and BR tests is drawn in two versions—Fig. 9.23(a) 
and Fig. 9.23(b). In the circuit of Fig. 9.23(b) the rotational output has to be subtracted from the gross 

Induction Machine 621
output. This gives better results than the circuit model of Fig. 9.23(a) and so would be adopted wherever 
such approximation (shifting shunt branch to motor input terminals) is warranted. The approximate circuit 
of Fig. 9.23(a) is mainly employed in circle diagram method of determining induction motor performance.
I1
I0
I¢2
X
X
1
2
+
¢
Riwf
Xm
V1
+
–
(a)
R (1/ – 1)
(Net mech. output)
s
¢2
R1
2
+ R¢
I1
Im
I¢2
X
X
1
2
+
¢
V
+
–
(b)
R (1/ – 1)
(Gross mech output)
s
¢2
R1
2
+ R¢
Fig. 9.23
 A 400 V, 6-pole, 3-phase, 50 Hz star-connected induction motor running light at rated 
voltage takes 7.5 A with a power input of 700 W. With the rotor locked and 150 V applied to the stator, the 
input current is 35 A and power input is 4000 W; the stator resistance/phase being 0.55 W under these 
conditions. The standstill reactances of the stator and rotor as seen on the stator side are estimated to be 
in the ratio of 1: 0.5. When the motor is operating at a slip of 4%, calculate the stator current, its pf, net 
mechanical output and torque. What is motor efﬁciency under these conditions of operation? 
Also calculate the motor performance as above by using the parameters of the approximate circuit 
model. Compare the results. 
SOLUTION 
BR test 
 
ZBR = 150
3
35
/
 = 2.47 W
 
RBR = 4000
3
35 2
¥
(
)
 = 1.09 W
 
XBR = 
( .
)
( .
)
2 47
1 09
2
2
-
 
 = 2.22 W
 
X1 + X2¢ = 2.22
 
X1 + 0.5 X1 = 2.22

622 Electric Machines
or 
X1 = 1.48 W, X2¢ = 0.74 W
 
R¢2 = (RBR – R1)
X
X
X
m
m
+
¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
2
2
 
Xm = 29.03 W (obtained from NL test below)
 
R¢2 = (1.09 – 0.55)
29 03
0 74
29 03
2
.
.
.
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
 = 0.568 W
NL test
 
Z0 = 400
3
7 5
/
.
 = 30.79 W
 
R0 = 700 3
7 5 2
/
( . )
 = 4.15 W
 
X0 = 
(
.
)
( .
)
30 79
4 15
2
2
-
  
 = 30.51 W
 
Xm = X0 – X1 = 30.51 – 1.48 = 29.03 W 
Output resistance
 
¢
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
R
s
2
1
1  = 0.568 ¥ 24 
 
 = 13.63 W
The exact circuit model is drawn in Fig. 9.24. It is not practical to proceed by the Thevenin equivalent method for 
ﬁnding stator, its power factor and power input. We shall therefore proceed directly by ﬁnding Zin  in the circuit model 
of Fig. 9.24. 
I1
0.55
1.48
I¢2
0.74
0.568
Zf
Zin
+
–
V
29.03
0.568
24
= 13.68
¥
W
Gross mech. output
Fig. 9.24 
 
Z f  = j Xm || (R¢2/s + jX2¢)
 
 = parallel combination of rotor impedance
 
   and magnetizing reactance 
 
 = j 29.03 || (14.2 + j 0.74)
 
 = 10.98 + j 5.96 = Rf + j Xf
 
Rf = 10.98 W 
 
Zin = (0.55 + j 1.48) + (10.98 + j 5.98) 
 
 = 11.53 + j 7.44 = 13.72 –32.8° W

Induction Machine 623
 
I1 = 231
13 72
.
 = 16.84 A 
 
pf = cos 32.8° = 0.84 lagging
 
Power input, Pin = 
3  ¥ 400 ¥ 16.84 ¥ 0.84
 
 = 9.80 kW 
As the magnetizing reactance is nondissipative, power in Rf will constitute the power across air-gap. Thus 
 
PG = 3I2
1 Rf (= 3I¢2
2 R¢2/s)
 
 = 3 ¥ (16.84)2 ¥ 10.98 
 
 = 9.34 kW 
 
Gross mechanical output = (1 – s) PG 
 
 = (1 – 0.04) ¥ 9.34 = 8.97 kW 
 
Rotational loss = 700 – 3 ¥ (7.5)2 ¥ 0.55 
 
 = 607 W 
Net mechanical output, 
Pout = 8.97 – 0.607 
 
 = 8.36 kW 
 
ws = 1000
2
60
¥ p  = 104.72 rad/s
 
Torque (net) = 
8360
104 72 1
0 04
.
(
.
)
-
 = 83.16 Nm 
Efﬁciency, 
h = 8 36
9 80
.
.
 ¥ 100 = 85.31% 
Enumeration of losses 
 
Rotational loss = 607 W 
 
   (core + windage + friction) 
 
Stator copper loss = 3 ¥ (16.8)2 ¥ 0.55 = 468 W
 
Rotor copper loss = sPG = 0.04 ¥ 9340 = 374 W 
 
Total loss = 607 + 468 + 374 = 1449 W 
Check:  
Pin – Pout = 9800 – 8360 = 1440 W 
Note: The above method can be used to ﬁnd the slip at maximum torque and its value, but the derivation to be carried out 
would be quite complex. It is much simpler to proceed by the Thevenin equivalent method. Equally the Thevenin method 
becomes cumbersome in determining stator current and its pf. This will be illustrated in the two examples that follow. 
Approximate Circuit Model 
NL test 
Rotational loss, 
Pr = 607 W (as calculated already)
 
Riwf = 3
231
607
2
¥ (
)
 = 264 W
 
Iiwf = 231
264  = 0.875 
 
Im = 
( . )
( .
)
7 5
0 875
2
2
-
 = 7.45 
 
Xm = 231
7 45
.
 = 31 W 

624 Electric Machines
BR test 
 
ZBR = 150
3
35
/
 = 2.47 W
 
RBR = 4000 3
35 2
/
(
)
 = 1.09 W 
 
X1 + X2¢ = 
( . )
( .
)
7 5
1 09
2
2
-
 = 2.22 W 
or 
X1 = 1.48 W,  X2¢ = 0.74 W
The approximate circuit model is drawn in Fig. 9.25. From this ﬁgure 
 
Z (total) = (0.55 + 0.54 + 12.96) + j 2.22
 
 = 14.22 –9°
 
I2¢ = 
231
14 22
9
.
– ∞ = 16.24––9° = 16.04 – j 2.54
 
Mechanical power output (gross) = 3 ¥ (16.24)2 ¥ 12.96 = 10.25 kW
 
Mechanical power output (net) = 10.25 – 0.607 (rot loss) = 9.64 kW
 
Torque (net) = 
9640
104 72 1
0 04
.
(
.
)
-
 = 96 Nm 
Stator current, 
I1  = I
I
m + ¢2
 
 = – j 7.45 + (16.04 – j 2.54)
 
 = 16.04 – j 10 = 18.90 – – 31.9° A
 
I1 = 18.90 A, pf = cos 31.9° = 0.85 lagging
 
Power input = 
3  400 ¥ 18.9 ¥ 0.85
 
  = 11.13 kW
 
h = 9 64
11 13
.
.
 ¥ 100 = 86.61%
Comparison The results as obtained from the approximate model are about 10-12% higher than those obtained from the 
IEEE model (the two efﬁciencies are of course quite close to each other). The approximate circuit leads to considerable 
ease in computation and visualization of the motor performance. 
I1
0.54
+
–
231 V
0.54
24
= 12.96
¥
Power output gross
I¢2
Im
Xm
Z(total)
0.55
2.22
Fig. 9.25
The Example 9.4 ﬁrst method is also solved by MATLAB.
%% example 9.4
clc

Induction Machine 625
clear
j=sqrt(-1);
Vt=400; P=6; f=50; Inl=7.5; Pnl=700;
%% blocked rotor test results
Vbr=150;
Ibr=35;
Pinbr=4000;
R1=0.55
k=1/0.5;
s=0.04;
Zbr=Vbr/(sqrt(3)*Ibr);
Rbr=Pinbr/(3*(Ibr)^2);
Xbr=sqrt(Zbr^2-Rbr^2);
X1=Xbr/(1+0.5)
X2=Xbr-X1
%% no load test results
Zo=Vt/(sqrt(3)*Inl);
Ro=Pnl/(3*Inl^2);
Xo=sqrt(Zo^2-Ro^2);
Xm=Xo-X1
R2=(Rbr-R1)*((Xm+X2)/Xm)^2
Zf=1/((1/(j*Xm))+(1/((R2/s)+j*X2)));
Rf=real(Zf);
Xf=imag(Zf);
Zin=R1+j*X1+Zf;
I1=Vt/(sqrt(3)*Zin);
Pin=sqrt(3)*Vt*abs(I1)*cos(angle(I1))
Pg=3*abs(I1)*abs(I1)*Rf
Pm=(1-s)*Pg
Prot=Pnl-3*Inl*Inl*R1
Pout=Pm-Prot
ws=1000*2*pi/60;
Tnet=Pout/((1-s)*ws)
eff=Pout*100/Pin
Answer:
R1 = 0.5500
X1 = 1.4814
X2 = 0.7407
Xm = 29.0299
R2 = 0.5663
Pin = 9.8102e+003
Pg = 9.3422e+003
Pm = 8.9685e+003
Prot = 607.1875
Pout = 8.3613e+003
Tnet = 83.1717
eff = 85.2307

626 Electric Machines
 The following results were obtained on a 3-phase, 75 kW, 3.3 kV, 6- pole, 50 Hz squirrel-
cage induction motor.
NL test: 
Rated frequency, 50 Hz 
 
V0 = 3.3 kV (line),   I0 = 5 A,   P0 = 2500 W 
BR test: 
Frequency 15 Hz 
 
VBR = 400 V (line), IBR = 27 A, PBR = 15000 W 
DC test on stator Resistance/phase = 3.75 W
 (a) Determine the parameters of the circuit model (exact version). 
 (b) Find the parameters of Thevenin equivalent as seen from the rotor circuit. 
 (c) Calculate the maximum torque and the slip at which it occurs. 
 (d) For a slip of 4%, calculate the stator current, its pf and motor efﬁciency. 
Calculate also internal motor torque 
SOLUTION 
NL test
 
Z0 = 3300
3
5
/
 = 381 W
 
R0 = 2500 3
5 2
/
( )
 = 33.33 W
 
X0 = 
(
)
(
.
)
381
33 33
2
2
-
 = 379.6 W
 
Xm = X0 – X1 = ?
BR test 
 
ZBR = 400
3
27
/
 = 8.55 W
 
RBR = 15000 3
27 2
/
(
)
 = 6.86 W
 
XBR = 
( .
)
( .
)
8 55
6 86
2
2
-
 = 5.10 W
 
X1 = X2¢ = XBR/2 = 2.55 W (at 15 Hz); 8.50 W (at 50 Hz)
\ 
Xm = 379.6 – 8.50 = 371 W 
 
R2¢ = (RBR – R1)
X
X
X
m
m
+
¢
È
Î
Í
˘
˚
˙
2
2
 
  = (6.86 – 3.75) ¥ 371
8 50
371
2
+
È
ÎÍ
˘
˚˙
.
 = 3.25 W
 
(a) The circuit model is drawn in Fig. 9.26(a).
 
(b)  
VTH  = (
/
)
.
(
. )
3300
3
0
371
3 75
371
8 5
– ∞¥
+
j
j
 
  
 = 1862 –0.6° V 
 
  
ZTH  = j
j
j
371
3 75
8 5
3 75
371
8 5
¥ (
+
)
+
+
.
.
.
(
. )
 
  
 = 9.08 –66.8° 
 
  
 = 3.58 + j 8.35 = RTH + j XTH
 
 The corresponding circuit is drawn in Fig. 9.26(b) 

Induction Machine 627
I1
3.75
8.50
8.50
3.25
Zf
Zin
+
–
V
371
PG
3.25 1
s – 1
= 78
for s = 0.04
(a)
3.25
+
–
VTH
I¢2
Im
Z(total)
3.58
8.35
8.5
3.25 1
s – 1
(b)
Fig. 9.26
 
(c) For maximum torque to be developed 
 
  
3 25
.
max,
s
T
 = 
( .
)
( .
.
)
3 58
8 35
8 50
2
2
+
+
 
 or 
smax,T = 3 25
17 22
.
.
 = 0.189
 
 or 
R2¢/smax,T = 3 25
0 189
.
.
 = 17.2 W
 
  
ns = 1000 rpm, ws = 104.72
 
  
Ztotal  = (3.58 + 17.22) + j16.85
 
  
 = 20.80 + j 16.85 = 26.77 –39° W
 
  
I2¢ = 1862
26 77
.
 = 69.56 A
 
  
Tmax = 3
69 56
17 2
104 72
2
¥
¥
(
.
)
.
.
 
  
 = 2.387 Nm
 
(d) As the stator current and its pf are required, we shall proceed by using the circuit of Fig. 9.26(a).
 
  
Z f  = j
j
j
371 81 25
8 50
81 25
379 50
(
.
.
)
.
.
+
+
 
  
 = 78.11 –18.1°
 
  
 = 74.24 + j 24.26 = Rf + j Xf

628 Electric Machines
 
  
Zin = (3.75 + j 8.5) + (74.26 + j 24.26)
 
  
 = 84.60 –22.8° 
 
  
I1 = 3300
3
84 60
/
.
 = 22.52 A
 
  
pf = cos 22.8° = 0.922 lagging
 
  
Gross mechanical output = (1 – s) PG 
 
  
 = (1 – 0.04) ¥ 3 ¥ (22.52)2 ¥ 74.24 
 
  
 = 108.43 kW 
 
  
Rotational loss = 2.500 – (5)2 ¥ 3.75 
 
  
 = 2.41 kW 
 
  
Motor input = 
3  ¥ 3.3 ¥ 22.52 ¥ 0.922 
 
  
 = 118.22 kW 
 
  
Net mechanical output = 108.42 – 2.41 = 106.1 kW 
 
  
h = 106 21
118 42
.
.
 = 89.1%
 
  
Internal torque developed = (108.43 ¥ 1000)/[104.72 (1 – 0.04)] = 1078.6 Nm
 A 400 V, 1450 rpm, 50 Hz wound-rotor induction motor has the following circuit model 
parameters. 
 
R1 = 0.3 W 
R2¢ = 0.25 W 
 
X1 = X2¢ = 0.6 W 
Xm = 35 W 
 
Rotational loss = 1500 W 
 (a) Calculate the starting torque and current when the motor is started direct on full voltage. 
 (b) Calculate the full-load current, pf and torque (net). 
 
 Also ﬁnd internal efﬁciency and overall efﬁciency. Internal efﬁciency is deﬁned as
 
  
Pout (gross)/Pin; Pout (gross) = (1 – s) PG 
 (c) Find the slip for maximum torque and the value of the maximum torque. 
SOLUTION 
The motor circuit model is drawn in Fig. 9.27(a) and its Thevenin equivalent version is drawn in 
Fig. 9.27(b). Thevenin equivalent quantities are calculated below. 
 
ZTH  = j
j
j
35 0 3
0 6
0 3
35 60
( .
. )
.
.
+
+
 = 0.29 + j 0 59 W 
 
VTH  = 231 0
35
0 3
35 60
– ∞¥
+
j
j
.
.
 = 227 –0.5° V
 
ns = 1500 rpm  ws = 157.1 rad/s
 
(a) Starting on full voltage (s = 1)
 
 From the circuit of Fig. 9.27(a) 
 
  
Z f  = 
j
j
j
35 0 25
0 6
0 25
35 6
( .
. )
.
.
+
+
 
  
 = 0.24 + j 0.59 W
 
  
Rf = 0.24 W 

Induction Machine 629
 
  
Zin = (0.3 + j 0.6) + (0.24 + j 0.59) 
 
  
 = 1.31 –65.6° W
 
  
I1(start) = 231
1 31
.
 = 176.3 A
 
  
T(start) = 3 1
2
I Rf
s
w
 
  
3
176 3
0 24
157 1
2
¥
¥
(
. )
.
.
 = 142.4 Nm
 
(b)  
sf l = 1500
1450
1500
-
 = 1/30
 
  
R2¢/sfl = 0.25 ¥ 30 = 7.5 W 
 
 From the circuit of Fig. 9.27(a) 
 
  
Z f  = j
j
j
35 75
0 6
7 5
35 6
(
. )
.
.
+
+
 
  
 = 6.94 + j 2.05 W
 
  
Rf = 6.94 W 
 
  
Zin  = (0.3 + j 0.6) + (6.94 + j 2.05) 
 
  
 = 7.71 –20.1° W 
 
  
I1 = 231
7 71
.
 = 30 A 
 
  
pf = cos 20.1° = 0.94 lagging
 
  
PG = 3 ¥ (30)2 ¥ 6.94 = 18.74 kW
 
  
Power output (gross) = (1 – s) PG 
 
  
(1 – 1/30) ¥ 18.74 = 18.12 kW
 
  
Rotational loss = 1.5 kW 
 
  
Power output (net) = 18.12 – 1.5 = 16.62 kW 
 
  
Torque (net) = 16 62
1000
157 1 1
130
.
. (
/
)
¥
-
 = 109.4 Nm 
 
  
Power input = 
3  ¥ 400 ¥ 30 ¥ 0.94 = 19.54 kW 
 
  
h = 16 62
19 54
.
.
 ¥ 100 = 85.06%
 
  
Internal efﬁciency = P
s
P
G
in
(
)
1 -
 
  
 = 18 74 1
130
19 54
.
(
/
)
.
-
 = 92.71%
 
(c) We shall use the Thevenin equivalent circuit of Fig. 9.27(b). For maximum torque 
 
  
0 25
.
max,
s
T
 = 
( .
)
( .
. )
0 29
0 59
0 6
2
2
+
+
 
 or 
smax,T = 0.204
 
  
R2¢/smax,T = 0.25/0.204 = 1.225
I1
0.3
0.6
0.6
0.25
Zf
Zin
+
–
231 V
35
(a)
0.25
+
–
227 V
Z(total)
0.29
0.59
0.6
(b)
0.25(1/ – 1)
s
I¢2
0.25(1/ – 1)
s
Fig. 9.27

630 Electric Machines
 
  
Z (total) = (0.29 + j 0.59) + (1.225 + j 0.6)
 
  
 = 1.93 –38.1°
 
  
I2¢ = 227
1 93
.
 = 117.6
 
  
Tmax = 3
117 6
1 225
157 1
2
¥
¥
(
. )
.
.
 
  
 = 323.5 Nm
With the parameters of the approximate circuit model obtained from the no-load and blocked-rotor tests, the 
complete performance of the induction machine can be calculated by varying the slip. To help visualize the 
nature of induction motor performance over a complete range of slips, a graphical locus approach, called 
circle diagram, is very helpful. For this purpose it is acceptable practice to use the approximate circuit model 
of Fig. 9.23(a). In this circuit the current I2¢ ﬂows in a series inductive circuit with variable resistance. Locus 
of this current phasor (tip) can be easily shown to be a circle. The shunt branch (magnetizing and Piwf 
(loss) branch) draws constant current, which merely shifts the circle from the origin of phasor diagram; the 
reference phasor being the voltage –V = 0°. The complete circle diagram is drawn in Fig. 9.28 following the 
steps enumerated below. It may be noted here that we have earlier used the sufﬁx BR for quantities measured 
during blocked- rotor test, which presents short circuit conditions in the circle model, i.e. s = 1. We shall now 
onwards use the alternative sufﬁx SC with the same meaning as BR.
Motoring
P
s
SC ( = 1)
Output
line
F
Torque line G
L
Q
N
H
M
X
P
f¢SC
E
D
C
B
P
I¢2
I2
f1
P0
f0
O
A
I0
f¢SC
V
Braking
Fig. 9.28
 
(i) Locate the voltage-axis along which the voltage phasor V  as represented by OV. The projection of a 
current phasor on the V-axis is the active current component while the reactive current component is 
the current projection on OX-axis (drawn lagging the V-axis by 90°). These current components repre-
sent real and reactive powers when multiplied by V, the voltage/phase. 

Induction Machine 631
 (ii) Locate OP0 at angle f0 (no-load pf angle) from the phasor V  to represent the no-load current I0. Then
 
 No-load loss, P0 = OP0 cos f0 = P0A (to scale of voltage V )
 (iii) Draw
 
  
P0Q = 
V
X
X
1
2
+
¢
 
 at 90° to the V-axis. This indeed is the current I2¢ if all resistance in this part of the circuit could be 
reduced to zero. 
 
 P0Q is the diameter of the circle of the ¢I2 -locus. The circle is drawn with centre M at the midpoint of 
P0Q.
 (iv) The short-circuit point PSC is located on the circle corresponding to s = 1.
 
  
I2¢ (SC) = P0PSC = 
¢
+
¢
+
+
¢
V
R
R
X
X
(
)
(
)
1
2
2
1
2
2
 
  
f¢SC = tan–1 
X
X
R
R
1
2
1
2
+
¢
+
¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
 The circle can also be drawn* by locating PSC without the need of determining P0Q· 
 
 At any operating point P on the circle 
 
  
OP = I1, input current
 
  
OP0 = I0, no-load current 
 
  
P0P = I¢2, rotor current as seen from stator. 
From the similarity of D¢s P0DB and P0GPSC 
 
BD
P G
SC
 = P D
P G
0
0
 
(9.52)
Further, from the similarity of D¢s P0DP and P0QP and also similarity of D¢s P0GPSC and P0QPSC , 
 
P D
P P
0
0
 = P P
P Q
0
0
 or P0D = (
)
P P
P Q
0
2
0
 
(9.53) 
and 
P G
P PSC
0
0
 = P P
P Q
SC
0
0
 or P0G = (
)
P P
P Q
SC
0
2
0
 
(9.54) 
Substituting Eqs (9.52) and (9.53) in Eq. (9.54), 
 
BD
P G
SC
 = (
)
(
)
P P
P PSC
0
2
0
 = 
¢
¢
I
I SC
2
2
2
2
 
(9.55)
Multiplying the numerator and denominator of the right-hand side of Eq. (9.55) by (R1 + R2¢ ), 
 
BD
P G
SC
 = 
¢
+
¢
+
¢
I
R
R
I
R
R
SC
2
2
1
2
2
2
1
2
(
)
(
)  = copper-loss on load
copper-loss on SC  
(9.56)
 
* Directly in terms of the blocked-rotor test data, PSC is located by translating the data to the rated voltage from the 
reduced voltage at which the test is conducted.
 
OPSC = I1 (SC )|at rated voltage at angle fSC

632 Electric Machines
Since the power drawn on short-circuit* is 
 
PSCH = GH + PSCH = P0 + Pc 
\ 
PSCG = Pc, copper-loss** (stator + rotor) 
It therefore follows from Eq. (9.56) that 
 
BD = I¢2
2 (R1 +R2¢) = copper-loss on load 
Now divide PSCG at F such that
 
P F
FG
sc
 = 
¢
R
R
2
1
From similarity of appropriate triangles it then easily follows that
 
BC = rotor copper-loss (on-load) 
 
CD = stator copper-loss (on-load) 
If P0F is produced to meet the circle at P , then 
 
P L = stator copper-loss, while corresponding rotor copper -loss is zero. 
This is only possible when
 
¢
R
s
2  = 0, or s = 
Thus P  point corresponds to inﬁnite slip. 
At load point P, 
 
PE = PB + (BC + CD) + DE 
or 
Input power, 
Pi = Pm + (Pcr + Pcs) + P0 
where 
Pm = PB = net mechanical power output 
 
  (Pwf having been accounted for in P0) 
Therefore, the mechanical power output is the vertical intercept between the circle and the line P0PSC, 
called the output line. 
Now 
 
PG(air-gap power) = Pm + Pcr 
 
 = PB + BC = PC = torque in synchronous watts 
Therefore, the vertical intercept between the circle and line P0P , called the torque line is the torque in 
synchronous watts. Further, 
 
Slip, s = P
P
cr
G
 = BC
PC
By observing the circle diagram certain generalized conclusion can easily be drawn about the induction 
motor performance. These are:
 
(i) The motor has a very low pf (lagging) on no-load which improves to a certain maximum value (when 
OP is tangential to the circle) and then begins to reduce. The induction motor inherently has a lagging 
 
* As already discussed P0 remains constant as the slip increases to unity, where it is wholly constituted of iron-loss. 
 
** With the approximation already made that Pc (stator) = I¢2
2 R1. 

Induction Machine 633
power factor (around 0.8) over which no control is possible unlike the synchronous motor*. This is 
because, being a singly-fed device, it draws a large zero pf lagging current to set up the resultant air-
gap ﬂux/pole.
 (ii) The mechanical power output exhibits a maximum; it can be located by drawing a line tangential to 
the circle and parallel to the output line.
 (iii) The torque also exhibits a maximum, located 
at a point different from that corresponding 
to the maximum power. It can be located by 
drawing a line tangential to the circle and 
parallel to the torque line.
 (iv) It is obvious from (ii) above that the efﬁciency-
load plot will also exhibit a maximum. This is 
the inherent characteristic of any device with 
a constant loss component and a variable loss 
component proportional to the square of the 
load (refer Sec. 5.8).
 (v) The input current increases continuously.
Typical plots of current, torque (net), pf, slip and 
efﬁciency versus pu power output for the induction 
motor are shown in Fig. 9.29. These plots are shown 
in a solid line up to 1.0 pu output (full-load) and 
beyond this are drawn dotted. 
As brought out by Fig. 9.14 (torque-slip characteristic) that the induction machine acts as a generator when 
run as super-synchronous speed (s < 0) by a primemover. The circle diagram for generator operation is the 
lower part of the circle (centre M ) not shown in Fig. 9.28. Induction generator operation will be taken up in 
Section 9.13. 
 A 15 kW, 415 V, 4-pole, 50 Hz delta-connected motor gave the following results on test 
(voltages and currents are in line values): 
 
No-load test 
415 V  
10.5 A  
1,510 W 
 
Blocked-rotor test  
105 V  
28 A  
2,040 W 
Using the approximate circuit model, determine: 
 (a) the line current and power factor for rated output, 
 (b) the maximum torque, and 
 (c) the starting torque and line current if the motor is started with the stator star-connected. 
Assume that the stator and rotor copper losses are equal at standstill. 
Hint Part (a) is best attempted by means of a circle diagram. For proceeding computationally from the 
circuit model, we have to compute the complete output-slip curve and then read the slip for rated output. 
Current, torque, efficiency,
power factor (pu)
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
4.4 p.u. on SC
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
T
T
I
I
T
p.f.
p.f.
s
s
h
Output power (pu)
Fig. 9.29
motor 
 
* The resultant air-gap ﬂux/pole in a synchronous machine can be independently adjusted by the dc excitation 
thereby allowing control over the machine power factor.

634 Electric Machines
SOLUTION 
OP0 = 10.5 A 
 
cos f0 = 
1 510
3
415
10 5
,
.
¥
¥
 = 0.2
or 
f0 = 78.5° 
 
OPSC = 28
415
105
¥
 = 110.7 A (at 415 V)
 
cos fSC = 
2 040
3
105
28
,
¥
¥
 = 0.4
 
fSC = 66.4°
 
Rated output = 15 kW = 
3 V(I cos f)rated 
 
(I cos f)rated = 15 000
3
415
,
¥
 = 20.87 A
 
(a) The circle diagram is drawn in Fig. 9.30. PP¢ is drawn parallel to the output line P0PSC at a vertical distance 
20.87 A above PPSC. The point P pertains to full load (P¢is the second but unacceptable solution—too large a 
current): 
f = 30°
66.4∞
78.5∞
O
P0
P
C
V
R
S
G
F
PSC
P¢
20.9 A
H
X
Fig. 9.30
 
 Then, 
 
  
I1 = OP = 30.5 A 
 
  
pf = cos f = cos 30° = 0.866 lagging
 
(b) Torque line P0F is drawn by locating F as the midpoint of PSCG (equal stator and rotor, losses). The maximum 
torque point is located by drawing a tangent to the circle parallel to P0F. The maximum torque is given as 
 
  
RS = 44 A
 
  
Tmax = 3
145
3
44
¥
¥
 = 31,626 syn watts
 
  
ns = 1,500 rpm,  ws = 157.1 rad/s
 
  
Tmax = 31 626
157 1
,
.
 = 201.3 Nm

Induction Machine 635
 
(c) If the motor is started to delta (this is the connection for which test data are given) 
 
  
Is(delta) = OPSC = 110.7 A 
 
  
PSCF = 22 A
 
  
Ts(delta) = (
)
.
3
415
22
157 1
¥
¥
 = 100.7 Nm 
 
 Star connection 
Is(star) = 100 7
3
.
 = 33.6 A
 
  
Ts(star) = 100 7
3
.
 = 33.57 Nm
 A 400 V, 3-phase, 6-pole, 50 Hz induction motor gave the following test results: 
 No-load 
400 V 
8 V  
0.16 power factor 
 Blocked-rotor  
200 V  
39 A  
0.36 power factor
Determine the mechanical output, torque and slip when the motor draws a current of 30 A from the 
mains. Assume the stator and rotor copper losses to be equal. Use circle diagram method. 
SOLUTION 
cos f0 = 0.16;   f0 = 80.8° 
 
cos fSC = 0.36;   fSC = 69°
The circle diagram is drawn in Fig .9.31. On the circle diagram we located P such that OP = 30 A. We get the following 
results. 
 
Pm = 
3  ¥ 400 ¥ PB(= 10.75 A)
 
 = 7.45 kW
 
Slip s = BC
PC  = 3 5
13 5
.
.
A
A  = 0.26
 
Torque T = 
3
400
13 5
¥
¥
=
PC
A
s
(
.
)
w
 
and 
ws = 120
50
6
2
60
¥
p  = 104.7 rad/s
 
T = 
3
400
13 5
104 7
¥
¥
.
.
 = 89.33 Nm
V
O
E
H
F
B
C
D
G
PSC
P
P0
P
80.8°
69°
Fig. 9.31

636 Electric Machines
 A 3-phase, 400 V, 6-pole, 19 kW induction motor has the following parameters of its 
approximate circuit model. 
 
R1 = 1.4 W  R¢2 = 0.6 W
 
X1 = 2 W   X¢2 = 1 W 
 
Xm = 50 W
The rotational loss is 275 W. For a slip of 0.03, – 0.03, and 1.2, determine:
 (a) the line current, pf and power input. 
 (b) the shaft torque, and mechanical output.
 (c) the efﬁciency. 
SOLUTION 
The approximate circuit is drawn in Fig. 9.32. 
 
(i) Slip = 0.03 
 
(a)  
R¢2/s = 0.6/0.03 = 20 W
 
  
¢I2  = 
231 0
1 4
20
3
– ∞
+
+
( .
)
j
 
  
 = 10.69–– 8° A
 
  
 = 10.58 – j 1.49 A
 
  
Im  = 231 0
50
90
– ∞
–
∞ = – j 4.62 A
 
  
I1  = I
I
m + ¢2
 
  
 = 10.58 – j 1.49 – j 4.62 
 
  
 = 10.58 – j 6.11 = 12.22 – – 30° A
 
  
I1 = 12.22 A pf = cos 30° = 0.866 lagging 
 
  
Power input = 
3  ¥ 400 ¥ 12.22 ¥ 0.866 = 7.33 kW
 
(b)  
PG = 3
10 69
0 6
0 03
2
¥
¥
(
.
)
.
.
 = 6.86 kW 
 
  
Mechanical output (gross) = (l – 0.03) ¥ 6.86
 
  
 = 6.65 kW
 
  
Rotational loss = 0.275 kW 
 
  
Mechanical output (net) = 6.65 – 0.275 = 6.37 kW
 
  
ns = 1000 rpm,  ws = 104.72 rad/s 
 
  
Torque (net) = 
6370
104 72 1
0 03
.
(
.
)
-
 = 62.22 Nm 
 
(c)  
h = 6 37
7 27
.
.
 ¥ 100 = 87.62% 
 
(ii) Slip = –0.03 
 
(a)  
R¢2/s = –20 W (negative resistance)
 
  
¢I2  = 
231 0
1 4
20
3
– ∞
-
+
( .
)
j
 
  
 = 12.26 – – 171.3° A 
 
  
 = – 12.12 – j 1.85 A 
+
–
231 V
50
Im
I1
I¢2
1.4
3
0.6/s
Fig. 9.32 

Induction Machine 637
 
  
Im  = – j 4.62 
 
  
I1  = (– j 4.62) + (–12.12 – j 1.85)
 
  
 = –12.12 – j 6.47 = 13.73 ––151.9° A 
 
  
I1 (out) = – I1  = 13.73 –28.1° A (machine is generating)
 
  
I1(out) = 13.73A, pf = cos 28.1° = 0.882 leading 
 
  
Power output (elect) = 
3  ¥ 400 ¥ 13.73 ¥ 0.882
 
  
 = 8.39 kW
 
  
Mechanical power output = (
)
1
3 2
2
2
-
¢
¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
s
I
R
s
 
  
 = 1.03 ¥ 3
12 26
0 6
0 03
2
¥
¥
-
(
.
)
.
.
 
  
 = – 9.20 kW 
 
  
Mechanical power input (net) = 9.20 kW
 
  
Mechanical power input (gross) = 9.20 + 0.275 (rotational loss)
 
  
 = 9.4 kW 
 
  
Shaft torque (gross) = 
9480
104 72 1
0 03
.
(
.
)
+
 = 87.9 Nm
 
  
h (gen) = 8 49
9 48
.
.
 ¥ 100 = 88.5% 
 (iii) slip = 1.2 
 
(a)  
R¢2/s = 0.6/1.2 = 0.5 W
 
  
¢I2  = 
231 0
1 4
0 5
3
– ∞
+
+
( .
. )
j
 
  
 = 65.1 – – 57.7° A
 
  
 = 34.79 – j 55.02 A 
 
  
Im  = – j 4.62 
 
  
I1  = (– j 4.62) + (34.79 + j 55.02)
 
  
 = 34.79 – j 59.64 A 
 
  
 = 69.05 – – 59.7° A 
 
  
I1 = 69.05 A,  pf = cos 59.7° = 0.505 lagging 
 
  
Power input (elect) = 
3  ¥ 400 ¥ 69.05 ¥ 0.505 
 
  
 = 24.16 kW
 
(b)  
PG = 3
65 1
0 5
1 2
2
¥
¥
(
. )
.
.
 
  
 = 5.30 kW
 
  
Mechanical power output = (1 – s) PG 
 
  
 = (1 – 1.2) ¥ 5.30
 
  
 = –1.06 kW
 
 or 
Mechanical power absorbed (net) = 1.06 kW
 
 Rotational loss can be ignored as motor speed is 
 
  
h = 1500 ¥ (1 – 1.2) = – 200 rpm or – 20.94 rad/s 

638 Electric Machines
 
 Note: Motor runs in opposite direction of the air-gap ﬁeld—absorbing mechanical power (braking action) 
 
  
Torque developed = -
-
1060
20 94
.
 = 50.62 Nm
 
 This torque acts in direction opposite to that of the rotating ﬁeld. 
 
 Total power dissipated (in the motor)
 
  
 = 24.16 (elect) + 1.06 (mech)
 
  
 = 25.22 kW 
The power to be dissipated by the motor (mostly in windings) is larger than the motor rating. This can 
be permitted to happen only for a short period. Further the braking power is quite low. It can be seen from 
Fig. 9.14 that the braking torque would reduce as the speed increases further (in negative direction). 
Note: A problem with MATLAB solution is included towards the end of this chapter. 
At the time of starting the motor slip being unity, the load resistance with reference to the approximate circuit 
model of Fig. 9.33 is 
 
¢
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
=
R
s
s
2
1
1
1
 = 0
meaning thereby that short-circuit conditions prevail. Therefore, 
the motor current at starting can be as large as ﬁve to six times 
the full-load current. In comparison the exciting current in the 
shunt branch of the circuit model can be neglected reducing the 
circuit to that of Fig. 9.33.
Now 
 
Starting torque, Ts = 3
2
2
ws
sI R
◊
¢  
(9.57) 
Assuming for simplicity that as a rough approximation 
 
Ifl ª I¢2, fl 
(9.58)
i.e., the magnetizing current is neglected even under full-load conditions. Then
 
Full-load torque, Tf l = 3
2
2
ws
fl
fl
I
R s
◊
¢/
 
(9.59)
where sf l = full-load slip (2 to 8%) 
The starting torque expressed as ratio of the full-load torque* is 
 
T
T
s
fl
 = 
I
I
s
fl
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
2
sfl 
(9.60)
+
–
V
s = 1
ZSC
Is
R1
X
X
X
=
+
1
2¢
R¢2
Fig. 9.33
starting conditions 
 
* Two assumptions are imbedded in Eq. (9.60). These are:
 
 1. Rotor resistance remains constant. The actual rotor resistance will vary with the frequency of the rotor cur-
rent—a few hertz at full-load to 50-Hz at starting. 
 
 2. Magnetizing current is ignored. While this is a good approximation for Is, it is a poor one for Iﬂ (Eq. (9.59)). 
 
 
 If instead of stator current in (9.60), rotor current is used, assumption (2) above is eliminated.

Induction Machine 639
Starting of Squirrel-Cage Motors 
Direct starting When a squirrel-cage motor is started ‘direct-on-line,’
 
Is = ISC = V/ZSC 
i.e. starting current equals the short-circuit (blocked-rotor) current. Let
 
ISC = 5 If l 
and 
sf l = 0.04
Then from Eq. (9.60) 
 
T
T
s
fl
 = (5)2 ¥ 0.04 = 1 
This means that when the starting current is as large as ﬁve times the full-load current, the starting torque 
just equals the full-load torque. With such a large starting current, the motor must accelerate and reach normal 
speed quickly otherwise overheating may damage the motor. The load on the motor at the time of starting 
must, therefore, be very light or preferably the motor must be on no-load. 
To protect their supply systems, the electrical utilities have regulations against short-time current peaks; 
the consumer is heavily penalized through suitable tariff for such peaks. Therefore, it is only small-size 
motors that can be started direct on-line. A bulk consumer can start motors up to 10 kW direct-on-line as long 
as he arranges to stagger the starting of such motors. 
Reduced voltage starting The starting current can be reduced to a tolerable level by reduced-voltage starting. 
This causes the starting torque to reduce heavily as it is proportional to the square of voltage. Such starting 
can only be carried out on no or light-load. Various methods of reduced voltage starting are discussed below. 
Stator-impedance starting Inclusion of resistors or inductors in the three lines feeding the stator of the 
induction motor reduces the stator terminal voltage to x V of the rated voltage V. The initial starting current 
is then 
 
Is = xISC
Substituting in Eq. (9.60) 
 
T
T
s
fl
 = x
I
I
SC
fl
2
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ sf l 
(9.61) 
Thus, while the starting current reduces by a fraction x of the rated-voltage starting current (ISC), the 
starting torque is reduced by a fraction x2 of that obtainable with direct switching. This method can be used 
for small motors such as those driving centrifugal pumps; but star-delta starting (given later) is cheaper with 
better starting torque. 
Autotransformer starting Reduced voltage for starting can be obtained from three autotransformers 
connected in star as shown in the schematic diagram of Fig. 9.34. If the voltage is reduced to a fraction x of 
the rated voltage V, the motor starting current (initial) is 
 
Is = xISC 
(9.62) 
where ISC = starting current (line) with full-voltage

640 Electric Machines
I
x
s
sc
(line) =
/
2
Is(motor) = x/sc
xV
V
Stator
Rotor
Fig. 9.34 Autotransformer starting
The current drawn from the supply is 
 
Is(line) = x(xISC) = x2ISC 
(9.63)
The starting/full-load torque ratio is 
 
T
T
s
fl
 = x
I
I
s
SC
fl
fl
2
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
(9.64)
It is found that while the starting torque is reduced to a fraction x2 of that obtainable by direct starting, 
the starting line current is also reduced by the same fraction. Compared to stator-impedance starting, the line 
current reduces further by a fraction x while torque remains the same. The autotransformer starting is much 
superior to the stator-impedance starting. Further, smooth starting and high acceleration are possible by 
gradually raising the voltage to the full line value. 
After starting, the autotransformer is cut as shown in the wiring diagram of Fig. 9.35. It is to be observed 
that the autotransformer can be short-time rated. The use of an autotransformer is an expensive way of 
induction motor starting and is warranted for large motors only.
Stator
Rotor
Fig. 9.35 Autotransformer starting—wiring diagram

Induction Machine 641
Star-delta starting The star-delta starting is an inexpensive two-step method of induction motor starting. 
The motor designed for delta running is started across full- line voltage by connecting the phases in star as 
shown in the schematic diagram of Fig. 9.36.
Is (star)
Star
V
V/ 3
÷
1
3
÷
Isc
Zsc
I
I
s
sc
(delta) =
3
÷
Isc
Zsc
V
Delta
Fig. 9.36 Star-delta starting
In direct delta starting: 
 
Starting phase current, ISC = V/ZSC; V = line voltage 
(9.65) 
 
Starting line current, Is (delta) = 
3 ISC 
(9.66)
In star starting: 
Starting line (phase) current, Is (star) 
 
 = V
ZSC
/
3  = 1
3
ISC  
(9.67) 
\ 
I
I
s
s
(
)
(
)
star
delta  = 1
3  
(9.68)
Using Eq. (9.60) 
 
T
T
s
fl
(
)
star  = 1
3
2
I
I
s
SC
fl
fl
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
(9.69)
where ISC = starting phase current (delta) and If l = full-load phase current (delta).
It is thus seen that star-delta starting reduces the starting torque to one-third that obtainable by direct-delta 
starting and also the starting line current to one-third. It just acts like autotransformer starting with
 
x = 1 3
/
 = 0.58 
A star-delta starter is much cheaper than an autotransformer starter and is commonly employed for both 
small and medium-size motors. The wiring diagram of star-delta starting is shown in Fig. 9.37. 
Starting of Slip-ring Motors (Rotor-resistance Starting) 
It has already been discussed that in slip-ring motors the starting current is reduced and the starting torque 
simultaneously increased by adding an external resistance in the rotor circuit. Figure 9.38 shows the motor 

642 Electric Machines
circuit (magnetizing branch neglected) with external resistance is added in the rotor circuit. For simplicity, 
the stator impedance is also neglected. Here
 
R¢ext = external resistance in each phase of the rotor 
circuit as seen from the stator 
 
 = 
N
N
R
e
e
1
2
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
ext
where Rext = actual external resistance in the rotor circuit 
Now
 
Is = 
V
R
R
X
(
)
¢ +
¢
+
¢
2
2
2
2
ext
 
(9.70) 
 
Ts = 3
2
2
2
2
2
2
ws
V
R
R
R
R
X
◊
¢ +
¢
¢ +
¢
+
¢
(
)
(
)
ext
ext
 
(9.71) 
Maximum starting torque is achieved at 
 
R¢2 + R ¢ext = X¢2 
(9.72)
which equals the breakdown torque or 
 
Ts(max) = 3
0 5
2
2
ws
V
X
.
¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = Tbreakdown 
(9.73) 
Stator
Rotor
Fig. 9.37 Wiring diagram of star-delta starting 
Is
X¢2
R¢2
s = 1
V
R¢ext
Fig. 9.38
resistance in the rotor circuit 

Induction Machine 643
By a suitable choice of Rext, the starting current and torque can be both adjusted to desirable levels. Since 
the maximum starting torque achievable is much more than the full-load torque, the use of slip-ring motors 
with rotor-resistance starting is ideal for starting on load. The external rotor resistance is arranged in steps 
which are gradually cut out during starting. The design of starter steps is beyond the scope of this book.
 A squirrel-cage induction motor has a slip of 4% at full load. Its starting current is ﬁve 
times the full-load current. The stator impedance and magnetizing current may be neglected; the rotor 
resistance is assumed constant.
 (a) Calculate the maximum torque and the slip at which it would occur. 
 (b) Calculate the starting torque. 
Express torques in pu of the full-load torque. 
SOLUTION 
 
(a)  
Is
2 = 
V
R
X
2
2
2
2
2
¢ +
¢
; (s = 1) 
(i)
 
  
I2
fl = 
V
R
s
X
fl
2
2
2
2
2
2
(
/
)
¢
+
¢
 
(ii)
 
 Dividing Eq. (i) by (ii)
 
  
I
I
s
fl
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
2
 = 
(
/
)
¢
+
¢
¢ +
¢
R s
X
R
X
fl
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
 = 
s
s
s
s
T
fl
fl
T
max,
max,
(
)
2
2
2
2
1
+
+
 
(iii)
 
 Substituting the values 
25 = 
s
s
T
T
max,
max,
( .
)
( .
) (
)
2
2
2
2
0 04
0 04
1
+
+
 
 or 
smax,T = 0.2 or 20%
 
  
Tmax = 3
0 5
2
2
2
ws
V
X
◊
¢
.
 
(iv)
 
  
Tfl = 3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
ws
fl
fl
V
R
s
R
s
X
◊
¢
¢
+
¢
2 (
/
)
(
/
)
 
(v) 
 
 Dividing Eq. (iv) by (v)
 
  
T
Tfl
max  = 0 5
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
. ¥
¢ +
¢
¢
¢
R
s
X
R X s
fl
fl
 
  
 = 0 5
2
2
.
max,
max,
¥
+
s
s
s
s
T
fl
T
fl
 
  
 = 0 5
0 2
0 04
0 2
0 04
2
2
.
( . )
( .
)
.
.
¥
+
¥
 = 2.6
 
 or 
Tmax = 2.6 pu
 
(b) As per Eq. (9.60)
 
  
T
T
s
fl
 = 
I
I
s
fl
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
2
sf l = (5)2 ¥ 0.04 = 1
 
 or 
Ts = 1 pu 

644 Electric Machines
 A 150 kW, 3000 V, 50 Hz, 6-pole star-connected induction motor has a star-connected 
slip-ring rotor with a transformation ratio of 3.6 (stator/rotor). The rotor resistance is 0.1 W/phase and its 
per phase leakage inductance is 3.61 mH. The stator impedance may be neglected. Find (a) the starting 
current and torque on rated voltage with short-circuited slip-rings, and (b) the necessary external resistance 
to reduce the rated-voltage starting current to 30 A and the corresponding starting torque. 
SOLUTION 
R2 = 0.1 W; 
X2 = 314 ¥ 3.61 ¥ 10–3 = 1.13 W 
 
R¢2 = (3.6)2 ¥ 0.1; 
X¢2 = (3.6)2 ¥ 1.13
 
 = 1.3 W 
 = 14.7 W 
 
(a)  
Is = 
3000
3
1 3
14 7
2
2
/
( . )
(
. )
+
 = 117.4 A
 
  
Ts = 3
2
2
2
2
2
2
ws
V R
R
X
◊
¢
¢ +
¢
2
 
  
ws = 2
1000
60
p ¥
 = 104.7 rad/s
 
  
Ts = 
3
104 7
3000
3
1 3
1 3
14 7
2
2
2
.
(
/
)
.
( . )
(
. )
◊
¥
+
 = 513.1 Nm 
 
(b)  
Is = 
3000
3
1 3
14 7
2
2
/
( .
)
(
. )
+
¢
+
Rext
 = 30 A
 
  
R¢ext = 54.33
 
  
Rext = 54.53/(3.6)2 = 4.21 W
 
  
Ts = 
3
104 7
3000
3
1 3
54 33
1 3
54 33
14 7
2
2
2
.
(
/
)
( .
.
)
( .
.
)
(
. )
◊
¥
+
+
+
 
  
 = 1440 Nm 
Remark By adding an external resistance in the rotor, starting current reduces by a factor of 117.4/30 = 3.91 
while the starting torque increases by 1440/513.1 = 2.8. 
 A small squirrel-cage induction motor has a starting current of six times the full-load 
current and a full-load slip of 0.05. Find in pu of full-load values, the current (line) and starting torque with 
the following methods of starting ((a) to (d)).
 (a) direct switching. 
 (b) stator-resistance starting with motor current limited to 2 pu, 
 (c) autotransformer starting with motor current limited to 2 pu, and
 (d) star-delta starting. 
 (e) what autotransformer ratio would give 1 pu starting torque? 
SOLUTION
 
(a) Direct switching 
 
  
Is = 6 pu 
 
  
Ts = (6)2 ¥ 0.05 = 1.8 

Induction Machine 645
 
(b) Stator-resistance starting 
 
  
Is = 2 pu (limited to) 
 
  
Ts = (2)2 ¥ 0.05 = 0.2 pu 
(Eq. (9.60))
 
(c) Autotransformer starting 
 
  
x = 2/6 = 1/3 
 
  
Is (motor) = 2 pu 
 
  
Is (line) = 1
3 ¥ 2 pu = 0.67 pu
 
  
Ts = (2)2 ¥ 0.05 = 0.2 pu  
(Eq. (9.60))
 
(d) Star-delta starting
 
  
Is = 1
3  ¥ 6 = 2 pu (Eq. (9.68))
 
  
Ts = 1
3  ¥ (6)2 ¥ 0.05 (Eq. (9.69)) = 0.6 pu 
 
(e) Autotransformer starting 
 
  
Ts = x2(6)2 ¥ 0.05 = 1.0 pu (Eq. (9.64))
 
  
x = 0.745 (ª 75% tap) 
A squirrel-cage rotor may exhibit a peculiar behaviour in starting for certain relationships between the 
number of poles and the stator and rotor slots. With the number of stator slots S1 equal to or an integral 
multiple of rotor slots S2, the variation of reluctance as a function of space will be quite pronounced resulting 
in strong alignment forces at the instant of starting. These forces may create an aligning torque stronger than 
the accelerating torque with consequent failure of the motor to start. This phenomenon is known as cogging. 
Such combination of stator and rotor slots must, therefore, be avoided in machine design. 
Certain combinations of S1 and S2 cause accentuation of certain space harmonics of the mmf wave, e.g. 
ﬁfth and seventh harmonics which correspond to poles ﬁve and seven times that of the fundamental. Since 
the space-phase difference between fundamental poles of the winding phase is (0°, 120°, 240°), this (space-
phase) difference is (0°, 240°, 120°) for the ﬁfth harmonic poles and (0°, 120°, 240°) for the seventh. Hence 
the ﬁfth harmonic poles rotate backwards with synchronous speed of ns/5 and the seventh harmonic poles 
rotate forward at ns/7. These harmonic mmfs produce their own asynchronous (induction) torques of the 
same general torque-slip shape as that of the fundamental. Figure 9.36 shows the superimposition of the 
fundamental, ﬁfth and seventh harmonic torque-slip curves. A marked saddle effect is observed with stable 
region of operation (negative torque-slip slope) around l/7th normal motor speed (s = 6/7). In Fig. 9.39 
the load torque curve intersects the motor torque curve at the point M resulting in stable operation. This 
phenomenon is known as crawling (running stably at low speed). 
Certain slot combinations, e.g. S1 = 24 and S2 = 18 cause the stator mmf to possess a reversed 11th and
a forward 13th harmonic mmf while the rotor has a reversed 13th and a forward 15th. The stator 13th harmonic 
mmf rotates at speed + ns/13 with respect to the stator and the rotor mmf of the 13th harmonic rotates at
– (ns – n)/13 with respect to the rotor when the rotor is running at speed n. These two mmf’s lock into each 
other to produce a synchronous torque when 
 
ns
13  = n
n
n
s
-
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
13

646 Electric Machines
5th harmonic
Torque
Stable
Resultant TM
TL
M
7th harmonic
ns/5
ns/7
6/5
1
6/7
Slip
Speed
0
0
ns
Fig. 9.39
(induction) torques 
or 
n = ns
7
Thus there is a discontinuity at ns/7 in the torque-slip characteristic produced by not the seventh but the 
13th harmonic as shown in Fig. 9.40.
Slip
Speed
1
0
0
ns
Torque
TM
TL
M
ns/7
Fig. 9.40 Synchronous harmonic torque in induction motor
Cogging and crawling are much less prominent in slip-ring induction machines as these possess higher 
starting torques. The induction harmonic torque cannot be avoided, but can be reduced by making a proper 

Induction Machine 647
choice of coil-span and by skewing. The synchronous 
harmonic torques can be avoided totally by a proper 
combination of stator and rotor slots. 
Skewing
The rotor teeth are given a slight twist as shown in Fig. 
9.41. As a result, each rotor tooth is opposite several 
stator teeth, thereby mitigating the effect of locking 
of stator and rotor teeth and so eliminating cogging. 
Further mmf harmonics get phase shifted along the 
rotor length reducing the effective harmonic torques.
Stepless control of speed of induction motors cannot be carried out as efﬁciently and inexpensively as for dc 
motors. Various methods of controlling the speed of the induction motor can be visualized by consideration 
of the speed equation
 
n = (1 – s) ns 
(9.74) 
It is seen from this equation that there are two basic ways of speed control, namely (i) slip-control for ﬁxed 
synchronous speed, and (ii) control of synchronous speed. Since 
 
ns = 120 f
P
 
(9.75) 
there are two ways to control synchronous speed—control of supply frequency and control of stator poles. 
The latter method gives a step control as poles can be changed in multiple of two. Pole-changing is carried 
out in a squirrel-cage motor only and that too for two steps.
Silp Control
There are three ways of controlling slip. These are presented below.
Voltage Control
Voltage is a slip-control method with constant frequency variable-voltage begin supplied to the motor stator. 
Obviously the voltage should only be reduced below the rated value. For a motor operating at full-load slip, 
if the slip is to be doubled for constant load torque, it followers from Eqs (9.34) and (9.35) that the voltage 
must be reduced by a factor of 1/
2 and the corresponding current (I¢2) rises to 
2  of the full-load value 
for constant torque. The motor, therefore, tends to get overheated.* The method, therefore, is not suitable for 
speed control. It has a limited use for motors driving fan-type loads whose torque requirement is proportional 
to the square of speed (see Fig. 12.40). It is a commonly used method for ceiling fans driven by single-phase 
induction motors which have large standstill impedance limiting the current by the stator.
Rotor-Resistance Control
As the name indicates, this type of speed control is only possible for slip-ring induction motors. It is easily 
seen by referring to Fig. 9.15(a) that as the rotor resistance is increased, the motor slip increases(speed falls) 
Fig. 9.41 
Rotor with skewed teeth
 
* This is the reason why induction motors tend to overheat when the supply voltage falls by a large percentage of 
the rated motor voltage.

648 Electric Machines
for a ﬁxed load torque. The stator current varies to a limited extent as the effect of change in slip and rotor 
resistance tend to cancel out (refer to Eq. (9.43)) for small values of slip. The input power, however, increases. 
This provides for power lost in rotor additional resistance.
The scheme of introducing variable resistance in the rotor circuit is shown in Fig. 9.42(a)
IM
3 phase AC supply
Slip ring
External resistance
variable
Fig. 9.42(a)
As the slip control is achieved by additional power loss in the rotor circuit, it is more conveniently carried 
out by a controlled rectiﬁer and a single ﬁxed resistance as in Fig. 9.42(b). The additional power loss in the 
external resistance in rotor circuit, causes the efﬁciency to decrease sharply. This method of speed control as 
such is, therefore, adopted for a narrow speed range and usually for a short-time operation. 
IM
3 phase AC supply
Converter
R0(fixed)
Fig. 9.42(b)
The efﬁciency of this type of speed-control scheme can be improved by returning the power out of the 
rotor mechanically to the rotor shaft or electrically to the mains. The ﬁrst scheme can be implemented by a 
rectiﬁer and dc motor coupled to the rotor shaft. The second scheme requires a frequency converter which 
converts variable -frequency power to a ﬁxed (supply) frequency for feeding the electrical power back to the 
mains. These schemes can be devised by SCR circuitry (see Figs 12.42 and 12.43). 

Induction Machine 649
It is possible to achieve supersynchronous speeds by injecting power at appropriate frequency into the 
rotor by means of an adjustable frequency source. It may be seen that this is just the reverse of adding rotor 
resistance in which power is drawn out of the rotor (and wasted in external resistance). A large range of speed 
control both above and below synchronous is made possible by including frequency-converting equipment 
in the rotor circuit.
It has been shown in Eq. 9.19 the torque developed in an inductor motor is
 
T = 3 2
2
2
I R
s
s
w
 Nm 
(9.76) 
For a given torque the slipe is controlled by I2
2R2, the rotor copper loss or , in more general terms, the 
electrical power removed from (or injected into) the rotor circuit. This is efﬁciently achieved by injecting 
a slip-frequency emf into the rotor circuit as shown in Fig. 3.43. The torque-slip relation of Eq. (9.76) now 
generalizes to 
 
T = 3 2
2
2
2
2
I R
E I
s
i
s
±
cosf
w
 
(9.77)
where f2 is phases angle between Ei  and I2
From the rotor circuit of Fig. 9.43
 
sE
Ei
2 ±
 = I Z
2
2
 
I2  = sE
E
Z
i
2
2
-
; minus sign as per polarities shown in ﬁgure 
(9.78)
When the injected emf Ei  is in-phase with the rotor induced emf sE2  the electrical power sE2I2 cos f2 is 
removed (recovered) from the rotor circuit and the plus sign applies in Eq. (9.77). On the other hand, when 
Ei is in phase opposition to sE2, the electrical 
power sE2I2 cos f2 is injected into the rotor 
circuit and the minus sign applies in Eq. (9.77). 
It easily follows from Eq. (9.77) that for a given 
torque, assuming rotor current I2 to remain 
nearly constant*, as the magnitude of the in-
phase emf Ei is increased, the slip increases 
(speed decreases). When the phase of Ei  is 
reversed and as Ei is increased in magnitude, the 
numerator in Eq. (9.77) becomes negative and so does the slip, i.e. a super-synchronous speed is achieved.
If instead the phase of the injected emf is changed with the magnitude of Ei remaining ﬁxed, 
control over the rotor current power factor and therefore over that of the primary input current 
is achieved. A leading phase angle of Ei would result in pf improvement. This is illustrated in 
Fig. 9.44 for Ei  leading sE2  by 90°. To a rough approximation the component of Ei in-phase
(or in phase opposition) controls motor speed and the quadrature component control the motor power factor. 
+
–
sE2
+
–
Ei
R2
I2
sX2
Fig. 9.43 Slip control by injected slip-frequency emf into 
rotor circuit 

650 Electric Machines
I0
I1
Enet
Ei
sE2
f2
f1
Input
pf angle
I2
I0
V
E
1
1
ª
Fig. 9.44 
power factor control by rotor injection
 A 3 phase 50 Hz, 12 pole, 200 kW slip-ring induction motor drives a fan whose torque 
is proportional to the square of speed. At full load, the motor slip is 0.045. The rotor resistance measured 
between any two slip-rings is 61 mW.
What resistance should be added in the rotor circuit to reduce the fan speed to 450 rpm?
SOLUTION 
For the rotor circuit is it is fair to assume that
 
R2/s >> X2
So we will neglect X2 
 
R2 = 61/2 = 30.5 mW
 
ws = 120
2
60
f
P
¥
p  = 4p f
P
 = 4
50
12
p ¥
 = 52.36 rad/s
 
w = (1 – s)ws = ( 1 – 0.045) ¥ 52.36 = 50 rad/s
At full load 
200 ¥ 103 = wT (fan) = 50 T
or 
T (fan) = 4000 Nm
Rotor current 
T = 3
2
2
2
ws
I R
p
  
4000 = 
3
52 36
30 5
10
0 045
2
2
3
.
.
.
¥
¥
¥
-
I
or 
I2 = 321 A
Rotor circuit voltage (stand still)
 
E2 = I2 (R2/s) = 321
30 5
10
0 045
3
¥
¥
-
.
.
 = 217.6 V
The fan speed is to be reduced to
 
n = 450 rpm or 
450
2
60
¥ p  = 47.12 rad/s
 
* For large value of slip. The rotor power factor (cos f2) decreases and so current for given torque increases

Induction Machine 651
 
Slip, s = 500
450
500
-
 = 0.1
 
I2 (new) = 217 6.
/
R s
t
 = 21 76
.
Rt
, Rt = total rotor resistance
 
T (new) = 4000 ¥ 
47 12
50
2
.
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = 3552 Nm
 
T (new) = 3
2
2
w
w
w
s
t
I
n
R
s n
(
)
(
)
 
3552 = 
3
52 36
21 76
0 1
2
2
.
(
.
)
.
¥
¥
R
R
t
t
From which we ﬁnd 
Rt = 76.4 mW
 
Rext = 76.4 – 30.5 = 45.9 mW (to be added)
 A 440 V, 50 Hz, 4-pole 3-phase, delta-connected motor has a leakage impedance of 
(0.3 + j 5.5 + 0.25/s) W/phase (delta phase) referred to the stator. The stator to rotor voltage ratio is 2.5. 
Determine the external resistance to be inserted in each star phase of the rotor winding such that the motor 
develops a gross torque of 150 Nm at a speed of 1250 rpm. 
SOLUTION 
ws = 2
1500
60
p ¥
 = 157.1 rad/s 
 
s = 1500
1250
1500
-
 = 0.167
Total leakage impedance referred to stator (equivalent star basis) 
 
 = 1
3 [(0.3 + 0.25/s) + j 5.5] = 0 1
0 083
1 83
.
.
.
+
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
s
j
W/phase (star)
From Eq. (9.22) with 
 
R¢2t = R¢2 + R¢ext; R¢2 = 0.083 W, R¢2t = R¢2 (total)
 
T = 3
0 1
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
ws
t
t
V
R
s
R
s
X
X
◊
¢
+
¢
+
+
¢
(
/ )
( .
/ )
(
)
Substituting values
 
150 = 
3
157 1
440
3
00 167
0 1
0 167
1 83
2
2
2
2
2
.
/
(
/
.
)
( .
/ .
)
( .
)
◊
(
)
¢
+
¢
+
R
R
t
t
 
R¢2t – 1.34 R¢2t + 0.093 = 0 
 
R¢2t = 1.27 W; 0.073 W
(The second value is less than R¢2 = 0.083 W) 
 
R¢ext = 1.27 – 0.083 W 
 
Rext(rotor) = 1 19
2 5 2
.
( . )
 = 1.19 W/phase

652 Electric Machines
 A 3-phase, 25 kW, 400 V, 50 Hz, 8-pole induction motor has rotor resistance of 0.08 W 
and standstill reactance of 0.4 W. The effective stator/rotor turn ratio is 2.5/1. The motor is to drive a 
constant-torque load of 250 Nm. Neglect stator impedance.
 (a) Calculate the minimum resistance to be added in rotor circuit for the motor to start up on load. 
 (b) At what speed would the motor run, if the added rotor resistance is (i) left in the circuit, and 
(ii) subsequently short circuited. 
SOLUTION 
Motor circuit seen on rotor side is shown in Fig. 9.45; stator impedance 
having been neglected. 
 
I2 = 
V a
R s
X
1
2
2
2
2
/
(
/ ) +
 
T = 3
2
2
ws
I
◊
R2/s
 
 = 3
2
2
2
2
2
2
ws
V a
R s
R s
X
◊
+
( / ) (
/ )
(
/ )
 
(i)
 
T(start) = 3
2
2
2
2
2
2
ws
V a
R
R
X
◊
+
( / )
; s = 1 
(ii)
Let external resistance added to rotor circuit be R2 (ext). Then
 
R2(total) = R2t = R2 + R2(ext) 
(iii) 
Then 
T(start) = 3
2
2
2
2
2
2
ws
t
t
V a
R
R
X
◊
+
( / )
 
(iv)
 
(a)  
a = 2.5,  X2 = 0.4 W,  R2 = 0.08 W
 
  
T(start) = T(load) = 250 Nm; This is minimum starting torque.
 
  
  Actual starting must be sufﬁciently more than this. 
 
  
V = 400/
3  = 231 V
 
  
ns = 750 rpm or ws = 78.54 rad/s 
 
 Substituting values in Eq. (ii)
 
  
250 = 
3
78 54
2312 5
0 4
2
2
2
2
2
.
(
/ . )
( . )
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ ◊
+
R
R
t
t
 
(v)
 
 or 
R2
2t – 1.304 R2t + 0.16 = 0 
 
 or 
R2t = 0.137 W, 1.167 W
 
 The T-s characteristics with these two values of R2t are drawn in Fig. 9.46. It is easy to see that with R2t = 1.167 
W the motor will not start as motor torque reduces (Tmotor < Tload) for s < 1. 
 
 So we select 
R2t = 0.137 W ﬁ R2(ext) = 0.137 – 0.08 = 0.057 W 
 (b) (i)  
R2t = 0.137 W; External resistance included in circuit.
 
 
 Substituting values in Eq. (i)
 
 
  
250 = 
3
78 54
2312 5
0 4
2
2
2
2
2
.
(
/ . ) (
/ )
(
/ )
( . )
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
+
R
s
R
s
t
t
 
 
 This equation has the same solution as Eq. (v). Thus 
+
–
V a
/
X2
I2
R s
2/
Fig. 9.45 

Induction Machine 653
 
 
  
R2t/s = 0.137, 0.167
 
 
 With 
R2t = 0.137 W, we get
 
 
  
s = 1,0.137/1.167
 
 
  
 = 0.117 (as shown in Fig. 9.42)
 
 
 Motor speed, 
n = 750 (l – 0.117) = 662 rpm
 
 (ii) With external resistance cut out
 
 
  
250 = 
3
78 54
2312 5
0 4
2
2
2
2
2
.
(
/ . ) (
/ )
(
/ )
( . )
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
+
R s
R s
 
 
 The solution would yield as before 
 
 
  
R2/s = 0.137, R2/s = 1.167 
 
 
 With 
R2 = 0.08, we now get
 
 
  
s = 0.584, 0.067 
 
 
 The solution points are indicated in the T-s characteristic 
drawn in Fig. 9.47. The motor will run at
 
 
  
s = 0.067 ﬁ 700 rpm
 
 
 The point s = 0.584 on T-s characteristic is unstable as 
the torque-speed slope here is positive and the motor 
will speed up beyond this. 
The number of stator poles can be changed in the ratio of 2 : 1 by simple changes in coil connections. Either 
of the two synchronous speeds can be selected. In a pole-changing motor, the rotor must be squirrel-cage 
to avoid complications caused by reconnection of the rotor winding if a wound rotor is used. A squirrel-
cage rotor automatically reacts to create the same number of poles as the stator. If two independent sets of 
stator windings are employed, each arranged for pole changing, as many as four synchronous speeds can be 
obtained. 
Figure 9.48(a) shows two coils a1a1¢ and a2a2¢ pertaining to phase a of the stator winding—several coils 
which may be short-pitched would normally be used for each phase. If the coils are connected to carry equal 
a1
a1
a¢1
a¢2
a1
a¢2
a¢1
a2
Low
speed (LS)
High
speed (LS)
Current direction
reversed
Stator
rotor
(a)
(b)
N
S
S
S
N
N
Consequent poles
Fig. 9.48 
Principle of pole changing 
250 Nm
0.137 W
1.167 W
T
1
0.117
s = 0
s
Fig. 9.46 
250 Nm
0.584
T
1
0.067
s
R2(ext) = 0
0
Fig. 9.47

654 Electric Machines
currents, both clockwise (or anticlockwise) as seen from top. Each coil forms a north pole and consequent 
south poles are created in the intervening space between coils. This is the lowspeed connection—a larger 
number of poles equal twice the number of coils. If the two coils are reconnected by means of a controller so 
that the current in one of the coils is reversed as shown in Fig. 9.48(b), the number of poles is now halved—
high-speed connection. Series/parallel arrangements of reconnecting coil groups to change the number of 
poles in 2: 1 ratio are illustrated in Fig. 9.49. Currents ﬂowing from x1 to y1 in one group and x2 to y2 in the 
second group produce a certain number of poles (case of consequent poles). If the current in one group is 
reversed (i.e. from y2 to x2), half as many poles are produced).
x1
y1
y2
x2
LS
HS
x1
y1
y2
x2
Series
y2
x2
LS
x1
y1
x1
y1
y2
x2
HS
Parallels
Fig. 9.49 Series/parallel connections of phase groups for pole changing 
Employing a series/parallel connection of phase groups of individual phases, the phases can themselves be 
connected in star/delta resulting in two-speed operation with the three types of torque-speed characteristics. 
These connections are designated as constant-torque, constant-horsepower and variable-torque and are 
illustrated in Figs 9.50, 9.51, and 9.52 respectively. In each of these ﬁgures, let 
 
V = line-to-line voltage 
 
I = allowable conductor current
 
hl,hh = respective efﬁciencies of LS and HS connections
 
cos fl, cos fh = respective power factors of LS and HS connections.
Referring to Fig. 9.50
 
LS output
HS output  = 
3
3
2
VI
V
I
l
l
h
h
(cos
)
(
)(cos
)
f h
f
h
 = 0 866
.
cos
cos
h
f
h
f
l
l
h
h
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
Hence
 
LS torque
HS torque  = 1.732 h
f
h
f
l
l
h
h
cos
cos
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
It is in general true that 
 
cos fl < cos fh 
 
hl < hh

Induction Machine 655
x1
y1
y2
x2
4
1
3
2
6
5
L3
L1
L2
LS series delta
x1
y1
y2
x2
1
3
2
6
5
L1
L2
HS parallel star
N
4
L3
Fig. 9.50
x1
y1
x2
y2
4
1
3
2
6
5
L3
L1
L2
HS series delta
x1
y1
x2
y2
6
5
L1
L2
LS parallel star
N
4
L3
Fig. 9.51
x1
y1
y2
x2
4
6
5
L3
L1
L2
LS series star
x1
y1
y2
x2
1
3
2
6
5
L1
L2
HS parallel star
N
4
L3
N
Fig. 9.52

656 Electric Machines
Their typical values are such that 
 
h
f
h
f
l
l
h
h
cos
cos
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = 0.7
Therefore, 
 
LS torque
HS torque  = 1.732 ¥ 0.7 = 1.21
This is indicative of constant-torque operation as illustrated by curve (a) of Fig. 9.53. 
T
0
Speed (rpm)
(c)
(a)
(b)
LS connection
HS connection
Fig. 9.53
 
Referring to Fig. 9.51
 
LS output
HS output  = 
3V
I
VI
l
l
h
h
(
)(cos
)
(cos
)
2
3
f h
f
h
 = 1 15
.
cos
cos
h
f
h
f
l
l
h
h
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
 = 1.15 ¥ 0.7 = 0.8 ª 1
and 
LS torque
HS torque  = 2 ¥ 0.8 = 1.6 
This is indicative of constant-horsepower operation as illustrated by the curve (b) of Fig. 9.53. 
Similarly referring to Fig. 9.52,
 
LS output
HS output  = 
3VI
V
I
l
t
h
h
(cos
)
(
)(cos
)
f h
f
h
3
2
 = 0.5 ¥ 0.7 = 0.35
and 
LS torque
HS torque  = 2 ¥ 0.35 = 0.7 
This is the variable-torque connection illustrated by curve (c) of Fig. 9.53.
This method of pole-changing has the advantage that the ratio of the two speeds need not be necessarily two-
to-one as in the method of consequent poles. 

Induction Machine 657
Consider the sinusoidally distributed mmf wave of one phase of the stator 
 
F (q) = F sin 
P
2 q
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  
(9.78)
where P is the number of poles and q the mechanical angle. 
Also remember that F varies sinusoidally with time as it is caused by a sinusoidally -varying phase current. 
Let this mmf wave be modulated by another sinusoidal mmf wave of PM poles 
 
FM(q) = M sin 
PM
2 q
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜   
(9.79)
The modulated mmf wave is then given by 
 
F¢(q) = MF sin
PM
2 q
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ sin
P
2 q
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
  = 
1
2
2
2
MF
P
P
P
P
M
M
cos
cos
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ -
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
È
ÎÍ
˘
˚˙
q
q
 
(9.80)
It is found from the expression of Eq. (9.80) that the modulated mmf wave is equivalent to two mmf waves, 
one having P1 = (P – PM) poles and the other P2 = (P + PM) poles. This indeed is the suppressed-carrier 
modulation which implies that the name pole-amplitude modulation is a misnomer. 
Since the stator is wound for P poles, the angle between phase axes is r(2p/3) elect. rad; r being integral 
nonmultiple of 3. The phase axes angle for modulated poles is then 
 
P
P
P
r
M
∓
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
2
3
p
 = (
/ )
1
2
3
∓P
P r
M
p
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
where r = integer, nonmultiple of 3.
To suppress one of the poles, say P1, the angle between its phase axes must be multiple of 2p, i.e. 
 
(1 – PM/P)r 2
3
p
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = n(2p); n = integer 
or 
PM/P = 1
3
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
n
r
 
(9.81) 
The angle between phase axes for P2 poles is then 
 
(1 + PM/P)r 2
3
p
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = 2
3
2
3
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
n
r
r
p
 
 = 2
2
3
2
r
n
p
p
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ - (
)  
 
 = 2
2
3
r
p
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  
(9.82) 
Since r is selected to be an integer nonmultiple of 3, the angle in Eq. (9.82) is integral multiple of (2p/3) 
and hence the rotating ﬁeld corresponds only to P2 = (P + PM) poles. Similarly P2 poles could be suppressed 
and P1 poles developed. 
For example, let P = 8. Then from Eq. (9.81) if the values n = 1 and r = 4 are chosen 

658 Electric Machines
 
 PM = 1
4 P = 2
Hence 
P1 = P – PM = 6 poles (suppressed)
 
P2 = P + PM = 10 poles 
In practice the modulating mmf used is rather crude; a rectangular wave of amplitude M = 1. This 
modulation is simply achieved by dividing the complete winding of each phase into PM groups and reverse 
connecting alternate groups. 
Figure 9.54 shows the eight poles of one phase for the example in hand. It also indicates the 2-pole 
(PM = 2) rectangular modulating function symmetrically located with respect to P = 8 poles. The value of 
M = –1 means reverse connecting pole groups 5, 6, 7 and 8 resulting in sign-reversed dotted poles. On this 
ﬁgure, P1 = 6 poles are identiﬁed by circled numbers but P2 = 10 poles are not evident. These can only be 
visualized from Eq. 9.54 wherein the modulating function is the fundamental of the rectangular space wave. 
The harmonic components of the rectangular wave create their own modulated poles but these can be ignored. 
It has already shown above that in this example P1 = 6 poles get suppressed resulting in P2 = 10-pole ﬁeld, 
when the pole groups 5, 6, 7 and 8 are reverse connected. The motor can, therefore, run corresponding to 
8 (original) and 10 (modulated) poles. 
2-pole modulating function
360° mech
360° mech
1
3
2
4
6
5
M = 1
2
3
5
7
4
6
8
M = 1
q
Fig. 9.54 8-pole winding with 2-pole rectangular modulation 
Pole-amplitude modulation technique permits two speeds to be obtained which need not be in the ratio 
2 : 1. It also allows great reduction in size and cost of the machine. 
 9.16 A 50 Hz, induction motor wound for pole-amplitude modulation has 20 initial poles and 
the modulating function has 8 poles. At what two speeds will the motor run? 
SOLUTION 
P = 20, PM = 8
 
P1 = 20 – 8 = 12
 
P2 = 20 + 8 = 28 
From Eq. (9.81) 
 
PM/P = 8
20  = 2
5  = 1
3
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
n
r
; n = l, r = 5 

Induction Machine 659
Hence P1 poles are suppressed
 
Speed (20 poles) = 20
50
20
¥
 = 300 rpm
 
Speed (28 poles) = 20
50
28
¥
 = 214.286 rpm
Frequency Control
The synchronous speed of the induction motor can be controlled in a stepless way over a wide range by 
changing the supply frequency. As per Eq. (9.1) the resultant air-gap ﬂux per pole is given by 
 
Fr = 
1
4 44
1
1
.
K
N
V
f
w
ph
◊Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  
(9.83) 
Therefore, in order to avoid saturation in stator and rotor cores which would cause sharp increase in 
magnetization current, the ﬂux Fr must be kept constant as f is varied. To achieve this, it follows from 
Eq. (9.83) that when f is varied, V must also be varied such that (V/f ) remains constant. Variable (V, f ) supply 
from constant (V, f ) supply can be arranged by the converter-inverter arrangement shown schematically in 
Fig. 9.55(a) which employs SCR circuitry (refer to Sec. 11.12). Figure 9.55(b) shows an alternative speed-
control scheme using a converter and dc motor (shunt). The chief attraction of employing induction motor for 
speed control is its ruggedness, low cost and maintenance-free operation as compared to dc motor. Because 
of the cost of the inverter involved in the induction motor speed-control scheme, the dc motor scheme as of 
today is more economical. However, the induction motor scheme is a strong candidate for speed control and 
is likely to take over in the near future with further improvement and cost reduction in SCR technology.
Converter
Inverter
Converter
IM
( , )
constant
V f
DC
variable
Variable f
( , )
constant
V f
( , )
variable
V f
V(dc)
variable
DC Mot
constant
/
V f
(a)
(b)
Fig. 9.55
f
f 
 
V0 = nominal voltage 
 
f0 = nominal frequency 
 
X¢20 = nominal rotor standstill reactance referred to stator (at frequency f0) 
Then at any frequency f,
 
V = 
f
f
V
0
0
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜

660 Electric Machines
 
X¢2 = 
f
f
X
0
20
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
¢
 
ws = 
f
f
s
0
0
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ w
Neglecting the stator impedance, from Eqs (9.29) – (9.31) 
 
smax,T = 
f
f
R
X
0
2
20
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = 
f
f
s
T
0
0
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
max, ,  
(9.84) 
 
Tmax, T = 
3
0 5
0
0
0
2
0
2
0
20
f
f
f
f
V
f
f
X
s
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
◊
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
¢
È
Î
Í
Í
Í
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
˙
˙
˙
w
.
  
 = 3
0 5
0
0
2
20
ws
V
X
◊
¢
.
 = constant, independent of f 
(9.85)
and 
Tstart = 
3
0
0
0
2
0
2
2
2
2
0
2
20
f
f
f
f
V
R
R
f
f
X
s
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
◊
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
¢
¢ + Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
¢
w
 
(9.86)
It is easily concluded from Eqs (9.84)-(9.86) that slip at maximum torque decreases with f increasing, the 
maximum torque remains constant and the starting torque decreases with f increasing.
For low values of slip, using the approximate expressions of Eqs (9.34) and (9.35) one can write 
 
I2¢ = 
s
f
f
V
R
0
0
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
¢
 
(9.87)
and 
T = 
3
0
0
0
2
0
2
2
f
f
s
f
f
V
R
s
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
◊
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
¢
w
 = 3
0
0
0
2
2
ws
f
f
sV
R
◊Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  
(9.88)
It is seen from Eqs (9.87) and (9.88) that current and torque both increase with f at a given slip.
From the above conclusions the torque-slip characteristics of the motor can be sketched at frequencies 
above and below the nominal as shown in Fig. 9.56. Figure 12.38 may be referred to for torque-speed 
characteristics. 
The torque-speed characteristics of (V/f ) control of induction motor are presented in Fig. 9.57. For speeds 
less than w0 (corresponding to base frequency f0) (V/f ) is kept constant, so that the maximum motor torque 
remains constant and the motor can drive a constant torque load as indicated in the ﬁgure. For speeds higher 
than the base speed, V needed to keep (V/f  ) constant is more than the rated value which cannot be provided 

Induction Machine 661
by the inverter (Fig. 9.55). So (V/f  ) in this speed region is allowed to reduce and the motor torque reduces 
proportional to the (V/f )2 (this corresponds to F 2
max). This region of speed control can then drive constant-kW 
loads (torque demand reduces with speed). This method of speed control thus produces overall torque- speed 
characteristic just like that of Ward Leonard speed control of dc shunt motor. With rapid strides made in 
power electronic devices and circuits combined with the ruggedness and higher efﬁciency of an induction 
motor, motors with this type of drive are replacing dc motors in several applications.
0
10
20
30
T
w <
0
w
0
w
w >
0
w
W
Constant T
Constant kW
Load
torque
f0
Fig. 9.57 Torque-speed characteristic for (V/f) control of induction motor
f
f
> 0
f
f
= 0
f
f
< 0
Tstart, 0
Tmax
T
1
smax,
, 0
T
0
S
Fig. 9.56
 A 50 Hz, 3-phase induction motor has a rated voltage V1. The motor’s breakdown torque 
at rated voltage and frequency occurs at a slip of 0.2. The motor is instead run from a 60 Hz supply of 
voltage V2. The stator impedance can be neglected.
 (a) If V2 = V1, ﬁnd the ratio of currents and torques at starting. Also ﬁnd the ratio of maximum torques. 
 (b) Find the ratio V2/V1 such that the motor has the same values of starting current and torque at 50 and 
60 Hz. 

662 Electric Machines
SOLUTION 
 
(a)  
smax,T = 
¢
¢
R
X
2
2
 = 0.2
 
 where X¢2 = standstill 50 Hz rotor reactance
 
 At rated voltage (V1) and frequency (50 Hz) 
 
  
Is(1) = I¢2(1) = 
V
R
X
1
2
2
2
2
¢ +
¢
 
(i)
 
  
Ts(1) = 
V
R
R
X
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
¢
¢ +
¢
 
(ii)
 
  
Tmax (1) = 3
1
2
2
ws
V
X
◊0.5
¢
 
(iii)
 
 At voltage V2 and frequency 60 Hz.
 
  
I2(2) = I¢2(2) = 
V
R
X
2
2
2
2
2
2
6
5
¢ + Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
¢
 
(iv)
 
  
Ts(2) = 
V
R
R
X
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
6
5
¢
¢ + Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
¢
 
(v)
 
  
Tmax(2) = 
3
6
5
0 5
6
5
2
2
2
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
¢
ws
V
X
.
 
(vi)
 
 Dividing Eqs (iv), (v) and (vi) respectively by Eqs (i), (ii) and (iii) 
 
  
I
I
s
s
( )
( )
2
1  = V
V
R
X
R
X
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
6
5
◊
¢ +
¢
¢ + Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
¢
 
  
 = V
V
s
s
T
T
2
1
2
2
2
1
6
5
◊
+
+ Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
max,
max,
 
  
 = 1
0 2
1
0 2
6
5
2
2
2
¥
(
) +
+ Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
.
( . )
 = 0.838 
 
  
T
T
s
s
( )
( )
2
1  = V
V
s
s
T
T
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
1
6
5
◊
+
+ Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
max,
max,
 
  
 = 1
0 2
1
0 2
6
5
2
2
2
¥
(
) +
+ Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
.
( . )
 = 0.703

Induction Machine 663
 
  
T
T
max
max
( )
( )
2
1  = V
V
2
2
1
2
2
5
6
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 = 0.694
 
(b)  
V
V
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
0 2
1
0 2
6
5
◊
(
) +
+ Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
.
( . )
 = 1
 
  
V
V
2
1
 = 1.19
 
 This ratio will also give equal staring torques.
The chief advantage of the slip-ring induction motor compared to the squirrel-cage one lies in the fact that 
while its rotor is designed with low resistance to give good running performance (high efﬁciency, low slip, 
etc.), excellent starting characteristic (low starting current, high starting torque, etc.) is simply achieved by 
adding an external resistance in the rotor circuit at the time of starting which is then cut out gradually while 
the rotor reaches normal speed. The rotor circuit in the squirrel-cage motor, however, cannot be tampered 
with so that while its resistance is designed to give excellent running performance, it has high starting current 
and low starting torque which is further impaired by a reduced-voltage starting employed to limit the starting 
current (starting torque is proportional to the square of the voltage applied to the motor stator). The attractive 
qualities of low-cost, ruggedness and maintenance-free operation of the squirrel-cage motor has impelled 
designers to ﬁnd ways of improving its starting characteristic without sacriﬁcing heavily its excellent running 
performance. The fact that the rotor currents are of stator frequency (50 Hz) at the time of starting while this 
frequency reduces to f2 = sf (may be as low as 2.5 Hz) under running condition, can be exploited as it causes 
automatic variation of rotor resistance from a high value at starting (50-Hz resistance) to a low value under 
running (about 2.5-Hz resistance). This phenomenon is basically the skin and proximity effect which occurs 
in any conductor carrying alternating current. For the conductor cross-sectional shape (round or square) 
normally employed for rotor bars, this variation is not prominent enough to give low starting current and high 
starting torque. To enhance the variation in the effective (ac) resistance of rotor bars, deep-bar conductors or 
double-cage rotor are employed. 
Deep-Bar Rotor 
In this type of construction bars of narrow width are laid down 
in deep semi-enclosed slots as shown in Fig. 9.58. The magnetic 
leakage ﬂux pattern set up by the bar current is indicated in dotted 
lines in the ﬁgure. The rotor bar can be imagined to be composed of 
elementary strips in parallel—topmost and bottom-most strips are 
shown in the ﬁgure. It is easily seen that a much larger ﬂux links 
the bottom elementary strip compared to the top elementary strip. 
As a consequence, the starting reactance (50-Hz reactance) for the 
bottom strip is much larger than that of the top strip. It then follows 
that the current in the top strip is much more than the current in the 
bottom strip and further the top-strip current somewhat leads the 
Top strip
Rotor bar
Bottom strip
Fig. 9.58 Deep-bar rotor and leakage 

664 Electric Machines
bottom-strip current because of its lower reactance. Similar arguments when applied to other elementary 
strips would reveal that the current is unevenly distributed over the bar cross-section with the current density 
progressively increasing while moving upwards from the bottom strip. Nonuniform current distribution 
causes greater ohmic loss meaning thereby that the effective bar resistance becomes much more than its dc 
resistance As the rotor speeds up to a value close to synchronous, the frequency of rotor currents ( f2 = sf ) 
becomes very low. The reactances of various elementary strips at this low frequency become almost equal 
and the current density over the conductor cross-section becomes nearly uniform so that it offers a resistance 
almost equal to its dc value. By choice of bar cross-sectional dimensions, it is possible to obtain a starting 
rotor resistance (50 -Hz resistance) to be many times the running rotor resistance (almost dc value). A deep-
bar rotor, therefore, has a low starting current and a high starting torque and a low running resistance which 
means that it can satisfactorily meet both the desired starting and running performances. Since the net rotor 
reactance at standstill is somewhat higher than in a normal bar design, the breakdown torque is somewhat 
lower. The torque-slip characteristic of a deep-bar rotor compared to a normal-bar design with low and high 
rotor resistance is illustrated in Fig. 9.59. 
High rotor resistance
Deep-bar rotor
Low rotor resistance
1
0
Slip
Fig. 9.59
Double-Cage Rotor
A rotor design, which though more expensive gives still 
better starting, and running performances than the deep-bar 
design, is the double-cage rotor. The squirrel-cage winding 
in this design consists of two layers of bars short-circuited by 
end rings. The upper bars have a smaller cross-sectional area 
than the lower bars and consequently a higher resistance. 
The slots accommodating the two sets of bars are joined by a 
constriction as shown in Fig. 9.60 which also shows the slot-
leakage ﬂux pattern for the double-cage rotor. By arguments 
similar to those presented for the deep-bar rotor construction, 
it is seen that the upper bars have a much lower leakage ﬂux 
linkage and, therefore, a much lower reactance. Furthermore, 
the self-leakage ﬂux linking the upper/lower bars can be 
controlled by the dimension of the air-constriction. The 
constriction is also necessary because of the fact that in its 
absence the main ﬂux will return via the iron path between 
Constriction (air)
Fig. 9.60
cage rotor 

Induction Machine 665
the two slots thereby “missing” the inner bars which then 
would not contribute to torque development. 
It is then found that the outer cage has high resistance 
and low reactance while the inner cage has low resistance 
and high reactance. Therefore, in the starting, the current 
is mainly conﬁned to the outer cage with a consequent 
decrease in starting current and an increase in starting 
torque. Under running condition the reactance difference 
between the two cages evens out because of low frequency 
of rotor currents such that these act to conduct current in 
inverse proportion to their dc resistances and as a group 
present a low-resistance rotor to the air-gap ﬂux giving an 
excellent running performance. Since the starting current is 
mainly conﬁned to the upper cage, this design is susceptible 
to frequent starting which would cause overheating and burning out of the upper high-resistance cage. 
Another type of a double-cage rotor construction in which the two cages are placed in staggered slots is 
shown in Fig. 9.61 along with its slot-leakage ﬂux pattern. 
The two cages though somewhat coupled magnetically can be treated as independent for simpliﬁed yet 
fairly accurate analysis. The approximate circuit model of the double-cage rotor on this assumption is given 
in Fig. 9.62. The resultant torque-slip characteristic as obtained by summation of the torque developed by the 
inner and outer cages is shown in Fig. 9.63. 
+
–
V
I1
I¢2
R2
X1
Xm
Riwf
I¢2o
X¢2o
R¢2o/s
R¢2i/s
X¢2i
I¢2i
Fig. 9.62
T
Slip
1
Inner cage
Resultant
Outer cage
0
Fig. 9.63 Torque-slip characteristic—double-cage induction motor
Fig. 9.61 

666 Electric Machines
It will be evident to the reader by now that for low starting torque requirement, which is the case with a 
vast majority of induction motor applications, the low-cost ordinary squirrel-cage construction is employed. 
A deep-bar rotor construction is adopted for higher starting torque applications and double-cage construction 
for still higher starting torque needs. For large-size motors with stringent starting torque needs, the most 
expensive slip-ring construction is used.
 The impedances at standstill of the inner and outer cages of a double-cage rotor are 
(0.01 + j 0.5) W and (0.05 + j 0.1) W respectively. The stator impedance may be assumed to be negligible. 
Calculate the ratio of the torques due to the two cages (i) at starting, and (ii) when running with a slip 
of 5%.
SOLUTION 
From Eq. (9.31) (as seen on the rotor side) 
 
Ts = 3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
ws
V
R
R
X
◊
¢
+
where V¢ = rotor induced emf
Substituting values 
 
Tso = 3
0 05
0 05
0 1
2
2
2
ws
V
◊
¢
+
( .
)
( .
)
( . )
 
Tsi = 3
0 01
0 01
0 5
2
2
2
ws
V
◊
¢
+
( .
)
( .
)
( . )
\ 
T
T
so
si
 = ( .
)
( . )
( .
)
( . )
.
.
0 01
0 5
0 05
0 1
0 05
0 01
2
2
2
2
+
+
¥ Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
 = 100 
From Eq. (9.28) (as seen on the rotor side)
 
T = 3
2
2
2
2
2
2
ws
V
R s
R s
X
◊
¢
+
(
/ )
(
/ )
Substituting values 
 
T0 = 3
0 05 0 05
0 05 0 05
0 1
2
2
2
ws
V
◊
¢
+
( .
/ .
)
( .
/ .
)
( . )
 
Ti = 3
0 010 05
0 010 05
0 3
2
2
2
ws
V
◊
¢
+
( .
/ .
)
( .
/ .
)
( . )
\ 
T
Ti
0  = ( .
/ .
)
( . )
( .
/ .
)
( . )
.
.
0 010 05
0 5
0 05 0 05
0 1
0 05
0 01
2
2
2
2
+
+
¥
 
 = 1.436
Remark The outer cage contributes 100 times more torque than the inner cage at starting while it contributes 
only 1.436 times during running. 
To cater to the different starting and running requirements of a various industrial applications, several 

Induction Machine 667
standard designs of squirrel-cage motors are available in the market. 
The torque-speed characteristics of the most common designs are 
shown in Fig. 9.64. The effective resistance of the rotor cage circuit is 
the most important design variable in these motors. 
Class A Motors
They have normal starting torque, high starting current, and low 
operating slip. (0.005–0.015) with low rotor circuit resistance, they 
work efﬁciently with a low slip at full load. They are used where 
the load torque is low at start (e.g. fan, pump load) so that full speed 
is achieved quickly, thus avoiding the problem of overheating while 
starting. 
Class B Motors 
Class B motors have normal starting torque, low starting current, and 
low operating slip. The starting current is reduced by designing for relatively high leakage reactance by using 
either deep-bar rotors or double-cage rotors. 
These motors have similar values of full-load slip and efﬁciency and are good general purpose motors 
used for various industrial applications such as constant speed drives (e.g. fans, pumps, blowers). 
Class C Motors 
They have high starting torque and low starting current. A double cage rotor is used with higher rotor 
resistance. Class C motors are normally used for driving compressors, conveyors, crushers, etc. 
Class D Motors 
They have high starting torque, low starting current, and high operating slip. The torque-slip characteristics 
is similar to that of a wound-rotor motor with some external resistance in the rotor circuit. The full load slip 
is high making running efﬁciency low. These motors are used for driving intermittent loads requiring rapid 
acceleration and high impact loads such as punch presses or shears. For impact loads a ﬂywheel is ﬁtted to 
the system to provide kinetic energy during the impact.
It has been observed from Fig. 9.14 and Example 9.9 that an induction machine is in generating mode for  
s < 0 (negative slip). An induction generator is asynchronous in nature because of which it is commonly used 
as windmill generator as a windmill runs at non-ﬁxed speed. These are used in remote areas to supplement 
power received from weak transmission links. A transmission line connected to an induction generator feeding 
a local load is drawn in Fig. 9.65. The primemover must be provided with automatic control to increase the 
generator speed when it is required to meet increased load.
Figure 9.66 shows the circle diagram of an induction machine extended to the generating region i.e., below 
the OX co-ordinate, which is the negative slip region. At slip = slg, the motor draws current I1m which lags the 
applied voltage V1 by F1m > 90°. This means negative pf (cos F1m) or that the electric power ﬂows out of the 
machine resulting in generating operation. The generating current fed to the line is then
T
C
D
A
B
n
ns
Fig. 9.64 Torque-speed characteris-
induction motors 

668 Electric Machines
 
I1g = – I1m
with a leading pf cos F1m. This alternately means that the machine draws a 90°-lagging current component to 
provide its magnetizing current need. The transmission line has then to feed the lagging current component 
of the load as well as the magnetizing current of the induction generator. This places a severe lagging VARs 
load on the already weak lines. This burden must be relieved by connecting balanced shunt capacitors (in 
delta) across the induction generator terminals. These draw leading current or equivalently feed lagging 
magnetizing current of the generator. 
It is to be observed here that the operating frequency of the system of Fig. 9.65 is ﬁxed by the line 
frequency. 
An isolated induction generator feeding a load is shown in Fig. 9.67. The delta- connected capacitors across 
the generator terminals provide the magnetizing current necessary to excite the isolated generator. The voltage 
Transmission
line
IL
IC
I1g
Load
C
C
C
Induction
Gen.
w
PM
Fig. 9.65
I1g
f1g
s0
I0
f1m
s1m
V1
s1g
I1(mag)
+ve slip
X
–ve slip
I1m
O
Fig. 9.66

Induction Machine 669
build-up will be explained later in this section. As the generator is loaded, the operating frequency depends 
primarily upon rotor speed but is affected by the load, while the voltage is mainly decided by capacitor 
reactance (XC) at the operating frequency. 
Let 
w0 = rated frequency
 
ws = operating frequency (stator)
 
wr = stator frequency corresponding to rotor speed
 
a = ws/w0 and b = wr/w0
Load
IG
w, rad
(elect)/s
PM
Xc
Xc
Xc
Fig. 9.67 
The machine slip (which should be negative) can be expressed as
 
s = (ws – wr)/aw0
 
 = (aw0 – bw0)/aw0 = (a – b)/a; b < a 
Assuming that the machine reactances, excitation reactances and machine induced emf correspond to the 
rated frequency (w0), the per phase equivalent circuit of the system at operating frequency ws = aw0 is drawn 
in Fig. 9.68(a) with load considered as purely resistive. Dividing throughout by ‘a’, the circuit is reduced to 
the rated (ﬁxed) frequency and is drawn in Fig. 9.68(b). 
RL
V1
Ic
–jX
a
c
jaXm
aE
R
s
¢2=
aR
a – b
2
IL
I1
R1
jaX1
I¢2
jaX2
(a)
V1/a
–jX
a
c
2
jXm
E
R2
a – b
IL
I1
R1
jX1
I¢2
jX2
(b)
R
a
L
Fig. 9.68 

670 
Electric Machines
Voltage Build-up 
With reference to Fig. 9.67, consider that the generator is run at synchronous speed at no-load (switch off ) 
with D-connected capacitors hanging on its terminals. The rotor circuit behaves as open and so the circuit 
model is as drawn in Fig. 9.69(a).
V1 XC
I
I
= mag
R1
X1
Xm
E
(a)
(b)
Reactance line
(
)
XC
Mag
characteristic
V
V1
Imag
Fig. 9.69 
The current fed into the motor is I1 = Imag, the magnetizing current. If the voltage drop in stator impedance, 
R1, X1, is ignored, we have 
 
V1 ª E (induced emf )
 
 = E (Imag), the magnetization characteristic
Also 
V1 = XCImag; the reactance line on Fig. 9.69(b)
Like in a dc shunt generator, the magnetization characteristic and reactance line are drawn in Fig. 9.69(b). 
Their intersection gives the no-load voltage. This is the case at rated frequency. V1 will vary slightly as the 
actual stator frequency changes from the rated value. This variation may be ignored. 
9.14 
INDUCTION MACHINE DYNAMICS: ACCELERATION TIME 
In general, the mechanical time-constant for any machine is much larger than the electrical time constant. 
Therefore, the dynamic analysis can be simpliﬁed by neglecting the electrical transient without any loss of 
accuracy of results. 
The circuit model of induction motor of 
Fig. 9.8(b) holds for constant slip but would 
also apply for slowly varying slip as is 
generally the case in motor starting. Figure 
9.70 shows the typical torque-slip (speed) 
characteristic of a motor and also the load 
torque as a function of slip (speed). Each point 
on (TL – s) characteristic represents the torque 
(frictional) demanded by the load and motor 
when running at steady speed. The motor would 
start only if T > TL and would reach a steady 
Torque
T(machine torque)
TL(load torque)
P
Slip
(
–
)
T
TL
w = 0
= 1
s
w0
ws
s0
s = 0
w
Fig. 9.70

Induction Machine 671
operating speed of w0 which corresponds to T = TL, i.e. the intersection point P of the two torque-
speed characteristics. It can be checked by the perturbation method that P is a stable operating 
point for the load-speed characteristic shown. If for any reason the speed becomes more than w0,
(T – TL) < 0 the machine-load combination decelerates and returns to the operating point. The reverse happens 
if the speed decreases below w0. 
During the accelerating period 
 
T – TL = J d
dt
w  
(9.89)
where J = combined inertia of motor and load. Now 
 
w = (1– s)ws  
(9.90)
Therefore, Eq. (9.89) modiﬁes to 
 
T – TL = – J
ds
dt
s
w
 
(9.91) 
Integrating 
 
t
tA
0  = -
-
=
=
Ú
1
1
1
0
J
T
T
ds
s
L
s
s
s
w
 
(9.92) 
Since, the term 1/(T – TL) is nonlinear, the integration in Eq. (9.92) must be carried out graphically (or 
numerically) as shown in Fig. 9.71 for the case when s1 = 1 and s2 = s0. Since 1/(T – TL) becomes  at s0, the 
practical integration is carried out only up to 90 or 95% of s0 depending upon the desired accuracy. 
Figure 9.72 shows how slip (speed) varies with time during the acceleration period reaching the steady 
value of s0(w0) in time tA, the accelerating time. Because of the nonlinearity of (T – TL) as function of slip, 
the slip (speed)-time curve of Fig. 9.72 is not exponential.
1
T
TL

s = 1
= 0
w
s0
w0
w
Slip
T
T
–
L
Area
1
T
TL
ds
s
1
s
s0



z
s
s
=
0
s = 1
T
T
–
L
ds
z
Fig. 9.71

672 Electric Machines
s0
0
, w
1, 0
0
tA
Time
Fig. 9.72 
Starting on No-Load (TL = 0) 
In this particular case it is assumed that the machine and load friction torque TL = 0.
Assuming stator losses to be negligible (i.e. R1 = 0), the motor torque as obtained from Eq. (9.22) is 
 
T = 3
2
2
2
1
2
2
ws
TH
V
R s
R s
X
X
◊
¢
¢
+
+
¢
(
/ )
(
/ )
(
)
 
(9.93)
Also from Eq. (9.24) 
 
Tmax = 3
0 5
2
1
2
ws
TH
V
X
X
◊
+
¢
.
(
)  
(9.94) 
at a slip of (Eq. (9.23)) 
 
smax,T = 
¢
+
¢
R
X
X
2
1
2  
(9.95)
From Eqs (9.93) and (9.94), 
 
T
Tmax
 = 
2
1
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
(
) (
/ )
(
/ )
(
)
X
X
R s
R s
X
X
+
¢
¢
¢
+
+
¢
 
 = 
2
2
1
2
1
2
2
(
/ )
(
/ )
¢
+
¢ +
+
¢
¢
È
ÎÍ
˘
˚˙
R s
X
X
X
X
R s
 
(9.96)
Substituting Eq. (9.94) in (9.95) 
 
T
Tmax
 = 
2
s
s
s
S
T
T
max,
max,
+
 
(9.97)
Since TL is assumed to be zero, the motor torque itself is the accelerating torque, i.e. 
 
T = 
2T
s s
s
s
T
T
max
max,
max,
/
/
+
 = J d
dt
w  = - J
ds
dt
s
w
 
(9.98) 
The time tA to go from slip s1 to s2 is obtained upon integration of Eq. (9.97) as 

Induction Machine 673
 
tA = -
+
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
Ú
Ú
J
T
s
s
ds
s
s
ds
s
T
s
s
T
s
s
w
2
1
2
1
2
max
max,
max,
 
tA = J
T
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
T
T
w
2
2
1
2
2
2
1
2
max
max,
max,
ln
-
+
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
 
(9.99)
The acceleration time for the machine to reach steady speed from starting can be computed from Eq. (9.98) 
with s1 = 1 and s2 = s, i.e. 
 
tA = J
T
s
s
s
s
s
T
T
w
2
1
2
1
2
max
max,
max,
ln
-
+
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
 
(9.100)
Optimum s
T for Minimum Acceleration Time
To ﬁnd the optimum value of smax,T for the machine to have minimum acceleration time to reach s2 from sl, 
Eq. (9,98) must be differentiated with respect to smax,T and equated to zero, This gives 
 
(smax,T)opt = 
(
)
ln ( /
)
s
s
s s
1
2
2
1
2
2
-
 
(9.101) 
For minimum acceleration time for the machine to reach any slip s from start, the optimum value of smax,T 
is given by Eq. (9.100) with s1 = 1 and s2 = s. Then 
 
(smax,T)opt = 
(
)
ln ( / )
1
2
1
2
- s
s
 
(9.102) 
and 
 tA(min) = J
T
s
s
s
s
s
T
T
w
2
1
2
1
2
max
max,
max,
(
)
(
)
ln
-
+
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
opt
opt
 
(9.103)
Further, to enable us to compute the optimum value of the rotor resistance to accelerate the machine to slip 
s2 from s1, Eq. (9.101) is substituted in Eq. (9.95) giving 
 
(R¢2)opt = (X1 + X¢2)
s
s
s s
1
2
2
2
1
2
2
-
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
ln ( /
)  
(9.104)
 
 = (X1 + X¢2) (smax,T)opt 
(9.105)
 A 3-phase, 415 V, 6-pole, 50 Hz, star-connected slip-ring induction motor has a total 
stator and rotor reactance of 1.5 W referred to the stator. The machine drives pure inertia load; the moment 
of inertia of the rotor and load being 11 kg m2. Direct on-line starting is used and the rotor circuit resistance 
is adjusted so that the load is brought to 0.96 of the synchronous speed from rest in shortest possible time. 
Neglecting stator losses, compute the acceleration time and the value of the rotor resistance referred to the 
stator. 
SOLUTION 
s = 1 – 0.96 = 0.04 
Substituting in Eq. (9.101), 

674 Electric Machines
 
 (smax,T)opt = 
1
0 04
2
10 04
2
12
-
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
( .
)
ln ( / .
)
/
 
 = 0.394 
From Eqs (9.105) and (9.103) 
 
(R¢2)opt = 1.5 ¥ 0.394 = 0.591 W
 
tA(min) = J
T
s
s
s
s
s
T
T
w
2
1
2
1
2
max
max,
max,
(
)
(
)
ln
-
+
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
opt
opt
From Eq. (9.94), assuming VTH = V
 
Tmax = 
3
2
1000
0 5 415
3
1 5
2
p ¥
◊. (
/
)
.
 = 548.2
 
 = 11 2
1000 60
2
548 2
1
0 04
2
0 394
0 394
1
0 04
2
(
/
)
.
( .
)
.
.
ln
.
p ¥
¥
-
¥
+
¥
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
 
 = 2.66 s
For the approximate circuit model. For given slip (s) compute stator current, pf, torque (net) and efﬁciency 
(h). 
No-load Test  Measured P0, I0, V0 (rated value) 
 
R1 = dc resistance of stator (corrected to ac) 
 
Riwf = V
pr
0
2
; Pr = P0 – 3I2
0 R1 
(i)
 
(Rotational loss = stator core loss + winding and friction loss)
 
Iiwf = V
Riwf
0
3
/
 = 
P
V
r
3
0
 
Im = (I2
0 – I2
iwf)1/2 = I
P
V
r
0
2
2
0
2
12
3
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
/
 
(ii)
 
Xm = V
Im
0
3
/
 = 
V
I
P
V
r
0
0
2
2
0
2
12
3
3
/
/
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
(iii)
Needed for circuit model R1, Xm 
Blocked rotor test  Measured VBR, IBR, PBR
 
ZBR = V
I
BR
BR
/ 3

Induction Machine 675
 
RBR = P
I
BR
BR
/3
2
 = R1 +R¢2 
 
R¢2 = RBR – R1 = P
I
BR
BR
/
(
)
3
2  – R1 
(iv)
 
XBR = (Z2
BR – R2
BR)1/2 = 
V
I
P
I
BR
BR
BR
BR
2
2
2
4
12
3
9
-
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
/
 
(v)
 
X1 = X¢2 = X BR
2
 = 1
2
3
9
2
2
2
4
12
V
I
P
I
BR
BR
BR
BR
-
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
/
 
(vi)
Needed for circuit model R¢2, X¢2.
Circuit model 
 
V = V1
3  per phase 
 
Z f  = 
¢ +
¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
+
+
R
s
j X
jX
R
jX
m
f
f
2
2 ||
 
(vii)
 
Zin = (R1 + Rf) + j(X1 + Xf) = Rin + jXin 
(viii)
 
Zin = (R2
in + X2 in)1/2
 (a) Stator current
 
  
I1 = V
Zin
1
0
3
– ∞, pf angle f = tan–1 X
R
in
in
 
(ix)
 (b) Power factor 
 
  
pf = cos f, lagging 
(x)
 (c) Efﬁciency 
 
 Power input, 
Pin = 3VI1 cos f 
(xi)
 
 Power across air-gap, 
PG = 3I2
1 Rf 
(xii)
 
  
ws = 120 f
P
 
  
Pm (gross) = (1 – s) PG 
(xiii)
 
  
Pm (net) = Pm (gross) Pr 
(xiv)
 
  
h = P
P
m
in
(
)
net ¥
¥
100
100  
(xv) 
 (d) Torque 
ws = 120 f/P
 
  
w = (1 – s) ws
V
R1
R¢2
X1
I1
X¢2
I¢2
Zm
Xm
R¢2 1
s –1
Zf
Fig. 9.73(a)

676 Electric Machines
 
  
T(net) = P
P
s
G
r
s
-
-
(
)
1
w
 
  
s = given 
(xvi) 
 
 The above procedure is now illustrated by an example. 
 
by Thevenin’s Equivalent Circuit 
Induction-motor equivalent circuit simpliﬁed by 
Thevenin’s theorem is shown in Fig. 9.73(b).
where 
Z1eq = j X
R
j X
R
j X
X
m
m
(
)
1
1
1
1
+
+
+
 = R1eq + jX1eq 
 
V1eq = 
V
j X
R
j X
X
m
m
1
1
1
(
)
(
)
+
+
 
I2 = 
V
Z
j X
R s
eq
eq
1
1
2
2
+
+
/
 
ws = 120 f/P
Torque 
Tmech = 1
3 1
2
2
1
2
2
1
2
2
ws
eq
eq
eq
V
R s
R
R
s
X
X
(
/ )
(
)
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ +
+
È
Î
Í
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
˙
>>P0=467; 
I0=6.8; 
V0=400; 
f =50; 
P=8; 
r1=0.68; 
Pr=P0-3*I0^ 2.*r1 
Riwf=V0^ 2/Pr 
Iiwf=(V0/1.732)/Riwf 
Im=(10^ 2-Iiwf ^2)^0.5 
Xm=(V0/1.732)/Im 
Vbr=180; 
Ibr=17; 
Pbr=1200/3; 
Zbr=(Vbr/1.732)/Ibr 
Rbr=Pbr/(1br^ 2) 
R2=Rbr-r1 
Xbr=(Zbr^ 2-Rbr^ 2)^0.5 
V1eq.
R1eq.
X1eq.
X2
+
–
I2
R s
2/
Fig. 9.73(b) 

Induction Machine 677
X1=Xbr/2 
X2=Xbr/2 
V=V0/1.732 
s=.05;
Zf=(R2/s+i*X2).*(i*Xm)./(R2/s+i*X2+i*Xm) 
Rf=real(Zf) 
Xf=imag(Zf) 
Zin=(r1+Rf)+i*(X2+Xf) 
Rin=real (Zin) 
Xin=imag (Zin) 
Zin=(Rin^2+Xin^2)^0.5 
I1=V./Zin 
PFA=atan(Xin./Rin) 
pf=cos(PFA) 
Pin=3*V.*I1.*pf 
Pg=3*I1^2.*Rf 
Ws=120*f./P
Pmgross=(1–s).*Pg 
Pmnet=Pmgross–Pr 
W=(1–s).*Ws 
Tnet=Pmnet./W 
Eff=Pmnet./Pi n 
Pr = 
 
372.6704 
Riwf = 
 
429.3338 
Iiwf =  
 
0.5379
Im =  
 
6.7787
Xm =  
 
34.0695
Zbr =  
 
6.1133
Rbr =  
 
1.3841  
R2 =  
 
0.7041  
Xbr =  
 
5.9546  
X1 =  
 
2.9773
X2 =
 
2.9773
V =
 
230.9469

678 Electric Machines
Zf =
 
10.4058 + 6.6933i
Rf =
 
10.4058
Xf =
 
6.6933
Zin =
 
11.0858 + 9.6706i
Ri n =  
 
11.0858
Xin =
 
9.6706
Zin = 
 
14.7111 
I1 = 
 
15.6988 
PFA = 
 
0.7173 
pf = 
 
0.7536 
Pin = 
 
8. 1964e+003 
Pg = 
 
7.6937e+003 
Ws = 
 
750 
Pmgross = 
 
7.3090e+003 
Pmnet = 
 
6.9363e+003 
W 
 
712.5000 
Tnet = 
 
9.7352 
Eff = 
 
0.8463
>>
 The results of the no-load and blocked-rotor tests on a 3-phase, Y-connected 10 kW, 
400 V, 17 A, 50 Hz, 8 pole induction motor with a squirrel-cage rotor are given below. 
No-load test: 
Line to line voltage = 400 V
 
Total input power = 467 W 
 
Line current = 6.8 A 
Blocked rotor test: 
Line to line voltage = 180 V
 
Total input power = 1200 W

Induction Machine 679
 
Line current = 17 A 
The dc resistance of the stator measured immediately after the blocked rotor test is found to have an 
average value of 0.68 ohm/phase. 
Calculate the parameters of the circuit model of the induction motor. Draw IEEE circuit model. 
Using MATLAB calculate and plot against motor speed or slip the following variables: 
 
(i) Torque (net)
 (ii) Stator current
 (iii) Power factor
 (iv) Efﬁciency 
SOLUTION 
No-Load Test 
 
Y0 = 
6 8
400
3
.
/
 = 0.0294 
 
Giwf = 467
3 6 8
0 68
400
2
2
-
¥
( . )
.
(
)
 = 2.33 ¥ 10–3 
 
Bm = 
Y
Giwf
0
2
2
-
 = 2.93 ¥ 10–2  
 
Xm = 34.12 W 
The IEEE circuit model is given in the Fig. 9.73(c). 
R1
X1
I1
X ¢2
I¢2
Im
Xm
R¢2 1
s –1
Zf
V
R ¢2
Fig. 9.73(c)
Blocked-Rotor Test
 
Z = 180
3
17
/
 = 6.113 W
 
R = 1200 3
17 2
/
(
)
 = 1.384 W
 
X = 
Z
R
2
2
-
 = 5.95 W
 
R = R1 + R¢2
 
R¢2 = 1.384 – 0.68 = 0.704 W
 
X1 = X¢2 = X
2  = 2.975 W 

680 Electric Machines
Performance Calculation
 
s = 0.05
 
Z f  = 
¢ +
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
R
s
j X
j Xm
2
2 || (
)
 
 = 0 704
0 05
2 975
34 12
.
.
.
|| (
.
)
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
j
j
 
 = (14.08 + j 2.975) || ( j 34.12) 
 
 = 14 39
11 9
34 12
90
39 677
69 2
.
.
.
.
.
–
∞¥
–
∞
–
∞
 
 = 12.375 –32.7°
 
 = 10.414 + j 6.685
 
Z(
)
total  = 0.68 + j 2.975 + 10.414 + j 6.685
 
  14.7 –41.3° W
 
|
|(
)
Z
total  = 14.7 W
 
(a) Stator Current
 
  
I1 = 
400
3
14 7
¥
.
 = 15.69 A
 
(b) Power Factor 
 
  
pf = cos (14.3°) = 0.751 (lagging)
 
(c) Efﬁciency
 
  
Power input = 3Vph Iph cos f
 
  
 = 3 400
3
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  ¥ 15.69 ¥ 0.751 = 8163.4 W
 
  
Air-gap power = 3I2
1 Rf
 
  
 = 3 (15.69)2 ¥ 10.374 = 7661.5 W
 
  
ws = 120 f
P
 = 750 rpm
 
  
Pm (gross) = (1 – s)Pg 
 
  
 = 0.95 ¥ 7661.5 = 7278.4 W
 
  
Pm (net) = Pm (gross) – Pr 
 
 where 
Pm (net) = Pm (gross) – Pr
 
  
Pr = P0 – 3I2
0 R1 = 372 W
 
(d) Torque
 
  
w = ws (1 – s)
 
  
 = 750 ¥ 0.95 = 712 rpm

Induction Machine 681
 
  
T(net) = Pm net
(
)
w
 = 6906 4
712
.
 = 9.7 Nm
 
  
Efﬁciency = 
P
P
m net
(
)
input
 = 6906 4
8163 4
.
.
 = 0.846
 
  
% Efﬁciency = 84.6%
Torque Expression for Variable Slip
From the IEEE circuit model shown in the Fig. 9.73(d)
0.68 W
+
–
I2
2.975 W
2.975 W
34.12 W
400
3
I1
0.704
s
b
a
Fig. 9.73(d)
 
VTH = 
230 9
34 12
0 68
2 975
34 12
.
.
| .
( .
.
)|
¥
+
+
j
 (Thevenin’s voltage across ab terminals)
 
VTH = 212.35 V 
Torque, 
T = 
3
2
2
1
2
2
1
2
2
V
R
s
R
R
s
X
X
TH
s
¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
+
¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ +
+
¢
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
w
(
)
 
  = 
3
78 54
212 35
0 704
0 68
0 704
5 95
2
2
2
.
(
.
)
.
.
.
( .
)
¥
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ +
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
s
s
  
T = 
1212 57
0 68
0 704
35 4025
2
.
/
.
.
.
s
s
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ +
This expression will be used later to plot T-s curve using MATLAB.
Stator current expression for the variable slip 
 
I1 = V
Z
– ∞
0
Total

682 
Electric Machines
 
Z f  = 
j X
R
s
j X
R
s
j X
j X
m
m
¢ +
¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
¢ +
¢ +
2
2
2
2
 
 = 
(
.
)
.
.
.
.
j
s
j
s
j
34 12
0 704
2 975
0 704
37 095
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
 = 
-
+
+
101 507
24 02
0 704
37 095
.
.
.
.
j
s
s
j
 
ZTotal  = (0.68 + j 2.9785) + Z f
 
I1 = 
400
0
0 68
2 975
101 507
24 02
0 704
37 095
– ∞
+
+
-
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
+
.
.
.
.
.
.
j
j
s
s
j
s=0.0001: 0.01:1 
Zf =(–101.507+i*24.02./s)./((0.704./s)+i*37.095) 
Zt=0.68+i*2.975+Zf 
I1=(400/1.732)./Zt 
Rf=real(Zf) 
X=imag(I1) 
R=real(I1)
PHI=atan(X./R)
pf=cos(PHI) 
Plot(s,pf) 
Pin=3*(400/1.732).*abs(I1).*pf 
Pg=3*abs(I1).*abs(I1).*Rf 
Pmgross=(1–s).*Pg 
Pmnet=Pmgross-0.03726704 
Eff=Pmnet./Pin 
plot(s,Eff) 
plot(s,abs (I1)) 
s=–1:.0001:2
y=(0.68+0.704./s).*(0.68+0.704./s)+35.4025 
T=(1212.57./s)./y 

Induction Machine 683
plat(s,T) 
Plots are shown in Fig. 9.73 (e)–(h) 
–150
–100
–50
0
50
100
150
–200
Torque
–1
–0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Slip
Generating region
Motor region
Maximum torque
Starting toruqe
Braking region
Fig. 9.73(e)
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
15.65
Stator current (Amp)
0 0.05 0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Slip
Fig. 9.73( f ) 

684 Electric Machines
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.75
0.8
0 0.05 0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Slip
Stator power factor
Fig. 9.73(g)
0.9
1
0.87
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0 0.05 0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Slip
Effficiency
Fig. 9.73(h)
Thevenin’s Equivalent Circuit 
R1=0.68; 
X1=2.975; 

Induction Machine 685
Xm=34.12; 
X2=2.975; 
R2=0.704; 
V1=400/1.732; 
f=50; 
P=8; 
Z1eq=(Xm*i).*(R1+i*X1)./(R1+i*Xm+i*X1) 
R1eq=real(Zeq) 
X1eq=imag(Zeq) 
V1eq=V1.*i*Xm./(R1+i*X1+i*Xm) 
s=–1:0.001:2 
I2=Vleq./(Zleq+i*X2+R2./s) 
ws=120*f./P
Z=(Rleq+R2./s).*(R1eq+R2./s)+(X1eq+X2).*(X1eq+X2) 
Tmech=(1/ws).*(3.*V1eq.*V1eq.*(R2./s))./Z 
plot(s,Tmech) 
9.15 
INVERTED INDUCTION MACHINE 
In a wound-rotor induction machine the three-phase supply can be given to the rotor windings through the 
slip rings and the stator terminals can be shorted (see Fig. 9.74). Such a rotor-fed induction machine is 
also called an inverted induction machine. The three-phase rotor current will generate a rotating ﬁeld in the 
air gap, rotating at the synchronous speed with respect to rotor. If the rotor is kept stationary, this rotating 
ﬁeld will also rotate in the air gap at the synchronous 
speed. Voltage and current will be induced in the stator 
windings and a torque will be developed. If the rotor is 
allowed to move, it will rotate as per the Lenzs law, in 
opposite direction to the rotation of the rotating ﬁeld 
decreasing the induced voltage in the stator winding. 
Thus, at a particular speed, the frequency of the stator 
circuit will correspond to the slip speed.
Induction Regulator
The Induction Regulator is used in the applications 
requiring constant voltage under variable load conditions and variable ac voltage supply for speed control. 
The basic principle of operation is the three phase supply is supplied to stator and produces revolving magnetic 
ﬂux which induces emf in the rotor windings. This induced emf in the rotor is injected into the stator supply 
and hence supply voltage may be increased or decreased depending on the rotor position. In this process the 
rotor is stationary.
The construction of the rotor is made such that the magnitude of the induced voltage is not changed but by 
changing the angular position causes phase shift in the secondary induced emf. If Vs is supply voltage and Er 
is emf induced in secondary. Hence the addition of Vs and Er at an angle q corresponding to the rotor position 
to give output voltage Vo. Ipy is the primary current, Isy is the secondary current or rotor current and Im is the 
magnetizing component of current.
Wound-rotor
induction machine
3-phase power supply
Stator terminals
Rotor
terminals
Fig. 9.74
 

686 Electric Machines
R
3-phase AC supply
VS
Y
B
VS
Ipy
I
+ I
py
m
Primary
Secondary
Isy
VO
(a)
(b)
VS
VO
q
Er
VO
Fig. 9.75 (a) Three phase Induction Regulator, (b) phasor diagram
Synchronous Induction Motor
It is slip ring induction motor which can be operated as synchronous motor when the rotor excited with a 
dc source. One phase of slip ring carries a current Ia and the other two phases carry a current of – Ia
2
. The 
dc excitation gives alternate North and South poles on the rotor. This conﬁguration is similar to the working 
principle of synchronous motor.
1
2
3
External resistances
Slip
rings
R
B
Y
Shaft
+
–
T1
D1
L
C
Control
circuit
Permanent
magnet generator
1¢
2¢
3¢
Fig 9.76

Induction Machine 687
The synduction motor is started as an induction with external resistances in the rotor circuit as shown in 
Fig. 9.76. The station is not shown in the ﬁgure. The throw-over switch is in position 1, 2, 3. As the resistance 
is cut out the motor speed reaches close to synchronous, the switch is thrown to position 1, 2, 3 connecting 
the rotor to dc source. The rotor gets pulled into synchronism and theorem runs as a synchronous motion. For 
the dc supply a permanent magnet dc generator in coupled to the motor and connected to attached terminals 
(1¢, 2¢, 3¢) through a buck/boost converter. The voltage of the converter can be varied to control the pf of the 
motor.
The synduction motor provides a high starting torque and low starting current and pf control when running 
as synchronous motor.
With ever-increasing energy cost the life-time operating cost of an induction motor can be traded against a high 
efﬁciency and high capital cost induction motors. With rising demand for high efﬁciency or energy efﬁcient 
induction motors, designers and manufacturers are stepping up their production of such motors. Some of the 
important techniques, that are employed to construct a higher efﬁciency induction motor compared to the 
standard design, are listed below: 
copper weight and so cost. 
magnetic saturation and core loss. 
Rotor fans are designed with reﬁned aerody namic ﬁn shapes to reduce windage loss.
current loss. 
Achieving maximum efﬁciency needs both optimum design of the electric machinery and proper matching 
of machine and desired application. 
Increasing the cross-sectional area of the windings would reduce the resistance and the I2R losses. For a 
given ﬂux density eddy-current losses can be reduced by using thinner iron laminations. 
There is a trade-off involved always. A machine of more efﬁcient design normally requires more material 
and therefore is bigger and costlier. Users normally select the “lowest-cost” solution to a given requirement. 
Of course it would be prudent to choose an energy-efﬁcient motor as normally the increased capital cost 
would be offset by energy savings over the expected lifetime of the machine. 
To optimize the efﬁciency, it is important to select the smallest-rating induction motor which can adequately 
satisfy the requirements of a speciﬁc application. Use of modern solid-state control technology can also play 
a signiﬁcant role in optimizing both performance and efﬁciency. In selecting a motor the main constraint is 
that the motors are normally manufactured in certain standard sizes. If 0.9 kW motor is needed one may end 
up buying a 1 kW motor. A custom-designed and manufactured 0.9 kW motor can be economically justiﬁed 
only if it is required in large number. There should not be, as far as possible, the mismatch of the motor to its 
application. For example, even the most efﬁcient 100 kW motor will be somewhat inefﬁcient when driving 
a 60 kW load. 

688 Electric Machines
The basic principle and operation have already been explained in Section 5.8. The expression for linear 
velocity was derived there. Linear induction motor to produce linear motion has been devised in many different 
conﬁgurations. We shall mainly discuss the conﬁguration most commonly adopted for traction purposes. 
LIM is a developed version of cylindrical induction motor. If the elementary induction motor of Fig. 9.77(a) 
is cut axially and spread out ﬂat as in Fig. 9.77(b) it corresponds to LIM. Of course suitable magnetic circuit 
must be provided (this will be illustrated later in Fig. 9.77(b)). The secondary conductor now appears in form 
of a sheet. For obvious reasons the air gap is much larger than in a normal induction motor as the secondary 
conductor contributes towards the air gap. A typical air gap in LIM is of the order of 25 mm while in a 
cylindrical motor it is about 1 mm. 
a¢
b
c
a
c¢
b¢
Stator
Conductor
Rotor core
Cut here
(a)
Air gap
Sheet conductor
Secondary
Relative motion
of secondary
Primary
(b)
c
a¢
b
c¢
a
b¢
Fig. 9.77
The air-gap ﬁeld now moves linearly in the direction (acb) (assumed phase sequence abc). The induced 
currents in the secondary sheet interacting with this ﬁeld produce thrust on it and therefore its motion in the 
direction of the movement of the ﬁeld as indicated in Fig. 9.77(b). Unlike a cylindrical motor the ﬁeld in an 
LIM has end discontinuities. As the ﬁeld reaches the back end (in relation to direction of motion) it must 
reduce to zero while a fresh ﬁeld must build up at the front end. This rise and decay of ﬁeld causes statically 
induced current in the secondary sheet which cannot contribute any thrust and only adds to ohmic loss of the 
motor. 
Either the primary or secondary could be made mobile. The stationary member must of course be 
continuous throughout the length of intended travel. 
Magnetic attraction between members can be balanced out in a rotary machine but cannot be so balanced 
in a ﬂat machine unless double-sided construction is adopted as illustrated in Fig. 9.78(a) where there is 

Induction Machine 689
double layer three-phase winding on either side of the secondary. This construction is commonly adopted for 
traction wherein the ﬁnite length primaries are carried on the vehicle while the secondary takes the form of a 
continuous conducting (aluminium is used) rail as shown in Fig. 9.78(b). 
Speed In one cycle of supply frequency ( f ) the ﬁeld moves by distance of two pole pitches (2b ). The 
synchronous velocity of the ﬁeld is then expressed as
 
vs = 2b f m/s; see Eq. (5.76) 
(9.106)
As per induction principle the primary moves in opposite direction to the ﬁeld with the secondary held 
ﬁxed (on the rail track) at a speed v such that slip is given by 
 
s = v
v
v
s
s
-
 
(9.107) 
As per Eq. (7.106) the synchronous speed is not governed by the number of poles and any desired linear 
speed can be obtained by adjusting pole pitch. For example, for b = 1m
 
vs = 2 ¥ 50 = 100 m/s or 180 km/s 
which means that traction speeds are easily achieved. It may be observed here that the motor may have even 
or odd number of poles. 
N
S
N
Secondary (sheet)
S
N
S
Primary
Air gap
Primary
a a c c b b a a c c b b a a c c b b
a a c c b b a a c c b b a a c c b b
Ia = 0.5:
Ib = 0:
Ic = –0.5
(a)
Vehicle-mounted
double primary
Track
secondary
(b) Traction type LIM
Fig. 9.78

690 Electric Machines
Secondary Resistance and F-v Characteristic
In Fig. 9.79(a) and (b) illustrate the secondary current paths over one pole pitch of normal induction motor 
and LIM. Forward thrust is produced by the vertical current paths (ﬂux is into plane of paper) while the 
horizontal paths produce side thrust; being in opposite direction for top and bottom parts of secondary these 
cancel out. It is easily observed that the total length of torque producing paths is much more in a normal 
IM than in LIM (these are more like eddy currents unlike guided paths as provided by end rings in normal 
IM). As a consequence much energy is dissipated as resistive loss without production of corresponding 
mechanical power. LIM therefore has a much higher rotor resistance, operates at high slip at given thrust and 
has correspondingly low efﬁciency. The F-v characteristic is presented in Fig. 9.80 where high resistance 
secondary effect is easily seen.
 
b
End ring
Rotor
(a) Normal IM
b
Secondary
(b) LIM
 
n
ns
0
Thrust ( )
F
 
Fig. 9.79 Secondary current distribution 
Fig. 9.80 
F-v characteristics
Equivalent Circuit
LIM distinguishes from normal IM in terms of:
 gap (see Fig. 9.76(a)).
or resistance. 
The equivalent circuit of normal IM of Fig. 9.7 applies with the following remarks: 
 
much of the current does not link the whole of the air -gap ﬂux. 
Magnetic Levitation Motor 
In this motor, the rotor is suspended in the magnetic ﬁeld and the gravitational force is overcome by 
electromagnetic force. The rotor will ﬂoat over a guideway using the basic principles of magnets. The three 
main components of the system are: 
 
1. large electrical power source 
 
2. metal coils lining a guide way or track 
 
3. large guidance magnets attached to the underside of the train 
Here, the electric current supplied to the coils in the guideway walls is constantly alternating to change the 
polarity of the magnetized coils so that the magnetic ﬁeld in front of the rotor is to pull forward, while the 
magnetic ﬁeld behind the rotor adds more forward force. The guidance magnets embedded in the rotor body 

Induction Machine 691
keep it stable during run. Once the rotor is levitated, power is supplied to the coils within the guide way walls 
to create a unique system of magnetic ﬁelds that pull and push the rotor along the guideway.
 
 Induction motors are of two types : 
 
 Squirrel-cage Induction Motor – Copper/aluminum bars in rotor slots shorted by end rings. Aluminum 
is commonly used being of low cost.
 
 Wound-rotor or slip-ring Induction Motor  The rotor has 3-phase windings with connections brought 
out through three slip-rings, the winding is shorted externally, also external resistances can be included 
at the time of starting; expensive, used only where high-starting torque is must. 
 
 Results and statements made here are on per phase basis, powers – active and reactive on 3-phase 
basis. Winding connection will be assumed star (or equivalent star) except where speciﬁed otherwise. 
 
 Stator resistance and leakage reactance ignored 
 
  
V1 ª E1 = 
2 p Kw1Nph1(series) f Fr V 
 
 f = stator frequency (frequency of V1), Fr = resultant air-gap ﬂux 
 
 Exciting current 
 
  
I0  = I
I
m
i
+
 
  
Im = magnetizing current; 90° lagging
 
  
Ii = core loss current; in-phase 
 
 Magnitude-wise 
1m >> Ii 
 
 PF of I0 is very low, phase angle slightly less than 90° 
 
 Rotor standstill emf E2, frequency f 
 
  
E
E
1
2
 = a (ratio of effective turns)
 
 At speed n (slip, s) 
 
  
Rotor induced emf = sE2
 
  
Rotor frequency f2 = sf 
 
  
¢I
I
2
2
 = 1
a ; I¢2 stator current to counter I2 
 
 The net stator current 
 
  
I1  = I
I
0
2
+ ¢  = I
a I
0
2
1
+ Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
 I0 is almost 40% of I1 (full-load) 
 
 Power Factor Because of large I0 with phase angle slightly less than 90°, the pf of the line current is of 
the order of 0.8 to 0.85. At light load, I¢2 reduces and so does the power factor. Therefore, the induction 
motor should not be run at light load for a long period of time. 
 
 Rotor standstill reactance = X2 

692 Electric Machines
 
 Rotor circuit impedance 
 
  
Z2  = R2 + jsX2 
 
 Power across air-gap 
 
  
PG = Gross mechanical power output + rotor copper loss
 
  
 = Pm + 3I2
2 R2 
 
 Rotor resistance equivalent of mechanical power output 
 
  
 1
1
2
s
R
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
 which means 
Pm
3  = 1
1
2
2
2
s
I R
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
, Note I¢2
2R¢2 = I2
2R2
 
  
PG = 3
2
2
2
¢I
R
s
 = 3
2
2
2
I R
s
 
  
Pm = (1 – s) PG 
 
  
T = PG
s
w , ws = synchronous speed in rad (mech)/s
 
 PG is known as torque in synchronous watts 
 
 T = 3
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
ws
V
R s
R s
X
◊
¢
(
)
¢
(
) +
¢
/
/
 = 3
1
2
2
2
2
2
ws
s
V a
R s
R s
X
◊
(
)
(
) +
(
/ )
/
/
 
 Stator impedance ignored
 
 Torque-slip characteristic; see Fig. 9.14 
 
 Motoring  
0 £ s £ 1
 
 Generating 
s < 0
 
 Breaking 
 s > 1 
 
  
Tmax = Tbreakdown (TBD) 
 
 For T > TBD ; motor stalls
 
 Resistance added in rotor circuit – slip-ring induction motor only. TBD no change, slip at given torque 
increase, motor speed reduces, T(start) increases, I(start) reduces
 
 At Tmax 
 
  
R2 = smaxT X2
 
  
Tmax = TBD = 3
2
1
2
2
ws
V
X ¢
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  = 3
2
1
2
2
ws
V a
X
(
/ )
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
 Stator impedance ignored 
 
 Starting – stator impedance ignored
 
  
I2 (start) = 
V
R
X
1
2
2
2
12
¢ +
¢
 = 
V a
R
X
1
2
2
2
2
/
+

Induction Machine 693
 
  
T(start) = 3
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
ws
V
R
R
X
+
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
 = 
3
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
ws
V a
R
R
X
(
/ )
+
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
 
 Determination of circuit model parameters
 
 Quantities measured in test: voltage, current and power 
 
 No-load test 
 
  
Conducted at rated voltage 
 
  
Determines
 
  
Some of core loss and windage and friction loss, Xm ,Riwf 
 
 Blocked rotor test 
 
  
Conducted at reduced voltage, full-load current 
 
  
Determines 
 
  
Full-load copper loss 
 
  
R = R1 + R¢2, X = X1 + X¢2
 
  
(R¢2 = a2R2, X¢2 = a2X2) 
 
 Important Note In the computation of performance based the circuit model as determined by the 
above two tests, the windage and friction loss is accounted for in Riwf. Therefore the mechanical power 
output Pm = 3 1
1
2
2
2
s
I R
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 is the net mechanical power output called the shaft power. 
 
 Methods of starting 
 
 Squirrel-cage motor DOL (direct-on-line) starting not permitted for motors 5 kW and above, as the 
motor current is 5 to 6 times full-load current; the power supply companies do not allow such heavy 
short-time currents to be drawn. 
 
- Reduced voltage start
 
- Series resistance starting – can be used for fractional – kW motors only 
 
- Star/delta starting 
 
  
Start in star, run in delta 
 
  
Starting current and torque both reduce by a factor of 1/3. 
 
- Auto transformer starting
 
  
Expensive, used for very large motor 
 
  
Both starting current and torque reduce by a factor of x2, x = voltage reduction factor 
 
 Speed control – slip control, frequency control
 
- slip control Reduced voltages for very small motors, inefﬁcient
 
  Rotor resistance control for slip-ring induction motor, reduce efﬁciency drastically. Not suitable
 
- frequency control In varying frequency (V/f ) must be maintained constant for constant air-gap 
ﬂux
 
  Requires expensive full rated thyristor convertor/inverter equipment

694 Electric Machines
 9.1 A 4-pole wound-rotor induction motor is 
used as a frequency changer. The stator is 
connected to a 50 Hz, 3-phase supply. The 
load is connected to the rotor slip rings. 
What are the possible speeds at which the 
rotor can supply power to this load at 25 Hz? 
What would be the ratio of voltages at load 
terminals at these speeds? Assume the stator 
and rotor impedances to be negligible. 
 9.2 A 6-pole, 50 Hz, 3-phase induction motor 
running on full-load develops a useful torque 
of 160 Nm and the rotor emf is observed 
to make 120 cycles/min. Calcu late the net 
mechanical power developed. If the torque 
loss in windage and friction is 12 Nm, ﬁnd 
the copper-loss in rotor windings, the input to 
the motor and efﬁciency. Given: stator losses 
800 W (inclusive of windage and friction loss). 
 9.3 A 12-pole, 3-phase, 50 Hz, delta-connected 
induction motor draws 280 A and 110 kW 
under blocked-rotor test at rated voltage and 
frequency. Find the starting torque when 
switched on direct to the supply. Assume 
the stator and rotor copper losses to be equal 
under the blocked-rotor test. What would be 
the starting torque if the motor is started by 
connecting the phase windings in star. (Try 
this part after studying Sec. 9.8). 
 9.4 A 3.3 kV, 20-pole, 50 Hz, 3-phase, star-
connected induction motor has a slip-ring 
rotor of resistance 0.025 W and standstill 
reactance of 0.28 W per phase. The motor has 
a speed of 294 rpm when full-load torque is 
applied. Compute (a) slip at maximum torque, 
and (b) the ratio of maximum to full-load 
torque. Neglect stator impedance. 
 9.5 An 8-pole, 3-phase, 50 Hz induction motor is 
running at a speed of 710 rpm with an input 
power of 35 kW. The stator copper-loss at this 
operating condition is known to be 1200 W 
while the rotational losses are 600 W. Find 
(a) the rotor copper-loss, (b) the gross torque 
developed, (c) the gross mechanical power de-
veloped, and (d) the net torque and mechanical 
power output. 
 9.6 A 7.5 kW, 440 V, 3-phase, star-connected, 
50 Hz, 4-pole squirrel-cage induction motor 
develops full-load torque at a slip of 5% 
when operated at rated voltage and frequency. 
Rotational losses (core, windage and friction) 
are to be neglected. Motor impedance data are 
as follows: 
 
  
R1 = 1.32 W 
 
  
X1 = X¢2 = 1.46 W
 
  
Xm = 22.7 W 
 
 Determine the maximum motor torque at 
rated voltage and the slip at which it will 
occur. Also calculate the starting torque. 
 9.7 The motor of  Prob. 9.6 is fed through a feeder 
from 440 V, 50 Hz mains. The feeder has 
impedance of (1.8 + j 1.2) W/phase. Find the 
maximum torque that the motor can deliver 
and the corresponding slip, stator current and 
terminal voltage.
 9.8 A 400 V, 3-phase, stator-connected induction 
motor gave the following test re sults: 
 
 No-load  
400 V  
8.5 A  
1100 W
 
 Blocked-rotor  
180 V  
45 A  
5700 W
 
  Determine the ohmic values of the compo-
nents in the circuit model and calculate the 
line current and power factor when the motor 
is operating at 5% slip. The stator resistance 
per phase is 0.5 W and the standstill leakage 
reactance of the rotor winding referred to the 
stator is equal to that of the stator winding. 
 9.9 A 15 kW, 415 V, 4-pole, 50 Hz delta connected 
motor gave the following results on test 
(voltages and currents are in line values)
 
 No-load test 
415 V 
10.5 A 1510 W
 
 Blocked-rotor test 105 V 
28 A 
2040 W 
 
 Using the approximate circuit model, deter-
mine 
 

Induction Machine 695
 
(a) the line current and power factor for rated 
output,
 
(b) the maximum torque, and 
 
(c) the starting torque and line current if 
the motor is started with the stator star-
connected. 
 
 Assume that the stator and rotor copper losses 
are equal at standstill. 
 
 Hint: Part (a) is best attempted by means of 
a circle diagram. For proceeding computa-
tionally from the circuit model, the complete 
output-slip curve has to be computed and then 
the slip for the rated output read. 
 9.10 A 400 V, 3-phase, 6-pole, 50 Hz induction 
motor gave the following test results: 
 
 No-load 
400 V, 8 A, 
0.16 power factor
 
 Blocked-rotor 
200 V, 39 A, 0.36 power factor 
 
 Determine the mechanical output, torque and 
slip when the motor draws a current of 30 A 
from the mains. Assume the stator and rotor 
copper losses to be equal.
 9.11 A 4-pole, 3-phase, 400 V, 50 Hz induction 
motor has the following parameters of its 
circuit model (referred to the stator side on an 
equivalent-star basis): 
 
  
R1 = 1.2 W; 
X1 = 1.16 W
 
  
R¢2 = 0.4 W; 
X ¢2 = 1.16 W
 
  
Xm = 35 W
 
 Rotational losses are 800 W. 
 
(a) For a speed of 1440 rpm, calculate the 
input current, power factor, net mechanical 
power output, torque and efﬁciency, 
 
(b) Calculate the maximum torque and the 
slip at which it occurs. 
 9.12 A 3-phase, 3.3 kV, 50 Hz, 10-pole, star-
connected induction motor has a no-load 
magnetizing current of 45 A and a core-loss 
of 35 kW. The stator and referred rotor 
standstill leakage impedances are respectively 
(0.2 + j 1.8) and (0.45 + j 1.8) W/phase. 
The motor is supplied from 3.3-kV mains 
through a line of reac tance 0.5 W/phase. Use 
approximate circuit model. 
 
(a) The motor is running at 0.03 slip. Estimate 
the gross torque, stator current and power 
factor. Assume voltage at motor terminals 
to be 3.3 kV. 
 
(b) Calculate the starting torque and current 
when the motor is switched on direct to 
line with voltage at far end of the line 
being 3.3 kV. 
 9.13 A 6-pole, 440 V, 3-phase, 50 Hz induction 
motor has the following parameters of its 
circuit model (referred to the stator on an 
equivalent-star basis). 
 
 R1 = 0.0 W (stator copper-loss negligible);
 
 X1 = 0.7 W
 
 R¢2 = 0.3 W; X¢2 = 0.7W 
 
 Xm = 35 W 
 
 Rotational loss = 750 W 
 
 Calculate the net mechanical power output, 
stator current and power factor when the 
motor runs at a speed of 950 rpm. 
 9.14 A 75 kW, 440 V, 3-phase, 6-pole, 50 Hz, 
wound-rotor induction motor has a full- load 
slip of 0.04 and the slip at maximum torque 
of 0.2 when operating at rated voltage and 
frequency with rotor winding short-circuited 
at the slip-rings. As sume the stator resistance 
and rotational losses to be negligible. Find: 
 
(a) maximum torque, 
 
(b) starting torque, and 
 
(c) full-load rotor copper-loss.
 
 The rotor resistance is now doubled by 
adding an external series resistance. 
Determine: 
 
(d) slip at full-load, 
 
(e) full-load torque, and 
 
(f ) slip at maximum torque. 
 9.15 A 3-phase induction motor has a 4-pole, 
star-connected stator winding and runs on 
50 Hz with 400 V between lines. The rotor 
resistance and standstill reactance per phase 

696 Electric Machines
are 0.4 W and 3.6 W respectively. The effective 
ratio of rotor to stator turns is 0.67. Calculate 
(a) the gross torque at 4% slip; (b) the gross 
mechanical power at 4% slip; (c) maximum 
torque, (d) speed at maximum torque; and 
(e) maximum mechanical power output 
(gross). Neglect stator impedance. 
 9.16 A 30 kW, 440 V, 50 Hz, 3-phase, 10-pole, 
delta-connected 
squirrel-cage 
induc tion 
motor has the following parameters referred 
to a stator phase:
 
  
R1 = 0.54 W 
R¢2 = 0.81 W
 
  
X1 + X¢2 = 6.48 W
 
  
R1 = 414 W 
Xm = 48.6 W 
 
 Calculate the machine performance (input 
current, power factor, mechanical out put 
(gross), torque developed (gross)) for the 
following conditions: 
 
(a) as a motor at a slip of 0.025, 
 
(b) as a generator at a slip of – 0.025, and 
 
(c) as a brake at a slip of 2.0. 
 9.17 The following test results were obtained on a 
7.5 kW, 400 V, 4-pole, 50 Hz, delta-connected 
induction motor with a stator resistance of 
2.1 W/phase: 
 
 No-load 
400 V, 
5.5 A, 
410 W 
 
 Rotor blocked  140 V, 
20 A, 
1550 W 
 
 Estimate the braking torque developed when 
the motor, running with a slip of 0.05, has two 
of its supply terminals suddenly interchanged. 
 9.18 A 3-phase, wound-rotor induction motor has 
a star-connected rotor winding with a rotor 
resistance of 0.12 W/phase. With the slip-rings 
shorted, the motor devel ops a rated torque at 
a slip of 0.04 and a line current of 100 A. 
What external resistance must be inserted in 
each rotor phase to limit the starting current to 
100 A? What pu torque will be developed with 
rotor-resistance starting? 
 9.19 In Prob. 9.18 what external resistance must be 
inserted per rotor phase to develop full-load 
torque at three-fourths the synchronous speed 
with a line current of 100 A? 
 9.20 A 4-pole, 50 Hz, 3-phase induction motor 
has a rotor resistance of 4.5 W/phase and a 
standstill reactance of 8.5 W/phase. With no 
external resistance in the rotor circuit, the 
starting torque of the motor is 85 Nm. 
 
(a) What is the rotor voltage at standstill? 
 
(b) What would be the starting torque if 3 W 
resistance were added in each rotor phase?
 
(c) Neglecting stator voltage drop, what 
would be the induced rotor voltage and the 
torque at a slip of 0.03?
 9.21 Calculate the ratio of transformation of an 
autotransformer starter for a 25 kW, 400 V, 
3-phase induction motor if the starting torque 
is to be 75% of full-load torque. Assume the 
slip at full-load to be 3.5% and short-circuit 
current to be six times full-load current. 
Ignore magnetizing current of the transformer 
and of the motor.
 9.22 With reference to the circuit model of Fig. 9.13 
(as reduced by Thevenin theorem) show that 
 
  
T
Tmax
 = 
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
2
K
K
s
s
s
s
T
T
+
+
+
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
max,
max,
 
 where K = X
X
R
1
2
1
+
¢
 9.23 A 3-phase, 50 Hz, 75 kW induction motor 
develops its rated power at a rotor slip of 2%. 
The maximum torque is 250% of rated torque 
(i.e., the torque developed at rated power). The 
motor has a K-ratio (deﬁned in Prob. 9.22) of 
K = 4.33. Find
 
(a) slip (smax, T) at maximum torque, 
 
(b) rotor current referred to stator at maximum 
torque,
 
(c) starting torque, and 
 
(d) starting current. 
 
 The answers to parts (b), (c) and (d) should 

Induction Machine 697
be expressed in terms of current and torque at 
full-load speed. 
  9.24 A 3-phase induction motor is wound for P 
poles. If the modulation poles are PM’ obtain 
the general condition to suppress P2 = (P + PM) 
poles. Under this condition show that the angle 
between the phase axes for P1 = (P – PM) poles 
is 2r (2p/3), where r = integer non-multiple 
of 3. 
 
 If P = 10, ﬁnd PM and P1.
 9.25 The two cages of a 3-phase, 50-Hz, 4-pole, 
delta-connected 
induction 
motor 
have 
respective standstill leakage impedances of  
(2 + j8) and (9 + j2) W/phase. Esti mate the 
gross-torque developed 
 
(a) at standstill, the effective rotor voltage 
being 230 V/phase, and 
 
(b) at 1450 rpm when the effective rotor 
voltage is 400 V/phase. What is the 
gross starting torque if a star-delta starter 
is used? Rotor quantities given are all 
referred to the stator; the stator impedance 
is negligible. 
 9.26 A 3-phase, 50 Hz, 4-pole, 400 V, wound rotor 
induction motor has a D-connected stator 
winding and Y-connected rotor winding. 
There are 80% as many rotor conductors as 
stator conductors. For a speed of 1425 rpm, 
calculate
 
(a) the slip, 
 
(b) the rotor induced emf between the two slip 
rings, and 
 
(c) the rotor frequency 
 9.27 A squirrel-cage induction motor is rated 
25 kW, 440 V, 3-phase, 50 Hz. On full-load 
it draws 28.7 kW with line current 50 A and 
runs at 720 rpm. Calculate 
 
(a) the slip, 
 
(b) the power factor, and 
 
(c) the efﬁciency.
 9.28 A 3-phase, 400 V, 6-pole, 50 Hz induction 
motor develops mechanical power of 20 kW 
at 985 rpm. Calculate: 
 
(a) the rotor copper loss, 
 
(b) the total input power, and 
 
(c) rotor frequency.
 
 The stator losses are equal to 1800 W. 
Neglect mechanical loss. 
 9.29 A 400 V, 5 kW, 50 Hz induction motor runs 
at 1445 rpm at full-load. The rotational losses 
are 285 W. If the maximum torque occurs at 
900 rpm. calculate its value.
 9.30 The rotor of a 6-pole, 50 Hz slip ring 
induction motor has a resistance of 0.25 W/
phase and runs at 960 rpm. Calculate the 
external resistance/phase to be added to lower 
the speed to 800 rpm with load torque redcing 
to 3/4th of the previous value.
 9.31 For the motor of Prob P9.27 
 
(a) calculate the starting torque when rated 
voltage is applied to the stator. 
 
(b) calculate the slip at which the motor 
develops maximum torque and the value 
of this torque. 
 
(c) what is the output torque and power in  
part (b)? 
 9.32 A 5 kW, 400 V, 50 Hz, 4-pole induction motor 
gave the following lest data:
 
 No-load test:
 
 V0 = 400 V, P0 = 350 W, I0 = 3.1 A
 
 Blocked rotor test:
 
 VSC = 52 V, PSC = 440 W, ISC = 7.6 A, 24 V,
 
 dc when applied between the two stator 
terminals causes a current of 7.6 A to ﬂow. 
 
 Calculate the motor efﬁciency at rated voltage 
at a slip of 4%.
 9.33 A 3-phase, 20 kW, 600 V, 50 Hz, 6-pole, 
Y-connected squirrel-cage induction motor 
has the following parameters/phase referred 
to the stator:
 
  
R1 = 0.937 W 
R¢2 = 0.7 W
 
  X (equivalent) = 3.42 W 
 
  
Xm = 72.9 W
 
 The rotational and core losses equal 545 W. 

698 Electric Machines
For a slip of 3.5% ﬁnd:
 
(a) the line current and power factor
 
(b) the mechanical output and shaft torque
 
(c) the efﬁciency.
 9.34 A 7.5 kW, 400 V, 4-pole induction motor gave 
the following test results:
 
 No-load test
 
 V0 = 400 V P0 = 330 W I0 = 3.52 A
 
 Blocked-rotor test
 
 VSC = 110 V PSC = 615 W ISC = 13 A
 
 The effective ac resistance between the stator 
terminals is 2.2 W and the full-load slip is 4%. 
Determine: 
 
(a) the parameters of the per phase circuit 
model.
 
(b) the stator current and its pf when the motor 
is delivering full-load.
 
(c) the efﬁciency in part (b).
 9.35 A 30 kW, 440 V squirrel-cage induction motor 
has a starting torque of 182 Nm and a full-load 
torque of 135 Nm. The starting current of the 
motor is 207 A when rated voltage is applied. 
Determine: 
 
(a) the starting torque when the line voltage is 
reduced to 254 V.
 
(b) the voltage that must be applied for the 
motor to develop a starting torque equal to 
the full- load torque. 
 
(c) the starting current in parts (a) and (b).
 
(d) the starting voltage to limit the starting 
current to 40 A, and the corresponding 
starting torque.
 9.36 A 400 V, 4-pole, 7.5 kW, 50 Hz, 3-phase 
induction 
motor 
develops 
its 
full-load 
torque at a slip of 4%. The per phase circuit 
parameters of the machine are 
 
  
R1 = 1.08 W 
R¢2 = ?
 
  
X1 = 1.41 W 
x¢2 = 1.41 W
 
 Mechanical, core and stray losses may be 
neglected.
 
(a) Find the rotor resistance (as referred to 
stator) 
 
(b) Find the maximum torque, slip at 
maximum torque and the corresponding 
rotor speed.
 9.37 A 3-phase, 440 V, 4-pole 50 Hz induction 
motor has a star-connected stator and rotor. 
The rotor resistance and standstill reactance/
phase are 0.22 W and 1.2 W respectively; the 
stator to rotor turn ratio being 1.3. The full-
load slip is 4%. Calculate the full-load torque 
and power developed. Find also the maximum 
torque and the corresponding speed.
 9.38 A 3-phase, 3.3 kV, 6-pole wound rotor 
induction motor has the following test data: 
 
 No-load test 
3.3 kV 18.5 A 15.1 kW 
 
 Blocked-rotor test  730 V 
61 A 
3.5 kW 
 
 The resistance of the stator winding is 1.6 W 
and the rotational loss is 6.2 kW. Calculate 
the circuit model parameters (rotational loss 
not to be accounted in Ri core loss resistance). 
Assume X1/X¢2 = R1/R¢2 Calculate 
 
(a) the slip at maximum developed torque 
 
(b) the maximum developed torque and the 
corresponding shaft torque 
 
(c) the starting torque at half the rated voltage 
 
 Note Do not approximate the circuit model.
 9.39 A 6-pole, 50 Hz induction motor has a rotor 
resistance of 0.25 W and a maximum torque of 
180 Nm while it runs at 860 rpm. Calculate: 
 
(a) the torque at 4.5% slip 
 
(b) the resistance to be added to the rotor 
circuit to obtain the maximum torque at 
starting. 
 9.40 At rated voltage the blocked rotor current of 
an induction motor is ﬁve times its full-load 
current and full-load slip is 4%. Estimate its 
starting torque as a percentage of full-load 
torque when it is started by means of (a) a star-
delta starter, and (b) by an autotransformer 
with 50% tapping.
 9.41 A squirrel-cage induction motor has a full-
load slip of 4% and a blocked-rotor current 
of six times the full-load current. Find the 
percentage of tapping of the autotransformer 

Induction Machine 699
starter to give full-load torque on starting and 
the line current as a percentage of full-load 
current.
 9.42 A 440 V, 22 kW, 50 Hz, 8-pole induction 
motor has its rotor and stator winding star-
connected. The effective stator to rotor turn 
ratio is 2.5/1. The parameters of its circuit 
model are
 
  
R1 = 0.4 W 
R2 = 0.07 W
 
  
X1 = 1.03 W 
X2 = 0.18 W
 
  
Ri = 127.4 W 
Xm = 25.9 W 
 
 Turn ratio, a = 2.4
 
 (includes rotational loss)
 
 Neglecting any change in mechanical losses 
due to changes in speed, calculate the added 
rotor resistance required for the motor to run 
up to the speed 675 rpm for a constant load 
torque of 300 Nm. At what speed would the 
motor run if the added rotor resistance is: 
 
(a) left in the circuit 
 
(b) subsequently shorted out. Also compare 
the motor efﬁciency under these two 
conditions.
 9.43 A 40 kW. 400 V, 3-phase, 6-pole. 50 Hz wound 
rotor induction motor develops a maximum 
torque of 2.75 times full-load torque at a slip 
of 0.18 when operating at rated voltage and 
frequency with slip rings short-circuited. 
Stator resistance and rotational losses may be 
ignored. Determine: 
 
(a) the full-load slip. 
 
(b) the full-load rotor copper loss. 
 
(c) the starting torque at half the rated voltage. 
 
 The rotor circuit resistance is now doubled 
by adding an external resistance through 
the slip rings. Determine: 
 
(d) the developed torque at full-load current. 
 
(e) the slip in part (d).
 9.44 Determine the slip at maximum torque and 
ratio of maximum to full load torque for a  
3 phase star connected 6.6 kV, 20 pole, 50 Hz 
induction motor has rotor resistance of 0.12 W 
and standstill reactance of 1.12 W. The motor 
speed at full load is 292.5 rpm.
 9.45 Compute the full load copper losses per phase 
and total mechanical power developed for 
the following speciﬁcations: 3 phase, 50 kW 
induction motor operating at 3% slip. Assume 
the stator losses are neglected.
 9.46 A 3 phase, 5 hp (3.7 kW), 50 Hz, 4 pole star 
connected induction motor has the following 
test results:
 
 No load 
200 V 
350 W 
5 A
 
 Short circuit 
100 V 
1700 W 
26 A
 
 Draw the circle diagram for full load 
condition, the line current, power factor and 
maximum torque in terms of full load torque. 
Rotor copper loss at standstill is half the total 
copper loss.
 
 
1. Give a brief account of squirrel-cage 
induction motor. Explain qualitatively as to 
how it develops torque and the nature of its 
torque-slip characteristic. Why is it called 
asynchronous motor? 
 
2. What is the effective turn-ratio of an induction 
motor? 
 
3. What is standstill rotor emf and what is its 
frequency? How does the emf magnitude and 
frequency vary with speed? 
 
4. Explain what is meant by standstill reactance 
of induction motor rotor. How does it vary 
with speed? 
 
5. The stator of a slip-ring induction motor with 
slip-ring terminals open-circuited has a stator 
excited from 3-phase source. The rotor is run 
by a prime mover. What will be the frequency 
of rotor induced emf at the following speeds? 
 
(a) Half synchronous speed in the same 
direction as the air-gap ﬁeld (AGF)

700 Electric Machines
 
(b) Half synchronous speed in opposite to 
AGF 
 
(c) At 
synchronous 
speed 
in 
opposite 
direction to AGF 
 
6. What is meant by the excitation current of an 
induction motor? Draw its phasor diagram 
with applied voltages as the reference phasor 
showing its components. Which is the larger 
component and why? 
 
7. What is the difference between excitation 
current and no-load current? 
 
8. Draw the phasor diagram of an induction 
motor showing applied voltage, magnetizing, 
coreloss, load current and the line current. 
Label each component. 
 
9. Write the expression for the resistance in the 
circuit model, the loss in which is equivalent 
to the mechanical power developed. 
 10. What is meant by the torque in synchronous 
watts? Write its expression in terms of circuit 
model quantities. Therefrom ﬁnd the torque 
developed.
 11. Show that the maximum torque occurs at a 
slip s = X
R
2
2
 and further show that Tmax is 
independent of s. 
 12. Draw the T – s characteristic of an induction 
motor. Indicate the region where the 
characteristic is nearly linear. 
 13. Show that the motor can operate stably at 
smax,T. Use perturbation technique. 
 14. Neglect the stator impedance and show that 
the maximum power output (developed 
power) occurs at slip s = 
R
R
X
X
2
2
2
2
2
2
+
+
 
 Hint: In the circuit model of Fig. 9.13 use 
maximum power transfer theorem. The 
magnitude of ﬁxed impedance should match 
1
1
2
s
R
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
.
 15. Show that at super-synchronous speed the 
induction machine acts as a generator. Write 
the expression for PG in which direction does 
it ﬂow? How to ﬁnd the net mechanical power 
input and net electrical power output. 
 16. Neglecting stator impedance derive the 
expression for the starting torque of an 
induction motor. Show that it increases with 
rotor resistance. At what resistance value it 
reaches the maximum. Resistance added to 
the rotor of a slip-ring induction motor.
 17. Show that in star/delta starting of squirrel-
cage induction motor the starting current and 
torque are reduced by a factor of 1/3 compared 
to DOL starting. 
 18. Elaborate the statement “rotor resistance 
starting of slip-ring induction motor reduces 
starting current and increases starting torque”. 
 19. The power input on no-load running of 
induction motor is consumed in what losses? 
 20. The power input in blocked rotor test at 
reduced voltage, rated current is consumed in 
what losses. 
 21. No-load test determines what parameters of 
the circuit model of induction motor. 
 22. Blocked-rotor test determines which param-
eters of the circuit model of induction motor?
 23. Why is DOL starting current very high but 
the starting torque is still low? Why DOL is 
not permitted in starting even though the short 
duration current cannot harm the motor? 
 24. What methods are used in starting squirrel-
cage induction motor? Which method is used 
in what size of motor? Which is the most 
common method and what is its superiority? 
 25. Compare the speed control features of 
induction motor with dc shunt motor. 
 26. From no-load to full-load, what is the type 
speed-load characteristic of induction motor? 
 27. Compare and contrast the squirrel-cage and 
slip-ring induction motors. 
 28. Upon reducing the load on an induction motor, 
why does its pf come down? 

Induction Machine 701
 9.1 In an induction motor the stator mmf 
comprises:
 
(a) mmf equal to rotor mmf
 
(b) mmf required to cancel rotor mmf 
 
(c) vector sum of magnetizing mmf and 
component to cancel rotor mmf vector
 
(d) magnetizing mmf only
 9.2 Rotor impedance seen from the stator is (usual 
symbols are used):
 
(a) R¢2 + j s X¢2  
(b) R2 + j sX2
 
(c) R2/s + j X2  
(d) R¢2/s + j X¢2
 9.3 At low slip the torque-slip characteristic is
 
(a) T μ 1
2
s
 
(b) T μ s2
 
(c) T μ 1
s
 
(d) T μ s
 9.4 For maximum starting torque in an induction 
motor
 
(a) R2 = 0.5X2  
(b) R2 = X2
 
(c) R2 = 2X2  
(d) R2 = 0
 9.5 The starting current of an induction motor is 
ﬁve times the full load current while the full 
load slip is 4%. The ratio of starting torque to 
full load torque is
 
(a) 0.6 
(b) 0.8
 
(c) 1.0 
(d) 1.2
 9.6 In stator impedance starting of a squirrel-cage 
induction motor, the stator current is reduced 
by a factor x compared to direct on-line 
starting. The starting torque is reduced by the 
factor (compared to direct-on-line starting)
 
(a) x 
(b) x2
 
(c) 1/x  
(d) 1/x2
 9.7 For controlling the speed of an induction 
motor the frequency of supply is increased by 
10%. For magnetizing current to remain the 
same, the supply voltage must
 
(a) be reduced by 10% 
 
(b) remain constant
 
(c) be increased by 10% 
 
(d) be reduced or increased by 20%
 9.8 The speed of an induction motor is controlled 
by varying supply frequency keeping V/f 
constant:
 
(a) Breakdown 
torque 
and 
magnetizing 
current would both remain constant.
 
(b) Breakdown torque would remain constant 
but magnetizing current would increase. 
 
(c) Breakdown 
torque 
would 
decrease 
but magnetizing current would remain 
constant. 
 
(d) Breakdown 
torque 
and 
magnetizing 
current would both decrease.
 9.9 The power input to an induction motor is 
40 kW when it is running at 5% slip. The sta-
tor resistance and core loss are assumed neg-
ligible. The torque developed in synchronous 
watts is
 
(a) 42 kW  
(b) 40 kW
 
(c) 38 kW  
(d) 2 kW
 9.10 A squirrel cage induction motor having a rated 
slip of 2% on full load has a starting torque of 
0.5 full load torque. The starting current is 
 
(a) equal to full load current
 
(b) twice full load current
 
(c) four times full load current
 
(d) ﬁve times full load current
 

702 Electric Machines
10.1 
INTRODUCTION
So far 3-phase ac motors which are used for high-power rating applications 
have been discussed. For reasons of economy, most homes, ofﬁces and also 
rural areas are supplied with single-phase ac, as the power requirements 
of individual load items are rather small. This has led to the availability 
of a wide variety of small-size motors of fractional kilowatt ratings. These motors are employed in fans, 
refrigerators, mixers, vacuum cleaners; washing machines, other kitchen equipment, tools, small farming 
appliances, etc. 
 Though these motors are simpler in construction as compared to their 3-phase counterparts, their analysis 
happens to be more complex and requires certain concepts which have not been developed so far. Also the 
design of such motors are carried out by trial and error till the desired prototype is achieved. Because of the 
vast numbers in which these motors are produced, even a fractional efﬁciency increase or a marginal cost 
saving is extremely important. Nowadays, as in other ﬁelds, computers are employed for more accurate 
and optimum paper designs. 
 In this chapter these motors will ﬁrst be discussed qualitatively and semi-quantitatively and then the more 
detailed quantitative treatment will be described, which is used for accurate design/analysis purposes 
Note: As in Chapter 9, phasor superbar will be used only for phasor equations. 
10
A single-phase induction motor comprises a single-phase distributed winding on the stator and normal 
squirrel-cage rotor as shown schematically in Fig. 10.1 wherein for convenience the stator winding is shown 
in concentrated form. There are two important methods of analyzing this motor, viz. cross-ﬁeld theory and 
rotating ﬁeld theory. As the latter is more akin to the 3-phase induction machine theory advanced earlier, it 
will be adopted here.
Figure 10.1 gives the schematic diagram of a single-phase induction motor with one stator winding and a 
squirrel-cage rotor. The winding is distributed in space so that the space fundamental of mmf is the most 
dominant component of the actual mmf distribution. The space harmonics of mmf, as in the case of a 
3-phase induction motor, would then be ignored. When the winding carries a sinusoidal current, it produces 

Fractional Kilowatt Motors 
703
a sinusoidally space-distributed mmf whose peak value pulsates with time. As seen from the axis of the 
winding, the mmf at any angle q is 
 
F = Fpeak cos q 
(10.1) 
where q is the angle measured from the winding axis. Now 
 
Fpeak = Fmax cos wt 
(10.2)
so that the mmf has both space and time distribution expressed as 
 
F = Fmax cos q cos wt 
(10.3) 
This equation can be trigonometrically manipulated into the form
 
F = 1
2 Fmax cos(q – wt) + 1
2 Fmax cos (q + wt) 
(10.4) 
Equation (10.4) tells us that a pulsating single-phase ﬁeld can be considered as superposition of two 
rotating ﬁelds rotating at synchronous speed (w = 2p f elect. rad/s) in opposite directions:
 
1
2 Fmax cos (q – wt);  the forward rotating ﬁeld, Ff 
 
1
2 Fmax cos (q + wt);  the backward rotating ﬁeld, Fb
Both these ﬁelds have an amplitude equal to (1/2) Fmax where Fmax 
is the maximum value of the pulsating mmf along the axis of the 
winding. The splitting of a single pulsating ﬁeld into two rotating 
ﬁelds rotating in opposite directions is illustrated in Fig. 10.2. This 
ﬁgure shows the location of the rotating ﬁelds at the time instant 
when the mmf along the winding axis is + Fmax. 
For the single-winding case illustrated in Fig. 10.1, Fig. 10.3 shows the forward and backward rotating ﬁelds 
along with the rotor which is rotating at speed n in the direction of the forward ﬁeld. The slip of the rotor with 
respect to the forward rotating ﬁeld Ff is then 
 
sf = n
n
n
s
s
-
 = s 
(10.5a) 
Rotor (squirrel-cage)
Axis of phase
winding
i = lmax cos wt
 Single-phase induction motor
F
F
f
max
= 1/2
w
w
F
F
b
max
= 1/2
Fmax
Winding axis

704 Electric Machines
while the rotor slip with respect to the backward rotating ﬁeld Fb is
 
sb = n
n
n
s
s
- -
(
)  = 2n
n
n
n
s
s
s
-
-
(
)
 
 = (2 – s) 
(10.5b) 
Thus the rotor slips with respect to the two rotating ﬁelds are different and are given by Eqs (10.5a) and 
(10.5b). 
Rotor
ns
ns
Fb = 1
2 Fmax
Ff = 1
2 Fmax
n
Qualitative Treatment Under stationary rotor condition (n = 0, i.e. s = 1), the two rotating ﬁelds slip past the 
rotor at the same slip, s = 1, (see Eqs (10.5a) and (10.5b)) inducing equal currents in the squirrel-cage rotor. 
The two rotating ﬁelds have the same strength and produce equal and opposite torques resulting in net starting 
torque of zero value. The single-winding single-phase induction motor is thus nonself-starting. Further, the 
two rotating ﬁelds induce a resultant emf in the stator which balances the applied voltage assuming low 
leakage impedance of the stator winding. 
If, however, the rotor is made to run at speed n in the direction of the forward ﬁeld, the two slips are now s 
and (2 – s). For normal operation (2 – s) >> s and as a consequence the backward ﬁeld induced rotor currents 
are much larger than at standstill and have a lower power factor. The corresponding opposing rotor mmf, in 
presence of the stator impedance, causes the backward ﬁeld to be greatly reduced in strength. On the other 
hand, the low-slip forward rotating ﬁeld induces smaller currents of a higher power factor in the rotor than at 
standstill. This leads to great enhancement in the forward ﬂux wave. This reduction in the backward ﬁeld and 
strengthening of the forward ﬁeld is slip-dependent and the difference increases as slip s (with respect to the 
forward ﬁeld) reduces or the rotor speed in the forward direction becomes close to the synchronous speed. 
Infact, at near about the synchronous speed, the forward ﬁeld strength may be several times the backward 
ﬁeld. As a result there is a net running torque. The two ﬁelds together must always induce the stator winding 
emf to balance the applied voltage. The complete torque-speed characteristics as the sum of the two (forward 
and backward) torque-speed characteristics is drawn in Fig. 10.4. The result of weakening of one ﬁeld and 
simultaneous strengthening of the other leads to a toque-speed characteristic like that of a 3-phase induction 
motor in the speed region close to synchronous. The fact of zero starting torque is immediately observed here.
The forward ﬁeld and the rotor’s backward reaction ﬁeld and also the backward ﬁeld and the rotor’s 
forward reaction ﬁeld move in opposite directions with relative speeds of 2ns producing second harmonic 
pulsating torques with zero average value. As a consequence a single-phase motor is a noisier motor than a 
3-phase one which has no such pulsating torque. The pulsating torque in fact is a direct consequence of the 

Fractional Kilowatt Motors 
705
pulsating power in a single-phase circuit (see Appendix I, Eq. (I-28). In fact in the torque-speed characteristic 
of a single-phase motor, the torque ordinate represents the average torque.
To develop the circuit model of a single-winding (referred to as the main winding), single-phase motor on 
semi-quantitative basis, heuristic arguments will be used. The motor with a stationary rotor merely acts like 
a transformer with a circuit model as shown in Fig. 10.5(a). the core-loss branch having been ignored. The 
sufﬁx m in the stator refers to the main winding and Em is the stator-induced emf set up by the alternating 
ﬁeld.
The motor is now viewed from the point of view of the rotating ﬁeld theory. The resultant induced emf is 
composed of two equal components induced by the two oppositely rotating ﬁelds of the same strength, i.e.
 
Em  = E
E
E
E
mf
mb
mf
mb
+
;
=
 
(10.6)
The magnetizing and rotor impedances are divided into two equal halves connected in series as shown in 
Fig. 10.5(b); the motor behaves like two series connected motors one corresponding to each rotating ﬁeld. 
The circuits of the two component motors are identical under stationary condition as the rotor has the same 
slip with respect to each rotating ﬁeld.
When the rotor is running at speed n with respect to the forward ﬁeld, the slip is s with respect to it and 
(2 – s) with respect to the backward rotating ﬁeld so that the circuit model now modiﬁes as in Fig. 10.5(c). 
It is easily seen from this ﬁgure that Zf /2 >> Zb/2 and so Emf >> Emb, i.e., the forward ﬁeld motor effect 
predominates, creating a running torque. 
Practical necessity dictates that the two rotating ﬁelds are made to have unequal strength under stationary 
conditions thereby making the motor self-starting. This requires one more winding on the motor called 
auxiliary winding which is in space quadrature with the main winding and comprises smaller number of 
turns of thinner wire. This winding may be cut out of circuit once the motor has started except in case of 
the capacitor-run motor where it may be left connected serving the purpose of improving the overall power 
factor. 
Speed
Torque
O
–ns
ns
Forward field torque
Backward field torque

706 Electric Machines
(a) Transformer equivalent of single-phase motor with rotor stationary
R2
X
Em
X2
X1m
R1m
Im
Vm
+
–
(b) Rotating field equivalent of single-phase motor with rotor stationary
R2/2
X/2
X2/2
–
X2/2
X1m
R1m
Im
Vm
+
Zb/2
Emb
R2/2
X/2
Zf /2
Emf
(c) Rotating field equivalent of single-phase motor under running condition
R2/2(2 – )
s
X/2
X2/2
–
X2/2
X1m
R1m
Im
Vm
+
Zb/2
Emb
R2/2s
X/2
Zf /2
Emf
The detailed quantitative analysis of a single phase motor (one or two stator windings) will follow in  
Sec. 10.4 for the interested reader. 
The performance of a single-phase induction motor can be obtained by analysis of the circuit model of the 
motor given in Fig. 10.5(c), as was done for the case of a 3- phase induction motor. The results are similar to 
those for a 3-phase induction motor because the circuit model is essentially the same. 
The air-gap powers for the forward and backward ﬁelds are given by 
 
Pgf = 1
2
2
I R
m
f  = Air-gap power for forward ﬁeld 
(10.7a) 
 
Pgb = 1
2
2
I R
m
b  = Air-gap power for backward ﬁeld 
(10.7b) 

Fractional Kilowatt Motors 
707
where Im is the main winding current and Rf and Rb are the real parts of the complex number impedances Z f  
and Zb  respectively in Fig. 10.5(c). 
The torques produced by the two ﬁelds can be expressed as 
 
Tf = 1
ws
gf
P
 
(10.8a)
 
Tb = 1
ws
gb
P
 
(10.8b)
where ws = synchronous speed in rad/s. 
Since the two ﬁelds are rotating in opposite directions the torque produced by the two oppose each other. 
The resultant torque developed is therefore 
 
T = Tf – Tb
or 
T = 1
ws
gf
gb
P
P
(
)
-
 = I
R
R
m
s
f
b
2
2w (
)
-
 
(10.9) 
The rotor copper losses are in general equal to slip times the air-gap power. Thus 
 
Rotor copper-loss corresponding to forward ﬁeld = sPgf 
 
Rotor copper-loss corresponding to backward ﬁeld = (2 – s) Pgb 
 
Total rotor copper-loss = sPgf + (2 – s) Pgb 
(10.10)
The electrical power converted to gross mechanical form is 
 
Pm = (1 – s)wsT 
or 
Pm = (1 – s) (Pgf – Pgb) 
(10.11)
Equation (10.11) can also be written as 
 
Pm = (1 – s) Pgf + [1 – (2 – s)]Pgb  
(10.12) 
This implies that the electrical power input to the motor neglecting the stator copper-loss is 
 
Pelect = Pgf + Pgb 
(10.13) 
 A 220-V, 6-pole, 50-Hz, single-winding single-phase induction motor has the following 
equivalent circuit parameters as referred to the stator. 
 
R1m = 3.0 W, 
X1m = 5.0 W
 
R2 = 1.5 W, 
X2 = 2.0 W
Neglect the magnetizing current. When the motor runs at 97% of the synchronous speed, compute the 
following: 
 (a) The ratio Emf /Emb 
 (b) The ratio Vf /Vb
 
 (c) The ratio Tf /Tb
 (d) The gross total torque. 
 (e) The ratios Tf /(Total torque) and Tb/(Total torque) 

708 Electric Machines
SOLUTION 
Slip = s = 1 – 0.97 = 0.03
 
(a) From Fig. 10.5(c), 
 
  
E
E
mf
mb
 = Z
Z
f
b
 = 
|
||
|
|
||
|
jX
R
s
jX
jX
R
s
jX
2
2
2
2
2
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
-
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
 Since magnetizing current is neglected, X = . 
 
 \ 
E
E
mf
mb
 = 
|
/
|
|
(
)
|
R s
jX
R
s
jX
2
2
2
2
2
+
-
+
 
  
 = 
| . / .
|
| . /(
.
)
|
1 5 0 03
2
1 5 2
0 03
2
+
-
+
j
j
 = 23.38
 
(b) Vf and Vb are components of stator voltage Vm, i.e
 
  
Vm  = V
V
f
b
+
 
 These components are deﬁned by redrawing the circuit model of Fig. 10.5(c) in the symmetrical form of Fig. 10.6.
X2/2
R2/2 (2 – s)
X/2
Emb
Zb/2
R1m/2
X1m/2
Vb
Vf
Vm
Emf
Zf /2
X/2
R1m/2
X1m/2
X2/2
R
s
2/2
Im
+
–
 
 
 For the purpose of this problem X = , therefore 
 
  
Impedance offered to Vf component = 1
2
3
1 5
0 03
5
2
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ +
+
È
Î
Í
˘
˚
˙
.
.
(
)
j
 
  
 = 1
2 53
7
(
)
+ j
 
  
Impedance offered to Vb component = 
1
2
3
1 5
1 97
5
2
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ +
+
È
Î
Í
˘
˚
˙
.
.
(
)
j
 
  
 = 1
2 (3.76 + j 7)
 
 Hence 
V
V
f
b
 = |
|
| .
|
53
7
3 76
7
+
+
j
j
 = 6.73

Fractional Kilowatt Motors 
709
 
(c) From Eqs (10.8a) and (10.8b)
 
  
T
T
f
b
 = P
P
gf
gb
 = 
1
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
I
R s
I
R
s
m
m
/
/(
)
-
 
  
 = 2 - s
s
 = 2
0 03
0 03
- .
.
 = 65.7
 
(d) Total impedance as seen from stator terminal is 
 
  
Z (
)
Total  = 1
2
53
7
[(
)
+ j
 + (3.76 + j7)] 
 
  
 = 28.38 + j 7 = 29.2 –13.9°
 
  
Im = 220
29 2.
 = 753 A
 
  
ns = 120
50
6
¥
 = 1000 rpm
 
  
ws = 2
1000
60
p ¥
 = 104.72 rad/s 
 
  
Tf = 1
2
2
2
ws
m
I
R
s  
(i) 
 
  
Tb = 1
2 2
2
2
ws
m
I
R
s
(
)
-
 
(ii)
 
  
Ttotal = Tf – Tb
 
  
Ttotal = I
R
s
s
m
s
2
2
2
1
1
2
w
-
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  
(iii)
 
  
 = ( .
)
.
.
.
.
7 53
1 5
2
104 72
1
0 03
1
1 97
2 ¥
¥
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
  
 = 13.31Nm 
 
(e) From Eqs (i), (ii) and (iii) 
 
  
T
T
f
total
 = 
1
1
1 2
/
/(
)
s
s
s
-
-
 = 
1
1
2
-
-
s
s
 = 1.015
 
  
T
T
b
total
 = 
1 2
1
1 2
/(
)
/
/(
)
-
-
-
s
s
s  = 
1
2
1
-
-
s
s
 = 0.015
 A test on the main winding of a 1 kW, 4-pole. 2 15 V, 50 Hz, single-phase induction motor 
gave the following results: 
 
No-load test 
Rotor-blocked test
 
V0 = 215 V 
VSC = 85 A
 
I0 = 3.9 A 
ISC = 9.80 A
 
P0 = 185 W 
PSC = 390 W 
 
R1 = 1.6 W

710 Electric Machines
Given:
 (a) Calculate the parameters of the circuit model assuming that the magnetizing reactance hangs at the 
input terminals of the model.
 (b) Determine the line current power factor, shaft torque and efﬁciency of the motor at a speed of 
1440 rpm. 
SOLUTION 
 
(a) Parameters of the circuit model are calculated using both no-load as well as rotor-blocked tests. 
 
(i) No-load test: Assuming the slip to be zero, the circuit model on no-load is drawn in Fig. 10.7 with 
magnetizing reactance at input terminals 
R2/4
(short circuit)
R1/2
(
+
)/2
X
X
1
2
X/2
R2/0 =
(open)
R1/2
(
+
)/2
X
X
1
2
X/2
V0
+
–
V0
 
 
 Since the backward circuit is short-circuited for practical purposes, as X being magnetizing reactance is much 
larger 
 
  
X
2  = 215
3 9.
 = 55.1 W
 
 Rotational loss 
P0 = 185 W 
 
(ii) Rotor-blocked test (s = 1): The circuit model on rotor-blocked test is shown in Fig. 10.8.
 
  
390 = 85 ¥ 9.8 ¥ cos fSC
 
 or 
fSC = 62° lagging
 
 With reference to Fig. 10.8 
 
  
Ie  = V
jX
SC  = 
85
2
55 1
j ¥
.  = – j 0.77 A
 
  
¢Im = I
I
SC
e
-
 
  
 = 9.8––62° – (– j0.77) 
 
  
 = 4.6 – j7.88 = 9.13 – – 59.7°
 
  
¢
Z f  = (R1 + R2) + j(X1 + X2)
 
  
V
I
SC
m¢
 = 
85
9 13
59 7
.
.
– -
∞ = 9.31–59.7°
 
  
 = 4.7 + j 8.04 
R2/2
l¢m
R1/2
(
+
)/2
X
X
1
2
le
Vsc
X
j
/2 = 55.1
X
j
/2 = 55.1
lsc
l¢m
R1/2
(
+
)/2
X
X
1
2
R2/2
le
+
–

Fractional Kilowatt Motors 
711
 
  
R1+ R2 = 4.7 W 
 
  
R1 = 1.6 W (given)
 
  
R2 = 3.1 W 
 
  
Xl + X2 = 8.04 W 
 
 The circuit model with parameter values is drawn in Fig. 10.9.
j 55.1
leb
lmb
0.8
4.02
1.55/(2 – )
s
lef
j 55.1
1.55/s
4.02
0.8
lmf
Vm
Vmf
Vmb
+
–
lm
 
 
(b)  
s = 1500
1440
1500
-
 = 0.04
 
  
1.55/s = 1 55
0 04
.
.
 = 38.75; 1.55/(2 – s) = 1 55
1 96
.
.
 = 0.79 
 
  
Z f (
)
total  = j55.1 || (0.8 + 38.75 + j4.02)
 
  
 = j55.1 || (39.55 + j4.02) = 30.8 –39.6°
 
  
 = 23.73 + j19.63
 
  
Zb (
)
total  = j55.1 || (0.8 + 0.79 + j4.02) 
 
  
 = j55.1 || (1.59 + j4.02) = 4.02 –70° = 1.37 + j3.78
 
  
Z (
)
total  = (23.73 + j19.63) + (1.37 + j3.78) 
 
  
 = 25.1 + j23.41 = 34.3 –43° 
 
  
Im  = 
215
34 3
43
. –
∞ = 6.27 – – 43° 
 
  
IL  = Im = 6.27 A; pf = cos 43° = 0.731
 
  
Pin = 215 ¥ 6.27 ¥ 0.731 = 985.4 W 
 
  
Imf  = 6.27–– 43° ¥ 
j
j
55 1
39 55
59 12
.
.
.
+
 
  
 = 4.86 – – 9.2° 
 
  
Imb = 6.27 – – 43° ¥ 
j
j
55 1
1 59
59 12
.
.
.
+
 
  
 = 5.84 – – 41.4°
 
  
T = 
1
157 1. [(4.84)2 ¥ 38.75 – (5.84)2 ¥ 0.79]
 
  
 = 5.6 Nm 

712 Electric Machines
 
  
Pm = 157.1 (l – 0.04) ¥ 5.6 = 844.6 W
 
  
Rotational loss = 185 W 
 
  
Pout = 844.6 – 185 = 659.6 W 
 
  
h = 659 6
985 5
.
.
 = 66.9%
 
  
T(shaft) = 659.6/157.1 = 4.12 Nm 
To understand the ﬁeld phenomenon that contributes towards the generation of starting torque in a single-
phase motor, it greatly helps to ﬁrst study a balanced 2-phase motor. Figure 10.10 shows a 2-winding squirrel-
cage motor whose stator winding axes are in relative space phase of 90° elect. The two windings are excited 
with currents which have a time-phase relationship of 90° elect. 
 
Fm = NmIm = NaIa = Fa  
(10.14) 
where 
Im = rms value of main winding current 
 
Ia = rms value of auxiliary winding current 
Squirrel-cage
rotor
Main winding axis
Fm
Nm
im
la
Na
Fa
Auxiliary winding axis
n
 Two-winding single-phase motor 
In terms of the phasor relationship
 
Fm  = F ; 
Fa  = - jF (lagging, say) 
(10.15)
These windings therefore create two pulsating ﬁelds which are directed along their respective axes at 
90° elect. to each other in space. The maximum value of peak ﬁeld AT for each ﬁeld is Fmax = 
2 F. 
Figure 10.11(a) shows the time phase relationship of the pulsating main and auxiliary ﬁelds while Fig. 
10.11(b) shows their space phase relationship along with their rotating components at the time instant when 
the main ﬁeld along the winding axis has the value Fmax while the auxiliary ﬁeld has zero value in accordance 
with the phasor diagram of Fig. 10.11(a). Of the four rotating component ﬁelds, the two rotating in counter-
clock wise direction cancel out as they are in direct opposition; while the other two rotating in the clockwise 
direction being coincident add up to a single rotating ﬁeld of magnitude Fmax as shown in Fig. 10.11(c).
From the above it is concluded that two pulsating ﬁelds, of equal strength out of time phase by 90° elect, 
and oriented along axes at 90° elect, in space, produce a single rotating ﬁeld which rotates in the direction of 
leading phase to lagging phase axis. 

Fractional Kilowatt Motors 
713
0
F
F
m =
F
jF
a = –
(a) Phasor relationship of fields
1/2 Fmax
1/2 Fmax
1/2 Fmax
1/2 Fmax
Main axis
Fmax
0
w
w
ww
Auxiliary axis
(b) Space relationship of fields
0
Fmax
Fmax
w
Auxiliary axis
(c) Single rotating field
It now easily follows that if the phase sequence of the ﬁelds is reversed, i.e. Fm  = F  and Fa  = jF  
then the direction of rotation of the resultant ﬁeld would also be reversed. Corresponding conclusions for a 
3-phase induction motor were proved trigonometrically* in Sec. 5.5. 
While the concept of a balanced 2-phase system has been used earlier, let it be redeﬁned once again.
A set of two sinusoidal quantities constitute a balanced 2 phase system provided they have equal amplitude 
and a relative phase difference of 90° elect. They are known to be unbalanced otherwise. 
Let the pulsating ﬁelds Fm and Fa of the two windings of Fig. 10.10 constitute an unbalanced set (this is in 
fact the case in a single-phase 2-winding induction motor). By the theory of 2-phase symmetrical components, 
the unbalanced ﬁeld set can be divided into two balanced sets of opposite phase sequence. Thus,
 
Fm  = F
F
f
b
+
 
(10.16a)
 
Fa  = jF
jF
f
b
-
 
 (10.16b)
 
* These results for a 2-winding induction motor can also be obtained trigonometri cally as follows: The equations 
representing the ﬁelds of Fig. 10.11(b) when the time phase relation is given by Fig. 10.11(a) are
 
  
F m(q, t) = Fmax cos q cos wt
 
  
Fa(q, t) = Fmax cos (q – 90°) cos (wt – 90°)
 
 The resultant ﬁeld is then
 
  
Fm + Fa = Fmax cos q cos wt + cos (q – 90°) cos (wt – 90°)
 
 This can be simpliﬁed as
 
  
Fm + Fa = Fmax cos (q – wt)
 
 which is a rotating ﬁeld of amplitude equal to Fmax.

714 Electric Machines
where Ff  and jFf  constitute one balanced (forward) set and Fb  and - jFb  constitute the other with 
reversed (backward) phase sequence. The operations of Eqs (10.16a) and (10.16b) are illustrated by the 
phasor diagram of Fig. 10.12. 
jFf
Fa
Fb
Fm
Ff
O
–jFb
 
The inverse of the relationships (10.16a) and (10.16b) can be expressed as 
 
Ff  = 1
2 (
)
F
jF
m
a
-
 
(10.17a)
 
Fb  = 1
2 (
)
F
jF
m
a
+
 
(10.17b)
from which the forward and backward symmetrical 
components can be computed for a set of two unbalanced 
ﬁelds. The phasor diagram depicting the operation of 
Eqs (10.17a) and (10.17b) is given in Fig. 10.13. 
In fact any set of phasors (may be voltages or 
currents) can be similarly expressed in terms of their 
symmetrical components and vice versa. 
With reference to Eqs (10.16a) and (10.16b) it is 
observed that two ﬁelds Fm and Fa (assumed to be in 
space quadrature) can be split into two symmetrical 
component sets: Ff , jFf  and Fb, - jFb. Since the 
component ﬁelds of each set are equal in magnitude and are in both time and space quadrature, the ﬁrst 
set produces a forward rotating ﬁeld and the second set produces a backward rotating ﬁeld. It is therefore 
concluded that two unbalanced pulsating ﬁelds in space quadrature are equivalent to two ﬁelds rotating in 
opposite directions.
Fa
Fb
Ff
Fm
–jFa
jFa
O
 

Fractional Kilowatt Motors 
715
 A 2-winding single-phase motor has the main and auxiliary winding currents Im = 15 A 
and Ia = 7.5 A at standstill. The auxiliary winding current leads the main winding current by a = 45° elect. 
The two windings are in space quadrature and the effective number of turns are Nm = 80 and Na = 100. 
Compute the amplitudes of the forward and backward stator mmf waves. Determine the magnitude of the 
auxiliary current and its phase angle difference a with the main winding current if only the backward ﬁeld 
is to be present. 
SOLUTION 
The mmf produced by the main winding 
 
Fm  = N I
m m  = 80 ¥ 15 –0° = 1200 –0°
The mmf produced by the auxiliary winding 
 
Fa = N I
a a  = 100 ¥ 7.5 –60° = 750 –60°
From Eq. (10.17a), the forward ﬁeld is given by 
 
Ff  = 1
2 (
)
F
jF
m
a
-
 
 = 1
2 1200
0
750
45
(
)
– ∞-
–
∞
j
 
 = 334.8 – j265.2
 
Ff = 427.1 AT 
Similarly from Eq. (10.17b) the backward ﬁeld is given by 
 
Fb  = 1
2 (
)
F
jF
m
a
+
 
 = 1
2 1200
0
750
45
(
)
– ∞+
–
∞
j
 
 = 865.2 + j265.2 
 
Fb = 904.9 AT 
Since the forward ﬁeld is to be suppressed 
 
Fb  = 1
2 1200
0
100
(
)
– ∞+
–
j
Ia
a  = 0
or 
1200 + 100 Ia sin a + j100 Ia cos a = 0
Equating real and imaginary parts to zero
 
100 Ia cos a = 0 
or 
a = 90°
 
1200 + 100 Ia sin 90° = 0 
or 
Ia = – 12 A 
Note: Minus sign only signiﬁes a particular connection of the auxiliary winding with respect to the main winding.
When a motor is provided with two windings, even though these are excited from the same voltage (supply 
being single-phase), the currents in the two windings can be made out-of-phase by adjustment of the 
impedance of the auxiliary winding in relation to the main winding. As a result Fm  and Fa  constitute an 
unbalanced ﬁeld set with 90° elect. space-phase relationship. The two symmetrical components now being 

716 Electric Machines
unequal Ff  π Fb (Ff > Fb is desired); the forward rotating ﬁeld is made stronger than the backward rotating 
ﬁeld resulting in the net production of starting torque. This is how a single-phase motor is made self-starting. 
In fact phase splitting can be so devised (particularly with capacitive splitting discussed soon after), wherein 
the backward ﬁeld is reduced to zero at a speciﬁed speed resulting in a completely balanced operation. But 
such operation is possible only at one speed which can be optimally selected. 
Two of the important methods of phase-splitting are discussed below: 
Resistance Split-phase Motor The schematic diagram of the resistance split phase motor is given in 
Fig. 10.14(a). The motor employs an auxiliary winding with a higher R/X ratio as compared to the main 
winding. A high R/X ratio is achieved by using a smaller number of turns of thin wire for the auxiliary 
winding. The coil-sides of the auxiliary winding are sometimes placed on the top of the slots in order to 
reduce the reactance. This difference in the R/X ratio causes the auxiliary winding current Ia to lead the main 
winding current Im by angle a as shown in the phasor diagram of Fig. 10.14(b). The ﬁelds created by the two 
currents also have a phase difference of a thereby constituting an unbalanced ﬁeld system. The result is the 
production of the starting torque as explained earlier. 
The torque-speed characteristic of this motor is shown in Fig. 10.14(c) which also shows the speed n0 at 
which a centrifugal switch operates and thereafter the motor runs only on the main winding. The auxiliary 
winding need then be designed only for short-time use whereas the main winding is designed for continuous 
use. The value of a, the phase difference between the two currents, can at best be about 30° elect. resulting 
in poor starting torque as shown in Fig. 10.14(c). 
Rotor
Auxiliary
winding
Switch
lm
Main winding
la
V
l
la
V
lm
a
(b)
0
n0
ns
Main winding
Main + Auxiliary winding
Speed
Torque
Switch opens
(c)
(a)
+
–
 
Resistance split-phase motor

Fractional Kilowatt Motors 
717
Capacitor Split-phase Motors The problem of poor starting torque in a resistance split-phase motor is solved 
by using a capacitor in series with the auxiliary winding and thereby reaching the ideal case of a = 90°. 
The auxiliary winding along with the capacitor may be disconnected after starting. However, generally the 
capacitor and auxiliary windings are allowed to remain connected thereby improving the overall motor 
performance and in particular the power factor. Thus two types of capacitor split-phase motors (also known 
as capacitor motor) exist. 
(a) Capacitor-start Motor The schematic diagram of a capacitor-start motor is given in Fig. 10.15(a). The 
motor is so named because it uses the capacitor only for the purpose of starting. The capacitor value is 
usually so chosen as to give a = 90° elect. as shown in the phasor diagram of Fig. 10.15(b). The torque-speed 
characteristic with switching operation is shown in Fig. 10.15(c) which also shows that the starting torque is 
high. It may he noted that the capacitor need only be short-time rated. Because of the high VAR rating of the 
capacitor required, electrolytic capacitors must be employed. The range of capacitance is 250 mF or larger.
Main
winding
Torque
Main + Auxiliary winding
0
n0
ns
Speed
(c)
a = 90°
la
V
lm
(b)
Switch
Start capacitor
(short-time rated)
Auxiliary
winding
Main winding
lm
la
l
V
Rotor
(a)
+
–
 Capacitor-start split-phase motor
Addition of a capacitor and accompanying switch naturally increases the cost of the motor and 
simultaneously reduces its reliability (because of the inclusion of extra components). 

718 Electric Machines
 The schematic diagram of a 2-value capacitor motor is given in Fig. 10.16(a). 
As the name suggests, the 2-value capacitor motor not only uses a capacitor for starting but also continuous 
(run) operation. The capacitor used permanently is called the run capacitor, the use of which improves the 
motor running performance. Figure 10.16(b) shows the phasor diagram of currents while starting (both 
capacitors in circuit) where a > 90° elect. so that when the start-capacitor is disconnected a becomes 
90° elect. as shown in Fig. 10.16(c). 
Auxiliary
winding
Main winding
lm
la
l
V
(a)
Run-capacitor
(long-time rated)
Switch
Start capacitor
(short-time rated)
Rotor
a > 90°
V
lm
la
(b)
a = 90°
V
lm
la
(c)
Main + Auxiliary windings
(both capacitors in)
Main + Auxiliary winding
(run-capacitor only)
Torque
0
n0
ns
Speed
(d)
+
–
The quantitative circuit treatment given in Sec. 10.4 could be used for design purposes to ﬁnd the capacitor 
values for optimum performance. The practical values of a under running condition are close to 90° elect. 

Fractional Kilowatt Motors 
719
Figure 10.16(d) gives the torque-speed characteristics of a two-value capacitor motor. The auxiliary 
winding and run-capacitor can be designed to give a balanced 2-phase ﬁeld set at a speciﬁed speed in which 
case the backward rotating ﬁeld does not exist, thereby improving motor efﬁciency. This would also eliminate 
the second harmonic torques making the motor smooth running. Hence, this motor would exhibit the best 
start and best run characteristics with optimum efﬁciency at an extra cost incurred for the specially designed 
auxiliary winding and the capacitors. 
It may be noted that the start-capacitor has a large value and is rated for short-time whereas the run-
capacitor required is of small value but should be rated for continuous operation entailing more expense. 
It may also be noted that even if the start-capacitor is not connected at all, the motor is self-starting as 
the run-capacitor is still present. Though this results in reduced starting torque, the absence of the switch 
simpliﬁes construction and reduces the cost. Such a motor is called the permanent-capacitor or capacitor-
run motor. 
 The main and auxiliary winding impedances of a 50 Hz, capacitor-start single-phase 
induction motor are:
 
Main winding Zlm = 3 + j 2.7
 
Auxiliary winding Zla  = 7 + j 3
Determine the value of the capacitor to be connected in series with the auxiliary winding to achieve a 
phase difference of a = 90° between the currents of the two windings at start. 
SOLUTION 
Choose the applied voltage as a reference for phase angles. 
Phase angle of the main winding current 
 
–Im  = - –Z m
1
 = ––(3 + j 2.7)
 
 = – 42° 
The phase angle of the auxiliary winding current with capacitor in series 
 
–Ia  = – –[(7 + j3) – j/wC ] 
Now  
a = –
- –
I
I
a
m
 
90° = -
-
Ê
Ë
Á
Á
ˆ
¯
˜
˜
-
tan 1 3
1
7
wC
 – (– 42°) 
or 
tan-
-
Ê
Ë
Á
Á
ˆ
¯
˜
˜
1 3
1
7
wC
 = – 48° 
or 
3
1
7
- wC  = – 1.11
for 
w = 2p ¥ 50 rad/s, this yields 
 
C = 295.5 mF
Figure 10.17 shows a typical shaded-pole motor with a squirrel-cage rotor. A small portion of each pole is 
covered with a short-circuited, single-turn copper coil called the shading coil. The sinusoidally-varying ﬂux 

720 Electric Machines
created by ac (single-phase) excitation of the main winding induces emf in the shading coil. As a result, 
induced currents ﬂow in the shading coil producing their own ﬂux in the shaded portion of the pole. 
Main winding
Squirrel-cage
rotor
Stator
Shading coil
f
f
f
sb
m
sc
=
+
sc
f¢m
 Shaded-pole motor 
Let the main winding ﬂux be 
 
fm = fmax sin wt 
(10.18) 
where 
fm = f sc
m (ﬂux component linking shading coil) 
 
  + f¢m (ﬂux component passing down the air-gap of the rest of the pole)
The emf induced in the shading coil is given by 
 
esc = d
dt
m
sc
f
(since single-turn coil) 
 
 = fsc
max w cos wt 
(10.19) 
Let the impedance of the shading coil be 
 
Za  = Rsc + jXsc = Zsc–qsc 
(10.20)
The current in the shading coil can then be expressed as 
 
isc = f
w
w
q
max
cos (
)
sc
sc
sc
t
Z
-
 
(10.21) 
The ﬂux produced by isc is 
 
fsc = 1 ¥ isc
R
 = fmax
sc
sc
Z
R cos (wt – qsc) 
(10.22) 
where R = reluctance of the path of fsc 
As per Eqs (10.21) and (10.22), the shading coil current (
)
Isc  and ﬂux (Fsc) phasors lag behind the 
induced emf (
)
Esc  by angle qsc; while as per Eq. (10.19), the ﬂux phasor Fm
sc  leads Esc  by 90°. Obviously 
the phasor 
¢
Fm  is in phase with Fsc
m. The resultant ﬂux in the shaded-pole is given by the phasor sum 
 
Fsp  = F
F
m
sc
sc
+

Fractional Kilowatt Motors 
721
as shown in Fig. 10.18 and lags the ﬂux 
¢
Fm  of the remaining pole by angle a. The two sinusoidally varying 
ﬂuxes 
¢
Fm  and 
¢
Fsp  are displaced in space as well as have a time phase difference (a) thereby producing 
forward and backward rotating ﬁelds which create a net torque. A typical torque-speed characteristic of 
shaded-pole motor is shown in Fig. 10.19. It may be seen that the motor is self-starting unlike a single-
winding, single-phase motor.
 
Fmsc
F¢m
Fsp
qsc
a
Esc
Fsc
Isc
 
 
It is seen from the phasor diagram of Fig. 10.18 that the net ﬂux in the shaded portion of the pole (
)
¢
Fsp  
lags the ﬂux (
)¢
Fm  in the unshaded portion of the pole resulting in a net torque which causes the rotor to 
rotate from the unshaded to the shaded portion of the pole. The motor thus has a deﬁnite direction of rotation 
which cannot be reversed*. 
The fact that the shaded-pole motor is single-winding (no auxiliary winding), self-starting motor makes 
it less costly and results in rugged construction. The motor has low efﬁciency and low power factor and 
is usually available in a range of 1/300 to 1/20 kW. It is used for domestic fans, record players and tape 
recorders, humidiﬁers, slide projectors, small business machines, etc. The shaded-pole principle is used in 
starting electric clocks and other single-phase synchronous timing motors. 
In a 3-phase induction motor the maximum torque is independent of the rotor resistance, while the slip at 
which it occurs increases with the rotor resistance. No such neat result is possible in a single-phase induction 
motor as the backward rotating ﬁeld reduces the voltage available for creating the forward rotating ﬁeld 
thereby reducing the forward torque and also the torque of the backward ﬁeld reduces the net available 
torque. As a result the maximum torque in a single-phase induction motor reduces as the motor resistance is 
increased while the slip at maximum torque increases. 
As a consequence of the presence of the backward ﬁeld, the performance of a single-phase motor in every 
respect is somewhat inferior to that of 3-phase motor for the same frame size. It has a lower maximum torque at 
T
n = 0
n
n
=
s
n
 
* Reversal of direction of rotation where desired can be achieved by providing two shading coils, one on each end 
of every pole and by open-circuiting one set of shading coils and short-circuiting the other set.

722 Electric Machines
higher slip and greater losses. Further, it has greater volt-ampere and watt input because of their consumption 
in the backward rotating ﬁeld. Even the stator copper-losses are higher in a single-phase motor as a single 
winding is required to carry all the current. All this results in lower efﬁciency and higher temperature rise for 
single-phase motors. For a given power and speed rating, a single phase motor must therefore have a larger 
frame size than a 3-phase motor. Further, a single-phase motor also requires an auxiliary winding. In spite of 
these factors, the cost of a single-phase induction motor in fractional kilowatt ratings is comparable to that 
of its 3-phase counterpart owing to its greater volume of production. In fact the standard household power 
supply provides for single-phase loads only. 
Like other motors, the choice of a single-phase induction motor for a given application is dictated by factors 
such as initial cost, running cost, performance, weight and size, and other speciﬁc application requirements, 
the performance and the cost being the two important factors. Since high performance is associated with high 
cost, the application engineer has to arrive at a compromise between these two factors. 
Costwise the resistance split-phase motor has the lowest cost, the permanent- capacitor motor comes next 
and the 2-value capacitor motor has the highest price. Typical applications for these motors are listed below. 
It must be mentioned here that no clear-cut demarcation in motor application exists and a certain overlap in 
application is always found. 
Resistance Split-phase Motor It has a low starting current and moderate starting torque. It is used for 
easily started loads and typical applications include fans, saws, grinders, blowers, centrifugal pumps, ofﬁce 
equipment, washing machines, etc. These are usually available in the range of 1/20 to 1/2 kW. 
Capacitor-start Motor This motor has a high starting torque and therefore is used for hard starting loads, 
such as compressors, conveyors, pumps, certain machine tools, refrigeration and air-conditioning equipment, 
etc. This is the most commonly used induction motor and is available up to sizes as large as 6 kW.
Permanent-capacitor Motor It has a high starting torque but slightly lower than that of the capacitor-start 
motor as a result of the compromise between starting and running performances and the capacitor cost. 
Because of the permanent capacitor it has a better running power factor and efﬁciency and a quieter and 
smoother operation. It is used for both easy and hard to start loads. In fact in modern practice ceiling fans, 
air-circulators and blowers use this type of motor. 
Two-value Capacitor Motor It combines the advantages of capacitor-start and permanent-capacitor motors 
and is used for hard to start loads. At the same time it gives a high power factor and efﬁciency under running 
conditions. Typical applications are refrigerators, compressors and stockers. 
Shaded-pole Motor It is a cheap motor with a low starting torque and low power factor and efﬁciency during 
running. It is available in small sizes up to 1/20 kW. It is commonly used for fans of all kinds (particularly 
table fans), humidiﬁers, vending machines, photocopying machines, advertising displays, etc. 
The 3-phase reluctance motor has already been discussed as an unexcited salient-pole synchronous machine 
in Sec. 8.11. The expression for reluctance torque of a single-phase device was derived in Sec. 4.3 from 

Fractional Kilowatt Motors 
723
basic principles of energy conversion. The reluctance motor, in general, results wherever the stator produces 
a rotating ﬁeld in space and the rotor is noncylindrical such that the reluctance of the magnetic path offered 
by the rotor to the rotating ﬁeld is a function of the space angle. The origin of the reluctance torque lies in 
the tendency of the rotor to align itself in the minimum reluctance position with respect to the synchronously 
rotating ﬂux of the forward ﬁeld. The motor is made self-starting by the induction principle by providing 
short-circuited copper bars in the projecting parts of the rotor. 
In a single-phase reluctance motor the rotating ﬁeld can be produced by any of the phase-splitting methods 
discussed above. The salient-pole structure is given to the rotor by removing some of the teeth of an induction 
motor rotor as shown in Fig. 10.20(a). The remaining teeth carry short-circuited copper bars to provide the 
starting induction torque. After starting the rotor reaches near synchronous speed by induction action and 
is pulled into synchronism during the positive half-cycle of the sinusoidally varying synchronous torque*. 
(a) Constructional features of 4-pole reluctance motor
Rotor position
dependent
starting torque
Main + Auxiliary
winding
Torque (pu)
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0
no
ns
n
Switching speed
(b) Reluctance motor torque-speed characteristics
Main winding
only
 
* At speed less than synchronous the torque alternates between positive and negative half-cycles.

724 Electric Machines
This would only be possible if the rotor has low inertia and the load conditions are light. The torque-speed 
characteristic of a typical reluctance motor with induction start is given in Fig. 10.20(b). As seen from this 
ﬁgure the starting torque is highly dependent upon the rotor position because of the projecting nature of the 
rotor. This phenomenon is known as cogging. For satisfactory synchronous motor performance, the frame 
size to be used must be much larger than that for a normal single-phase induction motor. This accounts for 
the high value of starting torque indicated in Fig. 10.20(b). 
The stator of a hysteresis motor is wound with main and auxiliary windings with a permanently connected 
capacitor for phase splitting. The capacitor is selected to create balanced 2-phase conditions. The rotor is a 
smooth solid* cylinder of hard steel (this has high hysteresis loss) and does not carry any winding (no rotor 
bars). Both the stator windings are distributed such as to create a rotating ﬁeld with as nearly a sinusoidally 
space distribution as possible; this is necessary to keep down iron-loss due to space harmonics of the ﬁeld.
The phenomenon of hysteresis causes the rotor magnetization to lag behind the stator-created mmf wave. 
As a consequence, the rotor ﬂux lags by angle d the stator mmf axis. Figure 10.21(a) shows the magnetic 
condition in the motor at any instant. As the angle d is hysteresis-dependent, it remains constant, at all rotor 
speeds. The interaction torque (hysteresis torque) between stator and rotor ﬁelds therefore is constant at all 
speeds (Fig. 10.21(b)). Under the inﬂuence of the hysteresis torque the rotor accelerates smoothly and ﬁnally 
runs at synchronous speed with angle d getting adjusted to the load torque. This is a contrast to the “pull-in” 
phenomenon in a reluctance motor when it synchronizes. Constancy of the hysteresis torque is demonstrated 
by the derivation below.
Torque
0
ns
n
(b) Hysteresis torque vs speed
ws
(a) Magnetic field in a hystresis motor
d
Axis of Stator mmf
Axis of rotor magnetization
 
The hysteresis loss is expressed as 
 
Ph = Kh  f2B2  
(10.23)
where 
B = maximum ﬂux density, f2 = sf = rotor frequency
 
* To cause a saving in expensive hard steel instead a thick annular ring of hard-steel can be placed on an ordinary 
cylindrical steel core. 

Fractional Kilowatt Motors 
725
 
Power across air-gap = P
s
h  
(10.24)
 
Torque developed = P
s
h
s
w  = K sf B
s
h
s
2
w
 
 = K f B
h
s
2
w
 = constant 
(10.25)
Another component of torque caused by eddy-current loss is simultaneously created in the motor. This 
can be derived as: 
 
Pe = Ke f2
2B2
 
 = Kes2f 2B2 
(10.26)
 
T = P
s
e
s
w  = 
K f B
s
e
s
2
2
w
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
 (10.27)
As per Eq. (10.27), the eddy-current torque is highest at start and reduces linearly with slip vanishing at 
synchronous speed. This torque component aids the hysteresis torque at starting, endowing excellent starting 
characteristic to the hysteresis motor. 
The hysteresis motor has a low noise ﬁgure compared to the single-phase induction motor such that the 
load runs at uniform speed. This is because it operates at one speed (synchronous) and nearly balanced 
2-phase conditions are not disturbed (as they would in the induction motor when the slip changes with load). 
Further, a smooth (unslotted) rotor greatly aids in low noise performance of this motor. Multispeed operation 
is easily possible by arranging pole changing of stator windings; the rotor being unwound reacts to create the 
same number of poles as the stator. As already pointed out, the motor has excellent starting characteristics 
(starting torque equal to running torque). Therefore, it is well-suited to accelerate high-inertia loads. 
The winding unbalance and the fact that both the main and auxiliary windings are fed by the same supply 
result in unbalanced main and auxiliary ﬁelds. The phasor along the winding axes can be split into symmetrical 
components Ff  and Fb  as given by Eqs (10.17a) and (10.17b). The forward component set Ff  and jFf  
produces a forward rotating ﬁeld; similarly the backward component set Fb  and – jFb  results in a backward 
rotating ﬁeld. 
The rotor slips with respect to the two rotating ﬁelds are s and (2 – s) respectively as given by Eqs (10.5a) 
and (10.5b) and as a result the magnetizing and rotor circuits as seen by the two rotating ﬁelds with reference 
to the main winding are different and are shown in Figs 10.22(a) and 10.22(b).
It is noted that no-load losses* have been neglected and therefore the core-loss conductance has not 
been shown in both the circuits. The impedance seen by Emf, the forward ﬁeld induced emf of the main 
winding, is 
 
Z f  = jX
R
s
jX
||
2
2
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  
(10.28a)
 
* These losses can be considered as part of mechanical load on the motor.

726 Electric Machines
and the impedance seen by Emb, the backward ﬁeld induced emf in the main winding, is 
 
Zb  = jX
R
s
jX
||
2
2
2 -
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  
(10.28b) 
Hence 
Emf  = Z I
f
mf  
(10.29a)
and 
Emb  = Z I
b mb  
(10.29b)
where 
Imf  = forward component current in main winding
 
Imb  = backward component current in main winding
Of course 
Im = main winding current = I
I
mf
mb
+
 
(10.30) 
Equations (10.16a) and (10.16b) will now be converted into the current form. 
Let 
Nm = equivalent number of main winding turns 
 
Na = equivalent number of auxiliary winding turns 
Deﬁne 
a = N
N
a
m
 or Na = aNm 
(10.31)
Then from Eqs (10.16a) and (10.16b) 
 
Fm  = N I
m m  = N I
m mf  + N I
m mb  
(10.32a)
 
Fa  = N I
a a  = aN I
m a  = jN I
jN I
m mf
m mb
-
 
(10.32b)
From Eqs (10.32a) and (10.32b)
 
Im  = I
I
mf
mb
+
 
(10.33a) 
 
Ia  = j I
a
j I
a
mf
mb
-
 
(10.33b) 
The current in the auxiliary winding is Ia  but since the turns of auxiliary and main windings are different, 
the auxiliary winding current as seen from the main winding is equal to 
 
I¢a = 
N
N
I
a
m
a
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 = aIa 
(10.34) 
R Is
2
X2
Imf
Zf
X
Emf
(a) Seen by forward field
+
–
R I(2 – s)
2
X2
Imb
Zb
X
Emb
(b) Seen by backward field
+
–
 

Fractional Kilowatt Motors 
727
From Eqs (10.33a) and (10.33b), the symmetrical components of main and auxiliary winding currents 
with reference to the main winding can be expressed as 
 
Imf  = 1
2 (
)
I
jaI
m
a
-
 
(10.35a)
 
Imb  = 1
2 (
)
I
jaI
m
a
+
 
(10.35b)
The forward ﬁeld reaches the auxiliary winding 90° elect. ahead of the main winding and vice versa for the 
backward rotating ﬁeld. Thus the emf’s in the auxiliary winding induced by the two ﬁelds are: 
 
Eaf  = jaEmf  
(10.36a) 
 
Eab  = – jaEmb  
(10.36b) 
Also let the main and auxiliary winding terminal voltages be Vm  and Va  respectively. The auxiliary 
winding voltage is equal to (Va/a) as seen from the main winding. This set of voltages can also be split into 
symmetrical components as 
 
Vm  = V
V
mf
mb
+
 
(10.37a) 
 
V
a
a  = jV
jV
mf
mb
-
 
(10.37b) 
or alternatively 
 
Vmf  = 1
2 V
j V
a
m
a
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  
(10.38a) 
 
Vmb  = 1
2 V
j V
a
m
a
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  
(10.38b) 
Now consider the main winding terminal voltage Vm . It comprises three components: the emf induced by 
the forward rotating ﬁeld, the emf induced by backward rotating ﬁeld and the voltage drop in the winding 
impedance Z m
1  owing to current Im ﬂowing through it. Thus 
 
Vm  = I Z
E
E
m
m
mf
mb
1 +
+
 
(10.39a) 
Substituting for Emf  and Emb  from Eqs (10.29a) and (10.29b) 
 
Vm  = I Z
Z I
Z I
m
m
f
mf
b mb
1 +
+
 
(10.39b) 
which is represented by the circuit of Fig. 10.23(a). 
Similarly the auxiliary winding terminal voltage Va  comprises three components, 
i.e, 
Va  = I Z
E
E
a
a
af
ab
1 +
+
 
(10.40a)
where Z a
1  is the winding impedance of the auxiliary winding which in general has a capacitor included in it 
(starting/running capacitor). Using Eqs (10.36a) and (10.36b), 
 
Va  = I Z
jaE
jaE
a
a
mf
mb
1 +
-
 
(10.40b) 
or  
Va  = I Z
jaZ I
jaZ I
a
a
f
mf
b mb
1 +
-
 
(10.40c)
whose circuit representation is given in Fig. (10.23b). 

728 Electric Machines
R1m
jX1m
Z1m
Vm
(a) Main winding circuit
+
–
E
I
Z
mb
mb f
=
;
I
I
I
m
mf
mb
=
+
+
–
+
–
E
I
Z
mf
mf
f
=
R1a
jX1a
Va
(b) Auxiliary winding circuit
+
–
+
–
+
–
E
= jaZ I
af
mf
f
C
I
j
a =
I
a
mf
I
a
mb
– j
E
= – jaZ
I
ab
mb
mb
;
–
Z1a
–
Substituting Im from Eq. (10.33a) in Eq. (10.39b),
 
Vm  = (
)
(
)
Z
Z
I
Z
Z
I
m
f
mf
m
b
mb
1
1
+
+
+
 
(10.41a) 
Similarly substituting Ia from Eq. (10.33b) in Eq. (10.40c), 
 
Va  = j Z
a
aZ
I
j Z
a
aZ
I
a
f
mf
a
b
mb
1
1
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
-
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
(10.41b)
With Vm  and Va  as expressed in Eqs (10.41a) and (10.41b), one obtains from Eqs (10.38a) and (10.38b) 
 
Vmf  = Z
Z
a
Z
I
Z
a
Z
I
m
a
f
mf
a
m
mb
1
1
2
1
2
1
2
2
1
2
+
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
-
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
(10.42a) 
 
Vmb  = -
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
+
+
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
1
2
2
2
1
2
1
1
1
2
Z
a
Z
I
Z
Z
a
Z
I
a
m
mf
m
a
b
mb  
(10.42b)
Deﬁning 
Z11 = Z
Z
a
Z
m
a
f
1
1
2
2
2
+
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  
(10.43a) 
 
Z12  = 1
2
1
2
1
Z
a
Z
a
m
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  
(10.43b) 
 
Z22  = Z
Z
a
Z
m
a
b
1
1
2
2
2
+
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  
(10.43c) 
Equations (10.42a) and (10.42b) can be written as
 
Vmf  = Z I
Z I
mf
mb
11
12
-
 
(10.44a)
 
Vmb  = Z I
Z
I
mf
mb
12
22
+
 
(10.44b) 
Equations (10.44a), (10.44b) and (10.37a) are represented by the circuit model of Fig. 10.24.
It is further noted that
 
Z
Z
11
12
-
 = Z
Z
m
f
1 +
 
(10.45a)
 
Z
Z
22
12
-
 = Z
Z
m
b
1 +
 
(10.45b)
 
I
I
mf
mb
-
 = - jaIa  
(10.45c)

Fractional Kilowatt Motors 
729
+
–
Vmb
Vmf
+
–
+
–
Z11– Z12
Z12
Z22 – Z12
Imb
Imf
I
I
jaI
mf
mb
a
–
= –
Vm
From these the circuit model of Fig. 10.24 can be drawn 
in the form of Fig. 10.25. In Fig. 10.25 disconnecting the 
auxiliary winding under running condition is equivalently 
represented as the opening of switch S. 
Once the auxiliary winding is disconnected. 
 
Imf  = Imb  = 1
2 Im  
(10.46) 
 
Vm  = V
V
mf
mb
+
 
(10.47) 
By doubling the current and reducing the impedances to 
half the circuit model of Fig. 10.26 is obtained. It may be 
seen that this is the same circuit model as already presented 
in Fig. 10.5(c) on a heuristic basis.
+
–
Vmb
Vmf
+
–
+
–
Z12
Imb
Imf
I
I
jaI
mf
mb
a
–
= –
Z1m
Z1m
Zb
Zf
Vm
S
 Circuit model of single-phase induction 
+
–
Vm
+
–
Z
/2
1m
Vmf
+
–
Vmb
Z
/2
1m
Z /2
b
Z /2
f
X/2
X/2
R
s
2/2
R
s
2 /2(2 – )
X/2
X2/2
Im

730 Electric Machines
From Eqs (10.42a) and (10.42b), 
 
Imf  = 
V
Z
Z
Z
V
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
mf
m
b
mb
m
f
m
b
(
)
(
) (
)
1
12
12
1
12
1
12
12
2
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
 
(10.48a)
 
Imb  = 
V
Z
Z
Z
V
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
mb
m
f
mf
m
f
m
b
(
)
(
) (
)
1
12
12
1
12
1
12
12
2
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
 
(10.48b)
The winding currents are then given by 
 
Im  = I
I
mf
mb
+
 
(10.49a) 
 
Ia  = j
a I
I
mf
mb
(
)
-
 
(10.49b)
 
IL  = I
I
m
a
+
 = IL –q 
(10.50a)
 
pf = cos q 
(10.50b)
 
Pin = VLIL cos q 
(10.50c)
The developed* torque and mechanical power are given by
 
T = 2
ws
(I2
mf Rf – I2
mbRb) 
(10.51)
 
Pm = 2(I2
mf Rf – I2
mbRb) (1 – s) 
(10.52)
For balanced single-phase operation
 
VL  = V
V
mf
mb
+
 
Imb  = 0
or from Eq. (10.48b) 
 
 V
Z
Z
Z
V
Z
mb
m
f
mf
(
)
1
12
12
+
+
+
 = 0
or 
Z12  = 
-
+
+
V
Z
Z
V
V
mb
m
f
mf
mb
(
)
1
 = 
-
+
V
Z
Z
V
mb
m
f
L
(
)
1
 
(10.53)
From Eq. (10.38b) 
 
Vmb  = 1
2 V
j V
a
m
a
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
* Notice the factor 2 in Eqs (11.51) and (11.52). This is on account of the 2-phase structure of a 1-phase (one or two 
winding) motor. For the single winding case 
 
  
Imf = Imb = Im/2
 
  
T = I
R
R
m
s
f
b
2
2w (
)
-
 
 which is the same as Eq. (10.9) as it should be.

Fractional Kilowatt Motors 
731
For single-phase operation 
Vm = Va = VL 
\ 
Vmb  = V
j
a
L
2
1 +
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  
(10.54) 
Substituting Eq. (10.54) in Eq. (10.53) 
 
Z12  = -
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
+
1
2 1
1
1
j
a
Z
Z
m
f
(
)  
(10.55)
With Z12  deﬁned in Eq. (10.43b) 
 
Z12  = 1
2
1
2
1
(
/
)
Z
a
Z
a
m
-
or 
Z a
1  = a
Z
Z m
2
12
1
2
(
)
+
 
(10.56)
 
 = (RC – jXC) + (R1a + X1a) 
\ 
RC – jXC = Z a
1  – (R1a + jX1a) 
(10.57) 
 A (1/2) kW, 4-pole, 50 Hz, 220 V, two-value capacitor motor has the following circuit 
model parameters: 
 
R1m = 4.2 W, 
X1m = 11.3 W 
 
R1a = 5.16 W,  
X1a = 12.1 W 
 
X = 250 W, 
a = 1.05 W 
 
R2 = 7.48 W, 
X2 = 7.2 W 
Friction, windage and core losses = 45 W 
 (a) Calculate the starting torque and current if the two capacitors in parallel equal 70 mF. 
 (b) Calculate the value of the run capacitor for zero backward ﬁeld when the motor is running at a slip 
of 0.04. What is the meaning of the associated resistance value? 
 (c) Calculate the motor performance for the value of the run capacitor as in part (b). Assume RC = 0. 
SOLUTION 
 
(a) s = 1 
 
  
Z f  = Zb = j 250 || (7.48 +j 7.2) 
 
  
 = 10.1 –45.6° = 7.07 + j7.22 
 
  
Z a
1  = (5.16 + j12.1) -
¥
j
10
314
70
6
 
  
 = 5.16 – j 33.4 
 
  
Z
a
a
1
2
/
 = 4.68 – j 30.29
 
  
Z12 = 1
2
1
2
1
(
/
)
Z
a
Z
a
m
-
 
  
 = 1
2 (4.68 – j 30.29 – 4.2 – j 11.3)
 
  
 = 0.24 – j 20.8 = 20.8 – – 89.3°

732 Electric Machines
 
  
Vmf  = 220
2
1
1 05
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
j
.
 = 151.9 – – 43.60°
 
  
Vmb  = 220
2
1
1 05
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
j
.
 = 151.9 –43.6°
 
  
Z
Z
Z
m
f
1
12
+
+
 = Z
Z
Z
m
b
1
12
+
+
 = (4.2 + j11.3) + (7.07 + j7.22) + (0.24 – j20.8) 
 
  
 = 11.51 – j2.28 = 11.73 – – 11.2°
 
 Substituting in Eqs (10.48a) and (10.48b) 
 
  
Imf  = 151 9
43 6
11 73
11 2
151 9
43 6
20 8
89 3
11 73 2
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
(
.
)
–-
∞¥
–-
∞+
–
∞¥
–-
∞
–-
∞-
–-
∞
22 4
20 8
178 6
2
.
(
. )
.
 
  
 = 4928
49
561 3
43
–-
∞
–-
∞
.
 = 8.78 – – 44.7° = 6.24 – j6.18
 
  
Imb  = 151 9
43 6
11 73
11 2
151 9
43 6
20 8
89 3
561 3
4
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
–
∞¥
–-
∞+
–-
∞¥
–-
∞
–-
3∞
 
  
 = -
–
–-
∞
1506
64 6
561 3
4 3
.
.
.
 = – 2.68 –68.9° = – 0.96 – j2.5
 
  
ns = 1500 rpm, ws = 2
1500
60
p ¥
 = 157.1 rad/s
 
  
Ts = 
2
157 1.  ¥ 7.07{(8.78)2 – (2.68)2}
 
  
 = 6.31 Nm
 
  
Im  = I
I
mf
mb
+
 = 5.28 – j8.68 
 
  
Ia  = j
a I
I
mf
mb
(
)
-
 = 
j
1 05
.
(7.2 – j3.68) = 3.5 + j6.86
 
  
IL  = I
I
m
a
+
 = 8.78 – j1.82 = 8.97 – – 11.7°
 
  
IL (
)
start  = 8.97 A
 
(b) s = 0.04
 
  
Z f  = j
j
250
7 48
0 04
7 2
||
.
.
.
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
  
 = j250 || (187 + j7.2) = 147 –38.2° = 115.5 + j90.9 
 
 From Eq. (10.55) 
 
  
Z12  = -
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
+
1
2 1
1
j
a
Z
Z
m
f
(
)
 
  
 = -
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
1
2 1
1 05
j
.
[(4.2 + j11.3)] + (115.5 + j90.9)]
 
  
 = – 108.6 –84.1° = – 11.2 – j108
 
 From Eq. (10.56) 
 
  
Z a
1  = a
Z
Z m
2
12
1
2
(
)
+
 
  
 = (1.05)2 [2(–11.2 – j108) + (4.2 + j11.3)]
 
  
 = – 20.1 – j225.7

Fractional Kilowatt Motors 
733
 
 From Eq. (10.57)
 
  
RC – jXC = (– 20.1 – j225.7) – (5.16 + j12.1)
 
  
 = – 25.3 – j238
 
  
XC = 
1
314 ¥ C
 
 or 
C = 
10
314
238
6
¥
 = 13.4 mF
 
 RC being negative is unrealizable so that a completely balanced operation is not possible. 
 
(c) s = 0.04
 
  
Z f  = 147 –38.2° = 115.5 + j90.9 
 
  
    (as calculated in part (b)) 
 
  
Zb = j
j
250
7 48
1 96
7 2
||
.
.
.
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
  
 = j 250 || (3.82 + j 7.2) = 7.92 –63° = 3.6 + j 7.06 
 
  
Z a
1  = (5.16 + j12.1) – j
10
314
13 4
6
¥
.
 
  
 = 5.16 – j225.6 
 
  
Z
a
a
1
2
/
 = 4.68 – j204.6 
 
  
Z12  = 1
2 (4.68 – j 204.6 – 4.2 – j11.3)
 
  
 = 0.24 – j108 = 108 – - 89.9°
 
  
Z
Z
Z
m
f
1
12
+
+
 = 4.2 + j11.3 
 
  
 + 115.5 + j90.9
 
  
 + 0.24 – j108 
 
  
 = 119.9 – j5.8 = 120 – – 2.8° 
 
  
Z
Z
Z
m
b
1
12
+
+
 = 4.2 + j11.3
 
  
  3.6 + j7.06
 
  
  0.24 – j108 
 
  
 = 8.04 – j89.64 = 90 – – 84.9°
 
 Substituting in Eqs (10.48a) and (10.48b) 
 
  
Imf  = 151 9
43 6
90
84 9
151 9
43 6
108
89 9
120
2 8
90
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
–-
∞¥
–-
∞+
–
∞¥
–-
∞
–-
∞¥
–-
∞-
–-
∞
84 9
108
179 8
2
.
(
)
.
 
  
 = 
22735
82 9
16177
41 6
–-
∞
–-
∞
.
.
 = 1.405 – – 41.3° = 1.06 – j0.927 
 
  
Imb  = 151 9
43 6
120
2 8
151 9
43 6
108
89 9
120
2 8
90
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
–
∞¥
–-
∞+
–-
∞¥
–-
∞
–-
∞¥
–-
∞-
–-
∞
84 9
108
179 8
2
.
(
)
.
 
  
 = 
2506
0 24
16177
41 6
–
∞
–-
∞
.
.
 = 0.155 –41.8° = 0.116 + j0.103 

734 Electric Machines
 
  
T = 
2
157 1.  ¥ [(1.405)2 ¥ 115.5 – (0.155)2 ¥ 3.6] = 2.9 Nm 
 
  
Im  = I
I
mf
mb
+
 = 1.06 – j0.927 + 0.12 – j 0.103
 
  
 = 1.18 – j0.824 
 
  
Ia  = j
a I
I
mf
mb
(
)
-
 = 
j
1 05
.
(1.06 – j0927 – 0.12 – j0.103) 
 
  
 = 
j
1 05
.
(0.94 – j1.13) = 1.107 + j0.895 
 
  
IL  = I
I
m
a
+
 = 2.25 – j0.205 
 
  
IL = 2.26;  pf = 1 (almost unity) 
 
  
Pm = 2[(1.405)2 ¥ 115.5 – (0.155)2 ¥ 3.6] (1 – 0.04)
 
  
 = 437.8 W 
 
  
Pout = 437.8 – 45 = 392.8 W
 
  
Pin = 2.26 ¥ 220 = 497.2 W
 
  
h = 392 8
497 2
.
.
 = 79%
In a balanced 2-phase motor 
 
a = N
N
a
m
 = 1
and 
Z a
1  = Z m
1
Hence* in Eq. (10.43b) 
 
Z12  = 0 
This implies that the coupling between forward and backward motor circuits of Fig. 10.25 disappears and 
Imf  and Imb  can be obtained from independent circuits of Fig. 10.27. Notice that for convenience sufﬁx m 
has been dropped.
If
R1
X1
X2
Vf
Zf
X
R s
2/
(a) Circuit model for forward component
Ib
R1
X1
X2
Vb
Zb
X
R
s)
2/(2 –
(b) Circuit model for backward component
 
 
* In general  
Z12 = 0
 
 requires   
Z
a
a
1
2
2
/
 = Z m
1

Fractional Kilowatt Motors 
735
 The circuit model parameters in W/phase (referred to stator) of a 2- phase, 1 kW, 220 V, 
4-pole, 50 Hz squirrel-cage motor are given below: 
 
R1 = 3 W 
R2 = 2.6 W
 
X1 = X2 = 2.7 W 
X = 110 W 
The windage, friction and core losses equal 200 W. 
The applied voltages are adjusted such that 
 
Va  = 110 –90° and Vm  = 220 –0°
 (a) Calculate the starting torque and starting current (in each phase).
 (b) Calculate the motor performance at s = 0.04. 
 (c) With the motor running at s = 0.04, the phase a gets open-circuited. What voltage will be developed 
across this phase? 
SOLUTION 
From Eqs (10.38a) and (10.38b) (a = 1) 
 
Vf  = 1
2
(220 – j110 –90°) = 165 V 
 
Vb  = 1
2 (220 + j110 –90°) = 55 V 
 
(a) s = 1 
 
  
Z f  = Zb  = j110 || (2.6 + j2.7) 
 
  
 = 3.66 –47.4° = 2.48 + j2.69 
 
  
Z f (total) = Zb (total) = (3 + j2.7) + (2.48 + j2.69) 
 
  
 = 5.48 + j 5.39 = 7.69 –44.5° 
 
  
I f  = 
165
7 69
44 5
.
.
–
∞ = 21.45 – – 44.5° = 15.3 – j15.03 
 
  
Ib  = 
55
7 69
44 5
.
.
–
∞ = 7.15 – – 44.5° = 5.1– j5.01 
 
  
Is  = 2
157  ¥ 2.48 [(21.45)2 – (7.15)2]
 
  
 = 12.9 Nm 
 
  
Im  = I
I
f
b
+
 = 20.4 – j20.04 = 28.6 – – 44.4°
 
  
Im = 28.6 A
 
  
Ia  = j I
I
f
b
(
)
-
 = 10.2 + j10.02 = 14.3 –44.5°
 
  
Ia = 14.3 A 
 
(b)  
Z f  = j
j
110
2 6
0 04
2 7
||
.
.
.
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
  
 = 55.1 –32.4° = 46.5 + j29.5 
 
  
Zb  = j
j
110
2 6
2
0 04
2 7
||
.
.
.
-
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
 
  
 = 2.93 –64.5° = 1.26 + j2.64

736 Electric Machines
 
  
Z f (total) = (3 + j2.7) + (46.5 + j29.5)
 
  
 = 49.5 + j32.2 = 59 –33°
 
  
Zb (total) = (3 +j2.7) + (1.26 + j2.64)
 
  
 = 4.26 + j5.34 = 6.83 –51.4° 
 
  
I f  = 
165
59
33
–
∞ = 2.79 – – 33° = 2.34 – j1.52 
 
  
Ib  = 
55
6 83
51 4
.
.
–
∞ = 8.05 – – 51.4° = 5.02 – j6.29 
 
  
ns = 1500 rpm or ws = 157.1 rad/s 
 
  
Ts = 2
ws
(I2
f Rf – I2
f Rb) 
 
  
 = 
2
157 1. [(2.79)2 ¥ 46.5 – (8.05)2 ¥ 1.26]
 
  
 = 3.57 N m 
 
  
Im  = I
I
f
b
+
 = (2.34 – j1.52) + (5.02 – j6.29)
 
  
 = 7.36 – j7.81 = 10.73 – – 46.7° 
 
  
Ia  = j I
I
f
b
(
)
-
 = j[(2.34 – j1.52) – (5.02 – j6.29)] 
 
  
 = – 3.5 + j8.63 = – 9.31 –112.1° 
 
  
Im = 10.73 A, la = 9.31 A 
 
  
Pm = ws(1 – s)T = 157.1 (1 – 0.04) ¥ 3.57 = 538.4 W
 
  
Pout = 538.4 – 200 = 338.4 W 
 
  
Pm 
in = 220 ¥ 10.73 ¥ cos 46.7° = 1619 W 
 
  
Pa
in = 220 ¥ 5.47 ¥ cos 29.3° = 1049 W
 
  
Pin = 1619 + 1049 = 2668 W 
 
  
h = 338 4
2668
.
 = 12.7% (low because of unbalanced operation) 
 
(c)  
Ia  = j I
I
f
b
(
)
-
 = 0
 
 or 
I f  = Ib  
(i)
 
  
Vm  = V
V
mf
mb
+
 = 220 V 
(ii)
 
  
Va  = j V
V
mf
mb
(
)
-
 = ? 
(iii)
 
  
I f  = 
V
Z
mf
f (
)
total  = 
V
Z
mb
b (
)
total  = Ib
 
 or 
V
V
mf
mb
 = Z
Z
f
b
(
)
(
)
total
total
 
(iv)
 
  
 = 
59
33
6 83
51 4
–
∞
–
∞
.
.
 = 8.63 – – 18.4° 
(v)
 
 Solving Eqs (ii) and (v) 
 
  
Vmf  = 198.2 – – 1.9° = 198.1 – j 6.6 
 
  
Vmb  = 22.96 –16.5° = 22.01 + j 6.5 

Fractional Kilowatt Motors 
737
 
  
Va  = j (176.l – j 13.1) = 13.1 + j 176.l = 176.6 –85.7°
 
  
Va = 176.6 V 
 
 It may be seen that the angle of Va is slightly short of 90°. 
For a low-power (a few hundred watts) control application, a 2-phase (balanced) servomotor is ideally suited 
as it can be driven by means of a relatively rugged (drift-free) ac ampliﬁer. The motor torque can be easily 
controlled by varying the magnitude of the ac voltage applied to the control phase (phase a) of the motor as 
shown in Fig. 10.28. While the second phase called the reference phase (phase m) is excited at a ﬁxed-voltage 
synchronous ac voltage (both the voltages must be drawn from the same source*). The control phase voltage 
is shifted in phase by 90° from the reference phase voltage by means of phase-shifting networks included in 
voltage ampliﬁcation stages of the ampliﬁer. The motor torque gets reversed by phase reversal of the control 
phase voltage. 
a
Va
ac amplifier
(with 90° phase shift)
ac error signal
(from controller)
Servomotor
Fixed ac
voltage
Vm
 
For linear stable operation, the torque-speed characteristic of a servo-motor must be linear with negative 
slope (torque reducing with increasing speed). The torque  speed characteristic of a normally designed 
induction motor is highly nonlinear and the characteristic is unstable for normal loads in the region from zero 
speed to speed at breakdown torque. This indeed is the useful region of operation of a servomotor employed 
in position control systems. The desired linear characteristic is obtained in a servo motor by designing a 
rotor with high resistance so that the maximum torque occurs at a slip of – 0.5 or so. The high resistance 
also imparts another important desirable feature to the servomotor, i.e. it does not develop a single-phasing 
torque** which would disturb the control characteristic of the motor. 
The torque-speed characteristics of a servomotor for various per unit values of phase a voltage are drawn 
in Fig. 10.29. If the reference phase voltage is Vm –0°, the control phase voltage is 
 
Va  = aVm –90°;  a = variable
 
* It is already known that this is a necessary condition for establishing a rotating magnetic ﬁeld in the air-gap.
 
** A single-phasing torque is given by
 
  
T(single-phase) = Im
s
2
2w (Rf  – Rb)  
(10.9)
 
 When the rotor resistance is large, Rf ª Rb, almost eliminating the single-phasing torque. 

738 Electric Machines
Now  
Vmf = Vm
2 (1 + a) 
(10.58a) 
 
Vmb = V
a
m
2 1(
)
-
 
(10.58b) 
Thus the motor is excited with a special kind of voltage unbalance–angular phase difference of 90° is 
maintained while the magnitude of phase a voltage varies. The corresponding torque-speed characteristics 
(Fig. 10.29) are nearly linear with respect to motor speed and voltage of phase a. 
Based on the linearity assumption, the following relation is obtained* 
 
T = KVa – fw 
(10.59a)
where 
w = rotor speed 
Also 
T = Jw + f0w 
(10.59b)
where J = motor inertia, and f0 = motor viscous friction. 
Laplace transforming Eq. (10.59a) and (10.59b), the motor transfer function** can be written as 
 
GM(s) = w ( )
( )
s
V
s
a
 = 
K
Js
f
f
+
+
(
)
0
 
 = 
K
s
m
m
t
+ 1
where 
Km = K/(f0 + f ) = motor gain constant
 
tm = J/(f0 + f ) = motor time-constant 
–1.0 –0.8 –0.6 –0.4 –0.2
0.6
PU speed
Va = 0
–0.5
PU torque
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
0.4
0.2
0.8
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
Va = 1.0
a
 
 
* Negative value of Va implies phase reversal. 
 
** Electrical transient is quite fast compared to mechanical dynamics and has therefore been ignored in this 
derivation.

Fractional Kilowatt Motors 
739
In servomotors of rating below a few watts, low-
inertia construction can be achieved by using a drag-
cup rotor illustrated in Fig. 10.30. It is to be observed 
that the rotor core is stationary. 
Ac servomotor offers several advantages over its 
dc counterpart—the use of a drift-free ac ampliﬁer in 
control circuitry, low rotor inertia (faster response), 
rugged maintenance-free rotor construction, no 
brushes contacting commutator segments, etc. The 
rotor can withstand higher temperature as it does not 
involve any insulation. 
Ac (carrier) control systems usually require a 
feedback signal of carrier frequency whose amplitude 
is proportional to speed. Such signals are conveniently 
obtained by means of ac tachometers. An ac tachometer 
is nothing but a 2-phase induction motor with one 
phase (m) excited from the carrier frequency, while 
the phase a winding is left open-circuited as shown 
in Fig. 10.31. To achieve a low-inertia, a rotor drag-
cup construction is commonly employed. It is shown 
below that the voltage across phase a is proportional 
to rotor speed while it has phase shift close to 90° (see 
Ex. 10.5). 
For a balanced 2-phase winding
 
Z
a
a
1
2
/
 = Z1m
With the phase a open-circuited 
 
Ia  = j I
I
f
b
(
)
-
 = 0 
(10.60) 
or 
I f  = Ib  
(10.61) 
Therefore 
V
V
mf
mb
 = Z
Z
f
b
(
)
(
)
total
total  = Az
Also 
Vm –0° = V
V
mf
mb
+
\ 
Vmb  = 
V
A
m
z
1 +
 
Vmf  = V A
A
m
z
z
1 +
Now 
Va  = j V
V
mf
mb
(
)
+
  
 = jV
A
A
m
z
z
1
1
-
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
Drag-cup
rotor
Shaft
Stator
Stationary
rotor core
 Schematic constructional diagram of drag-
Rotor
m
a
To amplifier

740 Electric Machines
Since Z f  (total) and Zb  (total) are speed (slip) dependent, so is Az . Thus Va is speed dependent. If the 
rotor X2/R2 is either very small or very large, it is discovered that Va - speed relationship is linear. Low X2/R2 
gives low speed sensitivity but a wide linear range and vice versa. An intermediate value of X2/R2 generally 
meets most of the speciﬁcations. The phase shift is slightly less than 90° but is quite insensitive to speed. 
AC tachometers are quite commonly used in 400-Hz control systems. High precision construction is 
required to maintain concentricity and to prevent any direct coupling between the two phase windings. Pick-
up from stray ﬁelds is eliminated by soft-iron shields. 
The stepper motor is a special type of synchronous motor which is designed to rotate through a speciﬁc angle 
(called a step) for each electrical pulse received by its control unit. Typical step sizes are 7.5°, 15° or larger. 
The stepper motor is used in digitally controlled position control systems in open loop mode. The input 
command is in the form of a train of pulses to turn a shaft through a speciﬁed angle. 
There are two advantages in using stepper motors. One is their compatibility with digital systems and 
secondly no sensors are needed for position and speed sensing as these are directly obtained by counting 
input pulses and periodic counting if speed information is needed. Stepper motors have a wide range of 
applications; paper feed motors in typewriters and printers, positioning of print heads, pens in XY-plotters, 
recording heads in computer disk drives and in positioning of work tables and tools in numerically controlled 
machining equipment. The range of applications of these motors is increasing as these motors are becoming 
available in larger power ratings and with reducing cost. 
Elementary operation of a four-phase stepper motor with a two-pole rotor can be illustrated through the 
diagram of Fig. 10.32. Let us assume that the rotor is permanent magnet excited.
q
a
Rotor
ia
ib
ic
id
a
b
c
d
N
d
c
b
S
O
N
Such a rotor aligns with the axis of the stator ﬁeld with torque being proportional to the sin q, q being 
the angle of displacement between the rotor axis and stator ﬁeld axis. The torque-angle characteristics is 
drawn in Fig. 10.33(a) with phase a excited and also with phase b excited. It is easily observed that the stable 

Fractional Kilowatt Motors 
741
position of the rotor corresponds to that angle at which the torque is zero and is positive for smaller angles 
and negative for larger angles. Thus with phase a excited, the stable (or locked) position is q = 0° but not q 
= 180° (unstable) and the torque has a maximum positive value at q = – 90°. It is therefore easily concluded 
that each excitation pattern of phases corresponds to a unique position of the rotor. Therefore the excitation 
sequence a, b, c, d, aº causes the rotor to move in positive sequence in steps of 90°.
With rotor in position q = 0 and a and b both excited the rotor will move to 45°, which is a stable position 
(net torque due to a and b zero and torque-angle slope negative). So excitation sequence a, a + b, b, b + c, c º 
make the rotor to move forward in steps of 45°. Patterns for phase winding excitations can be easily visualized 
for steps of 22.5°, 11.25°, and smaller per pulse input to the circuit. Another feature of a PM stepper motor is 
that, when excited, it seeks a preferred position which offers advantage in certain applications.
Consider now that the rotor (projecting pole) is made of just ferromagnetic material (no permanent 
magnet). The device now behaves as a variable-reluctance motor. The ferromagnetic rotor seeks the position 
which presents minimum reluctance to the stator ﬁeld, i.e. the rotor axis aligns itself to the stator ﬁeld axis. In 
Fig. 10.32 with phase a excited, this happens at q = 0° as well as q = 180° in which positions the torque on the 
rotor is zero. At q = 90° the rotor presents inﬁnite reluctance to the phase ‘a’ axis and so the torque has also 
a zero* there. Thus the rotor torque is a function of sin 2q as drawn in Fig. 10.33(b). For a reluctance stepper 
motor there are two possible stable positions for a given excitation or set of excitations. 
Rotor torque
in +
direction
q
(a) PM rotor
–90°
0°
+90°
+180°
+270°
Phase a
excited
Phase
excited
b
0
q
N
S
Rotor position
excited
Na
(b) Variable
reluctance
rotor
Rotor torque
in +
direction
q
0
–90°
0°
+90°
+180°
+270°
Nb excited
Na excited
q
Rotor position
excited
Na
 
Having illustrated the operation of an elementary stepper motor and its two types, we shall now consider 
some further details. 
 
* At these position of maximum and minimum reluctance, the rate of change of reluc tance is zero (zero torque).

742 Electric Machines
A variable-reluctance stepper motor consists of a single or several stacks of stators and rotors—stators 
have a common frame and rotors have a common shaft as shown in the longitudinal cross-sectional view of 
Fig. 10.34 for a 3-stack motor. Both stators and rotors have toothed structure as shown in the end view of 
Fig. 10.35. The stator and rotor teeth are of same number and size and therefore can be aligned as shown in 
this ﬁgure. The stators are pulse excited, while the rotors are unexcited.
 
a
b
c
Stator a
Stator b
Stator c
Rotor c
Rotor b
Rotor a
 
360°
= 30°
T
 
 
Consider a particular stator and rotor set shown in the developed diagram of Fig. 10.36. As the stator is 
excited, the rotor is pulled into the nearest minimum reluctance position; the position where stator and rotor 
teeth are aligned. The static torque acting on the rotor is a function of the angular misalignment q. There are 
two positions of zero torque: q = 0, rotor and stator teeth aligned and q = 360°/(2 ¥ T ) = 180°/T (T = number 
of rotor teeth), rotor teeth aligned with stator slots. The shape of the static torque-angle curve of one stack 
of a stepper motor is shown in Fig. 10.37. It is nearly sinusoidal. Teeth aligned position (q = 0) is a stable 
position, i.e., slight disturbance from this position in either direction brings the rotor back to it. Tooth-slot 
aligned position (q = 180°/T ) is unstable i.e, slight disturbance from this position in either direction makes 
the rotor move away from it. The rotor thus locks into stator in position q = 0 (or multiple of 360°/T ). The 
dynamic torque-speed characteristic will differ from this due to speed emf induced in stator coils.
 
30°
15°
Rotor
Stator
q
 
T
Torque
q
0
180°
q = –
T
180°
q =
 
 
 
of stator-rotor 
 
motor stack

Fractional Kilowatt Motors 
743
While the teeth on all the rotors are perfectly aligned, stator teeth of various stacks differ by an angular 
displacement of
 
a = 360∞
nT  
(10.62) 
where n = number of stacks. 
Figure 10.38 shows the developed diagram of a 3-stack stepper motor with rotor in such a position that 
stack c rotor teeth are aligned with its stator. Here 
 
a = 360
3
12
¥
 = 10° (number of rotor teeth = 12)  
(10.63)
In a multiple stack rotor, number of phases equals number of stacks. If phase‘a’ stator is pulse excited, 
the rotor will move by 10° in the direction indicated. If instead phase b is excited, the rotor will move by 
10° opposite to the direction indicated. Pulse train with sequence abcab will make the rotor go through 
incremental motion in indicated direction, while sequence bacba will make it move to opposite direction. 
Directional control is only possible with three or more phases.
Stack a
Stack b
1
360°
×
=10°
12
3
2
360°
×
= 20°
12
3
Rotor
Stack c
Figure 10.39 shows the phases (stacks) of a 2-phase, 4-pole permanent magnet stepper motor. The rotor 
is made of ferrite or rare-earth material which is permanently magnetized. The stator stack of phase b is 
staggered from that of phase a by an angle of 90° elect. When the phase a is excited, the rotor is aligned as 
shown in Fig. 10.39(a). If now the phase b is also excited, the effective stator poles shift counterclockwise by 
221
2
∞ [Fig. 10.39(b)] causing the rotor to move accordingly. If the phase ‘a’ is now de-energized (with b still 
energized), the rotor will move another step of 221
2
∞. The reversal of phase a winding current will produce 
a further forward movement of 221
2
∞, and so on. It is easy to visualize as to how the direction of movement 
can be reversed.

744 Electric Machines
S
S
S
S
N
N
N
N
(a) Phase a
S
S
S
S
N
N
N
N
(b) Phase b
 
Permanent-magnet stepper motor 
To simplify the switching arrangement, which is accomplished electronically, double coils are provided 
for each phase. The schematic diagram of switching circuit is shown in Fig. 10.40.
Compared to variable-reluctance motors, typical permanent-magnet stepper motors operate at larger steps 
up to 90°, and at maximum response rates of 300 pps.
a
b
Switch a
Switch b
Phase b
Phase a
 
This is in fact a PM stepper motor with constructional features of toothed and stacked rotor adopted from the 
variable-reluctance motor. The stator has only one set of winding-excited poles which interact with the two 
rotor stacks. The permanent magnet is placed axially along the rotor in form of an annular cylinder over the 
motor shaft. The stacks at each end of the rotor are toothed. So all the teeth on the stack at one of the rotor 
acquire the same polarity while all the teeth of the stack at the other end of the rotor acquire the opposite 
polarity. The two sets of teeth are displaced from each other by one half of the tooth pitch (also called pole 
pitch). These constructional details are brought out by Fig. 10.41(a) and (b) for the case of three teeth on each 
stack so that tooth pitch gt = 360°/3 = 120°. This motor has a 2-phase, 4-pole stator. 
Consider now that the stator phase ‘a’ is excited such that the top stator pole acquires north polarity while 
the bottom stator pole acquires south polarity. As a result of the nearest tooth of the front stack (assumed 
to be of north polarity) is pulled into locking position with the stator south pole (top) and the diametrically 
opposite tooth of the rear stack (south polarity) is simultaneously locked into the stator north pole (bottom). 

Fractional Kilowatt Motors 
745
The repulsive forces on the remaining two front stack teeth balance out as these are symmetrically located 
w.r.t. the bottom stator pole and so do the repulsive forces due to the top stator pole on the remaining two rear 
stack teeth. This rotor position is thus a stable position with net torque on rotor being zero.
PM
N
S
(a)
(b)
Phase a
Phase b
Stator
Rotor
(N)
N
N
N
S
S
S
(S)
If the excitation is shifted from phase a to phase b such that right-hand pole becomes south and left-hand 
pole becomes north, this would cause the rotor to turn anti-clockwise by g t/4 = 30° into the new locking 
position. The rotor will turn clockwise by 30° if the phase b were oppositely excited. 

746 Electric Machines
If the stator excitation were to be removed, the rotor will continue to remain locked into the same position 
as it is prevented to move in either direction by torque because of the permanent magnet excitation. This fact 
is in favour of hybrid (also PM) motors. Compared to PM motor ﬁners steps for better resolution are easily 
obtained in hybrid motor by increasing the number of stack teeth and also by adding additional stack pairs on 
the rotor for example for a seven teeth stack the steps size is (360°/7)/4 = (90°/7)°. Also compared to variable-
reluctance motor a hybrid motor requires less stator excitation current because of the PM excited rotor. 
Half stepping can be achieved in a hybrid motor by exciting phase a and then exciting phase b before 
switching off the excitation of phase ‘a’ and so on. In fact any fractional step can be obtained by suitably 
proportioning the excitation of the two phases. Such stepping is known as microstepping. 
Typical step angles for stepper motors are 15°, 7.5°, 2° and 0.72°. The choice of the angle depends upon 
the angular resolution required for application. 
As the stepping rate is increased, the rotor has less time to drive the load from one position to the next as 
the stator-winding current pattern is shifted. Beyond a certain pulsing rate [(pulse/s) = pps] the rotor cannot 
follow the command and would begin to miss pulses. The start range as shown in Fig. 10.42 is that in which 
the load position follows the pulses without losing steps. The slew-range is one in which the load velocity 
follows the pulse rate without losing a step, but cannot start, stop or reverse on command. Obviously the 
maximum slew rate would increase as the load is lightened. Typical variable-reluctance motors can operate 
at maximum position response rates up to 1200 pps. 
Step skipping may also occur if motor oscillation amplitude about the locking position is too large.
Torque
Max torque
(steady)
Start range
Max pull-in
Max pull-out
Pulses/s(pps)
Pull-out torque
Slew
range
A series motor can be run from either dc or ac (single-phase) supply provided that both stator and rotor cores 
are laminated to limit the iron-loss. Figure 10.43 is the cross-sectional view of a series motor connected to ac 
supply. As the armature current alternates, the ﬁeld polarity alternates in phase with it as shown in Fig. 10.44; 
as a consequence the torque developed (μ fia) is unidirectional with a pulsating component over and above 
the average value*. The pulsating component of torque is ﬁltered out by the rotor and load inertia so that the 
 
* When the armature and ﬁeld of a shunt motor are ac excited, the ﬂux/pole and armature current would be out-of-
phase because of highly inductive shunt ﬁeld. Though there is a net forward torque, its magnitude is small and the 
motor opera tion is highly inefﬁcient.

Fractional Kilowatt Motors 
747
speed pulsations are almost negligible. The necessity of laminating the stator (poles and yoke) is indicated by 
the alternating ﬂux it is required to carry.
Cross field
( -axis)
q
Main field
( -axis)
d
ia
A
A¢
B¢
V
B
 Series motor
ia
t
f
t
N
S
T
t
Tav

748 Electric Machines
The current-carrying armature produces cross-ﬂux along the q-axis in space quadrature with the main ﬂux 
(in the d-axis). These two ﬂuxes apart from being in space quadrature are alternating at a supply frequency. 
Each of these ﬂuxes then induces rotational and static (transformer) emf’s in the armature. 
d
As in the dc case, rotational emf is induced in armature conductors adding to a maximum value at the q-axis 
brushes. The emf alternates in unison with ﬂux/pole. The magnitude of this emf is maximum in coils BB¢ 
(Fig. 19.43) and is zero in coils AA¢ under the brushes. Hence, commutation remains unaffected by this emf. 
Caused by time-variation of the ﬂux/pole, transformer emf’s are induced in armature coils which add to 
net zero value at the brushes. These emfs have zero value in coils BB¢ and maximum value in coils AA¢. Since 
coils AA¢ are shorted by the brushes, commutation is seriously affected resulting in brush sparking. 
The rms value of the rotational emf caused by the main ﬁeld is 
 
Ea = 1
2
60
FnZ
P
A
¥ Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜  
(10.64) 
where F = maximum value of ﬂux/pole 
This emf is in-phase with the main ﬂux phasor. 
The rotational emf caused by cross-ﬂux (along q-axis) induces net zero emf at the brushes. This emf is zero 
in coils BB¢ and maximum in coils AA¢ thereby interfering in the commutation process. 
On the other hand, the transformer emf of armature coils adds to a deﬁnite value and is alternating leading 
the crossﬂux by 90° (refer to Fig. 3.6). This emf is maximum in coils BB¢ and zero in coils AA¢ and so does 
not affect commutation. 
The rms value of transformer emf Et at the brushes is calculated below: 
 
Et = 
2p K f
N
b
a
p
F
 
(10.65) 
where 
Np = turns/parallel path; Fa = armature (cross) ﬂux; proportional to Ia 
 
Kb = space factor; though coil emf’s are in phase, their magnitude varies as cosine of angle the coil 
axis makes with the brush axis 
Assuming the armature winding to be ﬁnely distributed, it can be easily shown that 
 
Kb = 2/p 
Hence 
Et = 2
2 f FaNp 
(10.66) 
The ratio of the transformer emf (Et) to the rotational emf (Ea) is 
 
E
E
t
a
 = 
2 2
1
2
60
f
N
nZ
P
A
a
p
F
F
◊
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
But 
Np = Z
A
2
\ 
E
E
t
a
 = 120 f
nP
a
F
F
 = n
n
s
a
◊F
F
 
(10.67) 

Fractional Kilowatt Motors 
749
where 
ns = 120 f
P
 = synchronous speed 
The net emf induced in the armature is the sum of the transformer emf and that due to leakage inductance 
(xa) and is given by 
 
jI x
jE
a a
t
+
 = jI
x
E I
a
a
t
a
(
/
)
+
Since Et is caused by cross-ﬂux whose origin is in armature current, the two must be in phase. Deﬁne 
 
E I
t
a
/  = xat
Thus the net inductive emf in the armature circuit is 
 
jI
x
x
a
a
at
(
)
+
 = jI X
a
a
where 
Xa = xa + xat 
(10.68)
The circuit model of the series motor for ac operation can 
now be immediately drawn as in Fig. 10.45 where rf,xf = ﬁeld 
resistance and reactance respectively.
From the circuit model* of Fig. 10.45
 
V  = I
r
jx
I
R
jX
E
a
f
f
a
a
a
a
(
)
(
)
+
+
+
+
 
(10.69)
The corresponding phasor diagram is drawn in Fig. 10.46. The ﬂux phasor F  (main) and F  (cross) are 
assumed in phase with motor current Ia. In fact to be strictly correct Ia  will lead these ﬂux phasors by a 
small angle on account of hysteresis and eddy-current losses of the motor. 
I r
a f
I X
a f
I Xa
a
Va
I R
a
a
Ia
F(cross)
F(main)
q(pf angle)
Ea
V
 
Phasor diagram of series motor for ac operation
As shown in the beginning, the torque developed is pulsating in nature with an average value and a predominant 
second harmonic component. The average torque is given by 
 
Tavwm = EaIa 
(10.70)
Ia
rf
Xf
Va
Ea
Ra
Xa
V
 Circuit model of ac series motor 
for ac operation 
 
* This circuit model is not highly accurate because hysteresis and eddy-current losses and magnetic saturation have 
been ignored which in fact are signiﬁcant.

750 Electric Machines
Being a series motor Ea μ Ia (assuming linear magnetic circuit), the torque is therefore proportional to 
square of armature current which becomes directly proportional at high armature current because of saturation 
of the magnetic circuit.
Figure 10.47 shows the performance characteristics of an ac-operated series motor. The speed-torque 
characteristic has a typical series shape. The speed-torque characteristic for dc operation would lie somewhat 
higher as shown dotted. This is because of reactance voltage drops [Ia(xf + Xa)] in ac operation so that Ea and 
hence speed is lower for a given current and torque. The power factor of an ac-operated series motor is rather 
poor because of the large series reactance (Xf + Xa).
Power output
Current
Rated torque
Speed (dc operation)
Speed (ac operation)
Speed
or
power
or
current
Torque
 
Performance characteristics of series motor
The no-load speed of a universal motor, unlike other machines, is very high (of the order of 20000 rpm). 
Therefore, the motor is smaller in size than other types for a given load. Universal motors are used where 
light weight is important, as in vacuum cleaners and portable tools which usually operate at high speeds 
(1500–15000 rpm). 
To improve the power factor of a series motor, the cross-ﬂux 
which is mainly responsible for armature reactance must be 
cancelled out by a compensating winding connected in series 
with the armature circuit. The axis of this winding is along the 
brush axis and the winding must be spread over the full pole 
pitch for effective neutralization of cross-ﬂux. Like in a dc 
machine the interpole winding when provided must be effective 
over a narrow interpolar region. The schematic connection 
diagram of all the stator windings and the armature is shown 
in Fig. 10.48.
Main field
winding
Compensating
winding
Interpole
winding
Ia
V
 Arrangement of stator winding in 
ac-operated series motor

Fractional Kilowatt Motors 
751
 A universal motor (ac-operated) has a 2-pole armature with 960 conductors. At a certain 
load the motor speed is 5000 rpm and the armature current is 4.6 A; the armature terminal voltage and 
input are respectively 100 V and 300 W.
Compute the following, assuming an armature resistance of 3.5 W.
 (a) Effective armature reactance 
 (b) Maximum value of useful ﬂux/pole 
SOLUTION 
The operating conditions in terms of voltage and current of the armature circuit are shown in Fig. 10.49. 
 
100 ¥ 4.6 cos f = 330 W 
or  
f = 49.3° 
(lagging because of reactive nature of the circuit).
 
(a) From the circuit the following can be written 
 
  
100
49 3
0
3 5
–
∞-
– ∞
+
.
.
E
jX
a
a
 = 4.6–0°
 
 Ea  is in-phase with Ia
 
 or 
65.2 + j 75.8 – Ea = 16.1 + j 4.6 Xa 
 
 Equating real and imaginary parts, 
 
  
Ea = 65.2 – 16.1 = 49.1 V
 
  
Xa = 75 8
4 6
.
.
 = 165 W
 
(b)  
Ea = 1
2
60
◊
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
FnZ
P
A
 
  
F = 
2
49 1
60
5000
960
¥
¥
¥
.
 = 0.868 mWb 
 
 Fractional kilowatt motors are employed in fans, refrigerators, mixers, vacuum cleaners, washing 
machines, other kitchen equipment, tools, small farming appliances etc.
 
 When single phase induction motor winding carries a sinusoidal current, it produces a sinusoidally 
space-distributed mmf whose peak value pulsates with time.
 
 The two rotating ﬁelds have the same strength and produce equal and opposite torques resulting in 
net starting torque of zero value so the single winding single phase induction motor is thus non self-
starting.
 
 Practical necessity dictates that the two rotating ﬁelds are made to have unequal strength under 
stationary conditions there by making the motor self-starting. This requires one more winding on the 
motor called auxiliary windings which is in space quadrature with the main winding and comprises 
smaller number of turns of thinner wire.
 
 Two value capacitor motor has high starting torque and better running power factor and efﬁciency and 
quieter and smoother operation.
 
 The single phase reluctance motor working with the principle of the origin of the reluctance torque 
lies in the tendency of the rotor to align itself in the minimum reluctance position with respect to the 
synchronously rotating ﬂux of the forward ﬁeld. 
+
+
–
–
3.5
Ea
0°
–
Xa
4.6
0°
–
100 49.3°
–

752 Electric Machines
 
 In hysteresis motor, the rotor magnetization to lag behind the stator created mmf wave, so rotor ﬂux 
lags by angle of the stator mmf axis under the inﬂuence of the hysteresis.
 10.1 A 220 V, 50 Hz, 6-pole, single-phase induction 
motor has the following circuit model 
parameters:
 
  
R1m = 3.6 W (X1m + X2) = 15.6 W
 
  
R2 = 6.8 W 
X = 96 W 
 
 The rotational losses of the motor are 
estimated to be 75 W. At a motor speed of  
940 rpm, determine the line current, power 
factor, shaft power and efﬁciency.
 10.2 A(1/4) kW, 230 V, 50 Hz, 4-pole split-phase 
motor has the following circuit model 
parameters: 
 
  
R1m = 10.1 W, 
X1m = 11.6 W 
 
  
R1a = 40.30 W, 
X1a = 9.65 W 
 
  
X = 236 W, 
a = 0.92
 
  
R2 = 9.46 W 
X2 = 6.86 W
 
 Friction, windage and core-loss = 45 W.
 
(a) Calculate starting torque and current of 
the motor. 
 
(b) Calculate the performance of the motor at 
a slip of 0.035. (The auxiliary winding is 
open-circuited.) 
 10.3 A 400 W, 220 V, 50 Hz, 6-pole, permanent-
capacitor motor has the following circuit 
model parameters: 
 
  
R1 = 9.2 W, 
X1m = 8.7 W 
 
  
R1a = 15.5 W, 
X1a = 13.5 W
 
  
X = 138.5 W
 
  
ZC  = – j257 W (series capacitive reac-
 
  
  tance in auxiliary winding)
 
  
a = 1.25 
 
  
R2 = 14.3 W 
 
  
X2 = 6.84 W 
 
 The windage friction and core-loss is 45 W
 
(a) Calculate starting torque and current.
 
(b) Calculate motor performance at s = 0.1. 
 10.4 Show that if the stator voltages of 2-phase 
induction motor are Vm and Va with a ﬁxed 
phase difference of 90°, the starting torque is 
the same as for a balanced voltage of V V
m a  
per phase. 
 10.5 For a 2-phase servomotor with a high 
resistance rotor, ﬁnd approximate expres sions 
for forward and backward torques in terms of 
phase voltages (differing 90° in phase) and 
motor speed. Assume the stator impedance 
and rotor reactance to be negligible. 
 10.6 Show that in a 2-phase tachometer with a 
high resistance rotor, the voltage induced on 
the open-circuited phase (a) is proportional to 
the rotor speed and leads the other phase (m) 
voltage by 90°. Neglect the stator impedance 
and rotor reactance.
 
 
1. Explain why a single phase single winding 
induction motor produces no starting torque.
 
2. What is the advantage of a capacitor start 
motor over a resistance split phase motor?
 
3. Why are high speeds often desirable in the 
operation of universal motors? What limit the 
speed?
 
4. How can the speed of a linear induction motor 
(LIM) be controlled?
 
5. Give reasons for the low efﬁciency of 
hysteresis and reluctance motors.
 
6. What are servomotors and list their character-
istics?
 
7. State the various applications of a stepper 
motor.
 

Generalised Theory of Electrical Machines 
753
11.1 
INTRODUCTION
The objective of generalised machine theory is to establish an expression of 
electromagnetic torque in terms of machine variables (i and q). This theory 
may be developed based on anyone of the following principles:
 
(i) The derivation of equivalent-circuit representation of magnetically coupled circuits
 (ii) The concept of sinusoidally distributed winding 
 (iii) The concept of rotating air-gap Magneto Motive Force (mmf )
 (iv) The derivation of winding inductances, both synchronous and asynchronous machines
11
11.2 CONVENTION 
In the development of the generalized machine theory, certain conventions have been adopted and they are 
consistently maintained throughout, for intelligent speciﬁcation of theory. Some of them are listed as follows:
 
(i) The distribution of current and ﬂux under one pair of poles, repeats itself under all other pairs of poles.
 (ii) Each part of the actual machine forming a single circuit is represented in the idealized or basic two-
ploe machine by a single coil. These single coils occupy only a part of the radius on rotor and stator, 
the coils are shown on one side of the machine only.
 (iii) The axis of the poles is called the direct axis (Daxis) of the machine, The axis which is 90° away from 
it is called the quadrature axis (Qaxis). 
 (iv) The positive direction of the current in any coil is towards the coil in the lead nearer to the centre of 
the diagram.
 (v) The positive direction of rotation of the rotor is taken as clockwise or anti-clockwise and torque is also 
taken positive when acting in the sense of positive rotation.
In a two-pole machine representation, each part of the winding forming a single circuit is represented by a 
single coil. In general, the basic two-pole machine diagrams for any type of rotating electrical machine, can 
be drawn by knowing
 
(i) the stator and rotor conﬁguration, salient pole member being taken as stationary

754 Electric Machines
 (ii) the winding arrangement on both stator and rotor 
 (iii) the position of the brushes on the rotor
All the direct current (dc) machines are invariably ﬁtted with a commutator but in case of alternating current 
(ac) machines few of them have commutator winding. Fig. 11.1(a) depicts the two-pole machine representation 
of a commutator machine such as a dc separately excited motor. Commutator action effectively divides the 
armature winding along the brush axis to form two uniform current sheets which are in opposite polarity. 
While the armature rotates, the direction and magnitude of the armature mmf FQR remain unchanged, because 
the direction of current under north and south poles does not vary with armature rotations.
The two-pole representation of a commutator machine is shown in Fig. 11.1(b). As per magnetic 
considerations, the commutator winding behaves as a stationary concentrated coil (Qr) shown in Fig. 11.1(b). 
The direction of the ﬁeld current ﬂow in the coil (Ds shown in Fig. 11.1(b)) should divide the poles such as 
North Pole (N) or South Pole (S). For total equivalence, the stationary concentrated coil (Qr) generates the 
same rotational voltage as that generated by the commutator winding, when acting as a generator. In motor 
action, the same torque is developed for the same currents in the coil (Qr) and in the commutator winding. 
Such a coil is ﬁctious and as it is to be used to represent commutator winding, it is given the identifying 
name of pseudo-stationary coil or quasi-stationary coil. This coil does not move along the rotor. However, 
voltage is induced in the coil by virtue of rotation. In general, the coil is located in the quadrature axis.
DS
VDs
Daxis
Qaxis
Qr
wr
iQR
vQR
(a)
(b)
+
+
+
+
+
+
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑
N
Qaxis
FQR
FDS
S
Daxis
wr
iDs
 
 
(a) Commutated machine (seperately excited dc/motor) 
 
 
(b) Two-pole representation of commutator machine 
The basic 3-f induction machine diagram is shown in Fig. 11.2. It consists of  three windings on the stator 
can be represented by three coils R, Y and B. These windings are 120° electrically displaced between them. 
Letting the winding R is taken along the d-axis for convenience. The rotor carries a short-circuited cage or a 
slip ring winding. The rotor windings are represented by three coils R1, Y1 and B1 on the rotor.

Generalised Theory of Electrical Machines 
755
B
wr
Y
R
Y
1
R
1
B
1
Fig. 11.2 Basic machine diagram for an induction machine
11.4 TRANSFORMER WITH A MOVABLE SECONDARY WINDING 
An ideal transformer has been represented with two windings shown in Fig. 11.3. The secondary winding 
(Sy) is coincident with primary (Py) winding shown ﬁn Fig. 11.3(a). In Fig. 11.3(b), the secondary winding 
V1
V2
Py
Sy
(a)
(b)
V1
Py
Sy
q
V2 cos q
Fig. 11.3 Transformer with primary (Py) and secondary (sy) winding axis (a) coincident (b) at an angle of q

756 Electric Machines
axis is q degrees mechanically deviated with respect to the primary magnetic axis. Assume both windings 
have an equal number of turns. Suppose the secondary winding is coincident with the magnetic axis of the 
primary winding and the same amount of emf is induced in the secondary. Otherwise, the emf induced in the 
secondary winding given by  
 
e = N cosq 
(11.1)
where e is the total emf induced in the secondary winding in volts; N is the number of turns and q is the angle 
between magnetic axis of primary and secondary windings. 
The transformer and speed voltage of an armature winding can be understood from Fig. 11.4. It consists 
of coil (ﬁeld coil) dS along Daxis, and on the stationary element shown in Fig. 11.12(a). The magnetic ﬂux 
produced by the coil is assumed to be distributed sinusoidally in space and time varying in nature. Another 
Daxis
ids
dS
dR
q
wr
Qaxis
(b)
Daxis
dS
ids
dR
Qaxis
wr
(b)
Qaxis
dR
q = 270°
wr
Daxis
ids
ds
(c)
 
(a), (b) and (c) coils dS, dR

Generalised Theory of Electrical Machines 
757
similar coil dR along the d-axis is on the moving element. The alternating magnetic ﬂux produced by ids in 
coil ds links dR and its magnitude is given by 
 
lmd = Mdids 
(11.2)
where Md is the mutual inductance between the coils ds and dR and ids is the exciting current at this particular 
instant in coil ds. 
Assume the coil dR is a moving element, transverses an angle q in time, say t seconds, such that q = 
wrt radians shown in Fig. 11.12(b). Therefore, the ﬂux linkage in the coil dR after t seconds is given by 
 
lmd cos q 
(11.3) 
Applying Faraday’s law, the emf induced in the coil is written by 
 
e = - d
dt (lmd cos q) 
(11.4)
i.e., 
e = + lmd wr sin q – cos q Md pids; p = d
dt , derivative operator  
(11.5)
where d
dt
q  = pq = wr ; the ﬁrst term in. Eq. (11.5) is the speed voltage component, because speed wr appears 
in it. The other terms is called as transformer voltage, since this, component involves the time derivative 
of current ids. Figure 11.4(c) illustrates the coil dR coincide with q-axis, so emf induced in the coil dR at this 
instant is given by
 
eq = – wr lmd; no transformer voltage, cos 270° = 0 
(11.6)
The equivalent electrical network of a two-pole machine is called Kron’s primitive machine or generalized 
machine.
 
(i) The MMF distributed along the air-gap periphery is sinusoidal.
 (ii) Space harmonics and their effect on torque and on induced voltage are neglected.
 (iii) Saturation and hysteresis effects are neglected.
 (iv) No variation of inductances with the relative movement between stator and rotor (tapped by commutator 
brushes).
 (v) Inductance variations due to slot openings are neglected. 
 (vi) Self and mutual inductances vary sinusoidally as the rotor moves. 
Figure 11.5(a) depicted the Kron’s primitive and its two-pole representation. It consists of a stationary 
ﬁeld winding (ds) in the direct axis and an independent ﬁeld winding (qs) in the quadrature axis. A rotating 
armature winding is taken out from a commutator. Two sets of brushes are provided which are magnetically 
perpendicular to each other, with one brush set in direct axis and the other in the quadrature axis. The 
equivalent electrical network is called the generalized machine, Kron’s primitive machine, generalized 
Model or two axis model of rotating machines.
Note:
 
(i) Equivalent armature coils dR and qR as in Fig. 11.5(b) produce stationary ﬂux along the brush axes. 
 (ii) If the brushes are stationary, the brush axes are also called Park’s axes. 

758 Electric Machines
 (iii) If the brushes are rotating, the corresponding armature coil ﬂuxes will also rotate. 
 (iv) Single armature winding is made to act as two electrically and magnetically independent armature 
windings in quadrature, due to the presence of two brush sets. 
 (v) This representation is valid in both eclectically and magnetically linear systems and the principle of 
superposition is applicable.
Daxis
ids
ds
wr
Qaxis
(b)
Daxis
ds
Qaxis
wr
(a)
iqr
Vqs
iqs
Vqr
qs
qR
dR
idr
Vdr
Vds
qs
 (a) Kron’s Primitive machine (b) Two-pole representation of Kron‘s primitive machine 
The term ‘linear transformation’ means that the transformation from old to new set of variables or vice versa 
is governed by linear equations (An equation, each of whose terms is a ﬁrst-degree term in the variable is 
called a linear algebraic equation). A linear equation does not involve squares, higher powers of the variables 
or their products. 
 
[New variables] = [Transformation matrix] [Old variables] 
or 
[Old variables] = [Transformation matrix] [New variables] 
This principle of maintaining the same power under transformation from an old to a new set of variables are 
known as invariance of power. If power is variant under transformation, power and torques can be determined 
only from currents expressed in the original system reference axis. In other words, if the current in the 
new set of variables are obtained, it will be essential to transform them back to the original set of variables 
before power or torque is calculated. However, if the transformations corresponds to the power invariance, 
power and torques ‘calculated either from the new set of variables or from the old set of variables’ will yield 
identical results.
If a commutator machine has brushes displaced from d- or q axes shown in Fig. 11.6(a), a transformation is 
necessary from the displaced brush axis to d-q axis. Suppose one set of brushes, denoted by AA, makes an 

Generalised Theory of Electrical Machines 
759
angle a with the d-axis as shown in Fig. 11.6(b). The armature establishes an mmf (Fa) along its brush axis. 
This mmf can be resolved along the d-axis (Fd) and q-axis (Fq) as in Fig. 11.6(c) where, 
 
Fd = Fa cos a  
(11.7)
 
Fq = Fa sin a  
(11.8)
Assuming equal number of turns in both armature and d-q coils, we get
 
Nid = Nia cos a 
 
id = ia cos a  
(11.9)
 
iq = ia sin a 
(11.10)
Thus, two D and Q in 11.6(c) with the currents given above are required to establish the equivalence of 
mmfs.
Qaxis
wr
iQ
iD
Q
F
Ni
a
a
=
a
Daxis
ia
(b)
a
wr
(a)
Qaxis
ia
Daxis
A
A
ia
(c)
F
Ni
a
a
=
Brush axis
Daxis
Qaxis
Fd
Fq
a
 (a) One set of displaced brush axis (b) Its D-Q equivalent (c) shifting transformation of brush 
Consider now two sets of brushes AA and BB displaced from the D-, Q-axis by angles a and b respectively 
as shown in Fig. 11.17(a). The equivalent D-, Q-axis coils are shown in Fig. 11.17(b). 
The equivalent mmfs along D-axis and Q-axis can be written from Fig. 11.17(c) as 
The mmf in D-axis and Q-axis can be written as
 
Fd = Fa cos a – Fb sin g  
(11.11) 

