Winter’s Wife
ELIZABETH HAND
 
 
One of the most respected writers of her generation, Elizabeth Hand won
both the Nebula Award and the World Fantasy Award for her story “Last
Summer at Mars Hill,” and has been a finalist for the World Fantasy 
Award on a number of other occasions as well. Her books include the
novels Winterlong, Aestival Tide, Icarus Descending, Image of Support,
Waking the Moon, Glimmering, and Black Light. She’s also written a
num-ber of Star Wars novels, including Maze of Deception, Hunted, A
New Threat, and Pursuit, and movie novelizations such as Twelve
Monkeys, Anna and the King, Cat-woman, and The Affair of the Necklace. 
Her acclaimed short fiction, which has ap-peared in most of the major
markets in science fiction, fantasy, and horror, has been collected in Last
Summer at Mars Hill, Bibliomancy, and Saffron & Brimstone. Her most
recent book is the novel Mortal Love. Coming up is a new novel,
Generation Loss. She lives with her family in Lincolnville, Maine.
 
In the—appropriately enough—chilling story that follows, she
shows us what happens when all the money and influence and bright
shiny gadgets of the modern world come into conflict with ancient magic.
Magic old and slow and cold, and as immovable as rock.
 
* * * *
 
W
INTER’S real name was Roderick Gale Winter. But everyone in Paswegas
County, not just me and people who knew him personally, called him
Winter. He lived in an old school bus down the road from my house, and my
mother always tells how when she first moved here he scared the crap out
of her. It wasn’t even him that scared her, she hadn’t even met him yet; just
the fact that there was this creepy-looking old school bus stuck in the
middle of the woods, with smoke coming out of a chimney and these huge
piles of split logs around and trucks and cranes and heavy equipment, and
in the summer all kinds of chain saws and stuff, and in the fall deer and
dead coyotes hanging from this big pole that my mother said looked like a
gallows, and blood on the snow, and once a gigantic dead pig’s head with
tusks, which my mother said was scarier even than the coy-otes. Which,
when you think of it, does sound pretty bad, so you can’t blame her for

being freaked out. It’s funny now because she and Winter are best friends,
though that doesn’t mean so much as it does other places, like Chicago,
where my mother moved here from, because I think everyone in Shaker
Harbor thinks Winter is their friend.
 
The school bus, when you get inside it, is sweet.
 
Winter’s family has been in Shaker Harbor for six generations, and
even before that they lived somewhere else in Maine.
 
“I have Passamaquoddy blood,” Winter says. “If I moved somewhere
else, I’d melt.”                                      
 
He didn’t look like a Native American, though, and my mother said if
he did have Indian blood it had probably been diluted by now. Winter was
really tall and skinny, not sick skinny but bony and muscular, stooped from
having to duck through the door of the school bus all those years. He
al-ways wore a gimme cap that said WINTER TREE SERVICE, and I can
remem-ber how shocked I was once when I saw him at Town Meeting
without his hat, and he had almost no hair. He’d hunt and butcher his own
deer, but he wouldn’t eat it—he said he’d grown up dirt-poor in a cabin that
didn’t even have a wooden floor, just pounded earth, and his family would
eat anything they could hunt, including snake and skunk and snapping turtle.
So he’d give all his venison away, and when people hired him to butcher
their live-stock and gave him meat, he’d give that away, too.
 
That was how my mother met him, that first winter fifteen years ago
when she was living here alone, pregnant with me. There was a big storm
going on, and she looked out the window and saw this tall guy stomping
through the snow carrying a big paper bag.
 
“You a vegetarian?” he said, when she opened the door. “Everyone
says there’s a lady from away living here who’s going to have a baby and
she’s a vegetarian. But you don’t look like one to me.”
 
My mother said no, she wasn’t a vegetarian, she was a registered
certified massage therapist.
 
“Whatever the hell that is,” said Winter. “You going to let me in?
Jesus Q. Murphy, is that your woodstove?”
 
See, my mother had gotten pregnant by a sperm donor. She had it all
planned out, how she was going to move way up north and have a baby and
raise it—him, me—by herself and live off the land and be a massage

thera-pist and hang crystals in the windows and there would be this good
energy and everything was going to be perfect. And it would have been, if
she had moved to, like, Huntington Beach or even Boston, someplace like
that, where it would be warmer and there would be good skate parks,
instead of a place where you have to drive two hours to a skate park and it
snows from November till the end of May. And in the spring you can’t even
skate on the roads here because they’re all dirt roads and so full of
potholes you could live in one. But the snowboarding is good, especially
since Winter let us put a jump right behind his place.
 
But this part is all before any snowboarding, because it was all before
me, though not much before. My mother was living in this tiny two-room
camp with no indoor plumbing and no running water, with an ancient
woodstove, what they call a parlor stove, which looked nice but didn’t put
out any heat and caused a chimney fire. Which was how Winter heard about
her, because the volunteer fire department came and afterwards all anyone
was talking about at the Shaker Harbor Variety Store was how this crazy
lady from away had bought Martin Weed’s old run-down camp and now she
was going to have a baby and freeze to death or burn the camp
down—probably both—which probably would have been okay with them
except no one liked to think about the baby getting frozen or burned up.
 
So Winter came by and gave my mother the venison and looked at
her woodpile and told her she was burning green wood, which builds up
cre-osote, which was why she had the chimney fire, and he asked her who
sold her the wood, so she told him. And the next day the guy who sold her
the wood came by and dumped off three cords of seasoned wood and
drove off without saying a word, and the day after that two other guys came
by with a brand-new woodstove, which was ugly but very efficient and had a
sheath around it so a baby wouldn’t get burned if he touched it. And the day
after that, Winter came by to make sure the stove was hooked up right, and
he went to all the cabin’s windows with sheets of plastic and a hair dryer and
covered them so the cold wouldn’t get in, and then he showed my mother
where there was a spring in the woods that she could go to and fill water
jugs rather than buy them at the grocery store. He also gave her a chamber
pot so she wouldn’t have to use the outhouse, and told her he knew of
someone who had a composting toilet they’d sell to her cheap.
 
All of which might make you think that when I say “Winter’s wife” I’m
referring to my mom. But I’m not. Winter’s wife is someone else.
 
Still, when I was growing up, Winter was always at our house. And I
was at his place, when I got older. Winter chops down trees, what they call
wood lot management—he cuts trees for people, but in a good way, so the

forest can grow back and be healthy. Then he’d split the wood so the
peo-ple could burn it for firewood. He had a portable sawmill—one of the
scary things Mom had seen in his yard—and he also mills wood so people
can build houses with the lumber. He’s an auctioneer, and he can play the
banjo and one of those washboard things like you see in old movies. He
showed me how to jump-start a car with just a wire coat hanger, also how to
carve wood and build a tree house and frame a window. When my mother
had our little addition put on with a bathroom in it, Winter did a lot of the
car-pentry, and he taught me how to do that, too.
 
He’s also a dowser, a water witch. That’s someone who can tell where
water is underground, just by walking around in the woods holding a stick in
front of him. You’d think this was more of that crazy woo-woo stuff my
mother is into, which is what I thought whenever I heard about it.
 
But then one day me and my friend Cody went out to watch Winter do
it. We were hanging out around Winter’s place, clearing brush. He let us
use the hill behind the school bus for snowboarding, and that’s where we’d
built that sweet jump, and Winter had saved a bunch of scrap wood so that
when spring came we could build a half-pipe for skating too.
 
But now it was spring, and since we didn’t have any money really to
pay Winter for it, he put us to work clearing brush. Cody is my age, almost
fourteen. So we’re hacking at this brush and swatting blackflies, and I could
tell that at any minute Cody was going to say he had to go do home-work,
which was a lie because we didn’t have any, when Winter shows up in his
pickup, leans out the window, and yells at us.
 
“You guys wanna quit goofing off and come watch someone do some
real work?”
 
So then me and Cody had an argument about who was going to ride
shotgun with Winter, and then we had another argument about who was
going to ride in the truck bed, which is actually more fun. And then we took
so long arguing that Winter yelled at us and made us both ride in the back.
 
So we got to the place where Winter was going to work. This field that
had been a dairy farm, but the farm wasn’t doing too good and the guy who
owned it had to sell it off. Ms. Whitton, a high school teacher, was go-ing to
put a little modular house on it. There’d been a bad drought a few years
earlier, and a lot of wells ran dry. Ms. Whitton didn’t have a lot of money to
spend on digging around for a well, so she hired Winter to find the right
spot.
 

“Justin!” Winter yelled at me as he hopped out of the truck. “Grab me
that hacksaw there—”
 
I gave him the saw, then me and Cody went and goofed around some
more while Winter walked around the edge of the field, poking at brush and
scrawny trees. After a few minutes he took the hacksaw to a spindly
sapling.
 
“Got it!” Winter yelled, and stumbled back into the field. “If we’re
going to find water here, we better find a willow first.”
 
It was early spring, and there really weren’t any leaves out yet, so what
he had was more like a pussy willow, with furry gray buds and green
show-ing where he’d sawn the branch off. Winter stripped the buds from it
until he had a forked stick. He held the two ends like he was holding
handlebars and began to walk around the field.
 
It was weird. Cause at first, me and Cody were laughing—we didn’t
mean to, we couldn’t help it. It just looked funny, Winter walking back and
forth with his arms out holding that stick. He kind of looked like
Franken-stein. Even Ms. Whitton was smiling.
 
But then it was like everything got very still. Not quiet—you could hear
the wind blowing in the trees, and hear birds in the woods, and someone
running a chain saw far off—but still, like all of a sudden you were in a
movie and you knew something was about to happen. The sun was warm, I
could smell dirt and cow manure and meadowsweet. Cody started slapping
blackflies and swearing. I felt dizzy, not bad dizzy, but like you do when the
school bus drives fast over a high bump and you go up on your seat. A few
feet away Winter continued walking in a very straight line, the willow stick
held out right in front of him.
 
And all of a sudden the stick began to bend. I don’t mean that
Winter’s arms bent down holding it: I mean the stick itself, the point that
stuck straight out, bent down like it was made of rubber and someone had
grabbed it and yanked it towards the ground. Only it wasn’t made of rub-ber,
it was stiff wood, and there was no one there—but it still bent, point-ing at a
mossy spot between clumps of dirt.
 
“Holy crap,” I said.
 
Cody shut up and looked. So did Ms. Whitton.
 
“Oh my God,” she said.

 
Winter stopped, angling the stick back and forth like he was fighting
with it. Then it lunged down, and he yelled, “Whoa!” and opened his hands
and dropped it. Me and Cody ran over.
 
“This is it,” said Winter. He pulled a spool of pink surveyor’s tape from
his pocket and broke off a length. I stared warily at the willow stick,
half-expecting it to wiggle up like a snake, but it didn’t move. After a
mo-ment I picked it up.
 
“How’d you do that?” demanded Cody.
 
“I didn’t do it,” said Winter evenly. He took the stick from my hand,
snapped off the forked part, and tossed it; tied the surveyor’s tape to what
remained and stuck it in the ground. “Wood does that. Wood talks to you, if
you listen.”
 
“No lie,” I said. “Can you show me how to do that sometime?”
 
“Sure,” said Winter. “Can’t today, got a towing job. But someday.”
 
He and Ms. Whitton started talking about money and who had the best
rates for drilling. The next time my mom drove past that field, the drill rig
was there hammering at the ground right where Winter’s stick had pointed,
and the next time I ran into Ms. Whitton in the hall at school she told me the
well was already dug and all geared up to pump a hun-dred gallons a
minute, once she got her foundation dug and her house moved in.
 
Not long after that, Winter announced he was going to Reykjavik.
 
It was after school one day, and Winter had dropped by to shoot the
breeze.
 
“What’s Reykjavik?” I asked.
 
“It’s in Iceland,” said my mother. She cracked the window open and
sat at the kitchen table opposite Winter and me. “Why on earth are you
going to Reykjavik?”
 
“To pick up my wife,” said Winter.
 
“Your wife?” My eyes widened. “You’re married?”
 
“Nope. That’s why I’m going to Iceland to pick her up. I met her

online, and we’re going to get married.”
 
My mother looked shocked. “In Iceland!”
 
Winter shrugged. “Hey, with a name like mine, where else you gonna
find a wife?”
 
So he went to Iceland. I thought he’d be gone for a month, at least,
but a week later the phone rang and my mom answered and it was Winter,
say-ing he was back safe and yes, he’d brought his wife with him.
 
“That’s incredible,” said Mom. She put the phone down and shook her
head. “He was there for four days, got married, and now they’re back. I
can’t believe it.”
 
A few days later they dropped by so Winter could introduce us to her.
It was getting near the end of the school year, and me and Cody were
out-side throwing stuff at my tree house, using the open window as a target.
Sticks, a Frisbee, a broken yo-yo. Stuff like that.
 
“Why are you trying to break the house?” a woman asked.
 
I turned. Winter stood there grinning, hands in the pockets of his
jeans, his gimme cap pushed back so the bill pointed almost straight up.
Beside him stood a woman who barely came up to his shoulder. She was
so slight that for a second I thought she was another kid, maybe one of the
girls from school who’d ridden her bike over or hopped a ride in Winter’s
truck. But she didn’t have a kid’s body, and she sure didn’t have a kid’s
eyes.
 
“Justin.” Winter squared his shoulders and his voice took on a
mock-formal tone. “I’d like you to meet my wife. Vala, this is Justin.”
 
“Justin.” The way she said my name made my neck prickle. It was like
she was turning the word around in her mouth; like she was tasting it. 
“Gleour mig ao kynnast per. That’s Icelandic for ‘I am glad to meet you.’ “
 
She didn’t really have an accent, although her voice sounded more
English than American. And she definitely didn’t look like anyone I’d ever
seen in Maine, even though she was dressed pretty normal. Black jeans, a
black T-shirt. Some kind of weird-looking bright blue shoes with thick rubber
soles, which I guess is what people wear in Iceland; also a bright blue
windbreaker. She had long, straight black hair done in two ponytails— one
reason she looked like a kid—kind of slanted eyes and a small mouth and

the palest skin I’ve ever seen.
 
It was the eyes that really creeped me out. They were long and
narrow and very very dark, so dark you couldn’t even see the pupil. And
they weren’t brown but blue, so deep a blue they were almost black. I’d
never seen eyes that color before, and I didn’t really like seeing them now.
They were cold—not mean or angry, just somehow cold; or maybe it was
that they made me feel cold, looking at them.
 
And even though she looked young, because she was skinny and her
hair didn’t have any gray in it and her face wasn’t wrinkled, it was like she
was somehow pretending to be young. Like when someone pretends to
like kids, and you know they don’t, really. Though I didn’t get the feeling
Vala didn’t like kids. She seemed more puzzled, like maybe we looked as
strange to her as she did to me.
 
“You haven’t told me why you are trying to break the house,” she said.
 
I shrugged. “Uh, we’re not. We’re just trying to get things through that
window.”
 
Cody glanced at Vala, then began searching for more rocks to throw.
 
Vala stared at him coolly. “Your friend is very rude.”
 
She looked him up and down, then walked over to the tree house. It
was built in the crotch of a big old maple tree, and it was so solid you could
live in it, if you wanted to, only it didn’t have a roof.
 
“What tree is this?” she asked, and looked at Winter.
 
“Red maple,” he said.
 
“Red maple,” she murmured. She ran her hand along the trunk,
stroking it, like it was a cat. “Red maple ...”
 
She turned and stared at me. “You made this house? By yourself?”
 
“No.” She waited, like it was rude of me not to say more. So I walked
over to her and stood awkwardly, staring up at the bottom of the tree house.
“Winter helped me. I mean, your husband—Mr. Winter.”
 
“Mr. Winter.” Unexpectedly she began to laugh. A funny laugh, like a
little kid’s, and after a moment I laughed too. “So I am Mrs. Winter? But who

should be Winter’s proper wife—Spring, maybe?”
 
She made a face when she said this, like she knew how dumb it
sounded; then reached to take my hand. She drew me closer to her, until
we both stood beside the tree. I felt embarrassed—maybe this was how
they did things in Iceland, but not here in Maine—but I was flattered, too.
Be-cause the way she looked at me, sideways from the corner of her eyes,
and the way she smiled, not like I was a kid but another grown-up ... it was
like she knew a secret, and she acted like I knew it, too.
 
Which of course I didn’t. But it was kind of cool that she thought so.
She let go of my hand and rested hers against the tree again, rubbing a
patch of lichen.
 
“There are no trees in Iceland,” she said. “Did you know that? No
trees. Long long ago they cut them all down to build houses or ships, or to
burn. And so we have no trees, only rocks and little bushes that come to
here—”
 
She indicated her knee, then tapped the tree trunk. “And like this—
lichen, and moss. We have a joke, do you know it?”
 
She took a breath, then said, “What do you do if you get lost in a
for-est in Iceland?”
 
“I shook my head. “I dunno.”
 
“Stand up.”
 
It took me a moment to figure that out. Then I laughed, and Vala
smiled at me. Again she looked like she was waiting for me to say
some-thing. I wanted to be polite, but all I could think was how weird it must
be, to come from a place where there were no trees to a place like Maine,
where there’s trees everywhere.
 
So I said, “Uh, do you miss your family?”
 
She gave me a funny look. “My family? They are happy to live with the
rocks back in Iceland. I am tired of rocks.”
 
A shadow fell across her face. She glanced up as Winter put his
hands on her shoulders. “Your mother home, Justin?” he asked. “We’re on
our way into town, just wanted to say a quick hello and introduce the new
wife—”

 
I nodded and pointed back to the house. As Winter turned to go, Vala
gave me another sharp look.
 
“He tells me many good things about you. You and he are what we
would call feogar—like a father and his son, Winter says. So I will be your
godmother.”
 
She pointed a finger at me, then slowly drew it to my face until she
touched my chin. I gasped: her touch was so cold it burned.
 
“There,” she murmured. “Now I will always know you.”
 
And she followed Winter inside. When they were gone, Cody came
up beside me.
 
“Was that freaky or what?” he said. He stared at the house. “She
looks like that weird singer, Boink.”
 
“You mean Bjork, you idiot.”
 
“Whatever. Where is Iceland, anyway?”
 
“I have no clue.”
 
“Me neither.” Cody pointed at my chin. “Hey, you’re bleeding, dude.”
 
I frowned, then gingerly touched the spot where Vala had pressed her
finger. It wasn’t bleeding; but when I looked at it later that night I saw a red
spot, shaped like a fingerprint. Not a scab or blister or scar but a spot like a
birthmark, deep red like blood. Over the next few days it faded, and fi-nally
disappeared; but I can still feel it there sometimes even now, a sort of dull
ache that gets worse when it’s cold outside, or snowing.
 
* * * *
 
THAT same month, Thomas Tierney returned to Paswegas County. He was
probably the most famous person in this whole state, after Stephen King,
but everyone up here loves Stephen King and I never heard anyone say
anything good about Thomas Tierney except after he disappeared; and
then the only thing people said was good riddance to bad rubbish. Even my
mom, who gets mad if you say something bad about anyone, even if they
hit you first, never liked Thomas Tierney.
 

“He’s one of those people who thinks they can buy anything. And if he
can’t buy it, he ruins it for everyone else.”
 
Though the truth was there wasn’t much that he wasn’t able to buy,
especially in Paswegas. People here don’t have a lot of money. They had
more after Tierney’s telemarketing company moved into the state and put
up its telephone centers everywhere, even one not too far from Shaker
Harbor, which is pretty much the end of nowhere. Then people who used to
work as fishermen or farmers or teachers or nurses, but who couldn’t make
a liv-ing at it anymore, started working for International Corporate
Enterprises. ICE didn’t pay a lot, but I guess it paid okay, if you didn’t mind
sitting in a tiny cubicle and calling strangers on the phone when they were in
the mid-dle of dinner and annoying them so they swore at you or just hung
up.
 
Once when she heard me and Cody ranking on people who worked at
ICE, my mom took us aside and told us we had to be careful what we said,
because even if we hated the company, it gave people jobs, and that was
nothing to sneeze at. Of course a lot of those people who worked for ICE
ended up not being able to afford to live here anymore, because Tierney
gave all his friends from away the expensive jobs; and then they bought
land here, which used to be cheap, and built these big fancy houses. So
now normal people can’t afford to live here, unless they were lucky enough
to already own a house or land, like my mom and Winter.
 
But then Tierney got caught doing something bad, sneaking money
from his company or something, and ICE got bought by a bigger com-pany,
and they shut down all their operations in Maine, and all the people who
worked there got thrown out of work and a lot of them who did own their
own houses or land got them taken away because they couldn’t afford to
pay their bills anymore. Then people really hated Thomas Tier-ney; but it
didn’t do any good, because he never even got in trouble for what he did. I
mean he didn’t go to jail or anything, and he didn’t lose his money or his
house down in Kennebunkport or his yacht or his private airplane.
 
As a matter of fact, the opposite happened: he bought the land next
to Winter’s. Winter dropped by the day he found out about it.
 
“That sumbitch bought old Lonnie Packard’s farm!” he yelled.
 
Me and Cody looked at each other and sort of smirked, but we didn’t
say anything. I could tell Cody wanted to laugh, like I did—who the hell
actually says “sumbitch?”—but at the same time it was scary, because we’d
never seen Winter get mad before.

 
“I can’t blame Lonnie,” Winter went on, shifting from one foot to the
other and tugging at his cap. “He had to sell his lobster boat last year
‘cause he couldn’t pay his taxes, and then he had that accident and couldn’t
pay the hospital. And it’s a salt farm right there on the ocean, so he never
got much out of it except the view.”
 
Cody asked, “Why didn’t he sell it to you?”
 
Winter whacked his palm against the wall. “That’s what I said! I told
Lonnie long time ago, ever he wanted to sell that land, I’d take it. But
yes-terday he told me, ‘Winter, your pockets just ain’t that deep.’ I said,
‘Well, Lonnie, how deep is deep?’ And he pointed out there at the Atlantic
Ocean, and said, ‘You see that? You go out to the Grand Banks and find
the deep-est part, and I’m telling you it ain’t deep as Thomas Tierney’s
pockets.’ “
 
So that was that. Tell you the truth, I didn’t give much thought to it.
Where we snowboarded in the woods was safely on Winter’s property, I
knew that; besides which, it was late spring now, and me and Cody were
busy working on that half-pipe behind Winter’s house and, once it was
done, skating on it.
 
Sometimes Winter’s wife would come out and watch us. Winter had
made her a bench from a hunk of oak, laid slats across it, and carved her
name on the seat, VALA, with carved leaves and vines coming out of the
letters. The bench was set up on a little rise, so that you could look out
across the tops of the trees and just catch a glimpse of the ocean,
silver-blue above the green. Vala was so tiny she looked like another kid
sitting there, watching us and laughing when we fell, though never in a mean
way. Her laugh was like her eyes: there was a kind of coldness to it, but it
wasn’t nasty, more like she had never seen anyone fall before and every
time it hap-pened (which was a lot) it was a surprise to her. Even though it
was warmer now, she always wore that same blue windbreaker, and over it
a sweatshirt that I recognized as one of Winter’s, so big it was like a saggy
dress. It could get wicked hot out there at the edge of the woods, but I
never saw her take that sweatshirt off.
 
“Aren’t you hot?” I asked her once. She’d brought some water for us
and some cookies she’d made, gingersnaps that were thin and brittle as ice
and so spicy they made your eyes sting.
 
“Hot?” She shook her head. “I never get warm. Except with Winter.”
She smiled then, one of her spooky smiles that always made me nervous.

“I tell him it’s the only time winter is ever warm, when he is lying beside me.”
 
I felt my face turn red. On my chin, the spot where she had touched
me throbbed as though someone had shoved a burning cigarette against
my skin. Vala’s smile grew wider, her eyes too. She began to laugh.
 
“You’re still a boy.” For a moment she sounded almost like my
mother. “Good boys, you and your friend. You will grow up to be good men.
Not like this man Tierney, who thinks he can own the sea by buying salt.
There is nothing more dangerous than a man who thinks he has power.”
She lifted her head to gaze into the trees, then turned to stare at me.
“Except for one thing.”
 
But she didn’t say what that was.
 
* * * *
 
I had always heard a lot about Thomas Tierney, and even though I had
never seen him, there were signs of him everywhere around Shaker Harbor.
The addition to the library; the addition to the school; the big old disused
mill—renamed the ICE Mill—that he bought and filled with a thousand tiny
cubicles, each with its own computer and its own telephone. The ICE Mill
employed so many people that some of them drove two hours each way to
work—there weren’t enough people around Shaker Harbor to fill it.
 
But now it was empty, with big FOR SALE signs on it. Winter said it
would stay empty, too, because no one in Paswegas County could afford to
buy it.
 
“And no one outside of Paswegas County would want to buy it,” he
added. “Watch that doesn’t drip—”
 
I was helping Winter varnish a crib he’d made, of wood milled from an
elm tree that had died of the blight. He wouldn’t say who it was for, even
when I asked him outright, but I assumed it was a present for Vala. She
didn’t look pregnant, and I was still a little fuzzy about the precise details of
what exactly might make her pregnant, in spite of some stuff me and Cody
checked out online one night. But there didn’t seem much point in making a
trip to Iceland to get a wife if you weren’t going to have kids. That’s what
Cody’s dad said, anyway, and he should know since Cody has five brothers
and twin sisters.
 
“I think they should make the mill into an indoor skate park,” I said,
touching up part of the crib I’d missed. “That would be sweet.”

 
We were working outside, so I wouldn’t inhale varnish fumes, in the
shadow of a tower of split logs that Winter sold as firewood. I had to be
care-ful that sawdust didn’t get onto the newly varnished crib, or bugs.
 
Winter laughed. “Not much money in skate parks.”
 
“I’d pay.”
 
“That’s my point.” Winter shoved his cap back from his forehead.
“Ready to break for lunch?”
 
Usually Winter made us sandwiches, Swiss cheese and tomato and
horseradish sauce. Sometimes Vala would make us lunch, and then I’d lie
and say I wasn’t hungry or had already eaten, since the sandwiches she
made mostly had fish in them—not tuna fish, either—and were on these tiny
little pieces of bread that tasted like cardboard.
 
But today Winter said we’d go into town and get something from
Shelley’s Place, the hot dog stand down by the harbor. It was warm out,
mid-August; school would start soon. I’d spent the summer hanging out with
Cody and some of our friends, until the last few weeks, when Cody had
gone off to Bible camp.
 
That’s when Winter put me to work. Because along with the crib,
Win-ter had started building a house—a real house, not an addition to the
school bus. I helped him clear away brush, then helped build the forms for
the foundation to be poured into. Once the concrete cured, we began
fram-ing the structure. Sometimes Vala helped, until Winter yelled at her to
stop, anyway. Then she’d go off to tend the little garden she’d planted at
the edge of the woods.
 
Now I didn’t know where Vala was. So I put aside the can of varnish
and hopped into Winter’s pickup, and we drove into town. Most of the
summer people had already left, but there were still a few sailboats in the
harbor, including one gigantic yacht, the Ice Queen, a three-masted
schooner that belonged to Thomas Tierney. According to Winter she had a
crew of ten, not just a captain and mate and deckhands but a cook and
house-keeper, all for Tierney; as well as a red-and-white-striped mainsail,
not that you’d ever have any trouble telling her apart from any of the other
boats around here.
 
When he saw the Ice Queen, Winter scowled. But there was no other
sign of Tierney, not that I could see. A few summer holdovers stood in line

in front of Shelley’s little food stand, trying to act like they fit in with the
locals, even though the only other people were contractors working on job
sites.
 
And Lonnie Packard. He was at the very front of the line, paying for a
hot dog with onions and sauerkraut wrapped in a paper towel. It was the first
time I’d seen Lonnie since I’d heard about him selling his farm to Thomas
Tierney, and from the look on Winter’s face, it was the first time he’d seen
him, too. His mouth was twisted like he wasn’t sure if he was going to smile
or spit something out, but then Lonnie turned and nodded at him.
 
“Winter,” he said. He pronounced it “Wintah” in this exaggerated way
he had, like he was making fun of his own strong accent. “How’s it
hanging?”
 
Winter poked at the bill of his cap and gave his head a small shake.
“Not bad.” He looked at Lonnie’s hot dog, then flashed me a sideways grin.
“Now that looks like lunch. Right, Justin?”
 
So that’s how I knew Winter wasn’t going to stay pissed about Lonnie
selling his farm, which was kind of a relief.
 
But Lonnie didn’t look relieved. He looked uncomfortable, although
Lonnie usually looked uncomfortable. He was a big rough-faced guy, not as
tall as Winter but definitely plus-sized, with a bushy brown beard and baggy
jeans tucked into high rubber fisherman’s boots, which kind of sur-prised
me since I knew he’d had to sell his boat. Then I remembered all the
money he must have gotten from Thomas Tierney; enough to buy another
boat, probably. Enough to buy anything he wanted.
 
“Gotta run,” said Lonnie. “Got you an assistant there, eh, Winter?”
 
“Justin does good work,” said Winter, and moved up to the window to
place our order. For a moment Lonnie stared at him like he was going to
say something else, but Winter was already talking to Shelley.
 
Instead, Lonnie glanced at me again. It was a funny look, not like he
was going to speak to me, more like he was trying to figure something out.
Lonnie’s not stupid, either. He puts on that heavy accent and acts like he’s
never been south of Bangor, but my mother said he actually has a law
de-gree and fishes just because he likes it better than being a lawyer, which
I think I would, too. I waited to see if he was going to talk to me, but instead
he turned and walked quickly to where a brand-new SUV was parked in one
of the spots reserved for fishermen, got inside, and drove off. I watched

him go, then angled up beside Winter to get my food.
 
Shelley gave me a quick smile and went back to talking to Winter.
“See you’re putting a house up by your place,” she said, and handed him a
paper towel with two hot dogs on it, a container of fried clams for Winter,
and two bottles of Moxie. Winter nodded but didn’t say anything, just
passed her some money.
 
“Regular housing boom going on down there,” Shelley added, then
looked past us to the next customer. “Can I help you?”
 
We drove back to Winter’s place and ate, sitting outside on a couple
of lawn chairs and listening to woodpeckers in the pine grove. The air
smelled nice, like sawdust and varnish and fried clams. When I was almost
done, Vala stepped out of the school bus and walked over to me.
 
“Ertu buinn?” she said teasingly. “Are you finished? And you didn’t
save any for me?”
 
I looked uncertainly at Winter, still chewing.
 
“Mmm-mm,” he said, flapping his, hand at me. “None for her! Noth-ing
unhealthy!”
 
“Hmph.” Vala tossed her head, black ponytails flying. “Like I’d eat
that—it’s nothing but grease.”
 
She watched disapprovingly as the last fried clam disappeared into
Winter’s mouth, then looked at me. “Come here, Justin. I want to show you
something.”
 
“Hey!” Winter called in mock alarm as Vala beckoned me towards the
edge of the woods. “He’s on the clock!”
 
“Now he’s off,” retorted Vala, and stuck her tongue out. “Come on.”
 
Vala was strange. Sometimes she acted like my mother, grumpy
about me forgetting to take my shoes off when I went into the school bus,
or if me and Cody made too much noise. Other times, like now, she acted
more like a girl my own age, teasing and unpredictable.
 
The way she looked changed, too. I don’t mean her clothes—she
pretty much wore the same thing all the time—but the way that sometimes
she would look old, like my mom does, and other times she’d look the

same age as me and my friends. Which creeped me out, especially if it
was one of those times when she was acting young, too.
 
Fortunately, just then she was acting young but looking older, like
someone who would be married to Winter. For one thing, she was wearing
his clothes, a pair of jeans way too big for her and cuffed up so much you
couldn’t even see her shoes, and that baggy sweatshirt, despite it being so
hot.
 
“I said come,” she repeated, and whacked me on the shoulder.
 
I stood hastily and followed her, wondering if everyone in Iceland was
like this, or if it was just Vala.
 
Under the trees everything was green and gold and warm; not hot like
out in the full sun, but not cool, either. It made me sweat, and my sweat and
the dim light made the mosquitoes come out, lots of them, though they
never seemed to bother Vala, and after a few minutes I ignored them and
(mostly) forgot about them. The ground was soft and smelled like worms, a
good smell that made me think of fishing, and now and then we’d go by a
kind of tree that smelled so good I’d stop for a second, a tree that Winter
calls Balm of Gilead, because its buds smell like incense.
 
Winter owned a lot of land, more than a hundred acres. Some of it he
cut for firewood or lumber, but not this part. This part he left wild, because it
joined up with Lonnie’s land—Thomas Tierney’s land, now—and because it
was old-growth forest. People think that all the woods in Maine are wild and
old, but most of it isn’t much older than what you’d find someplace like New
Jersey—the trees were cut hundreds or maybe a thousand years ago by
the Passamaquoddy or other Indians, and when those trees grew back they
were cut by Vikings, and when those trees grew back they were cut by the
English and the French and everyone else, all the way up till now.
 
So there’s actually not a lot of true virgin forest, even if the trees look
ancient, like what you see in a movie when they want you to think it’s
someplace totally wild, when it’s really, like, trees that are maybe forty or
fifty years old. Baby trees.
 
But these trees weren’t like that. These were old trees—wolf trees,
some of them, the kind of trees that Winter usually cuts down. A wolf tree is
a big crooked tree with a huge canopy that hogs all the light and soil and
crowds out the other trees. Wolf trees are junk trees, because they’re
crooked and spread out so much they’re not much good for lumber, and
they overwhelm other, smaller trees and keep them from growing up tall

and straight so they can be harvested.
 
When I was little I’d go with Winter into the woods to watch him work,
and I was always afraid of the wolf trees. Not because there was anything
scary about them—they looked like ordinary trees, only big.
 
But I thought wolves lived in them. When I said that to Winter once,
he laughed.
 
“I thought that too, when I was your age.” He was oiling his chain saw,
getting ready to limb a wolf tree, a red oak. Red oaks smell terrible when
you cut them, the raw wood stinks—they smell like dog crap. “Want to know
the real reason they call them that?”
 
I nodded, breathing through my mouth.
 
“It’s because a thousand years ago, in England and around there,
they’d hang outlaws from a tree like this. Wolf’s-head trees, they called
them, because the outlaws were like wolves, preying on weaker people.”
 
Where the wolf trees grew here, they had shaded out most other
trees. Now and then I saw an old apple tree overgrown with wild grape
vines, remnants of Lonnie’s family farm. Because even though this was
old-growth forest, birds and animals don’t know that. They eat fruit from the
farm then poop out the seeds—that’s how you get apple trees and stuff like
that in the middle of the woods.
 
I was getting hot and tired of walking. Vala hadn’t said anything since
we started, hadn’t even looked back at me, and I wondered if she’d
forgot-ten I was even there. My mother said pregnancy makes women
spacey, more than usual even. I was trying to think of an excuse to turn
back, when she stopped.
 
“Here,” she said.
 
We’d reached a hollow on the hillside above the farm. I could just
make out the farmhouse and barn and outbuildings, some apple trees and
the overgrown field that led down to the ocean. There was no real beach
there, just lots of big granite rocks, also a long metal dock that I didn’t
remember having seen before.
 
It was still a pretty spot, tucked into the woods. A few yards from the
farmhouse, more trees marched down to a cliff above the rocky beach.
Small trees, all twisted from the wind: except for three huge white pines,

each a hundred feet tall.
 
Winter called these the King’s Pines, and they were gigantic.
 
“These trees are ancient,” he’d told me, pointing up at one. “See
anything up there?”
 
I squinted. I knew bald eagles nested near the ocean, but I didn’t see
anything that looked like a nest. I shook my head.
 
Winter put his hand on my shoulder and twisted me till I was staring
almost straight up. “There, on the trunk—see where the bark’s been
notched?”
 
I saw it then, three marks of an axe in the shape of an arrow.
 
“That’s the King’s Mark,” said Winter. “Probably dating back to about
1690. That means these were the King’s Trees, to be used for masts in the
King’s naval fleet. Over three hundred years ago, this was a big tree. And it
was probably at least three hundred years old then.”
 
Now, with Vala, I could see the King’s Pines jutting out above the
other trees, like the masts of a schooner rising from a green sea. I figured
that’s what Vala was going to show me, and so I got ready to be polite and
act like I already didn’t know about them.
 
Instead she touched my arm and pointed just a few feet away,
towards a clearing where trees had grown around part of the pasture.
 
“Whoa,” I whispered.
 
In the middle of the clearing was a bush. A big bush, a quince, its long
thin branches covered with green leaves and small red flowers—brilliant
red, the color of Valentines, and so bright after the dim woods that I had to
blink.
 
And then, after blinking, I thought something had gone wrong with my
eyes; because the bush seemed to be moving. Not moving in the wind—
there wasn’t any wind—but moving like it was breaking apart then coming
back together again, the leaves lifting away from the branches and
flicker-ing into the air, going from dark green to shining green like metallic
paint, and here and there a flash of red like a flower had spun off, too.
 
But what was even more bizarre was that the bush made a noise. It

was buzzing, not like bees but like a chain saw or weed whacker, a
high-pitched sound that got louder, then softer, then louder again. I rubbed
my eyes and squinted into the overgrown field, thinking maybe Thomas
Tierney had hired someone to clean up, and that’s what I was hearing.
 
There was no one there, just tall grass and apple trees and rocks, and
beyond that the cliff and open sea.
 
“Do you see what they are?”
 
Vala’s voice was so close to my ear that I jumped, then felt my skin
prickle with goose bumps at her breath, cold as though a freezer door had
opened. I shook my head and she touched my sleeve, her hand cold
through the cloth, and led me into the clearing, until the bush rose above us
like a red cloud.
 
“See?” she murmured.
 
The bush was full of hummingbirds—hundreds of them, darting in and
out as though the bush were a city, and the spaces between the leaves
streets and alleys. Some hovered above the flowers to feed, though most
flew almost too fast to see. Some sat on the branches, perfectly still, and
that was the weirdest thing of all, like seeing a raindrop hanging in the air.
 
But they didn’t stay still; just perched long enough that I could get a
look at one, its green green wings and the spot of red on its throat, so deep
a red it was like someone had crushed its tiny body by holding it too hard. I
thought maybe I could hold it, too, or touch it, anyway.
 
So I tried. I stood with my palm open and held my breath and didn’t
move. Hummingbirds whizzed around like I was part of the quince, but they
didn’t land on me.
 
I glanced at Vala. She was doing the same thing I was, this amazed
smile on her face, holding both arms out in front of her so she reminded me
of Winter when he was dowsing. The hummingbirds buzzed around her,
too, but didn’t stop. Maybe if one of us had been wearing red.
Humming-birds like red.
 
Vala wasn’t wearing red, just Winter’s grubby old gray sweatshirt and
jeans. But she looked strange standing there, eerie even, and for a second
I had this weird feeling that I wasn’t seeing Vala at all, that she had
disap-peared, and I was standing next to a big gray rock.
 

The feeling was so strong that it creeped me out. I opened my mouth,
I was going to suggest that we head back to Winter’s house, when a
hummingbird flickered right in front of Vala’s face. Right in front of Vala’s 
eye.
 
“Hey!” I yelled; and at the same instant Vala shouted, a deep grunting
noise that had a word in it, but not an English word. Her hand flashed in front
of her face, there was a greenish blur, and the bird was gone.
 
“Are you okay?” I said. I thought the hummingbird’s sharp beak had
stabbed her eye. “Did it—?”
 
Vala brought her hands to her face and gasped, blinking quickly. “I’m
sorry! It frightened me—so close, I was surprised—”
 
Her hands dropped. She gazed at the ground by her feet. “Oh no.”
 
Near the toe of one rubber shoe, the hummingbird lay motionless, like
a tiny bright green leaf.                                 
 
“Oh, I am sorry, Justin!” cried Vala. “I only wanted you to see the tree
with all the birds. But it scared me—”
 
I crouched to look at the dead hummingbird. Vala gazed back into the
woods.
 
“We should go,” she said. She sounded unhappy, even nervous.
“Win-ter will think we got lost and get mad at me for taking you away. You
need to work,” she added, and gave me a tight smile. “Come on.”
 
She walked away. I stayed where I was. After a moment I picked up a
stick and tentatively prodded at the dead bird. It didn’t move.
 
It was on its back, and it looked sadder that way. I wanted to turn it
over. I poked it again, harder.
 
It still didn’t budge.
 
Cody doesn’t mind touching dead things. I do. But the hummingbird
was so small, only as long as my finger. And it was beautiful, with its black
beak and the red spot at its throat and those tiny feathers, more like scales.
So I picked it up.                                                                                            
 
“Holy crap,” I whispered.

 
It was heavy. Not heavy like maybe a bigger bird would have been, a
sparrow or chickadee, but heavy, like a rock. Not even a rock—it reminded
me of one of those weights you see hanging from an old clock, those metal
things shaped like pinecones or acorns, but when you touch them they feel
heavy as a bowling ball, only much smaller.
 
The hummingbird was like that—so little I could cradle it in my cupped
palm, and already cold. I guessed that rigor mortis had set in, the way it
does when you hang a deer. Very gently I touched the bird’s wing. I even
tried to wiggle it, but the wing didn’t move.
 
So I turned the bird in my cupped palm onto its stomach. Its tiny legs
were folded up like a fly’s, its eyes dull. Its body didn’t feel soft, like
feath-ers. It felt hard, solid as granite; and cold.
 
But it looked exactly like a live hummingbird, emerald green where the
sun hit it, beak slightly curved; a band of white under the red throat. I ran my
finger along its beak, then swore.
 
“What the frig?”
 
A bright red bead welled up where the dead bird’s beak had
punctured my skin, sharp as a nail.
 
I sucked my finger, quickly looked to make sure Vala hadn’t seen me.
I could just make her out in the distance, moving through the trees. I felt in
my pocket till I found a wadded-up Kleenex, wrapped the hummingbird in it,
and very carefully put it into my pocket. Then I hurried after Vala.
 
We walked back in silence. Only when the skeletal frame of the new
house showed brightly through the trees did Vala turn to me.
 
“You saw the bird?” she asked.
 
I looked at her uneasily. I was afraid to lie, but even more afraid of
what she might do if she knew what was in my pocket.
 
Before I could reply, she reached to touch the spot on my chin. I felt a
flash of aching cold as she stared at me, her dark eyes somber but not
unkind.                                                                                                  
 
“I did not mean to hurt it,” she said quietly. “I have never seen a bird
like that one, not so close. I was scared. Not scared—startled. My reaction

was too fast,” she went on, and her voice was sad. Then she smiled and
glanced down at my jeans pocket.
 
“You took it,” she said.
 
I turned away, and Vala laughed. In front of the house, Winter looked
up from a pile of two-by-sixes.
 
“Get your butt over here, Justin!” he yelled. “Woman, don’t you go
distracting him!”
 
Vala stuck her tongue out again, then turned back to me. “He knows,”
she said matter-of-factly. “But maybe you don’t tell your friend? Or your
mother.”
 
And she walked over to kiss Winter’s sunburned cheek.
 
I muttered, “Yeah, sure,” then crossed to where I’d left the varnish.
Vala stood beside her husband and sighed as she stared at the cloudless
sky and the green canopy of trees stretching down to the bay. A few boats
under sail moved slowly across the blue water. One was a three-masted
schooner with a red-striped mainsail: Thomas Tierney’s yacht.
 
“So, Vala,” said Winter. He winked at his wife. “You tell Justin your
news yet?”
 
She smiled. “Not yet.” She pulled up the sweatshirt so I could see her
stomach sticking out. “Here—”
 
She beckoned me over, took my hand, and placed it on her stomach.
Despite the heat, her hand was icy cold. So was her stomach; but I felt a
sudden heat beneath my palm, and then a series of small thumps from
in-side her belly. I looked at her in surprise.
 
“It’s the baby!”
 
“Eg veit,” she said, and laughed. “I know.”
 
“Now don’t go scaring him off, talking about babies,” said Winter. He
put his arm around his wife. “I need him to help me finish this damn house
before it snows.”
 
I went back to varnishing. The truth is, I was glad to have something to

do, so I wouldn’t think about what had happened. When I got home that
evening I put the hummingbird in a drawer, wrapped in an old T-shirt. For a
while I’d look at it every night, after my mother came in to give me a kiss;
but after a week or so I almost forgot it was there.
 
* * * *
 
A few days later Cody got back from Bible camp. It was September now.
Labor Day had come and gone, and most of the summer people. School
started up. Me and Cody were in eighth grade; we were pretty sick of be-ing
with the same people since kindergarten, but it was okay. Some days we
skated over at Winter’s place after school. It was getting crowded there,
with the piles of split firewood and all the stacks of lumber for the new
house, and sometimes Winter yelled at us for getting in the way.
 
But mostly everything was like it usually was, except that Vala was
getting more pregnant and everyone was starting to think about winter
com-ing down.
 
You might not believe that people really worry about snow all the time,
but here they do. My mother had already gotten her firewood from Winter
back in August, and so had most of his other regular customers. Day by
day, the big stacks of split wood dwindled, as Winter hauled them off for
delivery.
 
And day by day the new house got bigger, so that soon it looked less
like a kid’s drawing of a stick house and more like a fairy-tale cottage come
to life, with a steep roof and lots of windows, some of them square and
some of them round, like portholes, and scallop-shaped shingles stained
the color of cranberries. I helped with that part, and inside, too, which was
great.
 
Because inside—inside was amazing. Winter did incredible things
with wood, everyone knew that. But until then, I had only seen the things he
made for money, like furniture, or things he made to be useful, like the
cab-inets he’d done for my mother.
 
Now I saw what Winter had done for himself and Vala. And if the
outside of the little house looked like a fairy tale, the inside looked like
something from a dream.
 
Winter usually carved from pine, which is a very soft wood. But he’d
used oak for the beams, and covered them with faces—wind-faces with
their mouths open to blow, foxes and wolves grinning from the corners,

dragons and people I didn’t recognize but who Vala said were spirits from
Iceland.
 
“Huldufolk,” she said when I asked about them. “The hidden people.”
 
But they weren’t hidden here. They were carved on the main beam
that went across the living room ceiling, and on the oak posts in each
corner, peeking out from carved leaves and vines and branches that made
the posts look almost like real trees. There were huldufolk carved into the
cupboards, and on benches and cabinets and bookshelves, and even on
the headboard that Winter had made from a single slab of chestnut, so
highly polished with beeswax that the entire bedroom smelled like honey.
 
So even though the house looked small from the outside, when you
got inside you could get lost, wandering around and looking at all the
wonder-ful carved things. Not just carved so the wood resembled
something new, but so that you could see what was inside the wood, knots
and whorls turned to eyes and mouths, the grain sanded and stained till it
felt soft, the way skin might feel if it grew strong enough to support walls
and ceilings and joists, while still managing to remain, somehow, skin, and
alive.
 
It was the most amazing house I’ve ever seen. And maybe the most
amazing thing wasn’t that it made me want to live in it, but that after
spending hours working on it, I began to feel that the house lived in me, the
way the baby lived inside Vala.
 
Only, of course, I could never tell anyone that, especially Cody. He
would think I’d gone nuts from inhaling varnish fumes—even though I wore
a dust mask, like Vala wore a fancy ventilating mask that made her look like
Darth Vader.
 
She was working inside, too, building a stone fireplace. She found
rocks in the woods and brought them up in a wheelbarrow. Big rocks, too, I
was amazed she could lift them.
 
“Don’t tell Winter,” she whispered to me when I found her once,
heft-ing a huge chunk of granite from the edge of the woods. “He’ll just
worry, and yell at me. And then I will yell at you,” she added, and narrowed
her spooky blue-black eyes.
 
Once the rocks were all piled inside she took forever, deciding which
one would go where in the fireplace. When I made a joke about it she

frowned.
 
“You do not want to make rocks angry, Justin.” She wasn’t kidding,
either. She looked pissed off. “Because rocks have a very, very long
mem-ory.”
 
It was early morning, just after seven on a Saturday. My mom had
dropped me off at Winter’s place on her way to see a client. It was a
beau-tiful day, Indian summer, the leaves just starting to turn. I could see
two sailboats on the water, heading south for the winter. I would rather have
been skating with Cody, but Winter was anxious to get the inside of his
house finished before it got too cold, so I said I’d come over and help trim
up some windows.
 
Winter was outside. Vala, after yelling at me about the rocks, had
gone up to the bedroom to get something. I yawned, wishing I’d brought my
iPod, when upstairs Vala screamed.
 
I froze. It was a terrifying sound, not high-pitched like a woman’s voice
but deep and booming. And it went on and on, without her taking a breath. I
started for the steps as Winter raced in. He knocked me aside and took the
stairs two at a time.
 
“Vala!”
 
I ran upstairs after him, through the empty hall and into the bedroom.
Vala stood in front of the window, clutching her face as she gazed outside.
Winter grabbed her shoulders.
 
“Is it the baby?” he cried. He tried to pull her towards him, but she
shook her head, then pushed him away so violently that he crashed against
the wall.
 
“What is it?” I ran to the window. Vala fell silent as I looked out across
the yellowing canopy of leaves.
 
“Oh no.” I stared in disbelief at the cliff above the Bay. “The King’s
Pines—”
 
I rubbed my eyes, hardly aware of Winter pushing me aside so he
could stare out.
 
“No!” he roared.

 
One of the three great trees was gone—the biggest one, the one that
stood nearest to the cliff edge. A blue gap showed where it had been, a
chunk of sky that made me feel sick and dizzy. It was like lifting my own
hand to find a finger missing. My chin throbbed and I turned so the others
wouldn’t see me crying.
 
Winter pounded the windowsill. His face was dead white, his eyes so
red they looked like they’d been smeared with paint. That frightened me
more than anything, until I looked up and saw Vala.
 
She had backed against the wall—an unfinished wall, just gray
Sheetrock, blotched where the seams had been coated with putty. Her face
had paled, too; but it wasn’t white.
 
It was gray. Not a living gray, like hair or fur, but a dull, mottled color,
the gray of dead bark or granite.
 
And not just her face but her hands and arms: everything I could see
of her that had been skin, now seemed cold and dead as the heap of
fireplace rocks downstairs. Her clothes drooped as though tossed on a
boulder, her hair stiffened like strands of reindeer moss. Even her eyes
dulled to black smears, save for a pinpoint of light in each, as though a drop
of water had been caught in the hollow of a stone.
 
“Vala.” Winter came up beside me. His voice shook, but it was low
and calm, as though he were trying to keep a frightened dog from bolting.
“Vala, it’s all right—”
 
He reached to stroke the slab of gray stone wedged against the wall,
reindeer moss tangling between his fingers, then let his hand drop to move
across a rounded outcropping.
 
“Think of the baby,” he whispered. “Think of the girl . . .”
 
The threads of reindeer moss trembled, the twin droplets welled and
spilled from granite to the floor; and it was Vala there and not a stone at all,
Vala falling into her husband’s arms and weeping uncontrollably.
 
“It’s not all right—it’s not all right—”
 
He held her, stroking her head as I finally got the nerve up to speak.
 
“Was it—was it a storm?”

 
“A storm?” Abruptly Winter pulled away from Vala. His face dark-ened
to the color of mahogany. “No, it’s not a storm—”
 
He reached for the window and yanked it open. From the direction of
the cliff came the familiar drone of a chain saw.
 
“It’s Tierney!” shouted Winter. He turned and raced into the hall. Vala
ran after him, and I ran after her.
 
“No—you stay here!” Winter stopped at the top of the stairs. “Justin,
you wait right here with her—”
 
“No,” I said. I glanced nervously at Vala, but to my surprise she
nodded.
 
“No,” she said. “I’m going, and Justin, too.”
 
Winter sucked his breath through his teeth.
 
“Suit yourself,” he said curtly. “But I’m not waiting for you. And
listen—you stay with her, Justin, you understand me?”
 
“I will,” I said, but he was already gone.
 
Vala and I looked at each other. Her eyes were paler than I
remem-bered, the same dull gray as the Sheetrock; but as I stared at her
they grew darker, as though someone had dropped blue ink into a glass of
water.
 
“Come,” she said. She touched my shoulder, then headed out the
door after her husband. I followed.
 
All I wanted to do was run and catch up with Winter. I could have,
too—over the summer I’d gotten taller, and I was now a few inches bigger
than Vala.
 
But I remembered the way Winter had said You stay with her, Justin,
you understand me? And the way he’d looked, as though I were a
stranger, and he’d knock me over, or worse, if I disobeyed him. It scared
me and made me feel sick, almost as sick as seeing the King’s Pine
chopped down; but I had no time to think about that now. I could still hear
the chain saw buzzing from down the hill, a terrible sound, like when you
hear a truck brake but you know it’s not going to stop in time. I walked as

fast as I dared, Vala just a few steps behind me. When I heard her
breathing hard I’d stop and try to keep sight of Winter far ahead of us.
 
But after a few minutes I gave up on that. He was out of sight, and I
could only hope he’d get down to the cliff and stop whoever was doing the
cutting, before another tree fell.
 
“Listen,” said Vala, and grabbed my sleeve. I thought the chain saw
was still running, but then I realized it was just an echo. Because the air
grew silent, and Vala had somehow sensed it before I did. I looked at her
and she stared back at me, her eyes huge and round and sky-blue, a color
I’d never seen them.
 
“There is still time,” she whispered. She made a strange deep noise
in the back of her throat, a growl but not an animal growl; more like the
sound of thunder, or rocks falling. “Hurry—”
 
We crashed through the woods, no longer bothering to stay on the
path. We passed the quince bush shimmering through its green haze of
feeding hummingbirds. Vala didn’t pause, but I slowed down to look back,
then stopped.
 
A vehicle was parked by the farmhouse, the same new SUV I’d seen
that day down at Shelley’s hot dog stand: Lonnie Packard’s truck. As I
stared, a burly figure came hurrying through the field, the familiar orange
silhouette of a chain saw tucked under his arm. He jumped into the SUV,
gunned the engine, and drove off.
 
I swore under my breath.
 
“Justin!” Vala’s anxious voice came from somewhere in the woods.
“Come on!”                                                
 
I found her at the head of the trail near the cliff. Through a broken wall
of scrawny, wind-twisted trees I could just make out the two remaining
pines, and the bright yellow gash that was the stump of the one that had
fallen. The sharp scent of pine resin and sawdust hung in the air, and the
smell of exhaust fumes from the chain saw.
 
But there was no other sign of Lonnie, obviously, or of anyone else.
 
“Look,” said Vala in a hoarse whisper. She clutched me and pulled
me towards her, her touch so cold it was like I’d been shot up with
Novocain. My entire arm went numb. “There! The boat—”

 
She pointed down to the boulder-strewn beach where the dock thrust
into the bay. At the end of the dock bobbed a small motorboat, a Boston
Whaler. Farther out, the hulking form of the Ice Queen rose above the gray
water, sails furled.
 
She was at anchor. Several small forms moved across the deck. I
squinted, trying to see if I recognized any of them. A frigid spasm shot
through my ribs as Vala nudged me, indicating the rocks below.
 
“Is that him?” she hissed. “This man Tierney?”
 
I saw Winter loping across the beach towards the dock, jumping from
one boulder to the next. On the shore, right next to the end of the dock,
stood two men. One was tall, wearing an orange life vest and a blaze
orange watch cap and high rubber boots. The other was shorter,
white-haired, slightly heavyset, wearing sunglasses and a red-and-white
windbreaker, striped like the Ice Queen’s sails.
 
“That’s him,” I said.
 
Vala fixed her intense sky-blue gaze on me. “You’re sure?”
 
“Yeah. I’ve seen his picture in the newspaper. And online.”
 
She stood at the top of the trail and stared down. An angry voice rose
from the rocks—Winter’s—then another voice joined in, calmer, and a third,
calm at first, then laughing. I heard Winter curse, words I couldn’t believe
he knew. The third man, Tierney, laughed even harder.
 
I glanced at Vala, still staring at what was below us. One of her hands
grasped the branch of a birch tree beside the path. She seemed to be
think-ing; almost she might have been daydreaming, she looked so
peaceful, like somehow she’d forgotten where she was and what was
happening. Fi-nally, she shook her head. Without looking back at me, she
snapped the branch from the tree, dropped it, and started down the trail
towards the beach.                                                                    
 
I started after her, then hesitated.
 
The branch lay across the narrow path at my feet. Where Vala had
touched them, the leaves had shriveled and faded, from yellow-green to the
dull gray of lichen, and the white birch bark had blackened into tight,
charred-looking curls.

 
I tried to lift the branch. It was too heavy to move.
 
“It’s my land now.” Thomas Tierney’s voice echoed from the cliff
face. “So I suggest you get the hell off it!”
 
I looked down to see Vala’s small form at the bottom of the trail,
hopping lightly from one boulder to the next as she headed for the dock. I
scrambled down the path after her.
 
But I couldn’t go as fast. For some reason, maybe because first
Winter, then Vala had raced down before me, rocks had tumbled across
the narrow trail. Not big rocks, but enough of them that I had to pick my way
care-fully to keep from falling.
 
Not only that: in spots a white slick of frost covered the ground, so
that my feet slipped, and once I almost fell and cracked my head. I stopped
for a minute, panting. As I caught my breath, I looked away from the beach,
to where the cliff plunged into a deep crevice in the granite.
 
There, caught in the gigantic crack so that it looked as though it had
grown up from the rocks, was the fallen pine. It tilted over the water, black in
the shadow of the cliff, its great branches still green and strong-looking, the
smell of pine sap overpowering the smell of the sea. In its uppermost
branches something moved, then lifted from the tree and flew out above
the bay—a bald eagle, still mottled brown and black with its young plumage.
 
I couldn’t help it. I began to cry. Because no matter how strong and
alive the tree looked, I knew it was dead. Nothing would bring it back again.
It had been green when no one lived here but the Passamaquoddy, it had
seen sailors come from far across the sea, and tourists in boats from
Paswegas Harbor, and maybe it had even seen the Ice Queen earlier that
morning with her red-and-white-striped mainsail and Thomas Tierney on the
deck, watching as Lonnie Packard took a chain saw to its great trunk, and
the tree finally fell, a crash that I hadn’t heard.
 
But Vala had.
 
You stay with her, Justin, you understand me?
 
I took a deep breath and wiped my eyes, checked to make sure I
could still see Vala on the rocks below, then continued my climb down.
When I fi-nally reached the bottom, I still had to be careful—there were tidal

pools everywhere between the granite boulders, some of them skimmed
with ice and all of them greasy with kelp and sea lettuce. I hurried as fast as
I could towards the dock.
 
“You don’t own those trees.” Winter’s voice rang out so loudly that my
ears hurt. “Those are the King’s Pines—no man owns them.”
 
“Well, I own this land,” retorted Tierney. “And if that doesn’t make me
the goddamn king, I don’t know what does.”
 
I clambered over the last stretch of rocks and ran up alongside Vala.
Winter stood a few yards away from us, towering above Thomas Tierney.
The other man stood uneasily at the edge of the dock. I recognized him—
Al Alford, who used to work as first mate on one of the daysailers in
Paswegas Harbor. Now, I guessed, he worked for Tierney.
 
“King?” Vala repeated. “Hann er klikkapor.” She looked at me from
the corner of her eyes. “He’s nuts.”
 
Maybe it was her saying that, or maybe it was me being pissed at
myself for crying. But I took a step out towards Tierney and shouted at him.
 
“It’s against the law to cut those trees! It’s against the law to do any
cutting here without a permit!”
 
Tierney turned to stare at me. For the first time he looked taken
aback, maybe even embarrassed or ashamed. Not by what he’d done, I
knew that; but because someone else—a kid—knew he’d done it.
 
“Who’s this?” His voice took on that fake-nice tone adults use when
they’re caught doing something, like smoking or drinking or fighting with
their wives. “This your son, Winter?”
 
“No,” I said.
 
“Yes,” said Vala, and under her breath said the word she’d used when
I first met her: feogar.
 
But Winter didn’t say anything, and Tierney had already turned away.
 
“Against the law?” He pulled at the front of his red-and-white
wind-breaker, then shrugged. “I’ll pay the fine. No one goes to jail for cutting
down trees.”

 
Tierney smiled then, as though he was thinking of a joke no one else
would ever get, and added, “Not me, anyway.”
 
He looked at Al Alford and nodded. Al quickly turned and walked—
ran, practically—to where the Boston Whaler rocked against the metal
railing at the end of the dock. Tierney followed him, but slowly, pausing
once to stare back up the hillside—not at the King’s Pines but at the
farm-house, its windows glinting in the sun where they faced the cliff. Then
he walked to where Alford waited by the little motorboat, his hand out to
help Tierney climb inside.
 
I looked at Winter. His face had gone slack, except for his mouth: he
looked as though he were biting down on something hard.
 
“He’s going to cut the other ones, too,” he said. He didn’t sound
disbelieving or sad or even angry; more like he was saying something
everyone knew was true, like It’ll snow soon or Tomorrow’s Sunday. “He’ll
pay the twenty-thousand-dollar fine, just like he did down in Kennebunkport.
He’ll wait and do it in the middle of the night when I’m not here. And the
trees will be gone.”
 
“No, he will not,” said Vala. Her voice was nearly as calm as Winter’s.
There was a subdued roar as the motorboat’s engine turned over, and the
Boston Whaler shot away from the dock, towards the Ice Queen.
 
“No,” Vala said again, and she stooped and picked up a rock. A small
gray rock, just big enough to fit inside her fist, one side of it encrusted with
barnacles. She straightened and stared at the ocean, her eyes no longer
sky-blue but the pure deep gray of a stone that’s been worn smooth by the
sea, with no pupil in them; and shining like water in the sun.
 
“Skammastu pei, Thomas Tierney. Farthu til fjandanns!” she cried,
and threw the rock towards the water. “Farthu! Ldttu peog hverfa!”
 
I watched it fly through the air, then fall, hitting the beach a long way
from the waterline with a small thud. I started to look at Vala, and stopped.
 
From the water came a grinding sound, a deafening noise like
thunder; only this was louder than a thunderclap and didn’t last so long, just
a fraction of a second. I turned and shaded my eyes, staring out to where
the Boston Whaler arrowed towards Tierney’s yacht. A sudden gust of wind
stung my eyes with spray; I blinked, then blinked again in amazement.

 
A few feet from the motorboat a black spike of stone shadowed the
water. Not a big rock—it might have been a dolphin’s fin, or a shark’s, but it
wasn’t moving.
 
And it hadn’t been there just seconds before. It had never been there,
I knew that. I heard a muffled shout, then the frantic whine of the
motor-boat’s engine being revved too fast—and too late.
 
With a sickening crunch, the Boston Whaler ran onto the rock. Winter
yelled in dismay as Alford’s orange-clad figure was thrown into the water.
For a second Thomas Tierney remained upright, his arms flailing as he
tried to grab at Alford. Then, as though a trapdoor had opened beneath
him, he dropped through the bottom of the boat and disappeared.
 
Winter raced towards the water. I ran after him.
 
“Stay with Vala!” Winter grabbed my arm. Alford’s orange life vest
gleamed from on top of the rock where he clung. On board the Ice Queen,
someone yelled through a megaphone, and I could see another craft, a
little inflated Zodiac, drop into the gray water. Winter shook me fiercely.
“Justin! I said, stay with her—”
 
He looked back towards the beach. So did I.
 
Vala was nowhere to be seen. Winter dropped my arm, but before he
could say anything there was a motion among the rocks.
 
And there was Vala, coming into sight like gathering fog. Even from
this distance I could see how her eyes glittered, blue-black like a winter sky;
and I could tell she was smiling.
 
* * * *
 
THE crew of the Ice Queen rescued Alford quickly, long before the Coast
Guard arrived. Winter and I stayed on the beach for several hours, while the
search and rescue crews arrived and the Navy Falcons flew by overhead, in
case Tierney came swimming to shore, or in case his body washed up.
 
But it never did. That spar of rock had ripped a huge hole in the
Boston Whaler, a bigger hole even than you’d think; but no one blamed
Alford. All you had to do was take a look at the charts and see that there
had never been a rock there, ever. Though it’s there now, I can tell you that.
I see it every day when I look out from the windows at Winter’s house.

 
I never asked Vala about what happened. Winter had a grim
expression when we finally went back to his place late that afternoon.
Thomas Tierney was a multimillionaire, remember, and even I knew there
would be an investigation and interviews and TV people.
 
But everyone on board the Ice Queen had witnessed what happened,
and so had Al Alford; and while they’d all seen Winter arguing with Tier-ney,
there’d been no exchange of blows, not even any pushing, and no threats
on Winter’s part—Alford testified to that. The King’s Pine was gone, but two
remained; and a bunch of people from the Audubon Society and the Sierra
Club and places like that immediately filed a lawsuit against Tierney’s
estate, to have all the property on the old Packard Farm turned into a nature
preserve.                                             
 
Which I thought was good, but it still won’t bring the other tree back.
 
One day after school, a few weeks after the boat sank, I was helping
to put the finishing touches on Winter’s house. Just about everything was
done, except for the fireplace—there were still piles of rocks everywhere
and plastic buckets full of mortar and flat stones for the hearth.
 
“Justin.” Vala appeared behind me so suddenly I jumped. “Will you
come with me, please?”
 
I stood and nodded. She looked really pregnant now, and serious.
 
But happy, too. In the next room we could hear Winter working with a
sander. Vala looked at me and smiled, put a finger to her lips then touched
her finger to my chin. This time, it didn’t ache with cold.
 
“Come,” she said.
 
Outside it was cold and gray, the middle of October, but already most
of the trees were bare, their leaves torn away by a storm a few nights
ear-lier. We headed for the woods behind the house, past the quince bush,
its branches stripped of leaves and all the hummingbirds long gone to
warmer places. Vala wore her same bright blue rubber shoes and Winter’s
rolled-up jeans.
 
But even his big sweatshirt was too small now to cover her belly, so
my mother had knit her a nice big sweater and given her a warm plaid coat
that made Vala look even more like a kid, except for her eyes and that way
she would look at me sometimes and smile, as though we both knew a

secret. I followed her to where the path snaked down to the beach and tried
not to glance over at the base of the cliff. The King’s Pine had finally fallen
and wedged between the crack in the huge rocks there, so that now
seaweed was tangled in its dead branches, and all the rocks were covered
with yel-low pine needles.
 
“Winter has to go into town for a few hours,” Vala said, as though
answering a question. “I need you to help me with something.”
 
We reached the bottom of the path and picked our way across the
rocks until we reached the edge of the shore. A few gulls flew overhead,
scream-ing, and the wind blew hard against my face and bare hands. I’d
followed Vala outside without my coat. When I looked down, I saw that my
fingers were bright red. But I didn’t feel cold at all.
 
“Here,” murmured Vala.
 
She walked, slowly, to where a gray rock protruded from the gravel
beach. It was roughly the shape and size of an arm
 
Then I drew up beside Vala and saw that it really was an arm—part of
one, anyway, made of smooth gray stone, like marble only darker, but with
no hand and broken just above the elbow. Vala stood and looked at it, her
lips pursed; then stooped to pick it up.
 
“Will you carry this, please?” she said.
 
I didn’t say anything, just held out my arms, as though she were going
to fill them with firewood. When she set the stone down I flinched—not
be-cause it was heavy, though it was, but because it looked exactly like a
real arm. I could even see where the veins had been, in the crook of the
elbow, and the wrinkled skin where the arm had bent.
 
“Justin,” Vala said. I looked up to see her blue-black eyes fixed on
me. “Come on. It will get dark soon.”
 
I followed her as she walked slowly along the beach, like someone
looking for sea glass or sand dollars. Every few feet she would stop and
pick something up—a hand, a foot, a long piece of stone that was most of a
leg—then turn and set it carefully into my arms. When I couldn’t carry any
more, she picked up one last small rock—a clenched fist—and made her
way slowly back to the trail.
 
We made several more trips that day, and for several days after that.

Each time, we would return to the house and Vala would fit the stones into
the unfinished fireplace, covering them with other rocks so that no one
could see them. Or if you did see one, you’d think maybe it was just part of
a broken statue, or a rock that happened to look like a foot, or a shoulder
blade, or the cracked round back of a head.
 
I couldn’t bring myself to ask Vala about it. But I remembered how the
Boston Whaler had looked when the Coast Guard dragged it onshore, with
a small ragged gash in its bow, and a much, much bigger hole in the
bot-tom, as though something huge and heavy had crashed through it. Like
a meteor, maybe. Or a really big rock, or like if someone had dropped a
granite statue of a man into the boat.
 
Not that anyone had seen that happen. I told myself that maybe it
re-ally was a statue—maybe a statue had fallen off a ship or been pushed
off a cliff or something.
 
But then one day we went down to the beach, the last day actually,
and Vala made me wade into the shallow water. She pointed at something
just below the surface, something round and white, like a deflated soccer
ball.
 
Only it wasn’t a soccer ball. It was Thomas Tierney’s head: the front
of it, anyway, the one part Vala hadn’t already found and built into the
fire-place.
 
His face.
 
I pulled it from the water and stared at it. A green scum of algae
cov-ered his eyes, which were wide and staring. His mouth was open so
you could see where his tongue had been before it broke off, leaving a
jagged edge in the hole of his screaming mouth.
 
“Loksins,” said Vala. She took it from me easily, even though it was
so heavy I could barely hold it. “At last ...”
 
She turned and walked back up to the house.
 
* * * *
 
THAT was three months ago. Winter’s house is finished now, and Winter
lives in it, along with Winter’s wife.
 
And their baby. The fireplace is done, and you can hardly see where

there is a round broken stone at the very top, which if you squint and look at
it in just the right light, like at night when only the fire is going, looks kind of
like a face. Winter is happier than I’ve ever seen him, and my mom and I go
over a lot, to visit him and Vala and the baby, who is just a few weeks old
now and so cute you wouldn’t believe it, and tiny, so tiny I was afraid to hold
her at first but Vala says not to worry—I may be like her big brother now, but
someday, when the baby grows up, she will be the one to always watch out
for me. They named her Gerda, which means Protector; and for a baby she
is incredibly strong.
 
* * * *

