KEEPER OF THE KING
By
Nigel Bennett & P. N. Elrod
CONTENTS
Chapter One
Chapter Two
Chapter Three
Chapter Four
Chapter Five
Chapter Six
Chapter Seven
Chapter Eight
Chapter Nine
Chapter Ten
Chapter Eleven
Chapter Twelve
Chapter One
Orleans, Normandy, the Beginning
 
An old man, and he was only thirty-five.
His arms felt like lead, his back ached, and sweat streamed into his eyes, creating
false tears. He'd fought the whole morning and well into the afternoon and felt every
harsh moment, but he couldn't show any weakness. Not to this crowd,  not  with so
much at risk.
A hundred men had started the great tourney and now the numbers were whittled
down,  as  they  always  were,  to  the  final  two.  Himself,  Richard,  third  son  of
Montague, the Duc d'Orleans, seasoned, hard… and that damned boy.
Richard had managed by a series of strategies, alliances, and  pure  skill to  defeat
some seventeen men. They had been strong, yet he had been stronger or smarter or
both. But now, as he faced his final opponent across the shattered turf, now he was
tired. More tired than he could  remember.  Every inch of  him  was  bruised  and  his

helmet, grown heavy from the constant battle, chafed around his neck.
Richard looked across to the galleries of the old Roman-built arena taken over for
the contest. They had been nearly empty for most of  the morning, but  as  the day's
climax neared, they fluttered with the movement of the onlookers. Even the duke his
father had deigned to show his face at last along with his fat firstborn, swollen even
now with the expectation of  his inheritance. No  such  joy for  the third son  of  most
houses. For him was the bitterness of a few thin gold coins and the polite request to
leave. Richard would go, eventually, but on his own terms and with honor. He would
make a show for them they'd never forget.
It had been his only real misfortune, Richard d'Orleans, to be third born. Nothing
other than that accident of timing could have marred him. He was tall, over six feet,
and handsome. He had inherited his mother's eyes, so he was told, of icy blue. He'd
never seen her, for she had died bearing him, bleeding her life away as he was rushed
to the wet nurse,  screaming.  He had  cried  for  three days,  whether from  hunger  or
from grief no one ever knew. His fair hair came from his father, as  did  his size and
strength. Montague d'Orleans had gained his place brutally over the bodies of many
an  enemy  and  not  a  few  friends.  His  third  child  came  by  his  streak  of  cold
determination honestly. If you knew the father, you knew the son.
Richard's childhood had  been  no  better  and  no  worse  than anyone else's  of  his
station. A wry grin crossed  his face  as  he thought of  it. His station!  The  third son
had no station. The first born inherited, the second went to the clergy, and the third?
The third simply went, the farther away the better, unless he could earn his keeping.
Thank God  for  the tourneys.  Early in his youth  he had  shown  the unmistakable
signs of  being a natural warrior.  In  play  as  children,  his  older  brothers  were  easy
prey  for  one  of  his  precocious  strength  and  skill.  In  the  course  of  his  years  of
training he went on  to  ever older,  larger opponents,  and  beat  them all. Never once
had he lost. When his body  flagged, his brain saved  him. He possessed  a tenacity
and intelligence that, coupled with his size, made him a natural champion. Pray God
these  qualities  would  not  forsake  him  now.  So  long  as  he  could  continue  as  the
favored champion of Orleans, bringing glory and honor to his family name, then his
parsimonious  father had  good  reason  to  allow him to  remain  home.  Anything  less
and he would be shown the door quickly enough. Neither his father or oldest brother
had said as much in so many words, but it was clearly understood. The outcome of
this tourney would decide many things for them all for some time to come.
Richard d'Orleans looked to his callow opponent, studying him. The youth could
have been' no more than sixteen, the age of a squire,  but  was  tall, muscled  beyond
his years, and heavy-boned in broken and  ill-fitting mail. His breathing was  labored
as he leaned for a brief moment of respite on his sword. A bastard, thought Richard,
 and all the more dangerous for that. Longing for honor. Longing to make a name
.
Because of his youth, he shouldn't have been allowed in the tourney, though there
were always exceptions.  If  the  boy  had  had  the  good  luck  to  capture  a  noble  of
some  rank  on  the  battlefield,  rather  than  submit  himself  to  be  ransomed  by  an

inferior, the noble would have knighted his captor on the spot, saving his name from
the humiliation. Richard  didn't  know or  really care  about  this  adversary's  past,  his
own future was  all  that  mattered.  The  boy  was  nothing  more  than  an  obstacle  to
overcome.
The trumpets sounded their strident calls. The defeated had been carried from the
field, either to be bandaged or buried, depending on their luck. Now it was the time
of champions.  The  crowd  would be  silent, awed by  strength and  savagery,  by  the
heat and the rush of blood and hope, until, as one of the champions fell, a great roar
would go up in exultation of the victor. Richard stood straight as silence descended,
facing his quarry, quiet as a statue. In past contests, so simple a ploy had often been
enough to  unman even the boldest  fighter. Soon  he would find out  if this  stripling
was in that number.
The herald called their names out to the crowd, shouting what was already known,
that the victor of this single combat would win not only the tourney purse, but all the
arms and armor of the loser. Richard had little use for the boy's shoddy equipment,
but he wanted—needed—that purse of gold  and  all the important honors  that went
with it. Then would he have the freedom he craved, to make the choice to stay in his
fathers court or to move on to serve in another, better house.
Despite his secure position as the firstborn with a son of his own to carry on the
title, his oldest brother had made no secret of his jealousy for Richard's abilities. The
teasing rivalry they'd  once  shared  as  children had  grown spiteful over  the years,  at
least on his brother's part. All too aware of his dependence on the good will of their
father, Richard  had  grimly  done  his  Christian  duty  and  turned  the  other  cheek  to
keep peace in the house, but it was damned difficult at times. More and more often
his whispered confessions to the priests included his great temptation to pound Dear
Brother to a jelly. Even after a day such as this he could do so without much effort,
and  oh,  but  didn't  Dear  Brother  know  that  well  enough?  The  priests,  of  course,
cautioned  him against  so  grave  a  sin,  and  he  reverently  submitted  to  the  penance
without a murmur. No one could accuse him of disdaining the knightly virtues.
But enough of  that. Memories of  the past  and  fair  dreams  for  the  future  could
wait. All thought, all attention must be fixed upon what was to come. That purse of
gold  wasn't  yet  tied  to  his  belt;  he  had  to  first  earn  it.  This  new  opponent  had
unquestionably fought well, defeating more than a dozen  veteran fighters to  get this
far; it would be foolish to underestimate him just because he was a boy.
I was  that  young  once,  that  desperate  to prove  myself.  Why  should  he  be  any
different?
Richard  continued  to  hold  still,  letting  his  cold  gaze  pound  against  the  boy's
scratched and dented helmet. He was distant enough to not be able to see the boy's
eyes, but still… Can you feel that, young pup?
The boy held still in turn, perhaps wise to Richard's game and attempting to play
as well. The stillness seemed to spread  out  from  them, encompassing  the field, the
crowd, until the least murmur was stifled to silence. For the tiniest moment Richard
thought he could hear their very breath in their throats.

Then in the stands, the kerchief fell. Battle was joined.
Those  who watched  would tell later that this was  the greatest  struggle  they  had
ever  witnessed.  It  was  a  struggle  between  man  and  boy,  between  experience  and
youth, confidence and desperation.
At first, little happened. The two adversaries circled  each  other  warily, searching
for weakness or fear. Then quick  as  lightning, they fell to  it. For  over  an hour,  the
clanging  of  sword  on  shield,  of  metal  against  metal  rang  out  across  the  damp
Normandy countryside. For over an hour,  it was  the only sound  to  be  heard,  as  if
not merely this crowd of watchers but the whole world held its breath. No bird sang,
no animal called, no infant cried. All was rapt attention, centered on the contest.
Initially, the young boy clearly had the upper hand.
He'd  used  his  moment  of  respite  well,  and  was  full  of  energy  and  spirit.  He
attacked  with  all  the  confidence  of  being  sixteen  and  immortal.  His  sword  arced
through the air time and  again, driving Richard  back.  It looked  to  all that the older
man had finally, brutally met his match.
Richard,  however,  felt  only  serenity  in  his  soul.  He'd  faced  this  many  times
before. Indeed, it was often a tactic of his to allow a brash opponent the upper hand
in the early going to tire him out. Then he would come on full strength and finish off
the  unfortunate.  He'd  convinced  himself  that  this  was  the  case  now,  and  sure
enough,  the  boy  was  slowing,  and  the  force  behind  his  wild  blows  had  faded.
Richard chose to forget the fact that he had been truly shocked by the sheer ferocity
of the boy's initial rush.
Now  it  was  his  turn.  He  hefted  his  great  sword  and  swung  it  into  smooth,
practiced  motion,  this  time  for  attack,  not  defense.  The  boy  staggered  well  back
under  the  onslaught,  and  for  the  first  time,  a  collective  murmur  arose  from  the
crowd.  Richard  basked  in  their  gift  of  approval,  all  but  feasted  on  it  in  the  brief
pause as the boy fought to recover himself. Time now to undermine his confidence
while he was yet vulnerable.
"I will have all you possess, all you desire. You are mine, boy."
"Not yet, I'm not," the younger man gasped. "I will not be beaten by an old man
such as you."
The words stung Richard. Unexpected, that, but easily returned. "Age, my lovely
youth, is in the eye of  the beholder."  And he struck  again, down  once  to  jar, then
hard to  the side  and  up,  driving the  boy's  sword  from  his  grasp  to  send  it  flying
through the air, a flash of silver in the fading sunlight.
It was nearly over. An unarmed boy against
Orleans's  greatest  champion—all  that  remained  to  be  decided  was  how  much
injury  to  give  before  Richard  chose  to  stop.  He  should  cripple  the  jumped-up
bastard, for no champion wanted such a dangerous opponent to ever challenge him
again. But as he prepared to deliver the blow the boy suddenly charged him, fast as
the wind, faster than he could bring his sword around, arms wide to  wrestle him to

the ground. An old trick, was his fleeting thought, tried often and doomed to fail.
The  boy  crashed  against  him  with  a  grunt,  the  shock  of  impact  passing  hard
through  his  mail  and  padding  beneath.  More  bruises  for  later.  He  felt  burly  arms
wrapping around his waist, trying to lift him, to topple him. He twisted to  break  the
boy's hold. Just for an instant he saw their long shadows black against the churned,
blood-soaked  grass,  saw  their shapeless  forms  struggling, striving, one  against  the
other.  He  lifted  his  sword  high,  the  blade  catching  the  lowering  sun  behind  him.
Sparks of light reflected off its polished surface, blinding him, but he didn't need to
see to accurately bring the thick pommel down  on  the back  of  the boy's  neck  just
below his helmet. It wouldn't kill, but it would give Richard the moment he needed to
tear free and finish the job. No mercy for this one, not after this humiliating trick. He
could hear the hooting from the galleries already.
Just as  he'd  raised  his arm high enough,  the inexplicable happened.  Not  that  he
had time to work out exactly what caused it, all he understood was that an invisible
hand seemed to seize the sword from his grip and send it flying through the air.
"Slipped away from him, by St. George!" someone crowed.
Thunderstruck,  Richard's  mind howled a silent denial at this even as  he tried to
recover from the setback. Not slipped! He knew better. Something had… had taken
it, plucked it right away from him when he needed it most.
Then his feet left the damp grass, he lost all purchase, all balance, and  the world
spun crazily beyond the confines of his helm. The earth came up and  slammed him
in the back, then another weight threw itself upon  his laboring chest.  He was  down
with the boy on top of him.
Even now, with his surprise about the sword  necessarily fading against changing
circumstance, he wasn't worried.  He'd  been  in this situation more than a few times
before,  wrestling in the mud  before  pinning  his  opponent  and  rising  first  to  claim
victory. But this time, he found it more difficult. The  youth  was  heavy and  fighting
with all the ferocious recklessness of one who truly needed the victory.  He wrested
out of Richard's grasp, quickly pushing himself to his knees. Richard  clawed at his
legs to  drag  him back,  but  the boy  pulled out  his dagger and  slashed  down  at the
older  man's  hand,  driving  the  thin  blade  between  the  protective  rings  of  his  mail
glove like a hammer. Richard  roared  with  equal  parts  of  pain  and  outrage.  Blood
spurted,  mingling  with  the  mud  as  the  boy  yanked  the  blade  free  then  twisted
Richards helmet off. The sudden air was freezing against his sweat-soaked face and
hair. Richard brought a now-clumsy arm up and over, barely managing to block the
next fall of the knife. He tried to strike the boy's  face,  but  that poor  fit of  a helmet
was sufficient protection. Not so for Richard. The boy's own mailed fist connected
like  the  club  it  was  against  the  side  of  Richard's  now  vulnerable  skull.  The  sun
whirled and flamed behind his eyes leaving behind a shuddering darkness.
The next thing he felt was  a hand  roughly  grab  his  hair,  pulling  his  head  back,
exposing  his throat.  For  an awful, bottomless  second  he was  utterly certain of  his
death. His time had  finally come.  All the victories  of  the years  past  meant nothing.
He was lost. Everything he had was lost.

The boy's leering face swam into view. "Yield, old man!"
His heaving breath stank, and the sweat dripped from his forehead onto Richards
own  streaming  face.  He  pressed  the  dagger  hard  against  Richard's  throat,  cutting
him. A thick trickle of blood slid hot over his cold skin.
"Your life, your possessions are mine no matter what. Yield to me and I will spare
you. Old man."
He spat the words out, and Richard knew he had no choice. He became aware of
the clamoring crowd, the blaring trumpets, the screams, the laughter.
"I yield."
The words came with no effort. Those words that he had fought so hard over the
years never to have to  say.  They simply fell from  his lips. Contemptuous,  the boy
released him and threw his arms skyward in victory and staggered like a drunk away
to the welcoming shouts of his supporters.
Richard's  strength was  quite gone.  He could  only lie in the grass  and  reddened
mud, staring at an empty sky. His lungs labored painfully, his heart pounded far too
hard and fast for  comfort,  but  gradually both  eased  their breakneck  pace,  allowing
him the single clear realization that he'd finally met defeat.
So it had happened at last, and strangely, very strangely, he felt free, released.
But God's mercy, how he hurt.
 
Dusk fell as  Richard  squatted  alone in his tent by  the lake. His servants  weren't
there when he'd  returned from  the field, nor  had  he expected  to  see  them after his
failure. They were, after all, attached to his father's household, not to him. However,
the boy's new page and squire, grinning like fools, had most timely come to remove
everything. His good  chain mail, every trapping  and  weapon  that  he'd  used  in  the
tourney, all his best possessions were forfeit. Even his great broadsword, his soul as
a fighter, disappeared, taken from  him as  he had  taken it from  his first victim. The
spoils  ever went to  the victor  in this kind of  contest.  It was  a lesson  Richard  had
learned long ago and benefited well from. Now, as though a great wheel had turned,
it was his time to suffer.
"Our master will have your horse in the morning. He has no need of it tonight. Do
not try to  remove it," the squire  had  sniffed  as  he went, "or  he will surely remove
your head."
Richard said nothing. His left hand hurt like the devil. When he'd removed his mail
glove to  give to  the page,  his severed  ring finger had  fallen right out  to  the  beaten
earth.  The  smirking  child  doubled  over,  whooping  with  laughter  at  Richard's
surprise.  The  squire  bent  and  picked  up  the  finger  to  offer  it  back  with  mocking
politeness.  Richard  stared  at him until the  youth  shrugged,  tossing  it  onto  the  old
blanket that served as a bed.  The  two  of  them finally finished their scavenging and
hurried away in the growing darkness,  laden  with  their  master's  booty,  anxious  to
deliver it and  pass  along their tale. They'd  left him  the  tent,  too  tattered  to  bother

claiming, his clothing, a bed, such as it was, and an oil lamp. After fourteen years of
service to his fathers house, this was all he had  left, but  he'd  be  damned  before  he
begged for aught else.
And now Richard squatted by the lamp's feeble light looking at the lifeless bit of
flesh  that  had  once  been  a  part  of  him.  The  blood  was  all  gone  from  it;  it  felt
absurdly light and small.
What to do, he thought, what to do? The idea of taking his horse  and  riding like
the wind for the coast and a ship to Britain or even Wales had, indeed,  crossed  his
mind, but he dismissed it. Bad enough that he'd  lost;  he would not  run away like a
beaten dog. No honor in that, mores the pity.
Ah, yes. Pity. The  most  favorable response  he could  anticipate for  his defeat…
and the least tolerable to  his temperament. God's  death,  but  it was  easy  enough to
pity others, but for himself—better to be scorned as the defeated champion than to
suffer
 charitable
 sympathy.
 The
 other
 response
 would
 certainly
 be
contempt—especially from Father and Dear Brother—for what had happened.
And  what  had  happened?  How  could  he  have  lost  his  sword  so  easily,  so
damned carelessly? At the time he'd have sworn on the church altar that it had been
solidly plucked away, and so it still seemed to  him now,  but  that was  ridiculous.  It
had to be. No one had been close enough to them to…
Had the young bastard had magical help? Had someone been working witchery in
his favor? Richard was aware of such things, but in all his long years of fighting had
yet to see any for himself. No, that couldn't be it. That very morning he'd  made his
confession  with all the  others  who  were  to  fight,  been  absolved,  prayed  at  mass,
taken Communion,  and  worn his blessed  cross  all  through  the  tourney.  Surely  no
sorcery,  no  matter  how  strong,  could  have  touched  him.  No,  despite  his  strong
impression of the incident, he must have mistaken things, somehow  muddled  them.
The  deed  was  done,  anyway,  over  forever  and  the  bleak  consequences  from  the
resulting loss were only just beginning to take root in his weary heart.
What to do?
He  knew  the  fate  of  men  in  similar  straits,  having  seen  it  often  enough.  He'd
always thought them pathetic  and  somehow  deserving  of  their  ignominy,  that  they
must have brought it upon themselves in some  manner. He was  well on  the way to
revising that belief, for it looked to be his future, too, wandering from court to court
in hope  that some  lord  would decide  he was  worth the keeping. If  lucky,  Richard
might attach himself to a wealthy liege and train other men to fight. If not, then dead
on a muddy road because… because he was an old man now and an easy kill. The
bastard had been all too right.
Old man.
He could still hear the boy's  taunt in his mind, still feel the surprising pain of  it.
Thirty-five and an old man, at least as a fighter. News of this would spread  far and
wide, of how the great champion  of  Orleans was  defeated  by…  what court  would
even have him after this?

Now who is raining pity upon you?
He looked up, sure someone  had  spoken  aloud  to  him, but  the tent was  empty.
He  listened,  hearing  nothing  except  the  distant  noise  of  the  revelers  starting  their
celebrations, a feast he had no stomach to endure. The voice had been a fancy only.
Perhaps he was getting a fever from the battering he'd taken, or from the lost finger.
That would make a perfect end to the worst day of his life.
What to do?
Of course, if he really got desperate he could  enter into God's  service.  It would
mean dawn to dusk toil, broken by an endless series of prayers and masses, but he
was used to heavy work and at least he'd be fed regularly. Without money he could
never hope to rise very far in the church hierarchy, nor did he have influence to make
up for the lack. His second-born brother,  who had  taken orders,  bore  as  little love
for  him  as  the  firstborn,  scorning  him  for  his  success  in  the  sinful  vanity  of
tournaments.  Perhaps  if his younger sibling was  sufficiently  repentant  might  he  be
persuaded to have a change of heart.
But no, the cloistered walls of an abbey or monastery  were not  for  Richard,  not
with his appetite for life's fleshly joys. For once, his most recent confession had had
nothing to do with his oldest brothers slights and  everything to  do  with the comely
wench whose  company  Richard  had  so  thoroughly enjoyed the night before.  He'd
gotten  a  weary  penance  for  that  sport,  but  she'd  been  worth  it.  Where  was  she?
Helping to celebrate the new champions victory no doubt. Not that he could  afford
her favors now. Sweet Jesus, but he didn't even have enough money to get decently
drunk.
It was an effort to drag his mind back to  the unhappy  cares  of  the moment,  but
back  it  came,  encouraged  by  a  legion  of  aches.  A  full  day  of  hard  combat  was
difficult enough to bear when victory came at the end of it. Now with the bitter gall
of defeat, the pain of his body was almost unbearable.
You  stink,  Richard,  he  thought  to  himself.  Go  and  bathe.  Then  have  your
wounds treated. Off to the good sisters with you.
It was his custom after any trial of arms to visit the Priory of Our Lady the Virgin,
give  generously  to  the  sisters,  and  take  advantage  of  their  skills  in  healing  if  he
needed it. Perhaps tonight they would remember his past  generosities and  treat him
for nothing. He hoped  so,  for  he was  in grievous need  of  their help. His left hand
throbbed  as  he tore  a strip  from  the blanket and  wrapped  it clumsily over  the  still
seeping wound. He'd have to find some hot wax to cauterize it, then have it properly
seen to; unless carefully treated he could lose his whole arm to rot, perhaps even die
from it.
There's a comforting thought.
With an immense effort  of  body  and  will, he slowly stood  and  turned  to  leave,
every separate stiffening muscle shrieking protest at the movement. It was  then that
he saw  her,  heard  her  soft  voice  drifting  to  him  across  the  dim  tent  like  a  gentle
summer breeze tousling the heads of wheat in a field.

"Bathing is an excellent idea, but if the good sisters possess  any sense,  they will
have nothing to do with you."
She stood just in the doorway of his tent, and for the first of many, many times,
the Lady Sabra took his breath  away. He wasn't  sure  if she  had  spoken  the words
he'd heard, for he hadn't seen her lips move. Certainly he didn't know what to say in
reply, particularly since she had commented upon his very thoughts. He stood like a
dumbstruck fool for what seemed an age, drinking her in with his eyes like a pilgrim
at the feet of a saint's statue. Such  was  the feeling her presence  inspired in him, as
though he were in church, but instead of a bit of  painted wood  or  stone  this statue
was alive, regarding him with ancient eyes, eyes that had  seen  all and  could  forgive
anything. For an instant he wanted to fall to his knees before their terrifying beauty.
"Lady, you  mistake your  place,"  he whispered,  finally mastering himself enough
to speak. "If you have lost your way…"
"I am not  lost."  Her voice  was  as  cool  and  smooth  as  the  lake  water,  and  she
continued with her steady regard of him. Smiling.
No  lady  of  any  rank—and  her  clothing  proclaimed  her  to  be  very  high  and
wealthy, indeed—would have been alone as she  seemed  to  be,  but  here she  stood,
looking at him as though nothing at all was amiss. He found it difficult to believe, but
perhaps this angelic beauty was  a camp  follower dressing  well beyond  her station.
Only one  of  that number would travel about  after  dark  with  no  escort  and  boldly
come to a man's tent.
"You  have  no  business  here.  I  have  nothing  for  you…"  There,  an  inoffensive
dismissal, an easy way for her to take her leave no matter who she might be.
"You are half correct," she said. "You have nothing for me, good Lord Richard,
but I do have business here." And she smiled that devastating smile again.
What kind of creature is she? he wondered.  She  was  built like a girl, small, tiny
compared to him, and yet there was a strange wisdom in her face. Her eyes were of
the darkest brown, so dark that the black center was indistinguishable. Her skin was
clear and  milky  white,  and  her  ready  smile  showed  strong,  white,  even  teeth.  But
there  was  something  else  about  her  that  he  could  not  readily  describe.  She  was
confident, yes, and there was royalty in her bearing for  sure,  and  at the same time,
something disturbing. Then it came to him. It was a sense of power so vast and great
that for  an instant the hairs on  the  back  of  his  neck  began  to  rise,  and  he  felt  an
almost overwhelming urge to run away as far and as fast as he could.
"I am the Lady Sabra. You may have heard of me."
He tried his memory,  but  so  unusual a name as  hers  meant nothing to  him, and
had he ever met her  before  he'd  certainly  have  remembered.  Had  she  been  in  the
galleries? No, for  he'd  have surely noticed  her there sparkling like a jewel amid the
gold.
"No,  Lady  Sabra,  I  have  not.  Forgive  me."  How  abashed  he  felt,  like  an
inexperienced lad with his first woman.

"It does not matter."
"You are kind." Why was she here, a lady of her rank? What could she want with
him? A base idea crossed his mind, one of many possibilities,  but  he was  reluctant
to explore it too far. He'd learned long ago that the pursuit  of  carnal pleasures  with
noblewomen was often of far greater danger than any battlefield. Best to find out her
business, then get rid of her as fast as politeness allowed.
"I  would  ask  you  to  sit,  but  as  you  can  see,  there  is  nothing  to  sit  on."  He
gestured with his right hand, holding his left close to his body.
"I  do  not  need  to  sit."  She  continued  to  smile  at  him  as  she  spoke,  her  gaze
holding  briefly  on  his  injured  hand  before  shifting  back  to  his  face;  an  unspoken
challenge flashed  from  her remarkable eyes.  "I  watched  you  today  at  the  tourney.
You did well… for an old man."
God's mercy, but he did not need this now, no matter how beautiful she was. His
lips tightened in an  effort  not  to  grimace.  "I  thank  you,  lady,  your  compliment  is
appreciated, though the 'old' is irksome. I have done  better  many times in the past.
Perhaps  Your  Ladyship  should  have  seen  me  then."  There,  he'd  almost  sounded
civil, even to his own ears.
"I saw all that I needed to see today," she said evenly. Her gaze now swept over
him from  top  to  bottom,  obviously  judging,  assessing,  noting  everything.  He  was
more than aware of  his ragged appearance,  the muddy  filth,  blood  and  bruises.  It
was of no matter to him, if she wanted to talk to a gaudy peacock there were plenty
to choose from in Father's court. "I saw," she continued, "a boy defeat a man. I saw
a man humbled before a great throng. I saw youth bring pride low."
God's  death,  but  he  did  not  need  this.  Had  a  man  voiced  such  things  to  him
Richard would have given in to temper and challenged him on the spot. Instead, for
the sake of her sex he must endure her insults. But she speaks  the  truth,  so how  is
that an insult? Still, his jaw ached for holding back a sharp retort to her. A woman
such as she would surely have a champion. However tempting it was, he didn't want
to offend  her and  get into another fight. At least not  for  a day  or  two.  He  took  a
deep, steadying breath  before  replying. "Indeed,  lady. Forgive me, but  I am not  at
my best,  and  truly do  not  need  to  be  reminded of  my defeat.  Perhaps  you  should
leave and allow an 'old man" —despite his wish for control his anger and voice rose
as he spoke— "to be alone with the ends of his overweening pride, and to  treat his
hurts as best he can."
"Forgive  me  Lord  Richard."  Her  demeanor  abruptly  softened  and  she  seemed
truly repentant. "I did not mean to add to your misery. I've not come here to gloat."
How could she have known he was thinking that?
"I simply tell as I see. There is no judgment there. In truth, that boy will gain little
from his victory. I see a short life for him…"
She  stopped,  as  if  uncertain  whether  to  go  on,  then  stepped  toward  him  and
looked up earnestly into his eyes.

"You are all my concern, Richard of Orleans." She cocked her head to one side,
for all the world, like a curious bird. "What will you do now?"
His temper melted away.  First  he  wanted  to  forgive  her,  then  he  wanted  to  be
angry all over again for plying him with the one question for which he had no answer.
A few  quick  meaningless  responses  crossed  his  mind,  but  before  that  searching
gaze, that gloriously beautiful gaze, he could only confess the unhappy truth.
"I do not know. I cannot stay here. I was  only tolerated  by  my father because  I
was,  it seemed,  invincible. Now that there is a new champion  they've no  place  for
me." Why  am  I telling  her  this? he thought as  the words  spilled from  him. "I  will
move on. There is always need for those who train others." He felt a great sadness
creeping over him. "Other than that, I do not know…"
And he could not go on. Had he tried, his voice would have cracked  and  all the
tears of his life, of his unspoken hurts, his loneliness, would have run uncontrollably
down his bruised cheeks and betrayed his manhood, reducing him to being that little
boy  who  had  cried  alone  in  the  hayloft,  longing  for  a  mother's  gentle  caress  that
would never come.
She reached up her hand and placed it against his cheek. Her pale skin was  cool
and  soft  and  delicately  scented.  His  heart  leaped  so  hard  he  felt  an  instant  of
dizziness from her touch.
"You will never be alone again, this much I promise," she told him with complete
certainty. "Come to my pavilion tonight and  we will talk further."  She  moved  away
toward the door. "You will find it easily. It is nearest your father's castle wall, on the
west side. And Lord Richard… ?" She arched one eyebrow.
"My lady?"
"Bathe first." And as silently as she had come, she was gone.
"Yes, my lady," he said to the darkness.
For a long time Richard stood looking at the opening of his tent, trying to decide
what to do. He concluded that it was  as  before  when the boy  held the knife to  his
throat: he had no real choice. He needed work, a station to call his own,  something
honorable to do, and she'd offered to help him. But worldly practicalities aside, she
was the most unsettling woman he'd ever encountered, bringing forth a multitude of
feelings and reactions from him such as he'd never before experienced. His instincts
screamed warnings to his mind that she was uncanny, and therefore dangerous,  but
his heart quietly assured  him that he of  all people  would suffer  no  harm from  her.
With the back of his hand he touched again where her fingers had brushed his face.
Had she said and done nothing else, that gesture alone would have sent him hurtling
after  her,  unable  to  resist  her  invitation.  Then  he  lowered  his  hand,  grunted,  and
headed out to the lake. She was right. He did stink.
 
The water was freezing cold. His open  wounds  stung  like wasps—especially  his
hand—his bruises were stiffening and like to remain so for days, but at least he was

clean. As he stood naked at the edge  of  the shore,  drying himself with handfuls of
sweet-smelling grasses,  he idly perused  his body.  For  an old  man he was  yet  well
muscled  and  as  hard  as  iron. There were scars  aplenty, but  none  so  bad  as  to  be
ugly, except maybe for the one on his shoulder from the sword blow that nearly took
his arm a few years ago. The sisters had done well with their healing on that one. Not
that  his  looks  mattered.  If  Sabra  had  an  interest  in  him,  it  would  not  be  for  the
unblemished perfection of his hide. He was a soldier, not a reciter of poetry.
He pulled on his tunic and tied up his hose, slipped his feet into soft  boots,  and
looped a belt loosely round his waist. These and a few other clothes were about  all
that he had left. Perhaps he could find a rich wife somewhere,  a girl with a wealthy
father anxious to  have  a  share  in  the  d'Orleans  name  even  if  it  meant  a  penniless
son-in-law. Oh, but did he want to be saddled with that kind of trouble? He couldn't
see  himself  ever  getting  quite  that  desperate,  but  it  had  happened  to  others.  He
shuddered at their lot as he walked from the lake.
The full moon had risen slowly, sluggishly above the trees and now hung heavy in
the topmost branches like a huge yellow-gold ball. He could see his breath on the air
in the chill of a late spring frost as he worked his way back toward the castle and the
town. How he loved  this time of  year. He had  ever since  he was  a  boy.  The  new
leaves, the damp  smell of  fresh-turned  earth, and  the  wood  smoke  never  failed  to
excite him. It was a time of  breeding and  of  promise,  trees  heavy with blossom  as
the fallow deer  was  heavy with her fawn. It was  also,  it seemed  to  him,  a  time  of
magic and the unending mystery of life. As he looked past the trees, he saw the light
of bonfires  springing up  far away across  the fields, and  the  sounds  of  music  and
laughter carried to him on the gentle wind. Despite everything, all the calamities of the
day, even despite himself and his failure, he smiled. Life could yet be good.
Soon the sounds of the castle came to him, and  as  he approached  he could  see
busy servants running, shouting orders, making sure that all went well at his father's
celebration banquet. A banquet he had not been invited to,  but  that was  only to  be
expected.  He purposely  avoided  the  light  from  the  flaming  torches,  and  made  his
way around to the west face of  the castle.  Here, all was  much quieter, for  here the
great west  wall stood  in defiance of  all who might try to  force  entry,  windowless,
doorless, solid. He strained his eyes into the darkness,  and  for  a moment was  sure
he'd been cruelly duped, for he could see no tent, no lights to signify habitation. He
turned, about to leave in disgust, when a voice disturbed the quiet.
"You are in the right place, Lord Richard. Come, my lady awaits."
He turned again to the darkness, and became aware of a darker shape within it. A
servant, no doubt And sure enough, beyond the beckoning arm of the servant, there
was the pavilion, torches lit, flags stirring in the gentle evening breeze.
The hair on the back of his neck rose again.
Magic? he thought, hesitating, feeling the cold air keen upon his flesh.
"Be so good as to follow me, Lord Richard," the man patiently requested.
There  was  something  strange  about  this  servant  as  well.  Something  about  his

voice, though for the life of him, Richard couldn't immediately fathom what it might
be. It was neither high nor low, but  of  a disturbing middle tone,  like that of  a boy.
Yet Richard was sure that this was no boy. Indeed, as they came into the light cast
from one of the torches set in the ground near the front of the pavilion, he could see
that the man was old, fat, and shiny-faced. Then it came to him: the man was no man
at  all,  but  a  eunuch.  Richard  had  once  seen  a  dozen  younger  versions  of  such
singing to  God's  glory in a church.  He'd  also  seen  less  fortunate  ones  working  in
some of the larger brothels of towns he'd visited.
"My lady waits within," said the eunuch, gesturing politely.
Richard saw the pavilion door, invitingly open.
"I thank you…" and his voice trailed off, for the servant was nowhere to be seen.
The  man  moved  swiftly  for  one  so  large,  and  quietly.  Richard  swallowed  his
confusion, pushed away a last wave of trepidation, and went through the open door.
Even in the dim candlelight, he could see the luxury of the pavilion. A great pile of
cushions lay atop a thick rug directly before  him. A table stood  to  one  side,  laden
with food, and on a smaller table near the cushions stood a gold pitcher of wine and
jewel-encrusted  goblets,  also  of  gold.  Brass  braziers  with  smoldering  charcoal
warmed the air. This was a lady of some very high station, indeed. From somewhere
he could hear muted music, the strains of a viol as sweet and plaintive as he had ever
enjoyed.  He  stood  waiting  for  some  time,  then  crossed  to  the  smaller  table  and
poured himself some wine. It had a fine taste—deep red and full-bodied. He savored
it and the rush of warmth it brought to his empty belly.
"I hope that it's to your liking, Lord Richard."
Her voice was as soft and sweet as it had been before. He turned, and there stood
the Lady Sabra,  breathtaking  again  in  a  gown  of  white  with  gold  needlework,  her
long chestnut hair loose about  her shoulders.  Surrounded  by  candles,  it seemed  to
Richard  that she  shone  out  like a beacon  of  hope  for  him  in  his  misfortune.  That
feeling of reverence stole over him again and he stood rooted, goblet halfway to his
mouth, unable to speak or move.
"My lady," he finally managed to say by way of an inadequate greeting. He fell to
one knee, head bowed,  suddenly  and  utterly certain that he was  in the presence  of
something more beautiful and powerful than any person, place, or thing he had ever
known.  The  silence  was  broken  only  by  the  rustling  of  her  dress  as  she  moved
toward  him. Then he became  aware of  her outstretched  hand.  It was  so  small,  so
delicate, that it almost vanished within his as  he took  it to  press  to  his mouth.  Her
scent drifted to him, sweeter than any bloom.
"Rise, Lord Richard. Come, sit with me, for there is much to talk about."
He felt her hand  pulling him upright and  was  surprised  at the strength in one  so
small. Then she was sitting amid the cushions and beckoning him to  join her, close
by her side.
He hesitated "My lady, it is not my place. I mistook you  before.  I did  not  know
you to be one of such rank. Forgive me, but I have no right here."

"My good Lord Richard, I have chosen you to be here. That gives you the right.
Do not question my decision, for like it or no, I will have my way."
He could  see  that behind her amused  demeanor  she  would brook  no  argument,
and it would be futile to try, not to mention bad-mannered. He obediently sat at her
side, uncomfortable despite the soft cushions. He felt he should still be on his knees
before her.
Her skin was  clear and  white and  contrasted  starkly with her  hair  and  eyes.  He
hardly dared to look on her, lest he stare. Instead he tried to keep his gaze moving,
taking in more details of her belongings, but  not  too  much of  that, either. He knew
about the trappings of wealth, had lived with them all his life, but nothing like this. He
abruptly felt like a swineherd in a palace.
What  could  she  possibly  want  of me? She  obviously  had  so  much  and  he  had
nothing. Now. He was champion no more.
"You wonder why I asked you to come here," she said suddenly.
Now he could permit himself to look at her, for as long as he liked, for as long as
she spoke to him. "How did you know?"
"I know many things. I have the Gift, as you may have guessed."
At once,  Richard  was  all attention.  He'd  heard  of  such  women  before,  women
with the Gift of Sight: an uncanny,  unholy ability, and  linked to  the Old  Ways.  His
upbringing  in  the  Church  had  taught  him  well  the  danger  of  the  old  magics.  The
priests who had tutored him told ghastly tales of unclean worship and bloody human
sacrifice.  He  did  not  understand  such  things,  nor  ever  wanted  to,  and  so  they
frightened him, though he would never admit as much aloud. Finally comprehending
the source of his earlier fears, he made to rise.
But she caught his hand, arresting him in midmovement. Her dark  gaze held him
as firmly as an iron chain. "Do not leave, Richard. Neither I nor she whom I worship
will harm you. You should beware of  believing all things that some  of  those  of  the
Church would tell you  of  us.  No  one  god  monopolizes  all the truth of  the world."
She drew him back to  sit by  her again. "All holy ones  possess  a portion  of  it. It's
only their mortal servants who presume so much for them."
He had  no  reply to  that,  having  once  heard  it  from  a  past  tutor.  The  man  had
cautiously whispered it, fearful of being overheard by his more dogmatic brothers. It
gave Richard the reassurance he needed to stay a little longer with her. Her talk of the
Old Ways was perilous, but was mere talk all the same.  If she  tried any of  the old
magic on him he knew his own faith and  the blessed  cross  he wore  would protect
him, though he could not imagine what she might do to him or why.
Sabra placed her hand lightly upon his injury and felt the rough bandages covering
his wound. "A mean blow. And it hurts still."
"Indeed it does, my lady," he said, glad for the change of subject.
"I can make you whole again, restore it."

His face fell, and he pulled his arm back. "The wound will heal, God willing, but
my finger is lost, lady, nothing can restore it."
She smiled. "That, we will see."
She's so sure of herself. Why?
Sabra stood and took the goblet that he had by now drained and went to the small
table to refill it This time she poured a clear, straw-colored draught from a different
pitcher. "You'll find this will give ease to the pains of your body."
Mead, he thought, carefully sniffing it before taking the smallest of sips. It tasted
of herbs and other elusive flavorings. The  good  sisters  at the abbey  had  given him
similar refreshment for  past  ills; this could  be  little different. More  warmth  flushed
through him when he drank the rest, leaving him lightheaded. Drink  without  food—
most unwise, Richard.
The Gift must have served her again. Without a word, she went to the large table
and brought back a tray laden with a fresh-baked loaf, a thick round of cheese, and
several perfectly roasted squabs glistening with a glaze of honey.
"Please  do  not  disappoint  my  cook,"  she  instructed  him.  She  spoke  most
somberly, but with her head tilted to one side and a light of mischief in her eyes.
He  felt  a  faint  twinge  of  laughter  trying  to  emerge  in  response,  but  was  yet
uncertain of  her or  of  himself, so  all he presented  in return was  a brief, shy  smile.
"Won't you have a share as well?" he asked.
"Later. Take your fill. After the day you've had you must be quite starved."
Indeed.  The  needs  of  his  body  had  roared  to  full  life  at  the  sight  of  such
provender, and he wasted no more time in satisfying the demands of a great hunger.
She said  nothing else until he'd  finished. Only then did  he think it strange  that  she
should  not  speak  the whole time. It hadn't  been  an uneasy silence, at least not  for
him, which—given the oddity of his situation—was in itself strange. Perhaps there'd
been more in the mead than simple healing herbs. Having reminded himself of  it, he
realized he was feeling much improved physically. Even the weary throbbing  of  his
hand had  lessened.  If she  was  weaving  a  magical  spell  around  him,  then  it  was  a
benevolent one.
Through  the  open  door,  the  fires  that  he  had  noticed  earlier  seemed  to  have
become  more numerous  and  brighter.  Sabra,  too,  noticed  them  and  stood  by  the
door, looking, listening.
"Come here, Lord Richard."
He stood and crossed to her, standing as close as he dared, nearly touching her.
She was so small her head barely reached his shoulder.  That  flower-sweet scent  of
hers was in her very hair.
"Do you know what day this is?" she asked.
"I know it is a day of defeat and bitterness, but other than that I have no idea."
"This is the feast of Beltane. Yonder  are the Beltane fires. The  people  who light

them  are  followers  of  the  Old  Way.  They  are  my  followers.  They  worship  the
Goddess as you worship your God."
She  unnerved  him  with  her  simple  stating  of  such  dangerous  things.  "I  know
nothing of these matters, lady." He wanted to leave. "If my lady would permit…"
"Your lady does not permit. You will leave when I tell you and no sooner. Do you
understand?"
He could  feel the palpable power  coming from  her as  strongly as  though it had
been a hand gripping his throat.  He had  no  option,  this he knew, and  strangely the
knowledge did not frighten him. Not too very much.
"I understand."
"Stand by me and I will tell you  of  Beltane and  then you  will understand  all and
know no fear."
God, he hoped so. As quick and as harsh as it had come, the power faded.  No,
that wasn't right… she'd pulled it into herself. It was  held in check.  For  how long?
Until he displeased her and she let it free once again, only this time to crush him? She
could  do  so,  could  do  so  without  even  moving.  His  heart  hammered  at  that
possibility, but he stood by her to look outside, their faces lit by the dancing flames
of the fires, and the Lady Sabra spoke.
"Beltane is the holiest of days. It is the day of creation. It is the day on which the
Goddess, through her priestesses, takes a man to  her so  as  to  create  life. Only the
Goddess  can  do  that,  Richard.  Only  the  Earth  can  create  new  life.  No  man  can
create  in  that  way.  Most  men  only  destroy.  Watch  the  animals,  Richard,  their
behavior tells us all. Only when the hind is ready can the stag go to her to breed, and
only the stag that she chooses will be allowed. That is the natural way. Whenever a
new worship perverts that natural order, chaos follows. Men fight wars, slaughter the
innocents, destroy the sacred places of the Earth in the name of their gods,  when it
has  ever  really  been  because  of  their  own  selfishness.  Even  your  holy  Jesus  was
killed by such men. Ah, his poor mother."
Sabra turned to Richard now, again unnervingly close to him, and  as  she  looked
up into his eyes he saw tears like clear gems upon  her face  and  felt a great rush  of
pity for  her. Perhaps  he was  in too  much haste  to  condemn  her beliefs, especially
when  she  had  spoken  with  unfeigned  sorrow  for  his  own  Lord  and  His  mother.
Except for that one tutor he'd  had,  the priests  had  never been  as  charitable in their
views of the Old Ways. Without thinking, Richard raised his uninjured hand to brush
at her tears.
"Please do not weep, lady."
"Yes, Richard, I must weep. I weep for  the Earth that it is destroyed  by  men. I
weep for the womb that is ravaged by men. I weep for our loss."
She took his hand in hers.
"Once  the whole world was  of  the  Old  Way.  The  whole  world  believed  in  the
power  and  goodness  of  the Goddess,  and  now all that  remains  intact  of  it  is  that

ancient isle known as Avalon."
Avalon. The  name had  ever and  only been  a tale recited  by  poets  to  speed  the
hours  of  a winter night. How could  she  possibly  be  from  a place  that had  no  real
existence?
"The  world  is  wider  than  you  can  ever  dream,  Richard,  and  full  with  many
wondrous things. What is legend in one place is the truth of life in another."
The Gift again, hearing my thoughts.
"Open your mind to it; your heart already understands or you would not be here."
"It is no easy thing you ask of me."
"Yet you are capable. You have but to listen without judgment."
A small enough request. "I shall try."
When he said this such a light sparked in her eyes as to make his heart leap. He'd
stay here all night and listen if she but looked at him like that again.
She'd held his hand this whole time, but now released it, turning slightly to better
face  him.  "Know  then,  Richard,  that  I  am  one  of  the  nine  sisters  of  Avalon,  a
priestess of the Goddess, though not the highest. I have been sent from my home on
a quest. You are the end of that quest, I feel it as strongly as anything I have ever felt.
I have been searching and know now that you have been my goal. Listen to me well,
for Avalon is in danger."
"In what way?"
"Hundreds  of  years  past  the ways of  goodness  and  the earth were trampled by
the  Romans.  There  was  no  creation  in  them,  Richard.  They  had  their  gods  and
goddesses,  but  the great Goddess  was  nowhere in  their  eyes  or  their  souls.  They
sought  to  convert  by  force.  They destroyed  the  sacred  groves,  defiled  our  altars,
burned the priestesses and  priests,  deprived  the people  of  the wisdom  of  the way,
plundered, and took captives away as slaves."
"That was long ago," he said.
"Not  so  long,"  she  whispered.  "Not  long at all. A mere moment  of  time  as  the
stars make their wheel in the sky."
She returned to the cushioned floor. He let fall the curtained door of the pavilion
and  unbidden  sat  by  her  side.  He  sat  closer  now,  his  unease  lessened,  feeling
somehow a part of her, at one with her and her grief for things long perished.
"There is a king in Britain now who is blessed by Avalon," she said, "one who is
sworn to protect Avalon and the Old Way.  He is to  be  the bridge  between the old
and the new, but  he is  threatened  every  day  by  the  forces  of  chaos.  He  must  be
protected. You are the chosen protector. You are to be the keeper of the king."
She was  so  certain, so  damnably certain, and  doomed  to  disappointment.  After
some thought on the best way to tell her Richard at last spoke.  "My lady, you  saw
today that I am champion no more. I would be no great protector for your king. I am

very sensible of the honor that you propose me, yet I know that I cannot fulfill it."
"Not as you are, good Richard, but if you will allow, you will not be as you are. I
have  gifts,  powers  to  give  you  that  will  make  you  the  greatest  champion  that  the
world has ever known. I could force you to  accept,  yet I will not.  You must  make
your choice freely."
Choices.  Gifts  and  powers.  Of  course  she  could  promise  much  to  him,  since
such promises were little more than air. But that certainty of hers—he'd seen its like
before on the faces of believers in church— that certainty was enough to make him
pause.
"What if I refuse?"
"If you choose to say no, all will be the same.  Your life as  it is will be  yours  to
live out as you wish."
As I wish. I did not wish for the day to have ended in defeat.
"If you choose to say yes, all will be beyond your dreams."
"That could be perilous."
"Indeed  it could,  but  you've  just been  wise enough to  see  it. The  Goddess  has
chosen well. Will you choose her?"
"To worship?"
"To serve as I serve. Anything more is a matter for your own heart to decide."
Richard stood and crossed to the food-laden table, needing time to think. Idly, he
picked up some fine exotic fruit, the like of which he had never seen before. Its taste
was strange, but wholesome. Was its presence  an example of  her power,  perhaps?
Or was he enspelled by her already and only imagining he had  a choice?  He turned
back to the Lady Sabra  and  was  not  surprised  to  find her gone  and  himself alone.
She'd known he wanted privacy. The  music of  the viol had  faded  now,  as  had  the
noise of celebration outside, and silence lay heavy in the pavilion like a blanket.
Gnawing  at  the  fruit,  he  mulled  over  the  proposition  that  she  had  made.  The
greatest champion in all the world. That certainly attracted him. To be the protector
of a king would be an honor indeed. And yet something stirred uneasily in his vitals
as a warning. She had mentioned great powers, and he'd felt the hard touch of them
during her one instant of impatience; that he could not deny to be real. Who was this
Goddess? How dangerous was she? Why should she have chosen him of all men?
Or was it Sabra who had made the real choice, guided not  by  a goddess  but  by
something  more  fundamental?  He  had  enough  experience  of  women  to  recognize
when one had a specific interest in him. But if Sabra wanted but to sate her appetite
for his body, there were less involved ways of going about it. She'd have found him
more  than  willing  and  thankful  for  the  privilege.  No,  all  that  she  said  about  the
Goddess was true, at least to her. He wasn't so ready to believe himself, yet.
Could  it  be  witchcraft?  But  he  had  met  too  many  in  the  contests  full  of  the
confidence of some crone's promised immortality and had defeated them as easily as

any other  opponent  to  give it much credence.  This  was  a different kind of  power,
then. And the power  of  the Old  Ways  was  ever strong  in the hearts  of  the  simple
folk. The  tutor  had  once  told  him that when  enough  people  believe  in  a  thing,  no
matter how impossible,  their belief makes it real. Did  enough  of  Sabra's  followers
believe to make a legend like Avalon real? Apparently so.
Then he thought  of  what  faced  him  if  he  refused  the  offer.  In  truth,  it  was  an
empty prospect. Why should he not accept the challenge? His future with the Lady
Sabra, whatever the risks posed by her Goddess and her magic, could be no worse
than his future without. But still…
He dropped the remains of the fruit on a tray, scowling.  Sabra  had  not  told  him
everything, and that was why he was uneasy. And suddenly something made a great
deal of sense to him, but he had to be sure; he had to get an answer from her on it.
"Then ask me what you will."
He managed not to start at the sound of her voice. She'd returned unseen and was
seated once more among the cushions. She smiled slightly, encouragingly against his
frown.
"My last contest  today…  was  it this power  of  yours  that took  away my  sword
when I most needed it?"
"Yes."
He'd  expected  a denial or  some  convoluted  explanation or  excuse,  but  not  this
simple admittance of guilt.
"Not guilt," she said.
Now it was  his time to  show  his anger,  his  power.  "Saints  damn  you,  woman,
stop doing that!"
She flinched at his tone and her eyes flashed with temper, then subsided. "Forgive
me,  Lord  Richard.  You  are  quite  right.  I  should  respect  the  privacy  of  your
thoughts."
And not before time.
She made no response.
That annoyance settled, he asked, "Why did you  do  it? If you've  been  watching
me as you say, then you knew how badly I needed to win. You cost me everything
with your witchery."
"Not so. Because of it you were spared."
"Or did you want me to lose so as to more easily tempt me with this proposal?"
"Were that the truth, then I would have answered no."
"But you caused me to lose, placing me in a position  where I'd  eagerly snap  up
the first bone tossed at me. Perhaps your Gift faded to show you that had I won I'd
have  left  this  place  anyway.  You'd  have  had  a  better  chance  persuading  me  into
service then than you do now—"

"No, I would not, for you would not then be alive!" Her voice rang harsh  in the
confines of the tent, followed by an equally harsh silence.
"What is your meaning?" he demanded.
"The Gift told me—"
"The Gift!"
"—the outcome  of  your  fight  with  the  boy—and  that  he  would  defeat  and  kill
you."
Richard's flesh prickled from a sudden chill from within. "You're making this up."
"Am I?" She stood, facing him squarely, her face white with suppressed fury. He
felt the heat of it beating at him. "Then see for yourself, Richard d'Orleans."
And  Sabra,  the  pavilion,  and  all  the  world  he  saw  ceased  to  be,  and  he  was
breathless on the tourney field again fighting for his life. The  boy  charged  him, and
as he'd done before Richard raised his sword high, but this time he held on to it and
brought the knob of the hilt down hard as he'd intended. The boy's forward motion
faltered, but his weight still carried them to  the ground  to  roll in the bloodied  mud.
The blow had  stunned  the boy  somewhat,  but  not  enough;  he  fought  as  one  in  a
frenzy.  Richard  tried  to  bring  his  sword  around  but  it  was  too  long  for  close-in
work.
Then the boy rammed a hard fist into Richard's belly. Twice, thrice, knocking the
breath from him. God, how it burned. Then he caught a glimpse of  the knife in the
boy's hand, its thin blade liberally stained with blood.
My blood…
The boy stabbed him again and again—
No!
—each  wounding a burning trail of  fire searing  all  the  way  through  his  flesh  to
Richard's very spine—
Oh, God, no!
—until he lay still, mouth sagging wide, eyes open but sightless—
Noooo…
—dead. His last awareness  was  of  sound,  of  the moan of  disappointment  from
the crowd, the only mourning he would ever—
He could see again. Sabra, the richly furnished tent—all was  as  he'd  left it, only
now he was on his knees, blinking hard, arms wrapped tight around his belly to hold
everything  in,  and  a  sheen  of  sweat  coating  his  skin  like  hoarfrost.  Shivering,  he
slowly, cautiously straightened, glancing fearfully down. No blood gushed from him;
he was untouched.
The Gift of Sight. It's true then.
"The Gift," she repeated. "You saw the day as it would have happened.  If I had

not taken the sword  from  you  in that moment,  you  would have surely died,  and  if
you had not chosen to yield when bested, you again would have died. The power of
the Goddess saved you, then you saved yourself. It is because of that inner wisdom
you were chosen. It is not enough to have a man who knows  only victory,  but  one
who understands when defeat is also necessary."
Sabra stood before him, arrow straight, arms at her side,  her face  alight with the
power, almost too beautiful to look upon. The  memory of  his pain and  fear faded,
replaced by shame. How could he have doubted her? How could  he have dared  to
be angry? Here in front of him was holiness, was something greater than any…
She  touched  his  upturned  face.  "Dear  Richard,  worship  me  not.  I  am  not  the
Goddess, only her servant."
"Then shall I be your slave."
"No, never that. Never." Her fingers were warm and soft and real, made of flesh,
not  moonlight.  He  caught  them  in  his  good  hand  and  kissed  them.  "Then  your
answer is yes." It was a statement, not a question.
As before on the tourney field, the words came with no effort and  this time with
no shred of repentance to follow. "My answer is yes."
She half laughed, half sighed. "I am glad." Now she leaned down  and  kissed  his
lips, and his heart began to pound near to bursting. His breath quickened from desire
for her. Did he dare do this? Would she?
That smile again, appraising and amused. Servant of something divine or no,  she
was a woman after all; her next words  giving him all the invitation he needed.  "For
the Goddess, such fleshly wants are considered sacred so long as both are pleased
to share them. Come  to  me, good  Richard,  for  you  are chosen  of  the Goddess…
and I would have you."
He smiled in turn. Does this mean the hind is ready for her stag?
In  answer,  she  lay  back  among  the  cushions,  her  hair  spilling  over  them,  lips
parted.  Her eyes  shone,  almost glowed in the gathering darkness,  for  some  of  the
candles had gone out. He crossed and knelt beside her. She reached up her hand to
him, gently entwining her fingers in his hair, then suddenly, roughly pulled his mouth
down onto hers. Her tongue forced its way between his lips, tasting him deep. They
locked together in a long, long embrace. And in the embrace, it seemed  to  him that
he heard her voice, echoing soft in his ears.
"I am yours, Richard, and you are mine. For tonight, and for evermore. For after
tonight, there will only be forevermore. Come, the Goddess stirs within me and  will
not be refused."
She stood, undid her dress, and let it slip to the floor. She was naked in the dim
light, her breasts firm and full, hard tipped with desire, her belly flat and smooth, her
wondrous  hair  cascading  down  over  her  shoulders.  She  smiled  and  moved  to  lie
down  once  more,  her  body  all  light  and  shadow  and  full  of  promise.  Richard
hurriedly stripped from his clothes and all but fell next to her. His hand moved down

to  the  gentle  swell  of  her  breasts.  He  winced  as  pain  shot  up  his  arm  from  the
wound, then determinedly ignored it.
Once  again, their mouths  locked,  wet, hot,  tongues  deeply  exploring.  Richard's
hands moved  over  her body,  feeling its strength,  its softness.  He held her breasts,
squeezing  the  hard  nipples,  bringing  whimpers  of  pleasure  from  her  sweet  lips.
Slowly, he moved his mouth down over her body, sucking,  tasting her fullness. He
could smell the muskiness of her womanhood,  and  as  he touched  her wetness,  her
back  arched  and  a  cry  escaped  her.  Her  hips  moved  against  him,  and  her  hands
pushed  his head  down,  down  toward  the darkness  between her legs. As  he  tasted
her, drank of her, she pulled him deep onto her and cried out yet again.
Then  with  unexpected  strength  she  rolled  him  onto  his  back,  and  knelt  astride
him. He was hard, harder than he could ever remember, and  a huge shudder  seized
him as she took him in her hands  and  engulfed him with the warmth of  her mouth.
His hands held her head rising and falling on him until she pulled away and, looking
all  the  while  into  his  eyes,  lifted  herself  up  above  him  and  slid  down,  down,
swallowing his great manhood inside her.
Their bodies  moved  together now,  slowly at  first,  then  faster  and  more  urgent,
uncontrollable, unstoppable. The sweat dripped down from her face  onto  his chest
and there mingled with his own. He felt an intense heat growing deep within her most
intimate  embrace  of  him.  It  was  nearly  unbearable  until,  throwing  her  head  back,
convulsing in fulfillment, an almost inhuman cry  escaped  her. She  hung on  to  him,
nearly spent as he thrust himself deeper and deeper into her, his own need becoming
more and more urgent. Then he too cried out as he pulsed  inside her, pumping out
his seed in that glorious moment of creation. Then his movements  slowed,  and  still
joined, she slumped against him to be cradled in his arms.
All was stillness as they slept.
He awoke to her hand caressing his chest with the touch of an angel. She lay next
to him now, her fingers lingering upon his blessed cross. The night must be old  for
the candles  had  guttered,  the darkness  nearly  complete.  From  within  the  darkness
came her soft voice. Soft and sad.
"I will not bear your child, Richard. I cannot. You will know why. Yet I will have
a child. You will be my child, my son, my lover, my best of all friends."
He  tried  to  speak,  but  could  not  find  the  words.  Perhaps  at  times  all  women
looked on their men in such a varied manner. Sabra  could  think of  him in any way
she willed, for he was pleased to be all things to her. Soon now he would be pleased
to fulfill his place as her lover again. He shifted, turning to kiss her.
"Anything my lady wishes,"  he murmured. His desire  was  as  intense as  the first
time, but  he moved  slowly, savoring her, exploring her,  finding  out  what  she  best
liked, best wanted from him.
"This will pleasure you more than you can imagine," she promised. "And do  not
fear."
But there was no danger here, his inner knowledge told him that. All was well and

as it should be. He was safe.
"Yes, Richard, you are safe. No  mortal will ever be  able to  harm you  again, for
the Goddess protects you, and wills me to give you the gift of life."
He wanted to say that he already had the gift of life and did not need it to be given
again,  but  could  not.  Instead,  he  looked  intently  into  the  gloom.  He  was  sure  he
could  see  her eyes  shining there despite  the dimness  of  the night. He felt both  her
hands now, reaching out to him once more,  caressing  his body  in earnest.  Her lips
brushed his thighs, her tongue licking. Once  more he hardened.  The  beating of  his
heart thundered in his ears,  and  once  more,  she  sank  onto  him, engulfing him. But
this  was  different.  This  was  more.  His  whole  body  was  sharply  alive,  his  skin
sensitive like a new-healed wound, his every pore tingling in the cool night air. Riding
him, her mouth swiftly came to  his,  and  again  their  tongues  entwined,  drinking  of
each other until she drew slightly away.
"Now, my Richard," her voice was husky, low, "now I will give my life's vigor to
you as you gave yours to me. Now you will become my son."
With a low growl she bit deep into his neck.
The abrupt pain of her sharp teeth tearing through his flesh made him cry out. He
tried to push her away and could not. She held fast and would not be moved. He felt
his life blood  spurt  into her  mouth  and  her  greedy  forceful  sucking  at  the  wound
she'd made. His heart thundered;  without warning, he spasmed  inside her, his seed
gushing forth. He cried out again, this time in pleasure, in pleasure and pain together.
It tore through him like a fire.
She lifted her head from her feeding. "See  how we give life to  each  other  in the
name of the Goddess," she  whispered,  rocking against him. "Circle and  encircle…
like the sun and the moon."
He could just see her face, her stained lips, her eyes glowing from  the unleashed
power within. Her top corner teeth were unnaturally long, wolflike. She had promised
he would understand everything. Now he did, all too clearly.
She  bit  down.  It  did  not  hurt  this  time,  quite  the  contrary.  Richard  ceased
struggling against her. What would be the point? He lay unmoving as the vampire fed
on his living body.  Every few moments  a long shudder  of  ecstasy  took  him,  each
raising him a little higher than the one before, like an ocean's  tide. If this was  to  be
his death, then he was a man to be envied, as his time of  rapture  continued  on  and
on, surpassing anything he'd ever known.
Her  quick  breath  hot  on  his  skin,  her  body  encompassing  his  writhed  and
trembled in such  a way as  to  tell  him  her  enjoyment  was  equal  to  his  own.  They
moaned together, and he tilted his head farther aside, pressing the back of  hers  that
her mouth settled more firmly against his throat.
Drain me to the dregs, my good lady. Take all that I have.
She drank until his arms had no strength to hold her. They slipped  down  and  he
could not raise them again. His hands and feet were like ice. Filling his lungs became

a matter of  conscious  action,  for  the air had  grown almost too  thick to  breathe.  It
was easier to take it in short, shallow gasps. His heart thumped and thudded at first,
now it was reduced to a swift pattering.
Sabra  drew  back  at  last,  her  movements  sluggish.  She  held  his  hand  to  her
breasts, bowing her head once to kiss it. He could no longer feel her touching him.
"Do not fear, this will soon pass."
He could hear his heart, could feel its frantic flutter against his breastbone, dying.
He shook as though with burning fever, but in all his life he'd never felt such terrible
cold.
"It will pass," she promised him.
He  listened  as  his  heartbeat  became  weaker  and  weaker  until,  inevitably,  it
stopped. Her voice came to him, clear but as though from a vast and ever-increasing
distance.
"Sleep, my love, my child, my friend. Sleep. All will be well."
 
When he awoke, Richard's first thought was of Sabra, their lovemaking, their long
night of passion, but as his eyes drifted open he found himself sprawled alone upon
the cushions. There was no sign of the Lady Sabra anywhere. He was  not  worried.
She would return. He knew it.
He stretched mightily, breathing deep. The air was warm for a morning—if it was
morning.  He  glanced  at  the  curtained  doorway.  Thin  slivers  of  sunlight  peered
through the cracks.  The  door  faced  west.  By  God,  but  he'd  slept  the  whole  day
through. Not  that he  minded  and  certainly  he  had  good  enough  reason  to  do  so.
She'd  fairly worn him out,  but  he felt better,  younger,  more robust  than  he  had  in
many a day. He'd heard other fighters swear that enjoying a woman after a battle was
the best way to ease one's wounds; perhaps there was something to that after all.
He  sat  up  and  looked  about  the  pavilion,  hungry.  The  food-laden  table  was
untouched  and  waiting.  He  pulled  his  tunic  on  and  padded  over  to  investigate.
Strangely, nothing there seemed  at all appetizing to  him,  but  nonetheless  he  broke
apart a loaf of bread, dipped it into a dish of cold beef jelly, and took a healthy bite.
At  the  first  taste  of  it  a  heavy  wave  of  choking  nausea  came  over  him,  and  he
immediately spat the food out, retching until the last crumb was gone.  Ugh. It must
have gone bad during the night, or the wine had left his stomach  too  fragile for  use
just now.  Such  illness  would  soon  pass,  though;  he'd  suffered  the  like  too  many
times before after a night of celebration to trouble much over it. Perhaps Sabra was
also feeling the same and had retired elsewhere to physic herself.
He wondered just where his sweet lady had gone. The pavilion door was tied well
shut, time he opened it and saw what was left of the day. The cords securing it came
undone readily, and with an easy motion he threw it open.
The pavilion was  on  top  of  a rise with a  fine  view  over  the  lake.  The  sun  was
close to the horizon; its red glow seemed to set the water aflame. He stretched again,

embracing its heat.
Perhaps a little too hot, he thought, but so beautiful. A cooling swim in the lake
would not be amiss. Sabra liked him clean, and if this evening held the same joys as
the last, he wanted to do his best by her. Without further thought of it, he made his
way  barefoot  down  the  slope,  glancing  back  once  at  the  pavilion  and  the  castle
behind it.
He was free and safe; he was to be the champion for a king in Britain and had the
love of the most perfect woman in the world. His father and Dear Brother could go
to the devil for all he cared.
His skin itched from the heat, but it wasn't so bad once he'd made it to the shady
cover of the woods below. It looked to be a very hot summer ahead.
He found a tree-sheltered place on the lake and,  stripping from  his tunic, waded
out  into  the  water.  By  all  the  saints,  it  was  cold.  Much  colder  than  before,  like
midwinter.  Worse  than  winter,  so  cold  it  burned.  Puffing,  he  could  only  briefly
splash himself before it was too much to bear and he had to rush back to the shore.
As he used the tunic to dry off he saw his skin had turned red as a cherry, and the
itch was much worse, stinging like ant bites. He could hardly stand to cover himself
again. Was  there  some  sort  of  contagion  in  the  lake?  He'd  once  heard  of  people
throwing poisoned snakes into wells to foul the water…
He'd work it out later. Now all he wanted was to get back  to  the cool  repose  of
Sabra's pavilion. He'd have more of that healing mead of hers again. would take care
of things.
As he emerged from  the  long  tree  shadows,  the  last  of  the  sun  struck  him,  as
sudden  and  forceful  as  hammer  to  anvil.  He  fell  back  under  the  protective  trees,
cursing. What was wrong? Not half an hour  past  he'd  felt superb,  but  now he was
weak  as  a  sickly  babe.  He  faltered,  caught  himself,  and  gasping  from  the  effort,
sprinted up the hill for all he was worth.
The tent door  was  suddenly  pulled open  from  within to  receive him and  closed
just as quickly once he was inside. He stood panting from the pain and  effort,  face
stinging,  arms  out  from  his  body,  not  daring  to  move  lest  he  further  outrage  his
burned skin.
Sabra had been the one to hold the door. Despite his pain Richard had to pause a
moment  and  drink  in  her  unearthly  beauty  once  again.  Bands  of  gold-and-blue
embroidery trimmed her gown, which was a rich brown, the same chestnut color as
her hair. On her breast she wore a gold  chain holding a gold  and  enamel medallion
bearing the signs of the sun and moon with a cup between them. She'd  braided  her
hair, the braid spilling over her right shoulder.
"What is wrong with me?" he finally asked, holding his red, now swollen arms out
to her.
"It will quickly pass now that you are inside. From now forward, whenever direct
sunlight strikes you, you will feel this way. It is a warning, if you like, that the sun is

no longer your friend."
"Why is that so?"
"Because of the new life you have from me. I hadn't thought you would wake so
soon, or I would have been here for you. Where did you go?"
"Just down to the lake to bathe."
Her hand went to her mouth. "Oh, no."
"What? Was that wrong?"
"No,  but  very dangerous,  like  the  sun,  free  flowing  water  is  bad  for  you.  Too
much of either will kill you."
"Kill me? The sun? How am I to be a champion for this king of yours if I cannot
face the light of day?
"The same way I do. I will teach you all you need  to  know.  Was  the water very
cold?"
"Like a witch's breath… that is… I mean—"
She made a calming gesture at him, smiling. "I'm not a witch as well you know. I
should have been here but had to oversee something with my servants. I'm only glad
you're all right. Is the burn easing?"
He  examined  his  arms.  The  redness  had  faded  to  an  angry  pink.  His  face  no
longer felt as stretched and tight. "Yes, a bit."
"The sun's nearly down. Once it is gone you will be healed."
That was interesting. "Is this more of your Goddess's power?"
"The power dwells within you now and is healing you. It takes a little time, but is
far faster  than it would be  for  other  men. Have you  not  noticed  your  wounds  and
bruising are no more?"
Another look.  Yesterday  he'd  had  enough battering to  leave him black  and  blue
for  a  month.  Now  his  flesh  was  whole,  marred  only  by  his  old  scars,  and  one
blemish in particular: his maimed hand.  The  bandagings  on  it were soaked  through
by  the  water,  but  that  was  all  right.  Now  he'd  be  able  to  change  them  without
worrying about the fabric being glued to his skin by dried blood.
She came close. "Let me see your poor hand."
He held out his injured limb and watched as she undid the rough dressing.  Soon
the bloodstained rags were gone and four good fingers and an ugly, scabrous stump
were revealed. The  wound  had  clotted  over  somewhat  but  would need  stitching to
properly heal.
"Is it a bad hurt?"
"Indeed it is, but I've lived with worse."
"No more." She glanced at the doorway.  The  light behind it had  faded.  "Good.
The sun is gone, I can do something about this at last." And then to his astonishment

she produced his severed ring finger.
"What do you with that? How did… ?"
"I sent my servants  over  to  your  tent to  look.  They were afraid you'd  thrown it
away or buried it."
"But why? Of what use is it to you?"
"See the power that we have together. See the power the Goddess bestows."
She took his hand, making him spread his fingers wide. Before he could ask what
the  devil  she  thought  she  was  doing,  she  pressed  the  shriveled  thing  against  his
wound. He tried to pull back in disgust, but she held it firmly in place.
"Sabra…" he began impatiently. Then his breath deserted him as a shattering bolt
of pain shot  through his arm. He cried  out,  jerking  away  from  her.  His  hand  was
afire, or so it seemed for much too long a moment… then, just as suddenly, the pain
vanished.
Sabra smiled as she spread her arms, palms out. "See?"
Richard looked and gasped, for  there was  his ring finger attached  again—for all
the world as if it had never been touched. Only a white scar remained encircling the
base  where  the  flesh  and  bone  had  been  rejoined.  He  gazed  in  bald-faced
wonderment, unable to speak.  He stared  at her, a dozen  questions  hovering on  his
lips… then forgot them.
She was radiant. A strange hunger washed over him. For her.
"How is this possible?" he whispered, holding up his hand.
"Dear Richard, do not ask. Simply accept the bounties that are yours."
"But I must know!"
"You will in time. Do you not remember last night? The last thing that we did?"
"I remember the lovemaking…" God, he'd never forget it. But then when she'd…
his  hand  went  to  his  throat.  The  skin  was  whole,  smooth,  but  still…  something
hovered  wraithlike beyond  the edge  of  memory,  and  it was  important.  "There  was
more, I know somehow that there's more."
"Indeed, sweet Richard, there is more. I will tell you, but first you must feed."
Distracted  by  so  much he'd  nearly forgotten  his empty belly. Reminded,  he  felt
hollow to the core as if he'd never before eaten in his life. He went to the table again,
but the sight, the smell of its food repelled him.
"What is wrong with  me?"  he  again  demanded  of  her.  "I  hunger,  but  I  cannot
touch any of this."
"You will be fed, do not fear."
Without being called, her eunuch servant appeared, but he bore no tray of edibles.
Richard's hunger increased at this frustration, was becoming unbearable.
"Give me food!"

"My sweet, I have." She gestured at her servant.
This  was  no  time  for  games.  Richard  looked  around  him  in  desperation.  The
greatest, most incessant gnawing that he had ever felt was growing inside him and yet
Sabra and the eunuch continued to stand unmoved.
"My love," she said, "take what you will. Take what your soul desires and needs."
The  eunuch  stepped  forward,  a  beatific  light  on  his  face,  the  elated  light  of  a
believer. He looked at Sabra. "Thank you, lady, for giving me this honor."
"Go  to  the Goddess  with love  and  in  peace,"  she  told  him.  "You  will  ever  be
remembered in this world. I swear it."
He  smiled  and  knelt  with  his  back  to  her.  Eyes  shut,  he  raised  his  chin  high,
exposing his throat. She stood close behind him, bending over him, low enough now
as though to whisper in his ear, then lower still until her mouth touched his neck. The
old man trembled, smiling.
Richard  watched  with horrified fascination.  She  could  not  mean this.  Then  in  a
flood, the memories of the night came back to him—all of them—and Richard knew
that,  indeed,  she  did  mean  this,  that  this  was  the  satiation  for  the  terrible  hunger
inside him.
Sabra lifted away from  her servant.  Blood  streamed  from  the man's  neck  where
she  had  bitten  him.  Her  eyes  were  glowing;  her  lips  parted,  revealing  the  sharp
wolflike fangs, the exultant expression on her face.
Unclean  worship…  bloody  human  sacrifice…  was  this  what  the  priests  of  his
youth had meant? Why they hated the Old Ways?
He caught the scent of the blood. Breathed in a great draught of it.
The eunuch opened his eyes, looked up at him.
"Come, my Lord Richard. You are the chosen of the Goddess. Let me honor her.
Please."
"You wish to die?"
"To be with the Goddess forever. Yes." Closing his eyes, he continued to kneel,
waiting.
Richard felt a snarl of impatience rise in his throat. He looked to Sabra.
"It is his dearest wish," she said. "Deliver it to him. Feed!"
I cannot.
"You must."
He could not tear his gaze from the blood.  He licked his lips, felt the change of
his teeth. I must look like her now, red of eye, wolfish, terrifying.
And then there was the hunger. Inescapable. Growing. He felt a cramp start deep
in his vitals like the stab of a knife.
"Wait no  more,  Richard,"  she  urged.  "Madness  could  take you  if you  wait  too

long. Feed now."
Trembling from head to foot,  he moved  toward  the eunuch until he stood  close
behind him. Blood still flowed from Sabra's wounding of him.
Perhaps if I take only a little of it…
No, once begun he knew he would not stop. His need was that great.
"Sabra." His voice was thick. He hardly knew the sound of it.
"Speak."
"Will he become like us?"
"No, he has chosen to go to the Goddess."
"And there is no other way?"
She gave no answer.
The pain wanted to take him again. He fought against it. A moment longer was all
he wanted. He willed his hands not to shake as he reached out.
"Stand," he told the eunuch. "No one should have to die on their knees."
He drew the old man upright, gently tilted his head to make taut the furrowed skin
of his throat.
"With peace and in love," Sabra whispered.
Richard  reared  his head  back  above  the  eunuch,  then  battened  hard  upon  him,
sank his teeth into the exposed willing neck, and for the first of  so  many times, felt
the warm gush  of  blood  coursing  down  his throat,  the life of  another  flowing  into
him.
How good it was.
 
Afterwards  Richard  lay with Sabra  on  the cushions,  gazing at the  ceiling  of  the
pavilion but not really seeing it. His malignant hunger was gone, but at such a price.
What sort of Goddess demanded the death of her worshipers? But the old man had
been willing, so joyfully willing to die that Richard might live, and unselfish sacrifice
was central to all he had ever been taught in his own church.
Other servants came to bear away the eunuch's drained body. She wept a little at
this.
"Was  this not  for  the glory  of  your  Goddess?"  Richard  asked.  He  studied  his
arms; all sign of the burning had quite faded from his skin, as she'd promised.
"It was, and all is well with him. I weep because I shall not see him again. He was
ever faithful and true. I will miss him."
"I am sorry."  He leaned back,  feeling heavy as  though his bones  were made of
lead. The feeding's done this to me. "Must we always kill to live ourselves?"
"All things  must  kill  to  live,  but  we  need  not.  I  took  much  from  you  and  that

blood  had  to  be  replaced.  The  next time you  feed  you  won't  need  a  tenth  of  that
quantity."
"The next time? When will that be?"
"In a few nights. You will know it when it happens."
"And who will I feed from?"
"I have many servants. We will teach you how not to bring permanent harm to the
one you choose."
That was good. "Will animal's blood not do just as well?"
"Only if you've no other choice. Animals are for humans to feast  on,  but  we are
somewhat more than human—and like calls to like."
"What we've…  what  I've  done,  the  priests  of  my  church  would  condemn  me,
drive me away."
"Given the chance most people would kill you. There are those who hunt our land
and seek to return us to the Earth by driving a stake of yew through our hearts,  but
even that doesn't kill right away. It freezes us,  pins  us  in place  so  we cannot  move
and feed. Those caught in this way die slowly, a lingering death  of  starvation.  The
lucky ones are beheaded."
He had  heard  stories  in his travels of  how  best  to  deal  with  certain  night-living
demons who fed on the blood of men. He'd dismissed them as fancies. No more.
"We are of the Earth, my love," she said. "As immutable as the mountains, and as
long living. This is the Goddess's greatest gift. Left alone, we will never die."
"And are we the first of our kind?"
"There  are others  in the world,  but  I know them not.  I was  the firstborn  of  the
Goddess. I will tell you how I came to be and about the Goddess if you wish."
"I would like that, yes."
"There is a goddess named Cerridwen, who has two sons, Gwynn and Gwythyr,
and  they  fight  eternally  for  her  favor.  Each  year  they  fight.  At  Beltane,  Gwythyr
triumphs  and  Gwynn  is  banished  to  his  home  in  the  underworld,  and  we  have
springtime and bountiful summer. But at Samhain in the darkening of  the year, they
fight again, and  this time, Gwynn is the victor,  and  then  the  gates  of  Annwyn  are
opened, and the wild hunt of winter begins. The great white hounds of Annwyn, eyes
as red  as  blood,  come  forth  and  search  out  human souls  to  take back  to  Annwyn
where they will await rebirth. We are the children of this eternal conflict,  for  we are
descended of the Hounds of Annwyn."
She stood and moved to the pavilion door to look  out  at the night. He followed
her. The moon, just past its full, cast a brilliant cold light over the land. He could see
every detail as though it were day.
"Cerridwen gave me eternal  life  so  as  to  ensure  that  the  ways  of  the  Goddess
would never be  forgotten.  She  summoned  Gwynn  and  instructed  him  to  have  his

greatest hound feed on me, on my blood,  and  in the feeding, my mortal body  was
changed, immortality given in its stead. This is why the bright sun will destroy us, for
the Hounds of Annwyn are creatures of darkness and the storm."
It sounded like a tale to him, something for the poets to recite.
"You may believe or not," she said. "Though here we are, proof of what I say."
He gave a quiet laugh. "Will I be able to hear the thoughts of others as you do?"
"No.  The  Sight  has  ever  been  with  me.  If  it  had  not  been  for  the  Goddess's
protection I'd have been killed for  it by  those  who fear its truth. Your Gift is your
strength, spirit, and  mind. Soon  you  will put  them all to  good  use.  My people  are
even now preparing for the journey. Tomorrow we will leave for Britain."
"For your king who has been chosen as a bridge between the old and the new."
"As you are also in the same way a bridge." She touched her medallion and then
his cross. "He is and will be a great king, blessed of Cerridwen, the once and future
king of all Britain. His name is Arthur, and you, my love, will be his strong right arm
in all things. You are the Goddess's gift to him, my gift to him."
"I shall do my best." He felt a familiar stirring within and put his arms around her,
pulling her close. "In all things."
After a long, quickening kiss, he easily scooped her up to carry back to their nest
in the cushions. There he sought to undo the laces on the back of her gown.
She leaned forward so he could better work, and her hand strayed down between
his legs. "Indeed, you will be his greatest champion.  I do  not  need  the Sight to  tell
me that."
"Only touch,"  he murmured, delighted with what she  was  doing.  If she  kept  on
like that he'd have to abandon the laces and simply raise her skirts.
"I am Sabra of the Lake, you know."
"And  very pleased  I am to  make my lady's  acquaintance."  There,  the  knot  was
loose and he could pull the cords freely.
"You  are now my best  weapon  against Arthur's  enemies." She  gave  him  a  firm
squeeze that left him panting. "My lance. My lance of the lake…"
She laughed, until he covered her mouth with his own.
Chapter Two
Toronto, Canada, Present Day
 
Richard Dun idly rubbed the white scar that ran all the way around the base of his
left ring finger and looked over the RCMP driver sent to pick him up. God, but they
were getting them young, though he'd seen still younger ones in his time.

Apparently no one had briefed the driver on what to expect; he openly goggled at
the luxurious accouterments of Richards combination office and home. It had every
modern  electronic convenience,  and  a  few  unexpected  old-fashioned  touches,  like
the Botticelli on the wall next to Richards desk. It was something of a risk having it
here,  but  he  liked  to  look  at  it  and  he  could  well  afford  the  insurance  and  alarm
systems.
While getting ready to leave, Richard Dun caught a quick  glimpse of  puzzlement
on  the  young  man's  face  before  it  dampened  to  poker-playing  mode.  Richard
thought  of  giving  out  his  usual  innocuous  reason  for  pulling  on  a  trenchcoat,
wide-brimmed hat, and gloves on a warm May morning, but decided not  to  bother.
Let the fellow show  a little initiative and  find out  for  himself the reason  behind the
eccentricity if it held any interest for him.
The  driver  preceded  him  out  the  front  entry  to  wait  at  the  foot  of  the  steps,
standing at much too obvious attention while Richard set the systems and locked the
door. At least the man wasn't in his red uniform. As they went down the walk to the
street Richard  pulled up  his coat  collar to  cover  the back  of  his  neck  and  put  on
some very dark wrap-around sunglasses. The man's face twitched.
Probably thinks I look like a leftover from a 1960s spy film, Richard thought as
he hurried to the unmarked car.
"That's  parked  illegally,"  he  commented  in  a  mild  tone,  noting  the  thing's
placement by the painted curb.
"I've got the flag up," said the driver, pointing to a placard on the dashboard that
declared  this  vehicle  was  on  official  government  business.  He  opened  the  rear
passenger door and held it for Richard.
"Indeed, and in a place where everyone can  see  it. I thought this was  to  be  low
profile."
Another twitch. Annoyance this time. And embarrassment, to judge by the sudden
pink tint of his ears.
"No need to use the siren, I hope?" he added and watched the man's ears deepen
to a nice ripe red. So he had wanted to use it. Such a pity to spoil his fun. Richard
got into the car, won a minor struggle with the inconveniently placed safety belt, and
settled himself, prepared to spend the rest of the trip saying nothing at all to the back
of  the  man's  head.  He  had  plenty  of  questions,  but  they  could  wait  until  he  met
someone with rank enough to answer them.
Wonder what the flap's on about this time?
Philip Bourland,  a  friend  and  one  of  his  chief  contacts  in  the  vast  government
bureaucracy,  had  made  the  call  early  that  morning  to  Richards  unlisted  home
number.
"Can't be specific over the lines," he'd drawled. "But it's important."
"There are degrees of importance," Richard countered, and waited for a reply.

Bourland answered with silence.
"So… it's that important. Very well, set a space aside for my car."
"We'll send  a driver to  your  office.  Lower profile, y'know."  He rang off  before
Richard could fish for more information.
Now and then Richard  would get a job  from  the Canadian government; the pay
wasn't huge, but he did it not for  his bank  account,  but  for  the contacts  it brought
him,  like  Bourland.  They'd  never  before  been  in  such  a  stir  as  to  send  a  special
driver to fetch him, though. Something interesting was up; perhaps it had to do with
the  impending  trade  conference.  Lots  of  VIPs  would  be  there,  lots  of  room  for
trouble to happen. If they were in a sweat about security, they should have made an
appointment two months ago, not at virtually the last minute. As it stood they'd quite
thoroughly interrupted Richard's morning, causing him to reschedule three potentially
lucrative consultations, and unless the meeting he was about to attend  moved  faster
than the traffic his afternoon would be equally lost.
Ah,  well,  if it's in  service to the  Monarch,  one  must  abide  by  their  whim  and
thus the whims of their other servants.
The driver  negotiated  the  crowded  streets  efficiently  enough,  going  north  from
Richard's East York home to Danforth Avenue, then west until it mysteriously turned
into Bloor Street. Then the driver went south  again to  Queen's  Park.  On  their right
were the extensive grounds and myriad structures  of  the University of  Toronto,  on
the left, the restful green expanse of Queen's Park itself. Too bad they had to spoil it
by placing the Ontario Parliament Buildings smack in the middle of things.
Instead  of  hunting  for  a  parking  space,  the  driver  took  them  around  to  a  side
entry, paused the car, then got out to hold the door. At attention again. Why didn't
he just launch a few fireworks with a bagpipe parade and have done with it? Richard
considered  miming a limp on  the way inside as  justification for  this  extra  attention
and  decided  it  wasn't  worth  the  bother.  At  least  he  was  close  in  and  spared  a
potentially painful hike in the sun.
"I'll find my own way, thank you,"  he  told  the  man,  praying  he  wouldn't  get  a
salute in return. He got a sensible nod  instead,  then levered out  of  the car,  walking
briskly to  the shelter of  the  building.  Once  within  its  shade  he  could  comfortably
pocket  his  sunglasses  and  gloves,  and  politely  remove  his  hat.  A  young  woman
standing in the wide hall, apparently waiting for someone, approached  him. Though
he'd never seen her before, a look of recognition registered on her face.
"Mr. Dun?" She spoke only just above a murmur. No one around them appeared
to have heard her.
He nodded. "I'm here to see—"
"Yes, sir. I'll take you right in." She gestured and walked just half a step ahead of
him. No nervous turning around to see if he followed and no other names mentioned;
things were  looking  up.  Bourland  must  have  briefed  her  himself  on  the  basics  of
discretion.

Instead of  a quick  lift trip up  to  Bourland's  office,  she  led Richard  to  a service
stair going down.  The  drab  halls  here  were  more  utilitarian  than  historical,  but  he
didn't mind. Work was work no matter how humble the setting; besides, it was most
definitely out of the sun.
She  knocked  twice  by  way  of  announcement  then  opened  one  of  the  many
identical doors in this part of the rat's maze. It bore no descriptive legend; for all he
knew she could be ushering him into a broom closet.
"Sir,  Mr.  Dun  has  arrived."  She  stood  back  so  Richard  could  pass  through.
Smooth-mannered  and  attractive enough to  gain his attention, he briefly gave  in  to
temptation and locked his gaze on her, smiling. Her eyes went big for an instant, then
she  flashed  him  a  dazzling  smile  in  return,  strictly  nonprofessional.  Artificially
induced,  yes,  but  still  so  good  for  the  ego.  He  really  must  try  to  quit  doing  that
sometime. He'd cut back quite a bit in the last few decades,  but  still, if the woman
looked interesting…
"Richard." Bourland's voice brought him back to business. His fascinated escort,
too. Continuing to smile, but with the voltage dimmed somewhat, she softly shut the
door  on  them. Bourland,  a fit six-footer  with an amiable face  and  deceptively  lazy
blue eyes,  stood  up  from  what appeared  to  be  a  makeshift  desk  and  crossed  the
bare floor to shake hands with him. "Really, now, what is it that you do to them?"
"Just my native charm," was his innocent reply.
"So long as you don't run into any harassment suits."
"Philip, you know I'm a gentleman through and through."
Bourland let one corner of his mouth twist. "You're one of the very few people I
know who can  make that statement and  be  believed. Come  have  a  seat,  but  don't
bother to get comfortable; we're going to a meeting in a minute." He glanced at a wall
clock.  It read  almost a quarter  past  the hour.  "Coffee?  I have  a  thermos  of  decaf
here."
"Thanks, but I prefer my vices as they were meant to be, uncorrupted by any hint
of virtue." Richard shrugged free of  the coat,  dropping  it on  a spare  chair and  put
his hat on a clear space  at the edge  of  the desk.  The  papers  there had  the look  of
police reports.  Some  large color  photos  were in the scatter;  the  central  subject  of
one on top indicated they were from a crime scene. A messy one.
"Allergy still a problem?" Bourland inquired, indicating the trenchcoat.
"Under  control,  especially  when  I'm  not  being  yanked  out  of  my  office  on  a
minutes notice. Now what's all this about?  And what's  this place?  You've  not  been
demoted,  have  you?"  Richard  waved  one  hand  at  the  dingy  room  and  its
continuation of the hallway's utilitarian theme.
"No, but my head's close to the block for mentioning your name to the PM."
"I thought he liked me."
"He  does,  it's  the  other  people  on  this  that  resent  his  calling  in  a  security

consultant from the outside. You'll be meeting them shortly."
"That old story. Nothing to worry about."
"Just thought I'd prepare you."
"For what?"
Someone  knocked  at  the  door,  then  opened  it.  The  woman  again.  "Sir?  Ms.
Selby's arrived and is waiting."
"Damn. All right, we're coming. Sorry, Richard, no time to go into things, but you
know the drills. Just try not to let Demarest annoy you. A personal favor." 
"Of  course."  No  need  to  ask  why, Richard  knew Bourland would have a  good
reason. Who the hell was Demarest, anyway?
"Leave your gear here, it'll be fine."
Richard  followed  Bourland  to  another,  larger  room  furnished  with  a  long,
unadorned meeting table lined with mismatched chairs. The dozen people occupying
the chairs  were of  a type  similar to  Bourland,  middle-aged, long of  face,  well  fed,
and garbed  in the standard  dark  suit  and  tie  uniform  of  the  species  bureaucratus
conservatius so popular in this century. They looked far too important for their plain
surroundings.
Oh, yes, something's definitely up to drag this lot into the cellar.
He was introduced  to  them all, including a Chief Inspector  Etienne Demarest of
the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and a Ms. Dayna Selby, special assistant to the
Prime Minister. Selby, a formidable looking woman of perhaps forty years, wore the
feminine version of the uniform, brightened only by a gold pin of abstract design on
one lapel. Everyone was civil in their greetings, guardedly curious, and unmistakably
ill at ease.
Dear me, and I've only just arrived.
Selby  began  things  as  soon  as  Richard  and  Bourland  were  seated.  "I  want  to
remind all of you  that what is said  in this room  is to  stay  here. No  confidences  to
your spouses, best friends, lovers, or even your dog. The reason for this is that one
of our people working undercover has died already, and we want no more casualties.
If any one of you breathes a word, I will personally see to it your lungs are surgically
removed with a dull knife."
Her gaze traveled over each of them in turn, causing them to shift a little. No one
cracked a smile. Apparently Ms. Selby was known as a woman of her word. She sat
and nodded once to Bourland, who launched into things with no preamble.
"The operative who was killed had infiltrated an IRA cell here in the city. He was
not highly placed, but was occasionally able to pass along useful information to  us.
His last report had to do with a plan to assassinate the Prime Minister."
"Hardly news to anyone, Philip," said one of them.
"They've been known to try that sort of thing all the time."

"Agreed,  but  the  agent's  death,  along  with  a  few  other  details,  have  led  our
analysts  to  conclude  that  this  report  should  be  taken  rather  more  seriously  than
usual. We think the group he infiltrated has a good chance of succeeding."
"Then we round up the leaders and—"
"Not  this  time.  Indications  are  that  this  sterling  idea  is  from  a  splinter  cell
operating separately from  the  ones  known  to  us.  We  don't  have  a  lot  in  the  files
about  them  except  they  are  willing  to  take  more  chances  than  their  fellows,  and
they've found money enough to hire an outsider to do the job."
"That's ridiculous. Whyever should they do that?"
"Because without the support of the main group they need someone with the skills
and reputation to deliver the goods."
"But an outsider? I've never heard of them taking such a risk."
"Which is why we're taking this threat very seriously. The man we believe them to
have contacted  for  the job  is known in the trade  by  the name of  Charon,  after the
Styx  ferryman."  Bourland  glanced  at  Richard,  who  raised  one  eyebrow.  "He  is
distinguished from his fellows by his reputation of never once failing to take down a
target. Mr. Dun is a security  specialist  here at the PM's  request  because  he knows
more about Charon than anyone else, how he works, even how he thinks. Mr. Dun
has also been known not to fail."
"There's a first for everything," said Chief Inspector  Demarest.  He was  lean and
dark, with a narrow hard-set jaw and an ingrained expression of annoyance. He fixed
a glare on Richard that was obviously meant to reduce newcomers to jelly. Richard
smiled  back  with  just  enough  sunny  sincerity  to  irritate,  but  not  provoke  a  direct
response. It worked.  Demarest pointedly turned  back  to  Selby.  "My department  is
perfectly capable of protecting the PM, especially since we have a forewarning of an
assassination attempt."
"Thank  you  for  that  reassurance,"  said  Selby.  "Since  the  safety  of  the  PM  is
rightfully uppermost  in your  mind, then I'm  sure  you  will extend every courtesy  to
Mr. Dun to see that his part of this investigation runs smoothly."
Demarest blinked once, his lips thin with distaste. Not a bad  recovery  for  a man
who's  just  been  chopped  off  at  the  knees,  Richard  thought.  He  was  vaguely
reminded of Mordred at the old council meetings, that way he had  of  holding in all
the destructive resentment—only Mordred had been able to hide it better.  Demarest
didn't look quite as smart. His next words confirmed it.
"Of  course,  Ms.  Selby,  but  the  calling  in  of  an  outside  consultant  is  extremely
irregular and certainly unwise. For security reasons."
Selby fastened a sub-zero, no-further-arguments gaze on him. "You will find that
Mr. Dun has  been  granted a blanket clearance in  regard  to  this  situation  by  direct
order of the PM himself. That should fully cover his free access to all the reports in
the files,  and  he  is  to  have  people  to  help  him  if  he  needs  them."  Her  gaze  now
traveled to the others, who were all department heads of one type or  another,  to  let

them know they were also included.
Richard was pleased. He'd made more contacts here in the last few minutes than
in the last five years. Some of them might prove to be useful, but only some of them.
Demarest,  for  instance,  had  gone  quite  red  about  the  collar,  directing  another
piercing glare at Richard.
Yes, my son, this means you have  to share  your  toys. If you  know  what's  good
for  you,  you'll  shut  up  before  she  hauls  out  that  dull  knife  for  some  carving
practice.
Thankfully, Demarest subsided. For the moment. Richard knew it would last only
as  long  as  the  meeting.  Bourland  answered  a  few  more  questions  on  the
assassination  topic,  but  broke  things  up  when  it  started  to  turn  into  a  discussion
group. He reminded them all one more time on the need for secrecy, then Ms. Selby
excused  herself,  saying  she  had  appointments  elsewhere  to  keep  before  taking  a
return flight to Ottawa. Her next meeting turned out to be in the room where Richard
left his coat. She was waiting there when he and Bourland returned.
"Philip," she  said,  not  rising from  her chair by  the paper-strewn  table.  She  was
studying the top photograph. "Mr. Dun."
"Yes, Ms. Selby?"
She looked him over, taking in the expensive suit, designer tie, handmade  shoes,
and finally the face that went with them. Her expression was polite, but  on  the cool
side. "I have been  instructed  by  the PM to  give you  every cooperation.  That  does
not mean I welcome your presence any more than Chief Inspector Demarest."
Richard made no reply, as one did not seem to be required.
"If you  decide  against taking part  in this investigation, you  will  still  be  paid  for
your time this morning."
"At this moment, my time is still my own, but it is at the disposal of Her Majesty's
representatives."
One of her eyebrows went up. "Does this mean you'll do this job for nothing?"
"No, but if you're planning to give me a dressing-down vote of  no  confidence,  I
can still answer you back without worrying about getting sacked."
The right corner of her mouth twitched and her eyes sparked.
Great,  she  likes  me.  "As  things  stand  no  one  has  even  asked,  officially  or
otherwise, if I do wish to participate." He directed this at Bourland.
Bourland examined his nails. "Sorry, must have been an oversight on my part."
"Right."
"Very well. I say, Richard, how would you like to go on a little assassin hunt for
fame and fortune? Or at least fame?"
"I'll have to look everything over first. I might not be able to help, and if not, then
there's no point in my saying yes and wasting your time and mine."

"The preliminaries are all right there." Bourland indicated the table.
"And one other thing—" Richard turned to Selby. "Why the farce in there about
security? You know that sooner or later someone's going to talk."
"Oh, yes," she said. "We know all about the 'two can keep a secret if one of them
is dead' thing. That was all very much on purpose."
"You think there's a leak?"
"We're always wary of that possibility. This seemed as good a time as any to test
them."
"Consequently putting my life on  the line if one  of  them fails on  purpose  or  by
sheer stupidity."
"Possibly. But Philip has assured me that you are indestructible."
More  than  you  think,  good  lady.  "Do  please  write  that  sentiment  on  my
gravestone should this have a disappointing outcome."
"As you wish."
She took her leave, and Bourland went with her. "When  you  decide  yea or  nay,
ring me up. You know the extension," he said in parting.
The  bloody  hypocrite  knows  I'll say  yes.  But  Richard  held  his  peace  until  they
were gone, then sat at the table to sort  through things. Despite the appalling pile of
paper there was little enough real information. McQuin, the dead operative, had been
found only yesterday, and the post mortem was yet to come, though the preliminary
report spoke guardedly about excessive violent trauma to his whole body. Probably
beaten and  stabbed  to  death,  poor  lad.  The  photos  showed  a  gory  mess  indeed.
They'd  fairly  gutted  him.  Richard  hadn't  seen  death  like  that  since  the  last  lot  of
Germans bombed London.
The data they had on Charon was most discouraging for its limits. McQuin's final
report stated that he'd heard  the rumor that "the ferryman" was  coming to  take the
PM across, but there was no hint of a time or place. One of the many annotations to
the  report  raised  the  possibility  that  "ferryman"  referred  to  Charon.  This  was
followed by  two  more annotations  attached  to  the first, one  discrediting,  the  other
supporting it. Both signed by the same person. Someone was being very careful on
this.
How did  this IRA cell get in contact  with someone  like Charon?  How  did  they
even know of him at all? He was  known as  a very high-priced specialist  and  didn't
exactly advertise his services  in The  Times. Even in the  intelligence  community  he
was  more  often  than  not  considered  to  be  only  a  story,  mostly  because  anyone
making a project  out  of  him wound  up  dead.  Richard  knew  of  three  investigators
killed for certain and two other  possibles.  Was  he to  be  number six by  picking up
where they had left off? If so, then Charon was in for one hell of a shock.
Richard patiently read through all the reports, idly rubbing his white scar.
 

"I'm glad to hear it," said Bourland when he answered Richards  call. "I'll get the
paperwork started so we can put you on the clock."
"Wrong, you give me my standard deposit fee, then I'll send you a bill afterwards.
Do the paperwork for that instead."
"Whatever you want. Oh, there's one thing, Richard, has to do with the chain of
command. You're to make your reports to Demarest. His card is in the file you have,
along with your special ID and authorization papers. Sign all four copies and—"
"Why not to you?"
"Because he's in charge of the case."
Damn, but it was only to be expected. "Why is that?"
"Because, as the Yanks say, he has his head up a lot of asses, including mine."
"How did you let that happen?"
"It's a long story, no need to burden you with it."
He'd get it out of Bourland later. "I'd rather report to you.  You know he's  going
to be trouble. I'm familiar with the type, he'll make himself annoying."
"I know, but it can't be helped. Just close your eyes and think of Canada."
"Do you still want to know what's going on?"
"Of course, but only in an unofficial way. Protocol requires that I be more or less
out  of  the  loop…  but  if  you  should  happen  to  run  into  me  now  and  then,  or
accidently  dial  my  number,  I'm  more  than  willing  to  lend  an  interested  ear.  I'd
appreciate it, Richard."
"So long as it doesn't place your head up my ass."
"Perish the thought."
Richard rang off and started pulling the papers and photos together into neat piles
and found folders for them in a drawer. Just as he finished the job  a double  knock
sounded at the door. Bourland's pretty assistant came in.
"Your drive back is waiting, sir."
"Thank you."
At least she didn't puzzle about the business with the coat as he put it on. Perhaps
Bourland had briefed her on it as well.
Richard  pressed  his gaze on  her again, to  be  rewarded  by  another  encouraging
smile that turned rather blank the longer she held it. He stood close before her, taking
in her scent, listening to her heart. He closed  his eyes,  letting it wash over  him. So
many, many years and he'd never, never yet tired of the sound.
She was tempting… and he was hungry.
He took one of her hands and lifted it to his lips. Very soft. Trace of cologne on
the pulse point. He opened his mouth to kiss her there, tasting, savoring. He felt his

corner teeth emerging in response, enjoyed the familiar sweep of fire and ice rushing
through him—something else he never tired of, even after all this time. Indeed,  over
the years it had gotten more intense, more delightful.
He ran his tongue over  her skin, heard  her  sharp  sigh  in  return.  Her  eyes  were
closed, lips parted, breath shallow. God, but life could be good.
On the other  hand,  he had  to  be  careful. The  door  was  not  the kind one  could
lock from the inside without a key. Bad luck for him if somebody walked in on them
while he was…  and  then  there  was  Bourland's  joke  about  harassment  suits…  no,
thank you.
With  a  great  deal  of  difficulty,  Richard  pushed  away  from  this  particular
temptation,  putting  his  back  to  her.  His  own  breathing  was  rather  too  ragged  for
comfort. Once the gate was  open,  the hungry beast  within was  always prepared  to
run free until he fed it. He managed to beat it back  into its cage  for  the time being.
It's too risky now, but I'll tend to you soon. I promise. Perhaps he was being overly
cautious, but he'd never once had cause to regret such a policy in his long past.
When  he  turned  around  his  teeth  and  eyes  were  quite  normal  again,  and  she
appeared to have recovered from his control as well. The effect of it was  such  that
she'd have no memory of the last few minutes, for which he was thankful. He didn't
want to  trust  himself  into  imposing  additional  hypnosis  on  her,  for  then  might  he
break down and indulge his appetite regardless of the risk.
No, better to wait until nightfall and go to one of his usual haunts.
 
There was no problem taking the files out of the building, and  the young RCMP
driver delivered him safely home.  Richard  fled inside,  for  it  was  bright  noon,  and
despite his coverings his skin began to itch in reaction to too much exposure.  Why
couldn't Bourland have called for him on a nice rainy day?
Once in the house he removed his protections. The special  room-darkening  steel
window blinds  he'd  had  custom  made for  the place  were never opened  except  on
very dull days or during the dark  of  winter. As  this was  not  one  of  those  times he
turned  on  the  lights.  He  could  have  done  just  as  well  without,  enough  sun  came
through the cracks to serve his sensitive eyes, but it always put the clients off.
Clients. Damn. He checked his appointments. Just one  in the later afternoon.  He
had lots of time to play, then. Suiting action to thought, he parked before one of his
computers and cruised through a dozen files before locating the one he'd built up on
Charon.  The  trouble  with abbreviated  titles and  passwords  was  that  he  sometimes
forgot them. It took a few tries before he could open it.
The data there was remarkably slim, all of it gleaned from reports of people in the
business who had tried to investigate Charon in the past. The first man had died six
years earlier in an auto wreck, another was an apparent suicide off a tall building, but
the remaining three had  been  taken out  from  a distance  by  a long gun. Head shots
except for the last, who'd gotten it in the neck. The bullet must have dropped slightly
as it traveled.

According to them, Charon's talents were apparently not in the service of any one
political  group.  Speculation  linked  him  with  several  kills  that  served  opposing
ideologies and  even rival organizations.  Nothing  personal,  just  business.  Of  those
assassinations in the last two decades that were positively linked to Charon, a dozen
were also with long guns. Snipers needed regular practice to keep their eye. He could
put someone to looking into local shooting ranges, though he didn't expect anything
from that; it was Richard's cast iron habit of covering every detail. He made a note
and scrolled on until a name came up that caught his eye.
Arlie Webb. Well, well. The last investigator had noticed that Webb  had  been  in
the area just prior to three of the assassinations. Webb's name was also on the list of
people McQuin had had contact with before his final report. Where was it? He dug
through the paper file and compared it to the one on his screen. No photo for either,
but  the  descriptions  matched.  A  former  Le  Mans  driver  and  part-time  alcoholic
striving for full-time status, Webb had no visible means of support, yet did  a lot of
traveling. Speculation  ran that he was  a smuggler and  a good  one.  His  last  known
location was some motel on the Canadian side  of  Niagara. Fortunate,  that. Richard
doubted his carte blanche from the Prime Minister extended over the border into the
States.
A few phone calls to  get the local RCMP  to  confirm things for  him ascertained
that Webb was still checked into the place. Almost as soon as he rang off Demarest
called him.
"What's this business in Niagara?" he demanded without giving greeting.
"Chief Inspector  Demarest? How good  to  hear from  you."  Richard  winced;  he
sounded far too sincere to be believed.
"Niagara, Mr. Dun. Why did you have my people calling there?"
"Just a minor lead I wanted run down. Nothing to it."
"You do understand that you are to report to me."
"Most  clearly,  Chief  Inspector,  and  I  will  be  happy  do  so  the  instant  I  have
anything to report. I've only just started, so give me a little time. Have a nice day."
He dropped the phone in its cradle and turned off the ringer. Ten  seconds  later his
answering  machine  went  to  work,  Demarest  again,  according  to  the  caller
identification  device.  He  didn't  bother  to  leave  a  message.  Richard  hated  when
people did that.
 
The  afternoon  appointment  netted  him  a  very  nice  consulting  fee  and  another
satisfied customer  to  add  to  the  roster.  By  sunset  he'd  gotten  his  preparations  all
sorted  and  was  driving toward  the lake and  the rental boat  waiting for  him.  Faced
with  fighting  the  evening  traffic  going  around  Lake  Ontario  or  taking  a  boat  trip
across,  he opted  for  the water journey, however hazardous.  He  detested  water,  at
least when it came to huge free-flowing quantities of the stuff, but in this instance it
was  a  calm  night,  and  he  had  a  nice,  sturdy  fiberglass  shell  between  himself  and
disaster. Of course, he could  have simply chartered  a plane, but  he detested  flying

even more.
One boat trip and taxi ride later Richard stood in the parking lot of a place calling
itself Moonlight Court, an ambitious name if ever he heard one. It was a motel of the
older type with individual bungalows  intended as  an attempt to  give honeymooning
couples a bit of privacy. He estimated that its heyday had  been  in the thirties when
such  rustic  delights had  proved  a novelty to  a  less  sophisticated  society.  Now  its
once cozy rooms would raise only a sneer from a generation used  to  the sprawling
comfort of luxury hotels with their spas and king-sized beds. Whatever quaint charm
Moonlight Court  once  possessed  was  now  thoroughly  debauched  by  age  and  the
decidedly  downwardly  mobile neighborhood  surrounding  it. Why didn't  the  owner
just post hourly rates and have done with it?
Tempos  fugit, he thought with an inner sigh as  he strode  up  to  the office.  He'd
instinctively dressed  below par  for  the occasion  with faded  jeans, a  less  than  new
shirt, an old leather jacket, and  a comfortable  pair of  highly scuffed  western boots
on the verge of  retirement. The  ensemble  suited  the  local  scenery;  the  bored  man
behind the counter  glanced up  once  to  see  that the new customer  wasn't  intent on
armed robbery then went back to the cop show rerun blaring at rock concert level on
his TV.
"I'm here to see Arlie Webb," Richard shouted. "Which one is he in?"
The man shook his head, not bothering to adjust the sound. "If he was expecting
you then he'd have told you which one. What is it? A drug bust? Waste of time, he
only does booze. What the hell, try cabin twelve at the far end."
"Thanks. Who's winning?" He nodded  at the TV,  where the blue-clad cop  hero
crouched  behind some  shiny new trash  cans  that were miraculously  deflecting  Uzi
bullets.
"Captain Kirk, of course."
"Good for him." Richard started out, but the man called him back.
"Webb might be busy," he added.
"How so busy?"
"Has a girl in there. Nice redhead, legs up to here. Too pricey for me, or I'd flag
her myself when she comes out."
"Redhead? She look Irish?" Perhaps she was an IRA contact.
"She looked female and plenty of it."
"Well, maybe Arlie will share." He winked once and went out to pay off the taxi.
"Sure you wanna do this?" asked the driver. "Not much chance  of  getting a ride
back from here."
"You're willing to wait?"
"I got fares waiting, sorry." He did a fast U-turn and was gone, not so fast as to
miss his tip, but gone all the same.

Richard  walked  slowly  over  broken,  pitted  concrete,  the  TV  noise  gradually
fading  behind  him.  He  listened  to  the  faint  traffic  sounds  beyond  the  dark  court.
Busy night out  there, lots  of  ladies doing  business.  When  he  finished  with  Webb,
he'd take a walk in their direction and hire one to feed from. The girl would be ahead
a hundred dollars,  have a pleasurable,  if rather vague dream,  and  Richard's  hungry
beast could retire comfortably to its cage for a few more evenings until the next time.
Richard paused before the twelfth bungalow on the row. Lights showed behind its
red curtains.  He scanned  the rest  of  the shadowed  lot. The  cars  looked  on  a level
with the run-down area: an aging Pinto,  oversized  gas  guzzlers that had  seen  better
days, and a new Sentra with a rental sticker.  He noted  its plate numbers,  in case  it
belonged to Webb, before going up to the door.
He listened before knocking, not that he had  any compunctions  against breaking
in on a couple en flagrante—sometimes such occasions could be quite amusing. No
action tonight, though, they were talking.
"Five grand," said the woman in a firm tone.
Good God, what on earth did she do that was worth that much?
"Get out," said the man, presumably Webb.
"All right, six."
"No."
So, she was buying not selling. As it was not likely Webb himself was worth that
much then she was after something else.
"Ten, and that's final. It's more than you'd be getting from anyone else." She had
a decided Irish accent. Well, well.
"I don't know what you're talking about."
"Oh, but you do. I'll not be goin' to the police on this one, an' that's a promise. I
just want the item back and in good condition."
"Lady, you're crazy, you got the wrong man, and now you're gonna leave. Don't
come back."
Richard quick-stepped away from the door and nipped around the corner  of  the
building. Peering past it with one eye he saw a leggy redhead  indeed,  being pushed
out by a much larger man. She  wasn't  dressed  like the other  self-employed  women
of this neighborhood; that, and the fragment of what he'd heard gave him to wonder
just what her business was that she could be willing to drop ten thousand dollars on
someone like Webb.
She whirled around, and Richard ducked so she wouldn't spot him.
"You'll never get the full worth of it from anyone, that's a given, so why not deal
with me?"
"Because I've got nothing for you."
"What, you've passed it on already? Who has it? I'll pay you—"

"Go fuck yourself!" Webb slammed the door in her face.
"You first, you've had more practice!" she bellowed in return.
When  no  reply  came  back,  Richard  heard  her  footsteps  stalking  over  the
pavement, followed by  the opening and  shutting  of  a  car  door.  The  Nissan  rental
belonged to her. She gunned it to life, then roared out of the lot.
That  was  interesting, but  he'd  check  on  her later. Now it was  his turn with  Mr.
Charming.  Richard  stepped  up  and  forcefully  knocked.  Webb  yanked  open  the
door.
"Goddammit, bitch, I told you—" The shock of  seeing Richard  there instead  of
the woman added to the bleary surprise in Webb's bloodshot eyes. His mouth hung
open, an unfortunate effect, especially coupled with the booze on his breath.
"Was that my little sister  you  were just molesting?" Richard  inquired in his best
Irish accent.
"Who the hell are you?"
"Someone a damned sight more careful than you are to be sure." Richard pushed
past  him.  "What  d'ye  want  to  go  puttin'  on  a  show  like  that  for?  Y'know  how
important this job is."
"Job? What do you mean? My part in it's over."
"Ah, but  the boss  wasn't  happy  with your  part  of  it."  Richard  kicked  the  door
shut.
"I delivered on time and didn't get caught, what more does he want?"
"Your balls in a box unless you say where you put it."
"Right where it's supposed to be—wait, who are you? What the—"
But by then Richard had grabbed Webb's  arm, twisted him around,  and  shoved
him  hard  over  the  back  of  an  armchair.  It  was  surprising  this  place  even  had  an
armchair.  The  rest  of  the  room  consisted  of  a  sagging  bed,  night  stand,  phone,
liquor bottles full and empty, a twenty-year-old TV sitting on an even older  bureau,
and  a  faint  sewage  smell.  Webb,  poor  fellow,  suited  the  surroundings  perfectly,
being unshaven and shirtless in filthy jeans. His last bath  was  no  more than a fond
memory.
Richard  bent  low  and  whispered  reasonably  in  his  ear.  "The  fact  is  I  need
information from  you  or  you  could  end  up  like  young  McQuin  did,  with  his  guts
spread out all over creation."
Webb stopped struggling. "How you know about that? You're a fucking cop!"
"Oh,  I'm  much worse  than that, my lad. Cops  have rules  and  regs,  but  I  don't
bother  with the silly things, so  don't  you  forget  it for  one  minute, I never do."  He
pulled Webb's wrist up high, making the man gasp. "Now why don't you tell me the
story of your life? Skip over the dull bits, just give me the last week or so."
"You can't treat me like this, I'm an American!"

"They have my full sympathy. Come on."
Webb  told  him,  in  remarkably  coarse  language,  to  go  someplace  and  do
something rather painful to himself once he arrived, compelling Richard to push  the
chair forward until Webb crashed headfirst to the floor. He gasped and groaned until
Richard hauled him up for a short lug over to the unmade bed, where he threw him
onto it with spring-cracking force.  Webb  bounced  once,  then slithered to  the floor
again, legs everywhere, his back against the mattress edge.
"Can't keep your feet? You should get off this stuff." Richard plucked an empty
bottle of  vodka  from  the night stand.  Grasping  its base,  he smashed  it  against  the
stand. What remained was a truly terrifying weapon,  especially up  close.  He seized
Webb's  throat  with one  hand  and  brought  the  broken  bottle  between  them  at  eye
level.
"You've got two chances to tell me what you know, Arlie. Your left eye and your
right."
"Wh-whatever you say." Webb raised his hands high, palms out, making nervous,
placatory motions.
"Good lad. Now what did you smuggle?"
"Just some booze, that's all."
"Wrong answer." Richard nicked Webb's cheek with the bottle. "Oops! Oh, what
a shame, my hand slipped! It could slip again if—"
"Awright, it was a gun!"
"What kind of gun?"
"Dunno, it was in a case, a big one, hell of a job getting it over here."
"And where did you take it?"
"A  drop  point.  My  car,  their  car.  We  pass  each  other.  I  hand  it  through  the
window and drive away."
"And they didn't pay you?"
"I get paid by—" Webb blanched and swallowed. "Someone will bring the money
later."
"You're so trusting. You really think that will happen?"
"Always has, he—" He cut off again.
"Who are you expecting? Who's paying you? Charon?"
"Who?" But the whites flashed all around his pupils at the mention of the name.
"You heard me. Such  a lousy  pit for  you  to  wait in—what's  the matter, doesn't
Charon pay you enough for a nicer place? Or maybe you drink it away, is that it?"
Webb shut up again. He was slick with sweat  and  trembling. Richard  locked  his
gaze on him, concentrating.

"You're to tell me everything, in detail. Tell me about Charon."
"Charon?" Webb's voice thickened, but his resistance was better than most. The
drink in his blood would make things more difficult, but Richard could be patient.
"When is the hit on the Prime Minister scheduled? Where is Charon?"
Webb blinked, his head dropped. "No… can't…"
Richard shook him. "Look at me! You can. You want to tell me everything!"
"Fuck  you,"  rasped  Webb,  bringing  his  right  hand  around.  Richard  caught  the
movement with the corner of his eye and started to react. Too late. The revolver now
in Webb's  fist roared  and  flashed.  Once,  twice… Richard  dropped  heavily  on  his
side with a grunt of pain. Another shot.  His body  spasmed.  He felt hot  blood  spill
over his hands as he clutched at the wounds in his chest and belly.
"Fuck you,"  Webb  said  again in a much fainter voice,  like an echo.  Still on  the
floor, he backed away, staring at Richard the whole time.
Richard groaned, paralyzed by the agony from the three distinct fires that blazed
deep in his flesh. He dared not move, not until the worst shock of it had passed and
the healing began.  Betrayed again by  his damned  overconfidence.  He  should  have
looked  for  a gun; he knew better.  Of  course  a man like Webb  would always have
one ready  at  hand.  Where  was  the  bastard?  There,  across  the  room  now,  slowly
finding his feet.
Oh, God, don't let him shoot me again.
Webb brought the gun up. Fired.
The bullet hammered Richard  square  in the chest.  He  flopped  on  his  back,  his
skull knocking hard  against the bare  floor,  leaving him dizzy and  too  breathless  to
scream.  Shattered  breastbone,  shattered  heart. He could  feel its frantic  flutter  as  it
continued to pump on despite the damage. Any other man would be  dead  by  now.
All Richard could do was wait it through until it knitted up again.
And endure the pain. Bad now, but it would gradually fade.
Just wait it out. Won't be long.
But the pain was  not going away.  It  just  kept  on  and  on.  Abruptly,  a  wave  of
sickness  such  as  he'd  never  felt  before  washed  over  him  like  ice  water,  left  him
shivering. After a moment,  it  got  worse,  not  better.  He'd  been  shot  before,  knew
what to expect, but it wasn't happening. Something was wrong.
"Jeez,"  came  Webb's  voice.  There  was  relief  mixed  with  disgust  in  his  tone.
"Now what the hell am I supposed  to  do?"  He loomed  into view, looking down  at
Richard,  then moved  unsteadily past  him to  get to  the night stand.  Webb  fumbled
for one of the vodka bottles there and got it open. Two good jolts later and he was
dialing the phone.
Richard's  shivering  increased.  Cold.  Colder  than  anything  he'd  ever  known
before, right down to  the soul.  What was  wrong? He should  have been  recovering
by now.

Webb,  receiver  to  his  ear,  stared  at  him.  "Jeez,  you  take  a  lot  of  dying,  don't
you?"  He  aimed  the  gun  at  Richard's  face,  sighting  down  the  barrel.  "Pow,"  he
whispered, then grinned. Take your time, you son of a bitch. All the friggin' time you
need."
What was wrong with him? Cramp. A bad one.
With a strangled cry,  Richard  twisted on  his side,  doubling up  like a fetus  as  a
vise clamped down tight around his gut as though to squeeze him in two. God, what
was wrong?
Webb got an answer to his call. "Sean? It's me… yeah, I know I'm not supposed
to, but I've got a situation here, I need some help."
Sweat soaked Richard like a bath, and his breath came in little sobs like a panting
animal. His corner teeth were out. All that lost blood. It would need replacing. Soon.
Now, whispered a familiar growling voice within.
"I can't talk over the phone about it, you have to come here."
His hunger… like that of the newly born.  Excruciating. The  beast  was  emerging,
clawing free of its cave. He tried to push it back. Another cramp took him. His cry
of pain was deeper, rougher than the last.
"No I can't, you have to come to me, this is where the situation is, goddammit!"
Clawing…
"You just come and bring a couple of your boys." . . . free!
"I'll be right here at—oh, Christ!"
Webb's  last coherent  cry  was  for  his  long  abandoned  savior.  His  next  was  an
appalling shriek because Richard  was  up  and  on  him like a wolf, teeth bared,  eyes
blazing.  Richard  lifted  him  bodily,  slamming  him  against  the  wall  hard  enough  to
shake the whole cabin. Webb feebly tried to bring his gun up, but Richard swatted at
the weapon,  knocking it across  the room.  Webb  tried  his  fists  next,  to  no  effect;
Richard  was  past  noticing. He pushed  Webb's  head  away  to  one  side  and,  biting
hard and deep, tore into his throat.
A gagging scream. A twitching, struggling body.
Richard ignored both as the first rush of blood filled his mouth. Not enough. Not
nearly enough. He worried at the tough flesh. The beast wanted not just the surface
vein, but the big artery, the real treasure hidden beneath the skin and muscle.
He clamped his jaws together and pulled, ripping away half of Webb's throat. The
body  shuddered,  its  bare  heels  cracking  against  the  wall.  The  screaming  abruptly
stopped. A hot red fountain of  glorious life jetted over  Richard,  blinding him. Too
quick to swallow, then too slow. He couldn't  feed  fast  enough to  keep  up  with the
hunger, with the sheer desperate fury engulfing him.
Mindless, he slashed and rent, drinking, greedily drinking all he could  of  the red
nectar, all, until there was nothing left but  the drained and  mangled remnants of  the

pitiful shell that once held it.
 
The bathtub was only half full of cold water. It would have to do.
Richard plunged his head and hands into it. Scrubbing.
When he came up  for  air the water was  dark  with  blood.  Dark.  He  yanked  the
plug and watched it drain out.  As  the last of  it swirled away he thought of  the old
Hitchcock film and had to fight an hysterical giggle trying to escape.
Not now. Later. Panic later.
He ran more water, got the shower working at full force, and stepped into it fully
clothed.  The  shock  from  the  cold  went  all  the  way  down  his  spine  as  the  stuff
soaked through to his skin. He endured it. Had to.
He  rinsed  his  face,  his  hands,  turned  and  turned  again  in  the  freezing  spray,
rubbing at his clothes,  washing away more and  still more blood.  There  seemed  an
unending supply of it; just when he thought he was clean another fold of cloth would
yield another stain, and  he had  to  begin all over  again. He shrugged  off  the leather
jacket, hanging the sodden  thing over  the shower  rod.  Threads  of  red-tinged water
streamed  from  it,  half  into  the  tub  and  half  to  the  floor.  He  peeled  off  his  shirt,
wringing it, washing, then wringing, and put  it next to  the jacket, then did  the same
with his jeans. He threw his socks and boots in the sink.
Then he scrubbed himself down all over again.
His raw skin pinched from the gooseflesh when he stepped dripping from the tub;
the nearly healed bullet wounds tingling right to  the edge  of  fresh  pain. He found  a
towel, used it, staring all the while at the slaughterhouse beyond the bathroom door.
The heartsinking fear he'd been holding at bay threatened to paralyze him. He didn't
want to go out there.
But I have to.
He took a breath. It didn't help. The place reeked of  blood.  Every corner,  every
wall. Filling his lungs, nearly choking him with its thick smell.
He edged into the room, but there was no  way he could  avoid  contact.  Parts  of
the floor were merely dotted by the spray, but others were slick with it.
What had he touched here?
Outside doorknob? He couldn't remember for sure.
He stepped  carefully around  the ghastly thing  on  the floor.  He listened, hearing
nothing before  gently opening the door.  He swabbed  the knob  down  with  the  wet
towel, shut himself in again, and wiped the inside knob.
The vodka bottle. Yes, for certain. He found it in the wreckage and polished it.
What else?
Webb. They could lift prints from bodies now. Hell, he had to think about  DNA
tests  and  God  knows  what else. Something like this would have a major forensics

team poring over every inch of the room with their damned microscopes. There'd be
his hair, skin, clothing fibers, even his own blood.
And  Demarest  would  remember  the  calls  his  people  had  made  to  Niagara  on
Richards behalf. He wouldn't let that go. He'd talk to the boat rental place, to the taxi
driver, to the man in the office. Possibly Richard could get to them all first, persuade
them to think they'd never seen him before and…
No. That was useless. He needed a better cover-up, something plausible to fit the
situation.
Another look at the room and he had to forcibly quell the giggling again. Then the
sob of fear that followed. He didn't have time for it. Maybe someone in this hellhole
of a neighborhood had heard the shots and screams and called the police. Not likely,
or they most certainly would have been here by now, but he couldn't take the risk. At
least the office man had apparently missed everything, thanks to his TV addiction.
Richard went back to the bath, washed his feet clean, then put on all of his cold,
wet clothes. Nasty. But necessary.
He wiped down  everything in the room,  the taps,  the shower  walls, edge  of  the
tub, and checked the dimensions of the window. Small, but not too small. He rinsed
the towel clean then dropped it in the tub.
In the outer room he went to Webb's cache of booze. Two full bottles of vodka,
another of Scotch half gone. It would have to do. He opened the lot and poured the
contents all around the room, particularly the body, bed clothes, and curtains.  With
his  pocket  knife  he  cut  open  the  thinly  padded  arm  chair.  As  he'd  hoped,  the
padding  was  some  kind  of  cheap  foam  stuffing.  Almost  as  good  as  petrol.  He
spread  it  around  where  it  would  do  the  most  good.  He  slashed  at  the  mattress,
making a thorough job of it. Accellerant and fuel. Only one more thing to  complete
the circle…
Matches. There, on the bureau. Obviously not a nonsmoking suite.
He smothered the giggle.
Blood on the matchbook. Sticky against his fingers. Had it soaked through? The
heavy paper cover was soft. The matches inside were, too. He struck one. Nothing.
No, this wasn't the time to get the shakes.
Struck a second and a third. The fourth caught, then went out.
Calm. Deep breath. Bringing with it the smell of blood and the stink of booze.
And  death.  Don't  forget  death.  It's hovering  just  over there  waiting  to see  if  I
botch things.
Calm.
The next match stayed alight just long enough for him to drop it onto a patch  of
bedspread soaked with vodka.  Hot  blue flames leaped  up,  grew steady,  grew fast,
ran over the floor, up the walls, hopped impossibly from one side of the room to the
other. He fell back from the sudden heat, the swelling sound.

The damned things alive.
He retreated to the bath just in time, the fire licking at him, wanting a taste.
He  turned  on  the  cold  water  for  the  shower  again,  then  picked  up  the  heavy
ceramic lid from  the toilet's  tank and  began smashing it against the wire-reinforced
window over the tub. A few shards of glass flew. The aluminum frame bent outward.
He felt fresh night air streaming in; behind him the fire roared to greater life.
Sweating now. He could tell even through the wet clothes and the running shower.
His movements  became  mechanical as  he beat  at the window.  Soon  the glass  was
nearly  gone,  just  the  twisted  bar  across  the  middle  remained,  and  one  more  hit
would—there. Broken. He shoved it outward to clear the opening, dropped the tank
lid, and pushed himself through the window. Tight squeeze. He was a big man even
for this time.
The  leather  jacket  spared  him  from  the  worst  cuts,  but  not  the  jolt  when  he
tumbled out to the pavement six feet below.  He lay still a moment and  took  stock:
scraped hands and a few bruises—nothing he couldn't live with.
This time the sobbing laughter wouldn't stop.
 
The rest  of  the night went as  he'd  hoped.  Someone  finally  noticed  the  fire  and
called it in. The  other  bungalows  were spared,  but  number  twelve  was  thoroughly
gutted, a total shambles by the time the firefighters had finished with it.
Richard  allowed himself to  be  discovered,  apparently groggy  from  a  hit  on  the
head, in the alley behind the place.  He let the paramedics  look  him over  and  faked
waking up fully when they gave him some oxygen.  He produced  his ID, mentioned
Demarest's name, and let the bureaucracy trundle forward to work in his favor.
He reported everything that happened, veering from the truth only when he got to
the part  when Webb  shot  him. Instead,  Richard  stated  that he  must  have  been  hit
from behind by a third party already in the room when he'd entered. When he woke
up Webb was dead and the place on fire.
Richard told his spellbound  audience he couldn't  get to  the front  door  or  larger
window, but  did  just manage to  break  out  through the bath.  He was  told  in  return
that he was a lucky bastard, that his guardian angel had  been  doing  some  overtime,
that  they  were  glad  he  made  it  free.  Draped  in  a  blanket  stamped  with  the  logo
"Property of Niagara County," he let himself be congratulated for his narrow escape
while pretending to sip their vile coffee. He did not have to pretend to be shaken to
the core by what had happened.
Loss of control. Complete and total. Such as he'd never had before.
That was what had happened.
The  beast,  as  he'd  come  to  affectionately  call  it  over  the  years,  the  beast,
responsible for so  much pleasure in his long life, responsible  for  allowing him that
long life to begin with, had slipped its tether and not come back. Not until it had fully

indulged its vicious appetite.
He'd had no power over it, had just been along for the ride. While this rabid thing
had torn a man to shreds and fed on the blood, the part  of  his mind that still knew
itself to be Richard had simply watched. Done nothing.
But  that  son  of  a  bitch  Webb  had  shot  him,  he  could  tell  himself  in  his  own
defense. Certainly he could be expected to have a reaction, a bad one. But Richard
had been shot in the past, many times, and  he'd  never reacted  this way before,  not
with such mindless rage.
Loss of control. Anyone's nightmare. But for  him, for  someone  like him, it was
worse than any sleeping terror.
"You see  it?" One  of  the paramedics  asked  her partner.  She  must  have thought
they were out of range of Richard's hearing.
The body? No way, I smelled it cooking, that was enough for me. How bad?"
"Bad. It's so messed up only the bones let you know it was human. I don't envy
the med examiners on this one—not that I ever do," she added.
"Try not to think about it."
"Yeah, tell me another one. You know what it's like."
Richards heart juttered once, then beat faster as the memory of what he'd done to
Webb  surged  over  him. His hands  trembled so  that he  had  to  put  the  coffee  cup
down.
His  mouth  twitched.  Not  from  fear  or  disgust  now,  but  from  remembered
excitement.
Because… because… God help him, he'd enjoyed it.
Chapter Three
What was the point, Richard thought, of having an efficient highway system  if it
was always made inefficient by  constant  construction?  It seemed  to  him that  there
were two seasons in Toronto: winter and rehabilitation. That  was  the new word  for
it,  coined  by  other  frustrated  victims  of  progress,  usually  with  a  few  choice
descriptive  epithets  added  in. Whatever the word  the result was  the same,  lines  of
angry motorists  sitting in slowly overheating cars,  slowly getting  angrier,  glaring  at
apparently empty construction zones where no one appeared to be doing anything.
His E-Type Jaguar shuddered slightly as it ticked over in the late afternoon lineup
of homeward-bound  commuters;  he shifted  to  neutral and  fed  it  some  petrol.  The
carburetor  was  out  of  balance  again.  He'd  have  to  get  that  fixed.  This  was  a
thoroughbred machine that needed lots of patient attention and  frequent feedings at
the premium pump, but he thought the benefits were well worth the trouble.
Richard  had  fallen in love with this long, sleek monster  as  soon  as  he'd  seen  it

back in the sixties. There'd been a breaking-in period of course, where the vehicle's
many  mechanical  and  electrical  faults  turned  up.  He'd  made  a  special  project  of
finding the best repair shop in the area and set  them loose  on  his beautiful wheeled
pet to  disprove  the general opinion that it was  merely  a  status  symbol  to  be  seen
basking  in  one's  driveway,  but  not  for  actual  use.  His  car  was  now  impeccably
behaved: smooth acceleration, amazing power, and a degree of luxury conspicuously
absent in other sports models.
All the defects worked out, he then bought six more identical models. Money was
no object, so why not? He shipped one to Los Angeles for his frequent visits there,
another to Vancouver, and the other four were in Europe: London, Paris, Rome, and
Geneva. He would have had one stored in Moscow were it not for the lack of good
service facilities and  the city's  yet  uncertain  situation  of  the  present.  Poor  Russia.
He'd spent many wonderful times there and  was  saddened  by  this century's  varied
upheavals. Perhaps  one  day,  it would return to  its  former  prerevolution  glory,  but
without the attendant crime and tyranny—hopefully with a better economy to prevent
additional  rebellions.  He  thought  it  might.  He'd  seen  enough  changes  in  his  long
unlifetime  to  hope  so.  He  smiled  to  himself  at  that  word.  "Unlifetime."  What  an
accurate description of the gift that Sabra and her Goddess had given him.
But has it betrayed me?
Damned traffic. It gave him too much time to think. He'd  had  a surfeit of  that in
the last few days.  The  aftermath of  what he had  come  to  privately  refer  to  as  the
"Niagara Horror" had required he do a great deal of  thinking about  it. And lying. It
had been easy enough to lie to Demarest and later Bourland about it, holding to  his
story of being knocked  out  and  waking in time to  escape  the fire. So  far, forensic
evidence to contradict him had not yet surfaced, neither had any of the investigators
raised so much as an eyebrow at his accounting, so they believed him. So far.
The forensics team had scraped under his nails and taken a blood sample. Bit of a
risk, the  latter,  but  it  couldn't  be  helped;  it  would  have  aroused  suspicion  if  he'd
refused to cooperate. So long as they didn't subject it to a truly in-depth analysis it
would pass as being within normal parameters. Only just, but tests down to the DNA
level took time and  cost  money and  most  police  departments  had  little of  either to
spare. He chose not to worry about it, having more important concerns.
His sodden clothes had also been taken away as evidence, but the department lent
him  some  old  sneakers,  mismatched  socks,  and  a  fluorescent  orange  track  suit.
Richard  didn't  mind  the  vile  color;  the  stuff  was  dry  and  didn't  smell  of  Webb's
death.
Demarest was  not  amused  by  any of  the  sordid  business.  He'd  come  down  to
Niagara himself when the police  there called Toronto  to  inform him of  the incident
and to confirm Richards special ID. Demarest heard the preliminary report from the
senior officer on the scene, talked with a few other people, then eventually turned up
at  the  local  station  house  where  Richard  had  been  escorted  after  the  paramedics
were done with him.
Richard,  seated  in  the  dense  quiet  of  an  anonymous  office,  loathed  having  to

speak with the tiresome man, but thought it best to get the ordeal out of the way as
he had with all the others.
Demarest strode  forcefully in and  glowered  at  Richard.  To  no  effect.  "When  I
called you about your Niagara inquiry this morning you said  it was  a minor thing. I
don't appreciate being misled, Mr. Dun."
"At that time it was only minor. I had  no  idea it would blow up  in my face,"  he
replied truthfully.
"Then perhaps you should leave such investigations to professionals."
Richard could have pointed out that he was certainty himself a professional—with
several  lifetimes  of  experience—but  disdained  rising  to  Demarest's  easy  bait.  "I'll
keep that in mind, Chief Inspector. Until then I shall exercise more caution."
"All this is going into my report to the PM."
"I'm glad to hear it."
"Now why don't you tell me who S. Geary is?"
"Who?"
"The person who rented the Nissan. They traced the plate number."
"That's her name? What's the 'S' stand for?"
"You tell me."
Richard, tired beyond patience, wanting only peace, looked up to hypnotize him.
He'd gotten far enough to lock gazes and about to go just a little deeper and tell him
to leave, when the beast suddenly stirred.
No!
He shut things down and turned away. Fast.
Demarest shook  instantly  awake  and  seized  upon  a  whole  different  meaning  to
Richard's reaction. "You know her! Who is she?"
It took him a moment to find his voice. "I don't know her, and I've no stomach to
play your games. You have my report, and that's all you need."
"It's not nearly enough. You haven't told me everything."
"Yes, I left out the part about  having a splitter of  a headache  and  a need  for  air
that doesn't  stink of  burned  meat. If that's  what you  want, I'll be  glad to  add  it  in
tomorrow.  In  the  meantime,  I'm  getting  out  of  here."  He  picked  up  the  envelope
holding  his  wallet  and  keys  and  suited  action  to  word,  shutting  the  door  against
Demarest's  protests.  A uniformed  officer  gave  Richard  a  ride  to  the  nearest  large
hotel and left him there. One of his platinum cards did the rest.
Locked in his room, he stripped and  went straight in the shower.  Hot  water this
time, but still soaping and scrubbing every inch of his skin.
For two hours.

He couldn't sleep. Paced instead. Then stared out the window at the cold lights of
the  city.  Whenever  his  eyes  closed  he  saw  the  bungalow  again,  Webb's  pathetic
remains, and the cheap, prosaic furniture coated  with blood  like a field after battle.
No battle this, but  savage butchery  such  as  he'd  never done  before  in all his time.
What  vivid  pleasure  the  beast  had  taken  in  that  feeding.  He  could  not  deny  his
enjoyment of it then, no more than his abhorrence of it now.
But  that  wasn't  the  worst.  The  worst  was  the  difficulty  he'd  experienced
attempting  to  push  the  beast  back,  of  trying  to  return  to  his  human  self.  For  a
hideous  time it felt like he would never return,  not  because  he  didn't  want  to,  but
because he couldn't. And when, with a massive effort of will he did return, it was to
squat cowering and shaking in a corner of the room for all the world like a rabid dog.
Very apt, that, for a descendent of a Hound of Annwyn.
And soon, much too soon, he would grow hungry again.
He could kill again and not be lucky enough to get away with it.
There  were  ways  around  the  risk.  With  his  money  and  contacts  he  could  buy
blood, as much as he needed. That would spare  him the necessity  of  letting go,  of
letting the beast free, but it would not solve his central problem. No, he had to  deal
with it before his next feeding, and his heart told him who best to help him.
Sabra would know what was wrong. She always did.
He wanted to call her, but a few years ago she'd moved to a very isolated part of
Vancouver and hadn't bothered putting in a phone line.
"When you  want to  talk,  come  see  me,"  she'd  said,  what  she  always  told  him
when  the  necessities  of  living  caused  them  to  separate  for  any  length  of  time.
Whenever  he'd  been  troubled  during  his  centuries  of  existence  he  had  invariably
gone to her, and  she,  with sublime wisdom,  had  always calmed him and  explained
all. How he loved her still and needed her. How he wanted to be with her now.
Do you hear my troubled heart, Lady?
Probably so. Her Gift had always been very finely focused on him no matter how
many miles lay between them. Perhaps when he arrived in her private corner  of  the
world she'd be right there to greet him and lift away his burden of fear with her smile
alone. Just the thought of her was enough to give him hope and comfort. And finally,
when the night was nearly over and the eastern sky paled from black to deep blue he
drew the light-proof drapes and fell into restless sleep.
Two long days. Two, before the forces of law and order finally let him go.
He  arranged  to  read  the  other  official  reports  of  the  incident,  overheard  the
gossip, the speculations; all that mattered was that they did believe his story. No one
stopped  him  when  he  canceled  his  many  business  appointments  and  booked  a
first-class  seat  on  the  next  flight  to  Vancouver.  He'd  narrowly  escaped  a  horrible
death, after all, who could blame him for wanting to take some time off?
Now, if he could just get through the damned traffic.

He eased the Jaguar into gear as the line began to move and marveled as whatever
obstruction  ahead  suddenly  vanished,  and  all  vehicles  immediately  went  into  high
gear in their breakneck race to see who would reach the next lineup first. He slipped
into the passing lane and pushed gently through the gears until the car purred along at
an effortless seventy-five miles an hour,  leaving everything else in its wake. He had
less than an hour to make the flight and no intention of missing it.
Fifteen minutes later he slid the Jaguar into a parking space  at Pearson,  got  out,
took  his  carry-on  from  the  trunk,  locked  everything,  and  made  his  way  to  the
terminal. He had forty minutes before takeoff. His boarding pass was in order; now
came the anticlimax of waiting to be called. He wandered  to  the passengers'  lounge
and sat in an armchair facing the window. Thick clouds today, thank goodness. One
less thing to worry about, though his gloves and hat were along if he wanted them, as
was a bottle  of  maximum strength sunblock  lotion. His success  with the stuff  was
limited, but it was better than nothing at all.
Richard watched the great jets lumbering down  the runway before—magically, it
seemed,  defying  all  the  laws  of  nature—they  slowly  took  leave  of  the  earth  and
soared into the sky. He understood the general scientific principles behind powered
flight, but it still held more than a hint of  the miraculous for  him to  see  one  of  the
heavy silver birds actually make it into the sky and stay there.
A voice cut into his reverie, announcing it was  time for  first-class  passengers  to
board. He collected his bag and left for the gate.
A window seat. He could close the shade down if the light got too much for him.
Once  settled  in, he  concentrated  his  attention  on  something,  anything,  outside  the
window so he wouldn't have to look at the passengers heading back to the economy
section.  He  always  felt  a  twinge  of  guilt  about  traveling  first  class,  and  actually
catching the eye of  anyone not  also  enjoying his level of  luxury added  to  it, so  he
looked away. Then the hatch  was  sealed  and  suddenly  they were moving from  the
terminal  building  on  the  first  faltering  steps  of  their  journey.  His  sweating  hands
tightened on the padded chair arms.
He hated flying.
The plane taxied out,  dipping rhythmically like a bus  with bad  springs,  and  was
soon at the end of the main runway, turning, ready  for  takeoff.  This  was  the worst
moment of  all for  Richard,  being poised  and  waiting, he was  never sure  what  for.
Perhaps it was all show for the tourists to give them a bit of  suspense—that  or  the
airlines had a hidden streak  of  sadism  for  pale-faced  passengers  like himself. Then
he heard  the rise in pitch  of  the  engines  and  felt  the  growing  pressure  against  his
chest  as  the plane lumbered forward  and  began  its  terrifying  struggle  for  freedom
from the ground. It bounced and swung, centering, gathering speed.
God, how I hate flying.
He reminded himself that airplanes were after all, made to  fly, not  travel at  high
speed  along the ground,  so  the bumping and  swaying, unnerving  as  it  was,  meant
nothing.

Really, really hate it.
He had from the very first time he'd tried it ninety years  ago.  Once  up  it was  all
right, but the effort of getting there and back again never failed to terrify, though he
well knew nothing permanent could happen to him if anything went wrong.
That still did little to ease his fears, especially a few decades later when he'd gone
down  in  an  air  crash.  Sometimes  in  dreams  he  could  still  hear  the  screams  and
prayers of the doomed passengers as the stricken plane plunged toward the ground.
What stayed with him, stark cold in his memory, were the faces,  the panicked  eyes
of the stewardesses  as  they tried to  calmly put  the quite ineffective crash  drill into
effect. One, he remembered, had been silently crying the whole time.
Richard  himself  had  sat  frozen,  gripping  the  arms  of  his  seat,  white-knuckled,
waiting for the pain. He discovered long ago that his agelessness came with a price.
Every injury he suffered  hurt him as  much as  if he'd  been  a normal man. The  first
time a sword blade ran him through after his change had been surprising agony.  He
could  not  then imagine what the  aftermath  of  a  plane  crash  was  going  to  be  until
seconds later it hit the ground and utterly obliterated the lives and hopes and dreams
of every person on board save one.  He'd  lain, body  smashed,  for  what seemed  an
eternity  of  agony,  wishing  that  he  could  die,  until  his  body  finally  mended  itself
enough  to  move,  and  he  was  able  to  stagger  away  into  the  darkness  before  the
arriving search parties found him feeding, by necessity, off the dead. Not something
he was proud of, but better them than some hapless rescuer.
He'd  tried  his  best  to  avoid  air  travel  ever  since.  However,  as  the  century
progressed  and  aircraft became  more  and  more  indispensable  in  this  speeded  up,
impatient age, he was often forced to use them.
But the fear never left him. And never would.
Faster and faster the plane went, and just as Richard had decided this was it, they
weren't going to  make it this time, the nose  lifted  and  the  ground  swooped  away.
Trying  to  control  his  breathing,  Richard  went  through  his  usual  takeoff  routine,
counting slowly up  to  sixty. Someone  had  once  told  him during a stopover  that if
something  happened  within  sixty  seconds  of  leaving  the  ground,  there  was  no
chance of doing anything to avoid the catastrophe. So every takeoff he counted the
requisite number and then felt marginally better.
Ritual complete. They hadn't crashed.
He gradually allowed himself to  become  convinced  that they were safe  after all.
For the moment. Until they landed.
He pulled down the window shade,  accepted  the attendant's  offer  of  pillow and
blanket,  and  told  her  that  he  would  not  need  the  in-flight  meal  or  any  other
refreshment. Then he turned  to  the window and  closed  his eyes,  but  not  to  sleep.
He'd already had a bad dream about Webb; he didn't want to tempt his inner mind to
more. Instead, he did his best to think about Sabra, and that cache of sweet memory
helped as it always did.
Several hours  later, in the gathering dusk,  the majestic  bird  dipped  its  wings  to

begin a stately descent into Vancouver. Richard cautiously pulled up  the shade  and
looked at the scene below. The seemingly infinite mountain ranges had finally ended
and the plane had  unerringly found  its way to  the Fraser  River valley, following its
sweep toward the Pacific. The lights of the city twinkled below him, and towering in
the  distance  to  the  south  was  Mount  Baker,  flushed  pink  by  the  last  rays  of  the
setting sun. As the plane turned northward on its final descent the sun slipped below
the horizon, picking out the Gulf Islands and the comfortable rectangularity of Point
Roberts in a final act of defiance. Then the plane sank  into the gathering night, and
amid the screech  of  tires and  the roar  of  reverse  thrust,  landed,  managing  to  stop
before the runway gave out, turning gracefully for the terminal.
Safe again. He'd cheated the odds again. He surreptitiously dried his damp hands
on the blanket. God, how he hated flying.
 
His travel arrangements necessitated an overnight stay.  It couldn't  be  helped; the
smaller  airline  he'd  booked  with  had  not  been  interested  in  changing  its  regular
running schedule  no  matter how much extra he was  willing to  pay.  There  were  no
other flights to  the area. Tomorrow  evening he would be  hungry  again  and  with  it
was the potential of losing control once more. The worry chafed him all the way out
of the terminal.
He collected his second Jaguar from the long-term parking garage and headed for
downtown and his favorite hotel. A large and modern structure, Richard liked it not
so much because of its facilities, of which there were many, but because no one ever
asked  any questions  of  the reclusive guest  who preferred  his  curtains  shut  all  day
and never called for  room  service.  Discretion was  the  staff's  watchword,  and  this
endeared the hotel to him; in turn, he was endeared to the staff by the immense tips
he left. All in all it was a very satisfactory situation.
He checked in, had  someone  take his carry-on  up  to  the room,  but  remained in
the lobby,  knowing himself to  be  too  restless  to  settle  in  for  the  night.  Unlike  the
ephemeral people around him, he could not simply take a sleeping pill and  wait for
its chemicals to knock him out. If he could, he would, and save himself a few more
hours of useless vexation.
Not to mention hunger.
It was there, the faint beginnings of it, anyway. The beast stirring in its cage.
He  left  the  hotel  for  a  walk  around  the  block.  He  needed  distraction  and  the
exercise. The damp night air, even tainted with the day's exhaust fumes, felt good on
his skin and in his lungs. At least it was alive and free, not that recycled stuff aboard
the plane.
Perhaps… if he fed the beast before it fully wakened.
He'd already taken the measure of the area in one glance and judged it safe enough
for hunting. After all this time such assessments were automatic to him. There  were
people about, but not too many, and convenient unlighted alleys for the few minutes
it would take to accomplish. But did he dare make the attempt?

He remembered the slamming spray of blood from the severed artery striking his
face,  again felt the last futile struggles of  Webb's  body  trying  to  hold  onto  life  as
Richard tore into him far worse than any animal. Worse, for animals know when to
stop.  The  one  dwelling  within  him  had  not,  and  its  wanton  brutality  appalled
him—now. He was sane—now. In control of himself. But for how long?
Richard watched several women going past, released from  their downtown  jobs,
some hurrying to their car  or  bus  ride home,  others  walking more slowly, catching
his eye. It would be easy enough to find someone…
The old  cautions  and  practicalities,  the  sensible  warnings  against  undue  danger
flooded his mind. Yes, he might be able to retain control as before; he wasn't in dire
need  just  yet,  perhaps  not  nearly  to  the  point  of  putting  the  life  of  a  stranger  at
hazard.
But you can't afford another Niagara Horror here, my lad, he told himself.
He would wait. Had to wait.
Firmly turning away from the temptations passing him, all unaware of the presence
of a predator, he went back to the hotel, this time going straight up to his room.
 
He awoke just before  checkout  at noon,  left his customary  gratuity on  the night
table and left, then it was a quick drive across the Burrard Street Bridge, onto  Oak,
and west  to  the  airport.  The  day  was  one  typical  to  the  West  Coast;  good  solid
clouds and the threat of rain. Richard was glad, for it meant that he did not have to
worry overmuch about cover. No wonder Sabra loved it here.
He'd dressed for  the wilderness,  jeans and  sturdy  walking boots,  a flannel shirt,
sheepskin coat, and a black western-style hat. Sabra had very much liked the hat the
last time he'd seen her and teased him about being a cowboy. He'd promptly asked if
she might enjoy having a ride and then they'd—
Someone honked when he started to stray into the next lane. Well, as pleasant as
those particular thoughts  were, he'd  have to  think about  them later or  risk crashing
the car. He parked his Jag once more in its regular spot and went to claim his ticket
for Port Hardy.
He'd already long ascertained it was impossible to drive to Kingcome. Typical of
Sabra, he thought; when she decided that she wanted to get away from it all, she got.
She'd written to him about it in full, giving him detailed instructions on how to get to
her  cabin.  Kingcome  was  a  small  native  community  on  the  coast  north  of
Vancouver, and only accessible  by  boat  from  Vancouver  Island.  Consequently,  he
had to fly yet again, this time in a petite prop job. He was sure it would prove  even
more harrowing than the flight from  Toronto,  but  was  wrong,  however.  This  time
there was no sweaty conviction mat the plane would never take off; instead, he was
amazed at how easily this light bird flew and how surprisingly pleasant it was  to  be
so close to the ground for the whole trip. Things had changed much for small craft
in the last nine decades. Compared to his very first flight, and  especially compared
to  the  larger  plane  of  the  previous  day,  this  was  more  like  a  carnival  ride  than

anything else. He  almost  found  himself  enjoying  it.  But  only  almost.  They  landed
without mishap at Port Hardy, and Richard found himself at a tiny airstrip, suddenly
quite alone.
Afternoon  was  beginning its slow  descent  into evening as  Richard  strode  along
the dirt road toward Black Point where the local mail-cum-ferry boat sat. As soon as
he left all sign of habitation behind, he gradually increased his pace until he was little
more than a blur. This was one of the advantages  of  his vampire state  that he truly
loved; the ability to move at incredible speed.
Like flying, he thought. The way people should fly.
This was not flight, but it came a close and much better second as far as Richard
was concerned. The  rush  of  wind in his face  and  the pure  effortless  speed  always
gave him a deep and genuine pleasure. Rarely these days did he have the chance  to
stretch himself like this. He was quite disappointed when the first houses of the tiny
settlement came quickly into view. Their presence  forced  him to  slow  to  a  regular
human pace, but  slow  he must  until fully out  of  their sight Sabra's  training and  his
own past experience had taught him well. Discovery was not an option.
He'd arrived only just in time. The large silver-gray aluminum boat that carried the
mail and various other supplies to the island was ready to cast off from the dock. He
hurried forward—not  too  fast—calling for  them to  wait One  of  the men paused  at
his work with a rope and waved him to  come  aboard.  Richard  leaped  on,  steadied
himself and found a place to sit and put down his bag. Someone came by to collect
the tare, but after that he had nothing to do but wonder how deep the water was.
Planes  he  hated,  but  boats  he  merely  detested,  and  only  because  of  their
proximity  to  free-flowing  water.  He  concentrated  on  that  unpleasantness  for  a
moment, instead of his empty belly, for the hunger was growing. He would have to
deal with it tonight, but barring additional delays, he would soon be safe with Sabra.
The  power  of  her  Goddess  that  had  granted  him  this  kind  of  life  and  had  ever
protected him would now help him again. It had to.
From his carry-on he drew out the letter Sabra had sent when she'd first moved to
this place. She'd needed isolation, she said. She wanted time away from modern life
so as to touch the land again, to be closer to her beloved Goddess. Apparently she'd
found it here. He leafed through the fragile pages covered with the strong flow of her
handwriting.
"The  mountains  hover  around  me  in  never  ending  shades  of  gray  in  the
morning light, and clouds mingle with river mist around them, like laurel wreaths
about  the  crowns  of  champions.  The  river  teems  with  fish,  and  the  forest  that
presses in on all  sides  is full  of game;  black  tail  deer,  moose,  the  mighty  grizzly,
and  soaring  above,  watchful  guardian  over  all,  the  bald  eagle  rides  the  air
currents effortlessly, seemingly eternal.
"Kingcome  Inlet  itself  is  a  tiny  speck  on  the  face  of  the  world.  It  gained  its
strange  name  from  a  rash  tie told  by  the  government  agent  who  first  persuaded
the local native band to give up their ancestral lands  and  move to the  unfriendly

strip along  the  river.  He  assured  the  chief  that  if  they  moved,  the  English  king
would surely come and visit them to thank  them,  such  was  their  importance.  The
poor natives  believed  the  lie and  moved  without  complaint  and  wait  still  for  the
visit of the king."
Not  unlike  Britain  waiting  for  Arthur's  return  in  the  time  of  her  greatest  need.
There was a better chance of that happening than for the current monarch to drop in
here. As the boat brought Richard closer into the river estuary, he could well believe
that only a lie of such magnitude could persuade anyone to live in such  a desperate
hole.
"Though  surrounded  by  beauty,  the  settlement  itself  is  an  awful  spot.
Ramshackle  wooden  cabins  in  a  variety  of odd  colors line  the  river. There  is  no
doctor, no  store, nothing.  Strings  of raggedy  laundry  flutter  in  the  damp  breeze,
children run along the bank,  chasing  homemade  toy boats,  and  men  putter  with
aged  outboards,  convinced  that  the  right  degree  of  persistency  will  solve  any
problem."
That  the  actions  of  a  supposedly  benevolent  government  could  reduce  such  a
proud people to this squalor disgusted Richard. He huddled closer  into his coat  as
he stepped  off  the boat  onto  the dock.  He paused,  unsure of  his  direction.  Sabra
told him to  take the path  into the woods  from  the settlements lodge  house,  but  he
didn't know where it was. No one looked at him, or spoke, which he thought odd. In
such  isolation  the  presence  of  a  stranger  should  have  inspired  some  germ  of
curiosity. Same country, different culture, he thought. Finally, he approached a man
hunched over some nondescript piece of rusty machinery.
"Excuse me."
The man neither looked up nor stopped whatever task it was that involved him.
"Excuse  me,  my  friend,"  Richard  reached  down  and  touched  him  on  the
shoulder. "Can you help me?"
The man stopped dead still, then slowly looked up. Even as he saw Richard dark
against the sky, his eyes widened with… what? Surprise, fear, expectation? All three
perhaps? He began to tremble violently and mumbled something in his native tongue.
He repeated it again, loud enough for others around them to hear.
His reaction startled Richard. Like certain animals, some people were sensitive to
him, to  what he was,  but  he'd  not  seen  anything like this for  a very  long  time.  He
decided to bluff it out and ignore it. "I am looking for a woman named Sabra."
Immediately the man lurched to his feet, wrested free of Richards hand, and  ran,
disappearing between  the  houses.  Alarmed,  Richard  looked  around,  but  everyone
else had also apparently vanished. Damnation, what was going on?
Having no  better  course  to  take, he followed where the man had  gone,  taking a
well-worn  path  leading  away  from  the  village  into  the  trees.  He  soon  came  to  a
clearing, in the center of which was the lodge.  It was  in good  repair and  decorated
with  native  signs  he  did  not  recognize.  More  attention  had  been  lavished  on  this
building than the others, the result of community rather than individual effort. Boldly

carved totem poles stood about like guardians, reminding him of the ancient standing
stones of England with their hidden meanings and innate power. Sabra had described
it  all  in  her  letter  and  had  written  also  of  the  old  shaman  who  resided  over  the
spiritual  needs  of  the  people  from  this  place.  He  and  his  daughter  had  quite
impressed her, it seemed.
Richard  started  to  cross  the clearing—the path  to  Sabra's  cabin  lay  somewhere
beyond  it—and  stopped  midway.  Out  of  the  lodge  stepped  an  old  man,  upright,
resplendent in buckskin, carrying an ornately carved staff,  and  wearing a headdress
of eagle feathers. Richard knew this must be Black Eagle, the shaman of the village.
The  man  paused  for  a  long  moment,  staring  across  the  clearing  at  Richard,  then
purposefully marched forward until they were only a pace or two apart.
"We welcome you, dark spirit," the old man finally said.
Nonplused by this greeting, Richard recovered and smiled at him. "I am no spirit,
simply a man come to find a friend of mine."
"We know who you are, dark spirit, and why you are here. Your coming has been
known to us for many months."
Richard was about to lie to cover himself, when it came to him that these people
did indeed know about him—everything about him. "You know what I am?"
The  shaman  nodded.  That  explained  the  first  fellow's  startled  reaction.  Good
God, had Sabra brought them all into her circle?
"And the woman I seek?"
"The  great mother of  the night who lives alone. Yes,  we know that you  are  the
dark  mother's  honored  consort  and  the  son  of  her  blood.  Come."  Black  Eagle
turned and headed back toward the lodge.
Richard  had  lived  long  enough  and  seen  enough  to  know  that  to  question  the
wishes  of  a  shaman  was  an  invitation  to  trouble.  Besides,  the  dim  interior  of  the
lodge would provide him with a welcome respite from the light. Though the day had
been cloudy it still pressed hard upon  him, bright enough to  be  uncomfortable  and
exhausting.
Inside the lodge, all was cool semi-shadow and quiet. A fire, bounded by  rocks,
smoldered gently in the center of the dirt floor, its smoke drifting up to a hole in the
roof. The pungent, wholesome smell of burning sage and sweetgrass hung heavy in
the  air.  The  shaman  sat  cross-legged  on  a  blanket  on  the  floor  near  the  fire  and
Richard  accepted  the unspoken  invitation to  sit across  from  him. Black Eagle lit  a
pipe from a glowing taper and for the longest time nothing was  said.  All that could
be heard was the gentle crackle of burning wood, and the dry sucking sound of the
old man smoking.
Richard  wanted to  speak,  to  ask  questions,  but  quelled the impulse.  There  was
magic here, he sensed that much, and it would not be rushed.
Black  Eagle's  mouth  thinned  slightly.  Perhaps  that  was  his  version  of  an
approving smile, for he offered  the pipe  to  Richard.  He accepted  it with reverence

and drew on it deeply, inhaling the heady, sweet-smelling smoke. It was not ordinary
tobacco; Richard  could  not  tell what else it was,  only that it did  him no  harm and
was offered in peace and friendship.
He inhaled again and understood at least one of the meanings behind the shaman's
actions.  Richard  had  just come  from  an age of  rushing  speed  and  disquietude,  of
cruelty and indifference. Now he'd suddenly stepped into a pocket of serenity from
another century and needed to get used to the change. The flow of life ran differently
here where the shortest unit to measure time was the length of a day.
The shade, the silence, and the smoke granted an unexpected ease to the burdens
on his soul. He closed his eyes, content to feel the heat of the fire upon his face and
gradually came to realize that for now, in this place, his hunger slept.
Some  while later Black Eagle held a braid  of  sweetgrass  over  the fire. It caught
briefly, then went out, being unable to burn. He held the smoking braid in one  hand
and  chanted  for  awhile  in  his  own  language.  The  words  were  meaningless  to
Richard, but their rhythm was as soothing as a lullaby.
"I have asked the clouds to shelter you for the last steps of your journey," Black
Eagle told him when he'd finished.
Richard wasn't sure what reply to make to him and settled on a polite one. "Thank
you. That is very kind."
"The  mother who lives alone  came  to  us  years  ago.  She  needed  rest  from  her
good work and honored us with her presence. We have protected her and respected
her wishes ever since."
The old man paused, looking deep into Richard's eyes. "I had a vision of her that
told me her consort-son would come  soon  to  find her. The  vision told  me to  help
him, and I will obey the dark mother."
"I thank you," said Richard, "I have not spoken to her for many years,  and  now
my need to see her is great."
The old  man looked  into the fire. "Yes,  she  can  help you.  Maybe.  But  for  her,
help is too late. She is returning to the earth."
A fist closed over Richard's heart and squeezed. "What do you mean?"
But the old  man stood  abruptly and  went to  the door.  "Someone  waits  outside
now to  guide you  to  the  mother's  house.  You  will  be  safe.  The  sun  is  hiding  his
face."
"What do you mean she's returning to the earth?"
"It is her place to tell you, spirit, not mine. Come."
Richard  remained  sitting,  staring  after  him.  Returning  to  the  earth?  Had  Sabra
been injured in some way? He knew well that vampires could not simply die. Could
they?
He went to the door. Black Eagle stood in the clearing at the center  of  the totem
poles, looking down  the trail into the woods.  Silhouetted gray against the black  of

the  trees  was  a  shapeless  figure  shrouded  in  a  long  blanket.  His  guide,  Richard
thought. He shouldered his bag, walked over to Black Eagle, and they waited for the
guide to join them.
A woman, he discovered when she got close enough. Black hair and eyes, dusky
skin, native features strong in the fine bones of her face. The shaman said something
to her in their language. She  briefly lowered her head  and  pulled  the  blanket  more
tightly about her body.
"This is She-Who-Walks, my daughter. She will guide you, help you  in any way
she can."
"Very pleased to meet you," said Richard.
She made no reply.
Black Eagle turned to leave, but paused, his lips drawn thin again. "Good-looking
woman, huh?" He raised an arm and with his fist lightly thumped Richard's shoulder
twice in a friendly manner, then continued back to  the lodge.  He could  not  be  sure
because of the rustle of the wind, but the old man seemed to be softly chuckling to
himself.
Then  She-Who-Walks  stepped  forward  and  claimed  Richard's  complete
attention. She  looked  calmly  up  into  his  eyes.  Her  midnight  gaze  seemed  to  burn
right through him, seeing deep  into the darkest  recesses  of  his soul.  He  could  not
turn from her scrutiny, did not want to; was this what it was like when he pressed his
own power upon others? He finally could stand  no  more and  looked  away. He felt
suddenly naked and ashamed of his nakedness.
Until she reached out and took his hand.
She radiated peace and power in a way that he hadn't felt since his first meeting all
those hundreds of years past with Sabra. He felt a sudden warm stirring in his blood
and in his groin.
"Come."  She  released  his  hand,  walking  quickly,  and  was  at  the  edge  of  the
clearing before he could think to react.
She moved through the forest effortlessly, threading between the trees like a cats
shadow. He followed a respectful distance  behind and  wondered  that a person  not
of the Goddess's blood could be so at one with the earth. He was sure that she was
close to Sabra, closer than any except himself.
"Yes,  I am,"  She-Who-Walks  suddenly  said,  glancing at  him.  "I  am  her  bridge
with the world outside. She has told me many things of her life, of you."
So she has  the  Gift  of Sight  as  well.  No  wonder  Sabra  chose  her. "Is  it much
farther?"
She paused, a smile playing around her mouth. "Why? Are you tired?" She didn't
wait for his answer, but slipped on through the woods.
No, he wasn't remotely tired yet, but growing restive again. The shelter and solace
he'd found in the lodge were beginning to fall away, to be replaced by impatience…

and the hunger. He hoped he could last it out. In all likelihood, he would have to feed
upon She-Who-Walks. The prospect both aroused and alarmed him.
The pale light was visibly fading, both from the pending sunset and the thickening
sky. Wind gusted about them like stray spirits and the temperature dropped. Perhaps
Black  Eagle  might  have  overdone  things  when  he'd  asked  for  cloud  cover.  They
were in for a hell of a storm to tell by the signs.
Then he felt her. Sabra. His mother was near. His lover was  near. Just  ahead of
them.  His  heart  quickened,  the  breath  catching  in  his  throat.  With  a  surge  of
unnatural strength he sped  swiftly  past  She-Who-Walks  and  burst  into  a  clearing.
There  stood  a  small  cabin,  still  and  dark.  No  smoke  rose  from  the  chimney,  no
welcoming face appeared at the window.
"Sabra! Sabra!" His voice echoed from the cathedral pines surrounding them and
was thrown back a thousand times over. But there was no other reply. She was not
there. And yet, she was. He knew it. And then the sense of her faded and was gone
like a mist in the woods, and he felt suddenly, desperately alone.
"The  dark  mother  is  not  here  now,  but  she  will  be.  We  will  wait  until  she  is
ready." She-Who-Walks moved past him and into the cabin.  As  he followed under
the symbols of the sun and the moon carved above the door and the cup sign of the
Goddess, he heard Sabra's voice as clearly as if she stood next to him.
Feed, my Richard, feed. See what I have given you.
He looked back to the pressing forest. Yes, she was  there, somewhere,  but  why
was she hiding?
"Richard!"
She-Who-Walks's voice called to him from the dark interior. He hesitated for ten
long seconds, then licked his lips and followed her inside.
It was so dark that it took a moment even for Richard's eyes to adjust. There was
little  there  to  see;  a  bed  close  to  the  fireplace  where  She-Who-Walks  was  now
preparing and lighting a blaze, a small table, and a rocking chair were all the furniture.
There were  bunches  of  herbs  hanging  from  the  ceiling  to  dry,  and  books,  many,
many books lined in neat rows along the walls. They were old, wonderful books, the
pick of the ones that Sabra had collected over her long, long time on earth, bound in
leather and cloth, and some few tooled in gold, carefully preserved and loved.
The  fire  caught,  and  the  flames  threw  wanton  shadows  everywhere.  Richard
picked  up  the  text  lying  open  on  the  table.  It  was  an  old  reprint,  a  collection  of
Chretien  de  Troyes'  wildly  fanciful  romances.  He  hadn't  thought  of  the  fellow  in
decades. Not one of his favorite people, not after that ridiculous business de Troyes
had put into his Lancelot. None of it was true nor even much his own work; the silly
bugger had stolen from past writers or made it all up to flatter his current patron, and
no amount of argument could persuade him to change things.
Richard recognized other books about Arthur and the Grail Quest, as it was now
called, on the table: the Vulgate Cycle, Robert de Baron's Joseph d' Arimathie, von

Eschenbach's version of de Troyes'  Perceval, and  a scattering of  others,  including
that latecomer, Malory. Despite its many inaccuracies it was Sabra's favorite account
of what had been living experience for them and mere legend to all others since.
"She  loves  that  book,"  said  She-Who-Walks.  "I've  seen  her  reading  it  many
times, though she says that it is all wrong. I don't know why." Richard knew.
The  fire  smelled  sweetly  of  apple  wood  and  quickly  warmed  the  cabin.
She-Who-Walks now took the blanket from around herself and put it on the bed. He
fairly  gaped  at  the  exquisite  buckskin  dress  she  wore.  Covered  with  beads  and
fringe,  he  grasped  that  something  such  as  this  was  meant  only  for  very  special
ceremonial occasions.
"The  mother  told  me  what  you  would  need,"  said  She-Who-Walks,  standing
unnervingly close. He could smell the scent of crushed flowers in her shining hair. "I
know what must be done, and I am here for you."
Richard felt the hunger's gnawing at his insides. It had been a full three days since
he last fed, and its keen edge was  painful; he'd  not  felt it so  sharply since  the very
first time it had taken him. If he did not attend it, the cramps  would take him, drive
him mad again. "Most people would run from me now. Run for their lives and their
souls."
"My  soul  is  safe,"  she  replied  with  disarming  conviction.  "I  am  loved  by  the
mother and her Goddess. She will let no harm befall me."
Well, that was some reassurance. "Then I will take only what I need from you."
You must do more than that, my Richard.
He shivered at Sabra's touch in his mind. So close, so far. "Did you hear?"
She nodded. "Do what she asks of you."
"And what is it she asks?"
"Don't you know?"
"I haven't the Gift of Sight. Tell me."
Her dark eyes  glittered. "You  are to  make me like you.  Take  all that I have and
make me as you are, as she is."
Richard  couldn't  speak  for  a  moment.  He'd  bedded  countless  women,  nearly
always feeding from them while at the height of passion, but never in all his time had
he made another like himself. The  idea disturbed,  even frightened him. "Why?"  he
whispered, hardly loud enough to be heard.
"Because it is her wish. Is that not reason enough?"
"I don't understand."
"You will. She will tell you."
"She's not asked this of me ever before. Why now?"
"Because it is the right time. Do you know what day this is?"

He thought a moment  before  the  right  answer  came.  "Good  God.  It's  Beltane,
isn't it?"
"The holiest of days. The day of creation.  The  time has  at last come  for  you to
create. This is what the dark mother has told me. Are you going to grant her wish, or
should we walk back to the village?"
Richard… please.
He'd never once refused Sabra in the past. He wouldn't begin now, but he had to
at least warn this young woman. There's a danger from me you don't know of—"
"Is it about  the man you  killed?" She-Who-Walks  smiled at his discomfiture.  "I
saw it on your soul earlier. There is no danger for me. You will be all right with me if
you really want to  be.  What happened  to  you  then was  brought  on  by  your  anger
and pain. Such things are not in you tonight. Are they?"
Richard  lifted his hand  to  touch  her face  then  let  his  fingers  comb  through  the
thick black hair that fell over her shoulders. "No, they're not," he murmured. He bent
and kissed her, lightly. Her mouth was soft, warm and giving. "You're utterly certain
of this? In your own heart, you're sure?"
She smiled  again.  There  was  a  familiar  fire  deep  in  her  eyes,  daring  him,  even
mocking him. He'd seen it before in Sabra.
Answer enough.
This time he kissed She-Who-Walks hard and long and felt her firm strength melt
into his, her body take the shape of his, almost become his. She pulled away after a
moment,  smiling,  gently  biting  her  lower  lip.  Standing  by  the  bed,  she  undid  the
buckskin cord that served as a belt around her dress, and in a swift movement pulled
it over her head. Naked in the firelight, she let it slip to the floor. The flames seemed
to caress  the velvet  smooth  contours  of  her  brown  body,  deepening  its  shadows
with their shifting light. She raised her arms high.
"See,  see  what the Goddess  has  prepared  for  you."  And she  lay back  atop  the
blanket, waiting for him.
For  a moment,  he stood  motionless,  as  if  to  test  how  long  he  could  resist  his
nature  and  his  need.  He  could  feel  the  uncontrollable  building  within,  could  feel
himself  changing  from  the  inside  out.  The  wind  howled  beyond  the  cabin's  thick
walls, and rain pounded on the roof. His own heartbeat thundered in his ears as if to
match the drumming in the sky.
He stood  over  her, finally reaching down  to  touch  her,  to  rest  his  hand  on  the
silken flesh of her inner thighs. His fingers moved upward in a slow caress as far as
they could go. She was, indeed, ready for him. More than ready. As he was himself.
Unable to resist further, he surrendered fully to her. He was with her, on her, her
hands and his tearing at his clothes, mouths  open,  kissing, biting, tasting, both  in a
fever of need. She reached down and grasped his hardness in her hands, then took it
quickly within herself, gasping at his entry, moaning, hanging on to him with legs and
hands and nails. And he was  pushing,  thrusting, beyond  control,  fully immersed in

his true form.  Fangs  enlarged, eyes  red,  a great roar  escaped  him as  he  raised  his
head to strike. She turned her face to one side, crying out in her own ecstasy, and he
took her, fangs buried deep in her neck,  sucking hard,  greedy in his want, spurting
his  seed  into  her  as  he  drank.  Her  blood  gushed  into  him,  giving  him  life,
nourishment, satiation in every sense. She held his head against her as he fed.
"I have done as you asked, dark mother," she whispered.
And  Richard  was  suddenly  aware,  through  the  passion  and  the  bloodlust,  that
Sabra was there, watching as he fed. He lifted away, blood dripping from his mouth
onto  the  naked  woman's  belly,  onto  her  breasts,  and  there  through  the  window,
outside  in the shrieking wind  and  rain,  he  saw  his  mothers  eyes,  his  lover's  eyes,
glowing bright from their own inner flame. That was all he recognized,  though.  The
rest… her face… her body…
It's a distortion made by water on the window. It must be.
Lightning flashed close by, blinding him, leaving behind a nightmare afterimage of
a small figure, vaguely human in shape, but there the similarity stopped.
It has to be…
He stared hard, trying to  see  detail, but  caught only a blur of  movement against
the trees.  A great howling scream  rent the air, overwhelming the ferocity  of  nature
itself, and the gleam of her eyes disappeared into the darkness of the storm.
Richard pushed himself up from She-Who-Walks and stumbled to the door.
"You cannot leave yet, your task is not complete," she cried weakly from the bed.
"You must complete the making. The  mother told  me. I am to  be  the new mother.
She has prepared me in all the ways. All that is left is to make me as you. You must,
for her sake."
"What  has  happened  to  her?"  He  opened  the  door.  Icy  rain  slapped  him,  as
though to force him back. He could see nothing. "Tell me!"
"She is returning to the earth. It is the way, there is nothing to  be  done.  Yet the
work of the Goddess must go on."
"That's ridiculous. We cannot die. We're immortal."
"The mother knows, and she told me. It will happen. It is happening. There is no
other way."
He  slammed  the  door  against  the  wild  night  and  fumbled  for  his  clothes.  "I'm
going to her."
"You won't find her. She has willed it to  be  this way."  She-Who-Walks  reached
out, her featherlight touch enough to stay him. Her fingers were as chill and fragile as
glass. "After the making, she will come to you. Only after the making."
Looking at her, Richard knew in his soul that what she said was  true. Something
was very wrong here, wrong with Sabra, but there was nothing he could do about it,
not until the time was right. The fist tightened around his heart again, as unyielding as
iron.

"Do not fear for her, Richard."
"I can't help it." He reluctantly went back to the bed, climbing in next to  her. He
started to look out the window, but she pulled his head down and kissed him, licking
her own still wet blood from his lips.
"Take me. Make me. Give me your life."
He held her close, feeling more sad than he could ever recall.
"You must finish the making."
If this was what Sabra wanted, then this was what he would do even if he did not
know why. He was sworn to her.
He  tried  to  resume  what  they'd  begun,  but  felt  cold,  dazed.  She-Who-Walks
rolled on  top  of  him,  taking  the  lead  in  things.  Her  movements  were  slower,  less
frenzied than before, but she continued to  kiss  and  caress  him until desire  came to
take  the  place  of  fear.  She  pulled  him  upright,  pressing  his  face  against  her
bloodstained breasts, coaxing him to kiss them clean.
It took a little time, but mutual need gradually overtook them. She sank onto him,
sighing as he entered her, and wrapped her legs tight around his back.
Once  more,  Richard  buried  his  fangs  in  her  sweet  neck,  more  softly  this  time,
feeding steadily, intent now to take all her life into himself as he rocked her back and
forth. She moaned and shuddered as each wave of  pleasure he gave rolled through
her body.
Her arms  went slack,  eventually falling away, and  he had  to  completely support
her.
Her breaths came short and shallow. She had to fight for them.
And still he fed. He had to.
Her heart fluttered, straining hard to pump what little remained.
He worked  his  teeth,  cutting  deep  into  her  flesh.  She  made  a  last  faint  sighing
moan as a final burst of crimson flooded his mouth, then the flow ceased.
When he eased her body gently down, it was not her blood that dripped onto her
face, but his tears.
Richard spent the night squatted in a corner of the cabin, listening to every sound,
watching. He watched  She-Who-Walks  in her deathly sleep,  and  he  watched,  too,
for Sabra, but she did not come. The Beltane fire died to feathery gray ash, and the
blackness, both without and within his soul, was complete.
 
Morning crept  slowly  into  the  cabin.  Richard  stretched  and  stood,  rubbing  his
gritty eyes, and opened the door for one last look. If Sabra had  not  come  by  now,
she  would  not  for  the  duration  of  the  day.  Soon  he  would  lie  next  to
She-Who-Walks again and sleep himself until her awakening at dusk.
The sky seemed washed clean. The wind and rain had died with the dawn, and a

great stillness held the forest. In the trees a deer stepped gently across the deadening
carpet  of  pine  needles,  utterly  silent  on  its  meanderings.  The  sun  shone  this  day,
though it made little difference this deep in the trees.
Sabra was in trouble. His original reason for coming was unimportant next to that
fact.  He needed  to  see  her, to  help her, but  how could  he if  she  would  not  show
herself? He studied the surrounding forest, no longer comfortable with its closeness
and depth, seeing it now as a threat and obstacle.
What to do?
"Richard."
The deer bolted suddenly, tail flicking upright in alarm, and Richard turned to the
voice, the voice that he knew so  well. Only she  could  have come  this near without
his hearing.
"Sabra."
Though barefoot and wrapped in a old blanket she was as beautiful and elegant as
on that first night in his tent at Orleans, smiling, radiant.
I knew you would come.
"How could I do otherwise?"
She  all  but  flew  to  him  and  his  waiting  embrace.  He  held  her  hard  and  tight,
wanting to hold her forever. Impossible, of course, but he did  make it last until the
knot in his throat softened and he could speak again.
"Tell me what is going on. I must know."
"Yes, my love. But inside. The sun."
He lifted her, sweeping her into the cabin  and  closing the door  against the fight.
She clung to him a moment, then he reluctantly set her down. The blanket had pulled
away  from  her  and  he  saw  with  no  small  shock  that  she  was  naked  beneath  its
tattered cover.
"Sabra, what is this about? Why are you—"
But  she  held  one  hand  up  to  hush  him,  for  all  her  attention  was  on
She-Who-Walks. "She is beautiful, is she not? Did you complete it?"
"When she awakens, she will be like us. You aren't angry, are you?"
"It is as I wished."
"Why do I feel shame, then, as if I have betrayed you in some way?"
"Do not feel so, sweet Richard. She was my gift to you, given out of love."
"But I saw you at the window, looking at us." 
"I watched out of love, not anger or  jealousy."  She  looked  at him, face  glowing
with  a  smile  of  pure  childlike  joy.  "I  had  to  see  the  birth  of  my  granddaughter."
Sabra laughed, but the laughter suddenly turned to a gasp, and she doubled over.

Richard was beside her in an instant. "What is wrong? What's happening to you?"
She pushed him roughly away, her face pinched with pain, and  fell to  her knees.
The blanket dropped. Richard reached out, but the snarl that came from her stopped
him in midmovement.
"Sabra?" he whispered. Understanding flooded him. Cold  and  hollow. Oh,  dear
God, not you!
Her voice came to him, thick and heavy. "Do not come near me."
She  stayed  there  on  all  fours,  panting  for  breath,  her  back  rising  and  falling,
contracting in time to the spasms of pain spiking through her. Her hair had  become
dull  and  matted,  and  her  nails  thickened  and  curved  long  against  the  plank  floor,
scarring  and  splintering  the  wood.  Another  snarl  came  from  her,  followed  by  an
anguished cry.  Then she  was  upright,  or  at  least  as  upright  as  she  could  be,  and
lunging for the door. But Richard was as quick and caught her before she made the
threshold.
"What is happening, Sabra? What is wrong?"
He held her fast as she fought to leave, fought him with a strength near to his own,
tearing, scratching,  biting like a wild beast.  Finally,  exhausted,  she  went  slack  and
that was  when he saw  her  face  for  the  first  time.  Gone  was  the  beauty,  gone  the
elegance. The thing he held so  tenderly was  neither human nor  animal: face  coated
with hair, eyes  wild and  red,  fangs  extended.  Then with a shudder  that  racked  the
whole of her small body she changed, and the Sabra that he knew, that he loved, was
once more in his arms.
Fingers trembling, he brushed a dark  strand  from  her face  and  kissed  her brow.
"I'm right here. I'll always be here for you. Everything will be all right…"
All the sadness in the world was in her eyes as she looked at him.
"You must let me go, dear Richard, there is nothing you  can  do  for  me. This  is
my end, my natural end."
"No, you said we were ageless, that nothing could ever—"
"I never told you, my love, for I dared to hope it would not be true. Yet true it is."
"Then tell me!"
"You know it now for yourself already."
"The man I—"
"I felt your delight when you killed him, the exultation, then heard the cry of your
soul when it returned and you realized what you'd  done.  Felt your  terror.  My poor
love."
Of course she would. But what—?
"We're old, Richard, and often have we called on the power within us. Each time
we do, it becomes a little more difficult to take ourselves back to a human state. It's
subtle,  and  takes  a very long, long time, centuries before  we ever  begin  to  notice.

Then  we  reach  a  point  where  the  strength  needed  to  overcome  the  beast  within
becomes greater and greater until in the end, we cannot match it. We become a beast
of Annwyn and finally return to the earth. I can only maintain human form for a very
little time before the beast takes me again. It's worse at the full of the moon, and this
turning was  the hardest  yet. I'm  getting weaker,  soon  I  will  not  be  able  to  fight  it
anymore." She stopped, exhausted with the effort of speech.
Richard continued to hold her, frozen to the point of panic. This was Sabra, his
lover, his eternal friend, the mother of all he was, of all his world, speaking to him of
death. Her death. He could  not  dream of  an existence without her. But if what she
said was true, then he would himself have no better future.
"There must be something I can do for you. Some way to help."
"Perhaps, but I don't know if it—" She  began to  writhe once  more in his arms,
moaning in pain as the change began to seize her.
"Tell me!"
"I—I  must  drink  of  the  great  Cauldron
 of
 Cerridwen.
 What
 the
Christ-worshippers call the Grail. They searched for it to keep for themselves, to try
to smother the power of the Goddess. But I hid it from them all."
"Yes, but will it help you?"
"I don't  know,  but  I know not  what else to  do.  I cannot  travel to  it.  You  must
bring it to me and quickly. I don't think I shall survive the next turn of the moon."
"Where is it?"
"I hid it at the home of the nine sisters, the place  around  which the whole world
revolves, the entrance to Annwyn, Ynis Witrin… Avalon."
Her body shuddered from a vicious spasm, and  she  changed  once  more,  crying
pitifully like a trapped animal and struggling to get away. This time he let her go.
She  clawed  the  door  open  and  rushed  naked  out  into  the  deadly  sunlight.  It
seemed to have no effect on her, or she was beyond noticing. He had to stay inside,
shielding his eyes against the glare with one hand.
She paused at the edge of the trees, turning once to look back at him.
Find it for me, my Richard. Find it and release me from this agony.
She disappeared into the covering darkness of the forest.
 
His normal daylight sleep would not come. He had far too much to think about, to
worry over, to fear.
The stacks of books about the Grail made sense now. He flipped through each of
them,  hoping  to  add  to  his  knowledge,  hoping  to  refresh  his  memory  of  a
long-vanished age. Often he stopped to look out the windows or open the door, but
Sabra was quite gone.
Where does she sleep? How does she feed? Has she killed as well?

His desire was to immediately leave. Sun or no sun, he wanted to drop everything
and  get  started,  but  he  could  do  nothing  until  She-Who-Walks  awakened.  Had
circumstances  been  different  he  might  have  otherwise  enjoyed  the  wait,  the
anticipation, but now he fretted over the delay.
At long last you've produced an heir and yet feel only vexation. 'Tis unworthy of
you, Richard d'Orleans.
He scowled to himself and spent a little more of the endless day putting the place
in order and read from several of the books. When the evening shade crept across a
rain barrel next to the house, he ventured out to fetch water. He found a towel, wet it,
and gently cleansed the stains of his feeding from the young woman's  body,  noting
half  in  satisfaction  and  half  in  wonder  that  the  savage  wounds  he'd  made  on  her
throat in their passion were completely healed.
She stirred as he bathed her face. Her lips parted and she took her first breath of
the night, holding it, then slowly releasing it with a sigh. Her eyes opened.
He caressed her, smiling. "What do you remember?"
A pause as she thought, then her hand  closed  over  his and  she  smiled in return.
"Everything." Now she ran her hand up his arm and to the back of his neck, pulling.
He bent to kiss her. "Everything. You were good."
And he thought his ability to blush had long deserted  him. "Well, thank you.  So
were you."
"Maybe we can do it again later."
"I should like that very much. Do you hunger yet?"
"A little."
"You  should  have  a  period  of  grace  before  it  gets  really  bad.  Half  an  hour,
perhaps."
Then we'll have time to  get back  to  the  lodge.  Black  Eagle  said  he  would  wait
there for us."
Richard sobered. "Is he to be the one to…"
She must  have heard  the rest  of  his thought in her  mind.  "Our  way  is  different
from  the  time  of  your  change.  Instead  of  one  making  a  great  sacrifice  of  blood,
many will each make a little sacrifice to share in the honor."
"Your hunger may be too strong to stop once you begin. It was so for me."
"That's why you need to be there. Black Eagle is my father in life and you are now
my father in death. Between the two of you, you are to make sure I bring harm to no
one until I've had my fill. The dark mother said I'd be all right after that."
"And so you shall."
She got  up  and  supped  the buckskin  dress  over  her head,  retted  the  cord,  and
reached for the blanket, but it was liberally stained with red. She left it.
Richard put on his coat and donned his hat.

She-Who-Walks went to the mantel, opening an old metal candy box that served
as a bookend. This is for you. She said it might help."
A slip of paper, folded once. He opened and read it.
"In case your recollection falters, remember that I wrote everything down in the
Abbey Book. The last I'd heard it was still safe in that museum in Ireland. It's all
in the old tongue, of course—and in verse. I was never  very good  with  verse, but
was  mad  for it for a  time,  so please  forgive  my  faltering  efforts at  poetry.  Speed
well, but take care, and try not to worry about me. I am in good hands. 
May  the  Goddess  protect  and  guide  you,  my  love,  my  child,  my  best  of  all
friends."
She-Who-Walks read it when he passed  it to  her. "Soon  she  will not  be  able to
come back. She will be one with the earth."
"Not if I have anything to do with it," he said, once more shouldering his bag.
She crossed ahead of him to the door, but hesitated on the threshold. "It feels…
strange."
"It will for a time. You'll need to feed."
"Yes, I know. Do as she asks and try not to worry. I will care for her until she is
no longer in need  of  care.  I needed  to  be  like you  to  have the strength for  it. The
work of the Goddess will go on."
She stepped  through and  walked briskly across  the open  space  into  the  forest.
Richard looked around at the inside of the cabin one last time, drinking in as best he
could the lingering essence of the Sabra he'd known for  so  long. He picked  up  the
copy  of  Malory's  Morte d'Arthur, tucking it in the bag,  then  closed  the  door,  the
simple latch catching and holding. There was no lock. None necessary out here.
She-Who-Walks  waited  for  him  just  under  the  trees,  her  hand  out  to  take  his.
"Come… Father."
And he followed.
Chapter Four
Another full night gone and most of another day, just to get back to Vancouver.
On  their  return  from  the  forest,  She-Who-Walks  went  straight  to  the  clearing
before  the  lodge  house  where  Black  Eagle  and  what  appeared  to  be  the  whole
population of Kingcome waited in silence. She spoke briefly with her father in their
own language, then he raised his staff as a sign to the others. In twos and threes they
followed  her  into  the  lodge.  Black  Eagle  looked  at  Richard,  who  had  kept  a
respectful distance just outside the totem circle.
"You, too, dark father."
The new appellation pleased Richard.

"Our daughter grows impatient."
He waited for Richard, then they entered the lodge together.
I suppose this also makes me Black Eagle's son in a  way,  since  his  blood  now
flows in me through her, he thought. Richard now had a daughter, a lover, and,  he
hoped, a friend in She-Who-Walks, though what a modern psychologist would have
made  of  the  quasi-incestuous  implications  of  their  new  relationship  he  dared  not
speculate.  He  smiled  to  himself,  imagining  trying  to  explain  it  all  to  Freud.  Well,
Sigmund, it was one of those things where you just had to have been there.
The ceremony they'd all obviously prepared for did not take long. His daughters
awakened hunger would not allow for delay. Richard stood on her left, Black Eagle
on her right, with one of the young men of  the village before  her. He was  shirtless,
but the lodge was warm from the blazing fire and the press of bodies, the air dense
with the rough smell of humanity, burning sage, and curls of sweetgrass smoke.
She-Who-Walks's  eyes  were  flushed  red  with  anticipation,  and  when  her  lips
parted Richard could see her sharp corner teeth budding to their full length. None of
this was lost on the others. They said nothing, but glances were exchanged. Richard
felt a moment's unease about so  many people  being witness to  what was  to  come,
then pushed it to one side. This was the Goddess's work, and  he would trust  there
would be no trouble.
The young man held his arm out, a hint of apprehension in his eyes. Black Eagle
touched  his shoulder  in a reassuring gesture.  She-Who-Walks  bent  over  the  man's
arm, the sheet  of  her raven-dark  hair  obscuring  Richard's  view  of  her  face,  but  a
moment later he caught the tantalizing scent of fresh blood. Sabra must have told her
what to  do;  his  new  daughter  fed  as  he  usually  did  himself,  taking  from  the  vein
inside the elbow. It was much less visible than a throat wound.
After a few long minutes, Black Eagle interrupted her, or tried to, for she did not
relinquish her hold until he and Richard physically pulled her away. She tried to fight
them, driven by desperate hunger to blindly continue feeding, but Richard's strength
and Black Eagle's  soothing  words  were  enough  to  calm  her  until  the  next  person
came forward, a young woman this time.
The next instance she  resisted  them less  as  her hunger diminished, and  the next
was easier still.
The pattern  repeated  until  Richard  lost  count  of  how  many  shared  their  blood
with She-Who-Walks.  The  thick air, his own lassitude from  feeding so  heavily  the
previous night, and  the sheer  emotional exhaustion brought  on  by  worry for  Sabra
were having their way with him. Not until Black Eagle shook  him from  his standing
doze did he realize that it was over.
"You need rest," the shaman told him and led him outside.
Cold fresh night air, tinged with the dean smell of fir trees and the damp earth of
spring… Richard breathed it in with pleasure, rubbing the grit from his eyes. "I'll rest
while I travel. Can one of your men take me across to Black Point right now?"

"Yes, he can, but don't you want to stay? It's gonna be a hell of a party tonight."
Inside the lodge  a drum  and  a  mellow-voiced  flute  started  up,  and  several  voices
began to chant to them.
God,  but  it was  like the old  times, the ancient times, when he'd  celebrated  with
Sabra the various festivals of her Goddess in the forests of  Wales or  Ireland or  on
the plain of the Giant's Dance or in sacred Ynis Wytrin itself. A hopeless longing for
those lost days rose in him, hard and fast, trying to choke him. He pushed it back.
"I want to, I really do, but Sabra—my dark mother is in great pain from the beast
inside her. Every delay brings her more pain as the beast grows stronger."
Black Eagle nodded. "Pain is a part of living, but no one says we have to  like it.
I'll find someone to take you across, dark father."
"You can call me Richard."
"I know." The corners of Black Eagle's eyes crinkled with deep mischief. "But the
tourists  expect  that kind of  stuff.  I  like  to  stay  in  practice."  He  went  back  to  the
lodge. A moment later She-Who-Walks emerged.
"Will you return soon?" she asked, standing close before him.
"Well before the next change of the moon, I hope."
"With the Goddess's cup?"
"When I find it."
"I thought you knew where it was."
"Not the exact spot. There were some secrets Sabra did not share even with me."
The Goddess was jealous of bestowing too much knowledge upon the guardians of
her relics. In the past it had been enough for Richard to play the soldier and defend
without question,  leaving the inner mysteries to  Sabra  and  her  mortal  sisters.  That
had all changed, now. "I will find it, though."
"Watch  your  back."  He  felt  the  power  of  her  gaze  caressing  him,  those  dark,
intense eyes, so much like Sabra's, and yet different.
"I always do."
"But more than usual. There's something waiting ahead in your path…"
Her gift of Sight. "What can you tell me?"
"It  is—it's  dark  and  resents  and  fears  your  presence.  The  darkness  keeps  me
from seeing anything but where its shadow has been. Where it walks it leaves a trail
of blood… it thinks long thoughts and cold."
"Does it walk in this world or the one of the Goddess?"
"This one," she said decisively.
"Then I've little to worry about."
"Don't be too sure of that."

He knew better than to take a warning born of the Gift lightly. "All right, I won't. I
promise." He saw Black Eagle coming,  accompanied  by  another man. Time to  go.
Richard  kissed  her  forehead,  then  drew  her  tight  to  him  for  a  farewell  embrace,
wrapping his arms bearlike around her. How many times had he and Sabra parted in
this manner over the centuries? Beyond count. And it still hadn't gotten any easier.
 
The  boat  crossing  was  wretched;  the  wind  had  risen  and  an  unpleasant  chop
nearly forced them to turn back, but soon Black Point hove into view, and he was on
dry land again. Well, not really dry, for a torrential downpour began,  and  even with
his inhuman speed he was soaked by the time he got to the airfield at Port Hardy. No
planes  would  fly  from  there  until  morning,  though,  or  at  least  until  the  weather
cleared. He couldn't find a pilot foolish or greedy enough to make the attempt. After
a  few  phone  calls  he  learned  that  the  earliest  Vancouver/Toronto  flight  was
overbooked anyway. He arranged for a standby on the next and tried not to grind his
teeth at the delay.
I should  have  stayed  for  the  party,  he  thought  glumly  while  changing  into  dry
clothes in the men's room. He debated having a quick shave, then decided against it.
Why bother until it was necessary?
Instead,  he  took  a  seat  in  what  served  as  a  passenger  lounge,  watching  and
listening to the rain, and trying not  to  think about  Sabra  and  failing miserably. Was
she out in this stuff? Was she cold? Hungry? Afraid?
For distraction from the tormenting unknowns, he pulled out Sabra's book.  He'd
read it long ago when it first saw print, and recalled how odd it had felt to see a story
written about himself and the men and women that he had known, loved  and  hated.
Sabra  was  right,  much  of  Malory's  account  was  completely  wrong,  and  yet  the
timeless  tale  was  there,  true  in  its  essentials,  and  magnificently  written.  He
remembered  it  all  so  well,  the  heady  days  of  his  immortal  youth,  that  time  of
stretching his new powers, of testing them, and, on occasion, abusing them, such as
he had done with Guinevere.
Dear Guinevere. Theirs had been a passion to conquer worlds, or so he'd thought
at the time. She'd been beautiful and willing, but what a risk it had been, to dare to be
the queen's lover. He knew why he'd  taken it, having long ago  worked  it out.  He'd
done it simply because he could. The gifts the Goddess had bestowed upon him had
made it possible, even easy.
Sabra  hadn't  been  at  all  pleased,  not  because  of  his  making  love  to  another
woman,  but  for  the  adverse  political  repercussions  in  Arthur's  court.  It  was  only
Sabra's reminder of his oath to protect Arthur that ended things, but by  then it was
too late, and the scandal was already abroad like a fire, fanned by that damned sneak
Mordred.  If not  for  him then Richard  might have been  able to  hypnotize  them  all,
even Guinevere, into forgetting the whole thing.
I suppose they'd call it a learning experience now.
And then came the Grail.

The quest for it was Sabra's attempt to pull them all back together again, to  give
them a single goal to  distract  the leaders  from  the disaster  of  a civil war. With the
power  of  her Goddess  glowing within her, she  had  created  the vision  of  the  Grail
Cup in the minds of Christian and Pagan warrior alike and the inspiration for them to
go forth  and  search  for  it. And Richard—Lancelot—had  been  in their number.  As
Arthur's greatest champion they expected no less of him and  certainly considerably
more.
It had been a strange pursuit, looking for something that was not lost.  Yet Sabra
had insisted that he look, and longer than any of the others. A weary penance it was
to be  sure,  but  the  idea  had  worked,  at  first,  and  peace  continued  in  the  land.  It
didn't last, of course, peace  being such  a fragile thing, but  during that age a whole
generation  had  grown  up,  bred,  and  died  without  knowing  the  terrors  of  foreign
invasion  except  by  hearing  of  it  from  their  parents.  That  was  the  beginning  of
Arthur's legend, and ever after all of Britain's monarchs had tried to  ally themselves
with it, for they knew the hold the story had on the hearts of their subjects.
If Richard  had  known at the time he was  helping  to  create  a  legend,  he'd  have
taken more care than the singers and poets had done to preserve an accurate account
of  it.  Once  they'd  finished,  the  truth  was  twisted  almost  beyond  recognition  and
details were blown all out of proportion—like that business with Elaine and  her son
Galahad. What an embarrassment. Sabra  had  nearly laughed herself sick  when, hot
with outrage and exasperation, he'd confessed this latest calamity to her.
Richard  himself  was  not  fertile  because  of  his  changed  state,  but  he  had  been
close at hand when Elaine's belly started to show, and they demanded she name the
father. Who better to choose than Arthur's own right hand? Not only did  she  avoid
any  serious  reproach—for  who  could  blame  a  maiden  for  falling  in  love  with  so
gallant a fighter?—but she managed to get a favorable marriage out of it for  herself,
the scheming little bitch. She never did say who the real father was,  either. Galahad
turned  out  to  be  a  decent  boy,  though,  Richard  saw  to  that,  so  the  whole  thing
wasn't a complete disaster.
They were gone now.
Nothing left but their pale shades lingering in his memory.
Tears filled his eyes and unbidden fell in great drops  down  his face  and  into his
lap. Had he been asked, he would have been  quite unable to  describe  the depth  of
his sadness, for he did not have such words. It was beyond telling.
The weight of  the  years  and  their  many  griefs  sometimes  piled  overwhelmingly
upon him, but through everything Sabra had always been there. Always. She was his
reason for life, his reason to continue ever forward, no  matter how great the losses
of the past. To face a future without her, however brief it might be…
Sabra. Oh, my poor lady. I will find it for you. I swear it by your Goddess and
my God.
"Mr. Dun?"
He  snapped  awake,  wincing  against  the  harsh  morning  light  beating  upon  the

windows.  A  sleepy-eyed  airport  employee  informed  him  the  pilot  he'd  hired  was
ready to leave for Vancouver.
 
Toronto. His home for this particular life. He felt like he'd  been  away for  years,
not days,  and  sought  to  shrug  off  the feeling as  he walked quickly along  the  drab
tunnel joining the plane to the building and emerged into the afternoon brightness of
the terminal. He longed for  the dim sanctuary  of  his own house.  Problems  awaited
him there, he knew. He still had to deal with the aftermath of the Niagara Horror, and
help Bourland with his damned assassin hunt, but surely it could be put off for a few
days while he—
Then perhaps  not.  He spotted  the  two  plainclothes  RCMP  officers  right  away,
one hunter recognizing others of his kind. No one smiled at the encounter, not even
to show their teeth. The officers pulled out their badges, displaying them too fast for
him to get any names or to see if the photos matched the originals.
"Are you Mr. Richard Dun? Please come with us, sir. It's a matter of security."
Oh, so polite, but they bracketed him, making enough of a disturbance  to  attract
the brief notice of passersby. One or two stopped, staring at the two cleancut, suited
men hustling a sinister, stubble-faced third off the concourse.
Perhaps I should have had that shave after all, was his first sour thought about
the business.
A hand gripped his elbow just a little too firmly for comfort, and they steered him
through  a  doorway  marked  Employees  Only  into  a  too-brightly  lit  room  and
face-to-face with Etienne Demarest. They released Richard and backed off.
"Mr. Dun, how good to see you again," he said with a striking lack of sincerity.
Demarest was  smiling, or  at least Richard  assumed  that the strange  look  on  the
man's  face  was  meant  to  be  a  smile.  One  could  also  feel  the  electric  edge  of
excitement hovering around him, like a little boy about to play a trick on his teacher.
Obviously,  he  knew  something,  or  had  something  to  say.  Good  God,  had  they
turned up a bit of  telling evidence at Niagara? Richard  wished once  again that he'd
paid more attention to  Sabra  when she'd  tried to  develop  an ability in him  to  read
thoughts. She did it effortlessly, had always done so. The best that Richard had ever
achieved was to read general feelings, and the feeling he picked up now was anything
but good. He could easily sense dislike, suspicion, and… what was it… ? Ah, yes,
smug  satisfaction  for  a  clean  capture.  Richard  carefully  preserved  a  bland
expression.
"We thought you'd cut and run," Demarest continued.
We. Who did he think he was, some sort of monarch or a doctor? "Why on earth
should I do that?"
Demarest didn't bother to answer, only gestured at one of the plastic chairs in the
room. It was a dull, impersonal chamber,  useful for  most  any purpose,  from  spare
storage space to  private interrogations.  Demarest was  likely intent on  the latter, the

way he stared. Richard supposed that this was for the purpose of discomfiting him.
He  was  also  expected  to  sit  so  that  Demarest  could  have  the  psychological
advantage of height. Balls to that, my lad. I learned to do this sort of thing with the
big boys. He remained on his feet, forcing Demarest to do the same.
Richard broke the silence. "What's this about?"
"You tell me."
"I'm a busy man, Chief Inspector, I don't have time for these games. If you have
something to  say,  then say  it. Otherwise I'm  going."  He waited  a  moment,  got  no
reply, then turned  and  found  the larger of  the plainclothes men blocking  the  door.
The other one must be on watch outside. "And if you think he can stop me, you've
another think coming."
The officer remained front of him. They were about  the same height, though the
man was rather more bulky. As Richard started  past,  the fellow reached  to  grapple
him in the best training manual style. With a swift, almost casual movement, Richard
spun  and  slammed  him  facefirst  against  the  wall,  immobilizing  his  arms  in  a
surprisingly easy locking hold. Richard put on a little pressure,  gently, and  the man
became very still.
"All  right,  Dun,  that's  enough,"  Demarest  snarled  behind  him.  "Leave  my
constable alone."
"Then cut the crap and tell me why I was dragged in here."
"I want to know where you've been for the last three days."
"Is  that all?"  With  a  final  twitch  of  his  fingers,  Richard  released  his  hold.  The
man, flushed red with anger, recovered his balance, but kept his distance.
Richard  turned  once  more  to  Demarest.  "Where  I've  been,  Chief  Inspector,  is
none of your damned business."
"It is where the Prime Minister's safety is concerned."
So,  someone  upstairs  had  obviously  been  breathing  down  Demarest's  neck  for
results on the investigation and now Demarest was trying to breathe down another's.
Not because it would do any good, but simply because he could do it. Oh, dear, but
wasn't that a familiar pattern? Richard almost winced.  "My absence  was  a personal
matter and had nothing to do with the case."
"I've got no reason to believe anything you say, not after you tried to mislead me
from  the  very  beginning.  That  Niagara  killing  still  isn't  settled  to  my  satisfaction.
There's more to it, I know."
The schooling and practice of centuries prevented Richard from heaving a sigh of
vast relief just then. The man had suspicions, but nothing more. "Everything I could
say was in my report," he stated, quite truthfully.
"You  left  things  out,  everyone  leaves  out  things  they  don't  want  the  official
reports to carry."
Richard looked him up  and  down,  smiled, and  shook  his head  pityingly. "Don't

try to measure me by your own standards, Demarest," he drawled. "You'll come up
short every time."
Somewhere  by  the  door  the  RCMP  made  a  muffled  choking  sound,  quickly
suppressed. Demarest threw a murderous glance at him, then refocused on Richard.
"In a situation as grave as this, where the life of the Prime Minister is under threat, it
is my duty to ensure everyone involved in the investigation is above suspicion. In my
book, you are not."
"Indeed?"
"I've had you thoroughly checked out, Dun."
"So?"
"What I've found is just too good to be true."
"You have a problem with me being competent at my job?"
"I have a problem  with a record  that has  holes  in it so  big you  could  fly a 747
through them. When I try to fill them in they just get bigger, then I come up against a
brick wall. There is too much missing information."
"It's not missing, only classified—my other work for the government."
"So I've discovered, but I have a double A clearance and—"
"The file on me requires a triple A clearance. Sorry."
It looked  to  be  a hard  struggle, but  Demarest  managed  to  keep  his  voice  from
rising beyond  conversational  level. "I  am trying to  conduct  an investigation and  to
prevent a possible national emergency. To do that I need to see your file, all of it. I
demand you allow me access."
"The triple A designation is there for  very good  reasons  of  national security.  Its
not for me to  decide  who has  access.  If you  think it's  really that necessary,  then I
suggest you talk to the PM about it. And give him a damn good reason why."
"My reason  is that you  are hindering an official investigation  and  have  done  so
from the start.  You go  haring off  after a so-called  minor lead without  any  kind  of
support  or  backup  to  a  man  who,  according  to  you,  might  have  been  our  only
connection  to  the assassin.  The  man winds up  extremely dead  with  you  being  the
only witness to tell how he might have gotten  that way. Then,  when you  should  be
continuing  with  your  duties  here,  you  hop  a  plane  and  disappear  to  God  knows
where—"
"I did not disappear, and I had leave to go.  I was  on  the west  coast  visiting my
sick mother, if it's any of your bloody business, which it is not. If that's all you really
wanted to know, you could have just asked politely instead of pawing the ground to
show me how much dust you can kiack up."
Demarest looked him, as best he could from his lesser height, directly in the eyes.
"I don't like you, Dun, and I don't trust you. If it were left to me, you'd be in a cell
this minute being interrogated by the Sureté de Quebec. And believe me, you would
answer them."

Richard smiled at the thought. "Demarest, you are a fool. And trust me on this, it
could kill you."
Demarest paled. "Is that a threat?"
"A  warning."  He  loomed  close  over  Demarest  and  whispered,  "Against…
hypertension."
Demarest's mouth twitched. Color now darkened his face.
Dear me, not amused, are you? "You really should relax more. You'd have a lot
fewer headaches and greatly lower your risk of heart disease."
"You son of a bitch."
Richard gave a short laugh, shaking his head once. "If you were worth the effort,
I'd  be  tempted  to  rip  your  heart  out,  but  I'm  tired,  so  today's  your  lucky  day."
Demarest started to  speak,  but  Richard  raised  one  hand,  palm out,  to  cut  him off.
"No more. I've had quite enough of this. If there's any threat to the PM around here,
it's you. Don't you think it would be  a change for  the better  if you  investigated the
criminals rather than the investigators?"
He crossed  to  the door,  and  this time the constable  hurriedly moved  out  of  his
way.
 
Once more in the comfortable confines of the Jaguar, Richard eased the car  into
gear and pulled out  of  the parking lot into the light of  a mercifully cloudy  day.  He
cruised  along the clear highway, smiling at the long lines of  vehicles headed  in  the
other direction stopped by the construction that had so irritated him earlier. Still no
sign  of  the  source  of  the  obstruction,  either.  Winter  and  rehabilitation.  Demarest
could  definitely  use  some  of  the  latter,  for  if  anyone  in  this  business  was
obstructive…
Patience,  patience.  He's  just  a  fool  and  you've  dealt  with  his  sort  before.  No
need to let him get to you.
Demarest was  a fool,  but  persistent.  The  chance  certainly existed  that  he  could
somehow find access, authorized or not, to Richard's triple A file. Richard had paid
a fortune  to  a  computer  expert  to  get  that  high  of  a  security  rating,  and  another
fortune for what false data it covered, but one could do anything with computers  if
one knew how,  and  Demarest might have an expert  who  could  also  hack  into  the
system. If Demarest dug deeply enough, he could find out Richards birth certificate
was false, or that he'd not attended this university or  served  in that military branch.
For such an inquiry on so basic a level no computer was needed, a few phone calls
and he'd discover no teacher, no trainer, no officer at any of  the named institutions
with a recollection of a person named Richard Dun. All hell would break loose then.
Damn, but modern life was getting much too complicated. He would have to find
some sort of distraction to throw Demarest off  the track,  otherwise Richard  would
have to move on yet again, and one more thing he'd come to hate over the centuries
was moving. Especially when it was hurried and entailed changing not only his city,

but in these  days  of  better  communication,  country—not  to  mention  having  a  full
identity alteration. Easy  enough to  do,  he  had  several  of  those  set  up,  ready,  and
waiting for just such an emergency, but what a nuisance. Yet another matter to  deal
with, along with Sabra  and  Charon.  That,  and  the brown  Buick that was  following
him. It had been on his tail since he left the airport.
The  CN  Tower  and  Skydome  slid  past,  and  soon  he  was  on  the  Gardner
extension, nearing the Beaches. The Buick stuck with him, even through the line-ups
of parents retrieving their kids at the primary school. Richard could feel sorry for the
other driver. If he was  trying to  do  a covert  surveillance,  this  was  hardly  the  best
neighborhood  for  it.  If  he  was  trying  to  make  Richard  nervous,  he  was  in  for  a
disappointment.
The school  line delayed him only a little, and  a scant  thirty minutes after having
left the airport,  he was  pulling into  the  double  driveway  of  his  house.  The  garage
doors opened silently, mysteriously before him from his remote signal, and he eased
the E-Type to a gentle stop next to its sibling, a Land Rover. Checking the mirror, he
saw the Buick cruise slowly past.
Richard got out, retrieved his bag, and hit the inside button  that would close  the
doors, ducking under them to go around to the front entry. Sure enough,  the Buick
had  turned  somewhere  down  the  street  and  was  coming  back.  It  stopped  on  the
other side of the road and parked in front of Mrs. Simstead's house. Oh, dear.  She
wouldn't like that at all. He'd just blocked off her front view of the neighborhood and
the goings on of local life were better than television to her.
Richard  could  just  see  her  through  her  spotless  picture  window,  scowling
mightily. In another minute she'd work herself up into a fine righteous temper and be
out  to  chase  the  car  off  with  either  a  broom  or  a  garden  hoe,  depending  on  her
mood. No RCMP identification badge would faze her, she knew her rights, and he'd
just better move along or she'd call the police on him.
Assuming he was  RCMP.  Richard  waited on  the shady  step.  Watching.  There.
She was coming down her walk now, carrying a shovel this time and wearing a nicely
disgruntled expression. The man in the car noticed her. Richard relaxed as the fellow
flashed his badge  in her face.  Good,  he wasn't  IRA,  not  that they would faze her,
either.  Mrs.  Simstead  began  arguing  with  him,  pointing  down  the  street  with  the
business  end  of  her  shovel,  her  body  language  broadcasting  the  unmistakable
message of clear off. Rather than continue a futile skirmish with her, he finally rolled
his window up, started the motor, and moved the car. As he passed, Richard waved
a cheery greeting his way, then unlocked the front door and went inside.
He punched the code in to neutralize, then reset, his alarm system. It was a much
more sophisticated  version of  the  standard  ones  available  to  homeowners,  but  he
didn't mind the extra trouble  and  expense.  He had  his personal  treasures—like that
Botticelli in the office—and God help anyone trying to take them away.
Richard loved his house. It was his nest.  He had  realized many years  before  the
psychological importance of having a real home. Wherever he happened to be living,
he made sure to indulge himself with a comfortable sanctuary, a place to recharge his

batteries when he was drained, a place where he felt safe. He'd been happily living in
this particular domicile for several years now and had no desire to leave. Not for the
likes of Demarest, anyway. It was everything Richard could want, those wants being
the  result  of  centuries  of  consideration  and  testing.  The  inside  was  dark  and
comfortable  and  the outside  shaded  by  tall evergreens.  It was  quiet  and  secluded,
near enough to  the lake so  he  could  hear  the  gentle  surf  on  the  shingle  as  he  fell
asleep.  The  sound  comforted  him,  ever  reminded  him  of  his  lady.  Even  though
parted from Sabra as he'd been for the last few years he never felt alone here.
He stretched lazily. The long flight and the events of the last couple of days were
catching up with him. All he wanted was to strip and dive into his own bed. He'd be
no good  to  Sabra  unless  he got  some  real rest.  He opened  the  blinds  in  the  front
living room just enough to look along the street, and caught sight of the brown Buick
parked  a  little  way  down.  The  driver  had  angled  the  rearview  mirror  so  he  could
watch the front of Richard's house. The poor fellow would get a neck  ache  before
his shift change thanks to Mrs. Simstead's interference. Richard made a mental note
to gift his neighbor with a box of gourmet chocolates in the near future. As  for  the
driver, he could wait. After all, that's what he was paid to do.
Richard went upstairs to bed.
 
The  phone  buzzed  insistently,  like  an  angry  wasp.  Many  things  had  improved
through the ages, but not the relentless sound of a phone whether it beeped, buzzed,
whooped,  wailed  or  rang;  all  were  equally  annoying.  It  reached  into  Richard's
dreamless slumber and pulled at him like an impatient lover. And, like a lover, he was
unable to resist. He fumbled for the receiver on the night stand.
"Yes? What?" he muttered.
"Good, you're back. We wondered where you'd gone." Philip Bourland.
"Personal. I had clearance to go."
"Yes,  of  course,  you  don't  have  to  explain  to  me,  but  Demarest  has  been
screaming blue murder."
"I know."  Richard  sat  up,  pushing  away  bedclothes,  and  blinked  at  the  clock.
Hell, he'd only been asleep for a few hours. "He met me at Pearson  this afternoon.
Tried to throw his weight around."
"Must have been very pleasant. You know he's having you tailed?"
"Yes. Not very good work. Not meant to be. Demarest just wants me to know I'm
on his shit list."
"Well, I'm sure if you have to  you'll be  able to  get rid of  a shadow  without too
much trouble. Now…" Richard could see Bourland in his mind's eye, feet up on his
desk,  gazing  out  at  the  traffic  inching  its  way  past  his  office  in  the  Parliament
Building.  His  lazy  attitude  and  seeming  laxness  had  fooled  many  another,  but
Richard  knew  him  better.  He  was  like  a  snake  sunning  itself,  seeing  all,  ready  to
move in the blink of an eye. "… now, about the other matter."

He'd  want  a  private  report.  Unfortunately  there  was  nothing  Richard  could  tell
Bourland  that  he  hadn't  heard  already  or  was  otherwise  available  through  regular
channels. "Do you want this on an open line?"
"Of course not. Go to seven."
Richard rang off, swung his feet around, shedding tangled sheets, and slipped on
his bathrobe. Old, raggedy, faded blue, it wrapped around him like a warm puppy as
he  trudged  downstairs  to  his  office.  The  phone  on  his  desk  began  ringing.  He
pressed  the  number  seven  extension  out  of  the  nine  he  had  and  picked  up  the
receiver. From habit, he checked the little tap detector next to the phone. Green light
for a clear line. There was a series of buzzes and Bourland's voice came to him once
more.
"What happened in Niagara?"
This was getting entirely too repetitive. "It's all in my report. Really. You've  read
it. You've had enough time to memorize the damned thing."
"Except that it's all in official language, which is very dry  and  tends  to  leave out
uncomfortable details that would alarm those with a more squeamish nature. Did you
question the subject closely?"
Richard  loved  the euphemism. Bourland's  way  of  asking  if  Richard  had  gotten
physical with the interrogation. He had indeed questioned Arlie Webb closely, would
have continued but for… never mind. It would suffice  that in his last moments  the
terrified man would have sacrificed mother, sister, and grandmother to get out of that
stinking motel room and away from him.
"Yes,  I did."  His voice  betrayed  nothing of  his inner feelings,  of  the  frisson  of
fear his loss of control raised  in him, fear for  Sabra  and  what she  had  become,  of
what he would soon  become  himself. "But I was  interrupted before  I got  anything
useful out of him. Someone cracked me solid from behind and the next thing I know
the room's on fire."
"Pity… pity." Richard could clearly hear the sound of Bourland flicking his pencil
against his front  teeth, as  he always did  when he was  thinking. "So  the only  name
you got was somebody named Sean."
Yes, when the murdering sod was phoning for help to get  rid  of my  body,  but
you don't need to know that, my friend. "Philip, I still have other  sources  I can  try
for information, but as long as Demarest is being a pain it's going to put  a crimp in
my progress. Today he demanded access to my secure file. None of that stuff is any
of his business, nor does it have a bearing on this case. It's a hell of a distraction to
have him nipping my heels. I'd hate to have the PM brought down just because some
insecure twit has an ego problem with me."
"I'm not sure I can help you on that."
"Yeah, I know,  he's  got  his head  up  your  ass,  but  if that's  how he works,  then
there's bound to be someone with their head up his ass. Find them and get them to
convince Demarest I'm not Jack the Ripper so I can get on with my job."

Bourland made grumbling noises. "I can make no promises, but I'll see what I can
do  to  shift him. Remember,  time is probably  short.  Let  me  know  when  you  have
anything in the line of  progress.  If you  have  something  positive  to  report  it  might
help to take Demarest off the boil." And the phone went dead.
Richard hung up, strolled to the window, and  looked  out  at the gathering gloom
of early night. The brown Buick was still there, parked in exactly the same place. He
couldn't tell if it was the same driver, but no matter.
Easy, he thought, going back upstairs. Getting around this one would be easy.
 
Showered,  shaved,  and  feeling  one  hundred  percent  better  in  fresh  clothes,
Richard checked his window once more and saw to his deep pleasure that the Buick
was still there. How he loved to see government employees earning their salary.
He opened  one  of  his concealed  safes  to  draw  out  a  little  extra  cash,  carefully
noting  the  amount  on  the  running  account  he  always  kept  when  working  for  the
government. It would take forever, but he'd eventually get it back again, though they
might complain of the cost. Well, a visit to  the Judge was  a necessary  expense  for
this  investigation,  but  his  services  didn't  really  cost  all  that  much,  not  when  one
compared the price to a very expensive state funeral.
The  Judge.  If  anyone  knew  of  any  strange  goings  on  in  the  sad  underbelly  of
Toronto it was he. Richard picked up the phone—he still had a green light on his tap
detector—and punched in the numbers. The answer was almost immediate if lacking
in gentility.
"Yeah, what?"
"Gimme the Judge."
The line was  quiet for  a moment,  and  a breathless  voice,  a voice  Richard  knew
well from many a past interview, came on.
"What?"
"Dun. I'll meet you at Tim's. Seven o'clock." He hung up  without waiting for  an
answer.
Tim's sounded far more innocent than it actually was.  Positioned  at the junction
of  Dundas  and  Sherbourne,  the  most  dangerous  intersection  in  the  whole  of
Toronto, Tim's Bar saw more of the dark half of Toronto than any other. And yet it
remained something of a neutral territory between law and  disorder,  for  Tim was  a
solid man for  both  sides,  and  strangely honest.  He tolerated  no  criminal activity in
his house and was tough enough to enforce his rules. Consequently, the bar was safe
and known to  be  safe,  and  thus  a  very  good  meeting  place  for  those  who  would
otherwise not take unnecessary risks. Richard had been there often.
He checked once more, almost out  of  habit, that the watcher was  still watching,
and  having  satisfied  himself,  left  by  the  back  door.  Once  in  the  alley  behind  his
house, a cursory glance assured him that they'd failed to cover the rear entrance, and

he went on his way. On Queen Street he hailed a cab  and  was  at Tim's  in no  time,
safe, unknown, and unencumbered.
Tim's was a great bar. The people who went there were interesting, the food, had
it appealed to Richard in the slightest, was excellent, but above all, the music defied
description.  On  those  nights when a live band  played it was  a mixture of  jazz  and
blues and modern that Richard loved. He had also discovered his own special  kind
of  dinner  here  on  more  than  one  occasion,  and  more  than  a  few  of  those  ladies
wanted to repeat the experience—or what they remembered of it—with him.
It was his kind of place, and he loved it.
At five to the hour, Richard took a stool at the bar and ordered his usual. It was
from his private reserve. Tim, once he had realized how very grateful Richard would
be in a financial sense, had not hesitated to stock it and keep it totally apart from the
rest of  his inventory. A good  thing, too,  for  the cold  mixture  of  red  wine,  human
blood,  and  preservatives  in  the  opaque  bottles  would  have  sent  most  clients
scampering away into the  night,  rich  with  complaints.  Tim  brought  forth  a  bottle,
opened  it, and  poured  a sampling in a wineglass as  was  his custom,  and  left  both
bottle and Richard alone.
Sparse  pickings  tonight  anyway,  he  noted  automatically.  Two  couples  off  in
booths  near the front,  another  lone  man,  one  of  the  regulars,  at  a  table  reading  a
paper while eating fettucine with the special house sauce. Despite the distractions of
the printed page, his tie was still clean. Good trick, that.
No single women, or groups of women. It was  just as  well for  Richard  was  not
on the hunt tonight. At least not for dinner.
He sat for maybe five minutes, savoring his special reserve before a slight breeze
signified  someone  new  coming  in,  and  a  warm  voice  with  a  West  Indies  accent
husked into his ear.
"The Judge is here, mon, what you want?"
The  voice  belonged  to  Eugene  Mantalessa,  a  large,  gentle-looking  man  with
blue-black  skin,  soft  brown  eyes,  and  the  cold,  guileless  conscience  of  a  pimp,
drug-pusher and killer, which, after all, he was. Sell his mother for  a song?  Hell, he
would kill his mother for a song, if only he could find her.
"You want a drink?" Richard offered.
"What you got's fine for me, mon."
"No,  it's  not.  Have a beer."  Tim arrived, beer  bottle  open  and  glass  ready,  and
disappeared  as  quickly.  The  two  men  quit  the  bar  for  a  small  table  far  from  the
entrance.
The Judge disdained the glass  and  swigged straight from  the bottle.  He emptied
half of it before favoring Richard with his full attention. "So, what's happenin'? Why
you call on the Judge?"
"I need information. I hear that someone  has  been  arranging a set-up  for  a very

important man. I hear that someone's planning to  kill that man. What do  you  know
about it?"
"I know a lot of talk on killin's. One's just like 'nother."
"This is special. Some of the boys are bringing in hired help for it."
The Judge was very quiet for a moment. The boys, huh? Shit, mon, I don' wanna
stir stuff up with the Irish, they be crazy, mon. Least when I kill I do it for a reason,
they do it just for the hell of it. An' they do an awful lot of it."
Richard sipped his drink, waiting him out.
The Judge finished his beer.  He let his gaze wander around  the room  and  made
facial  contortions  meant  to  be  interpreted  as  deep  and  serious  thought.  "What  I
know," he finally said, "on a particular killin' depend on what you pay."
"What I pay  depends  on  what  you  know."  Richard  knew  this  bargaining  from
long experience. He slid an envelope across the table. As the Judge picked it up, out
spilled hundred dollar bills.
He eyed the money with vivid pleasure. "Mon, ya want him bad."
"Yes, Eugene, I want him bad."
The Judge looked  at him suddenly,  fear leaping into his eyes.  Richard  had  only
ever used his Christian name once before, and that had led to three men dying in the
gutter, three of the Judge's best men, men he could not afford to lose. None of them
weighed heavily on Richard's conscience, and the Judge was well aware of that hard
fact. He began to rise. "I don't know nothin' you want t—"
But Richard's arm instantly snaked across the table and his hand wrapped around
the man's throat, tight enough to make him gasp for breath. Tim looked over, mildly
curious. His gaze met Richard's, and he turned  away to  increase the volume of  the
heady jazz playing on the sound system. Richard half stood, pushing until the Judge
was well  back  into  his  seat,  eyes  reddening,  sweat  trickling  down  the  side  of  his
nose. Richard could smell the fear. Delicious.
"There is a very great deal of money in the envelope, Eugene, and—provided you
give me the information that I'm looking for—it is all yours. Do you understand me?"
The Judge nodded as best he could, and Richard let him go. Gasping in the smoky
air of the bar, the Judge nearly slithered from his seat.
"I need the bathroom," he whined.
Richard  nodded  permission.  "Don't  fuck  with  me,  Eugene.  I  don't  like  it  when
people fuck with me."
Eugene was a good source of information, but he always needed to be reminded
who was in charge.
"Ya,  mon."  And  the  Judge  skittered  across  the  near-empty  bar  and  down  the
stairs to  the washroom  below.  Richard  looked  around.  Only  Tim  had  noticed  the
exchange, and he would say nothing.

Richard got up, envelope in hand, and sauntered to the top  of  the stairs,  waiting
there until the Judge finally plodded back up again. He stopped  short  and  stared  at
the fat envelope, licking his lips once.
"I'll need to make some calls, contacts. It's gonna cost, mon."
He was smooth, confident again, and Richard knew exactly why. Caught on a hair
in his right nostril was a telltale white crystal. Eugene sniffed and wiped his nose on
his sleeve. His eyes  shone.  It  must  have  been  one  big  line,  to  have  given  him  so
much  courage  so  quickly.  Richard  took  five  crisp  hundred-dollar  bills  from  the
envelope and passed them over.
"The person you are looking for is called Charon. I want anything you get on him
or the people who hired him. Absolutely anything, the faster the better. You call me,
day or night, and tell me what you find out. If I like what you tell me, there's the rest
of this waiting for you. If you're lying, I will know."
The Judge nodded, pocketed the money, and headed for the door.
"And Eugene…"
He stopped on a dime.
"Don't  put  it  all  up  your  nose.  I  want  to  be  able  to  understand  what  you're
saying."
The Judge left, and  Richard  turned  back  toward  the  table  where  Tim  was  now
clearing things away. Richard  crossed  over  and  gave him a hundred.  "That  should
cover everything. Recork  the wine will you?  I'll take it with me, there's  no  point  in
wasting it."
"No problem." Tim stuffed  the bill into his shirt pocket  and  went back  to  work
with hardly a blink of an eye.
Richard phoned for a cab. He would enjoy the look  on  the watchers  face  at his
return home, but he would enjoy his special reserve even more.
 
"He must  have  used  the  back  door,"  the  unhappy  RCMP  officer  said  into  his
radio. He'd been sharply awakened from his gentle doze by Richard's loud whistling
as he strolled past the Buick and up to his front walk. He could have returned unseen
by the back entry, but it was so much more fun twisting Demarest's nose.
"We  need  more  operatives,"  the  young  man  insisted  to  whomever  was  on  the
other end.
The  night  and  neighborhood  were  quiet  enough  that  Richard  could  hear  every
word  through the car's  half-open window.  He grinned as  he listened and  watched,
hidden from view in his darkened living room. He pulled the cork from the bottle and
drank deeply, letting the fullness of the blood shudder through him. Not the same as
taking it hot and pulsing from a vein, but a pleasure, nonetheless. He had been right
about this in the bar: he was enjoying it and the show outside immensely.
The  officers  radio  report  ended  most  unsatisfactorily,  though,  at  least  for

Richard.  Another car  was  to  be  assigned.  Apparently  Bourland's  influence  on  the
issue was yet to be felt. Richard shrugged. No matter. He had other work to  attend
for the moment.
Hours later, he finished off the last precious drop in the bottle  and  congratulated
himself on a smart bit of trash clearing, the trash being three days worth of piled-up
mail  that  had  to  be  answered  or  tossed.  Like  it  or  not,  he  had  to  deal  with  the
practical  aspects  of  his  now  mundane-seeming  business.  He  shifted  his  calendar
dates around, clearing things for  the next month and  faxing detailed instructions  to
his part-time secretary. The modern world had its complications, but he liked some
pieces  of  it,  such  as  the  electronic  links  that  allowed  him  to  run  an  international
business  from  his  home.  His  secretary,  a  busy  mother  of  four,  also  liked  the
convenience for the same reason. Because of it, he'd only ever laid eyes on her once,
during her interview some years  ago,  though from  the phone  he knew her voice  as
well as his own.
No word from the Judge in all that time, but it was early yet. Some of the places
he'd check for contacts didn't even open until after midnight.
Working off the energy the blood imparted to him, Richard found himself pacing
in the dim room, the only light coming from the gentle glow of his computer screen.
He hated waiting. It gave him too much time to think.
Sabra  would not  leave his mind, but  he also  had  to  protect  the  Prime  Minister.
That was his job, had ever been his job,  from  the very beginning in Arthur's  court,
and  everyone  who  had  met  him  over  the  centuries  knew  that  Richard  d'Orleans
always fulfilled his responsibilities. Yet he also had to find a way to save Sabra, and
himself. He had to find the Grail.
Well, the Prime Minister could  wait while the Judge dug  around.  Richard  would
spend  the  remains  of  this  night  at  the  other—and  to  his  heart  much  more
important—task.
He logged on to the Internet, intent to mine it for  fresh  information on  the Grail.
He'd not paid much attention to current archeological studies on the topic. He knew
there'd  been  some  excavations  at  Glastonbury  in  the  past,  of  course,  but  they'd
found nothing significant. Sabra had seen to that, but she'd not been in England for
several years  now.  Things could  have changed.  They always did  if  one  lived  long
enough.
A red light on a detector attached to his Internet link came on, warning him that he
was now being monitored. What the hell… ?
Demarest,  the  son  of  a  bitch.  Probably  pissed  off  by  Richard's  earlier  jaunt
outside. God knows how many arms he twisted to get this tap accomplished.
Richard's first reaction was to log off and let them all stew, but decided against it.
It  didn't  matter  if  anyone  looked  over  his  shoulder  on  this  search,  for  what
connection did it have to the case at hand? None. They'd take it for  a bit of  hobby
work by a natural insomniac. Probably bore them silly. Good.

He continued, doggedly pointing and clicking to anything that might be directly or
remotely connected to the Grail. Pickings were slim to none. He tried Camelot,  and
again came up  with nothing but  a schedule  of  performances  of  the  stage  musical.
Finally,  almost  in  desperation,  he  searched  for  any  reference  to  the  Arthurian
legends, and lo and behold a single return flickered up onto the screen.
 
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO… STOP PRESS The  Faculty of  History of  the
University  of  Toronto  is  pleased  to  announce  that  Professor  Neal  Rivers,  world
renowned expert on King Arthur and other myths of the Celtic world and  author  of
Arthurian Legends: A Round View will be a guest lecturer at the faculty for the rest
of this semester.
 
Richard  read  an  impressive  line  of  credits  attached  to  the  professor's  capsule
biography. Perhaps the term "world renowned" was not an exaggeration after all.
Here on  a  research  sabbatical  from  the  University  of Southern  California,  he
will  be  giving  a  series  of  talks  on  his  latest  work.  These  talks  are  open  to  the
public.  Please  book  in  advance.  Demand  is expected  to  be  great,  and  seats  are
limited.
Richard  smiled. If he knew  anything  about  talks  on  Arthurian  legends,  demand
would  not  be  great  at  all.  Someone  in  the  faculty  was  clearly  trying  to  drum  up
support. Nothing worse than having a prize guest lecturer and no one to lecture to.
Perhaps  the man would have some  useful current  data  on  Glastonbury  Richard
could use. He took down the details of how to book  for  the talks and,  on  a whim,
decided  to  call the listed number there and  then to  see  if he  could  get  any  further
information. They'd  have a machine on  at this hour,  but  at the very least he  could
leave a voicemail message. He used line seven, which was still showing a green light.
He was quite surprised when someone actually answered his call.
"Hello. Yes?  Who  is it, and  what  do  you  want?"  The  man's  wide-awake  voice
was firm and energetic, with a pronounced American accent, possibly Midwestern.
"My  name  is  Richard  Dun.  I  know  it's  late,  but  I  was  wondering  if  there  was
anyone there who could talk to me about Professor Neal Rivers and his work. I read
about his lectures on the Internet, and—"
"Couldn't  sleep  either, eh? Same here, buddy.  Damn jet lag'll drive you  crazy  if
you're not careful. My body doesn't know what day it is, let alone what time."
"Tuesday," offered Richard. "For another twenty minutes, anyway."
"You're kidding. You're not kidding? Jeez, I gotta look at my watch more often.
Well, how can I help you, Mr.—ah—Dun?"
"I'm looking for  Professor  Neal Rivers,"  said  Richard,  wondering who on  earth
this strange person was.
"Yeah. You got him. That's me. Guilty as charged. What d'ya want to know?"

Richard could not believe his good fortune. The Goddess must be smiling down
on him this night. His stomach  tightened in anticipation of  what he might  discover
from this man, and he plunged right in.
"The Grail."
"What about it?"
Richard hesitated. He would have to be careful how much he gave away. He was,
after all, talking to a world expert. He could not  let it be  known that he knew more
about  the  thing  than  anyone  else  alive  with  the  exception  of  Sabra.  He  feigned
innocence.
"Everything, really. Where did it come from, what does it look like, and are there
any digs going on to find it?"
"You believe it exists, then?"
Richard  wanted  to  say  that  he  knew  damned  well  that  it  did,  but  restrained
himself. "So much has been written about it, why shouldn't it exist?"
"People write a lot a crap  about  a lot of  things, but  that doesn't  always make it
real. Check out the papers in the grocery lines if you think I'm wrong."
"I think the Grail is in rather a different area than Elvis sightings or crop circles."
"Don't be too certain of that. Here's a thought: what if crop circles are really gang
signs from UFOs? Wouldn't that be a bummer?"
"I'm sure, but—"
The voice interrupted him once  more,  this time with an edge  that Richard  could
not define. "Yeah,  does  the Grail exist or  not  I happen  to  know it still exists.  It is
real. In fact, I'm doing a new book on the subject."
Richard frowned. "Indeed? I'd like to hear more about it."
"Oh, yeah? You're letting yourself in for it, asking a writer about his work, I'll talk
your ear off."
"I have the time and stamina."
"Wow, okay. Are you in the city? Great. Come on over then. I could use a break.
I'll leave a message with security to let you in."
He gave Richard specific directions to his building and rang off. Richard sat quite
still for a while, the telephone in his hand. This man clearly did know something,  or
at least he thought he did. And whatever he knew, Richard, too, would know before
the night was gone. He replaced the phone on its cradle and looked out the window
once again. The brown Buick was still there, a figure slumped in the front  seat,  just
visible in the orange wash of a street light. It would have to  be  the back  door  once
again. He logged off the Net and set the house alarm system.
This time, however,  escape  wasn't  so  simple. As  Richard  eased  open  the  door
leading to the alleyway, it became clear that the plea made by the other operative for
more men had  been  answered.  There  was  a second  car,  yet another brown  Buick.

The  man  inside  was  far  more  vigilant  than  the  other,  and  he  wore  night-vision
goggles.
Of all the bloody cheek.
Take it as a challenge, Richard.
The man had  come  alert  the  moment  Richard  opened  the  door.  There  was  no
going  back,  so  he  closed  the  door  behind  him  and  walked  north  toward  Queen
Street. The operative spoke into his radio, pulled off the goggles, and emerged from
his car. He kept a careful distance. Richard led him no more than a few dozen yards
before turning and rushing back faster than a human eye could follow.
"I don't like being watched," he said casually.
The man turned,  choking with shock  to  find  Richard  was  now  looming  behind
him, ghostly in the light of the waning moon.
The operative was  just  quick  enough  to  work  out  that  something  uncanny  had
taken place—Richard  recognized  that kind of  look  very  well—and  was  starting  to
back away, choosing flight over fight, but Richard fixed him firmly in place. No need
for touch—with  the power  of  the Goddess  rushing through him a  stare  was  more
than  enough.  Red  eyes,  glowing  in  the  darkness,  glowing  with  the  power  of  the
hellhounds of Annwyn, irresistible, enveloping, Richard  spoke  softly,  but  knew his
words would shriek right through all barriers of conscious thought to the man's very
soul.
"Go  back  to  your  car.  I haven't left the  house.  You  were  mistaken.  When  you
report in the morning, you will say that I was at home all night. Do you understand?"
The operative nodded, walked slowly past, and returned to his car. He opened the
door, a glazed, vacant look fixed on his face as he settled in.
Richard  observed  this  with  a  certain  amount  of  pleasure  and  pride.  Another
aspect of his condition  that had  yet to  pall. Impressive.  No  doubt  about  it, he still
had the knack when he needed it. He disappeared into the bustle of Queen Street.
 
The University of  Toronto  was  a cluster  of  fine buildings on  and  around,  of  all
places,  University Avenue, near the downtown  core.  Richard  found  the Faculty of
History nestled  in an imposing Victorian edifice, the result of  the munificence of  a
former student and  Prime Minister. Richard  had  often  been  struck  by  the sense  of
peace that existed within the confines of these centers of higher learning. Even during
the turbulent sixties, when students over the world had rediscovered their voice and
political strength, he still felt a sense of detachment from the world, of safety within
the walls of learning. We care for our children even when they do not want it.
He  passed  through  the  heavy  oak  doors,  ornately  carved  and  propped
permanently and inexplicably open, and found his way blocked by modern glass and
an intercom button. He pressed it and waited. Nothing happened.  He pressed  again
and peered through into the dimly lit interior. He could see a large security desk with
a pair of proportionately  large feet propped  up  on  it. He pressed  the button  again,

and the feet still did not move. Whoever was there was  clearly fast  asleep.  Richard
banged on the glass and called out and there was still no response. He was about to
give up and leave when he caught sight of movement in the corridor beyond and saw
a man's figure heading for the desk. He leaned over the sleeping guard and the lock
release  buzzed.  Richard  pushed  on  the  door  and  it  opened,  admitting  him  to  the
slightly too warm interior. As the door closed behind him all the sounds  of  the city
disappeared. "Security! I'm glad they're not looking after my bank account," said the
man. "You must be Richard Dun."
Richard recognized the flat accent from the phone immediately and shook the firm
hand that was proffered him. "And you must be Professor Rivers." 
"Just  call  me  Neal.  I  save  the  title  to  impress  the  students.  I  called  down  to
arrange for  you  to  get in, but  there was  no  reply. Thought  I'd  better  check.  Good
thing too.  He'll be  out  until doomsday,  or  the end  of  his shift, whichever's  nearer.
Come on."
Richard followed. They wound their way through a seeming labyrinth of darkened
corridors until light spilling from an open doorway beckoned and they entered Neal's
office. "Make yourself comfortable, if you can. Though comfort is not a high point
here.  They  like  visiting  professors  to  concentrate  solely  on  their  work,  I  guess.
Reminds me of my dorm days when it was my turn to learn."
Richard looked around the cramped space and had to agree. A desk, two chairs,
a computer terminal, not new, with books and papers crammed and stacked into and
on every foot  of  shelf space.  The  wastebasket  was  overstuffed,  with the shredded
remains of some fast food wrappings balanced precariously on top, the scent of the
food  still strong  in the air. Though  it  was  distinctly  lacking  in  any  of  the  creature
comforts, it was  obvious  that Neal had  added  some  personal  touches.  There  were
white carnations in a vase on the desk, and a print thumbtacked to the wall opposite,
an Aubrey Beardsley, the one of Salome gloating over the head of John the Baptist.
"Inspiration," said Neal.
"Sorry?"
"She gives me inspiration. The Beardsley. I see you looking at her."
"Forgive me," said Richard, "I didn't mean to stare."
"No problem. If you're wondering what sort  of  inspiration, it has  to  do  with the
political  in-fighting  around  here.  Doesn't  matter  what  school  you  go  to,  there's
always some vicious little fracas going on in the faculty and they want the newcomer
for their side, whatever side that is. I really don't give a damn and just want to get on
with my work, but if one of 'em gets my goat I just picture his head up there instead
of old Johnnie B's. It's great therapy."
"I should imagine."
The  professor  went  over  to  a  small  coffee  maker.  "Want  some  not-so-fresh
caffeine?" he asked, pouring a cup, then stirred in half a dozen  sugar  cubes.  "I  got
some instant amaretto creamer to take the bite off the acid." He held up a small jar,

giving it a tempting shake.
"No thanks."
"Very wise, you'll probably outlast me, then. I practically have to live on this stuff
when I'm pulling all-nighters." Neal pawed through a box  of  petrified doughnuts  on
the same table.
"Aren't all-nighters for students, not teachers?"
"Teachers  do  'em,  too,  they  just  never  admit  it.  This  late  it's  easier  to  wrangle
computer time for  research  with no  annoying interruptions.  Oh,  jeez, I didn't  mean
that like it sounds."  Embarrassed,  he let  a  jelly-stuffed  doughnut  thud  back  in  the
box.
Richard smiled deprecatingly. "Not at all, it's very kind of you to see me."
Neal grinned, then sucked a sugar-smeared thumb. "Yeah, I guess it is. I'm truly a
wonderful person. Now, how can I help you?"
Richard looked him over, seeing an ordinary man in his early forties,  of  medium
height,  slightly  more  than  medium  weight,  a  humorous,  but  otherwise  bland  face
topped  by  thinning  dark  hair.  His  sharp  brown  eyes  were  his  most  remarkable
feature,  sparkling  with  cheerful  energy.  He  was  immaculately  dressed  in  a  dark
brown  suit  of  the  finest  wool,  a  crisp  white  shirt  in  which  the  newness  almost
crackled, and a tie of muted red perfectly knotted at his throat. A white carnation sat
on  his  lapel,  securely  held  there  by  a  gold  pin  at  the  end  of  which  was  a  tiny,
exquisite diamond. Strange habiliment for such a late hour, but as a visiting lecturer,
perhaps he had to try harder to make a positive impression on his peers.
As  Richard  looked,  Neal  passed  a  hand  selfconsciously  through  his  hair,  and
absently touched the knot in his tie. "Well, do I pass inspection?"
"I didn't mean to be rude."
"That's  okay,  I can  gawk right back  if  you  like."  Neal  widened  his  eyes  into  a
brief, pop-eyed stare, then broke off with a grin, and  gestured  at the visitor's  chair.
He fell into the one behind his desk, tilting it back as Richard seated himself.
"So you're into the Grail thing, huh? Get inspired by that Spielberg movie?"
Richard chuckled, liking his attitude. "Hardly.  I'm  just beginning research  myself
on the subject, for a book."
"Whoa, you think I'm gonna share what I know with the competition?"
Richard's  initial  lie  came  out  with  a  smoothness  born  of  hundreds  of  years  of
practice. "It's for a fictional book, nothing remotely scholarly, I promise."
"You're a writer?"
"I hope to be. I do know that to get good fiction one has to base it on good fact,
and I want the full story on  whatever facts  presently exist on  the Grail. Newspaper
tabloids aside, there is a tremendous amount of text about it—"
"And you think it's real, too?"

"I  know  that  everyone  says  it's  only  a  legend,  but  I  just  don't  believe  that.
Anyway, I'm  stuck.  I've  read  everything  that  I  can  find,  in  fictional  works  and  in
poetry, and am just now starring the factual investigation for archeological evidence."
"You should go to England, then, if you're really serious about it."
"I plan to, as soon as I can get vacation time from my day job.
"And the conclusion you've reached is… ?"
"That  it  certainly  exists,  and  is  probably  hidden  somewhere  at  Ynis  Witrin."
Richard had used the ancient name for Glastonbury without even thinking.
"That's  the place,  the Isle  of  Glass."  Neal  looked  at  Richard  over  his  steepled
fingers with a smiling expression of benign patience, rather like a parent watching its
child's first faltering steps.  Richard  found  it intensely irritating, but  then he'd  asked
for it with such a cover story, so he would bear it out.
"I've read all that folklore has to offer, but factual data is a bit thin. I must confess
that I've not had the chance to read any of your works—"
"Not surprising. Most of them are papers in academic publications, which are not
known for their wide distribution to the general public. My first real book on Arthur
and the rest has only just come out. That's why I'm here in this godforsaken  place,
to push  the book  and  do  research  for  the next opus  in  between  lectures.  I  give  a
fascinating talk, then sell the book while everyone's  all worked  up  and  curious.  But
it's  mostly  about  the  legends,  and  you're  interested  in  the  actualities.  Well,  you
lucked out, since the new one I'm working on has just that angle. I'm planning to go
to Glastonbury soon to complete my research."
"Really? There's to be a dig, then?"
"Nah, couldn't get anyone to put up the money. Anyway, I'm not so great with a
shovel, but just turn me loose in the old church archives and see what happens."
That was a relief.
"You do know why it was called Ynis Witrin, don't you?" asked Neal.
"Aaaah…"
And the professor was off, first sitting and waving his arms,  then pacing around
the cramped  room,  in  full  flight  on  what  was  clearly  his  favorite  subject.  Richard
simply  listened  and  nodded  intelligently  as  Neal  told  him  a  number  of  things  he
already  knew,  imparting  them  with  all  the  solemnity  of  the  rarest  of  insights.  He
trailed  off  into  myth  again  and  again,  which  was  both  annoying  and  fortunate,
annoying in that Richard wanted current hard fact, and the man knew no  more than
he  did;  fortunate,  for  it  meant  he  was  just  another  semicharlatan,  making  a  dollar
from historical inaccuracy.
"But it's all in my book, y'know."
Richard's frustrating but well-hidden boredom  was  broken  by  this last sentence.
Perhaps the end of the dissertation was in sight.

Neal dug into the depths of a cardboard box. "Here, I'll give you a copy. I'm sure
it'll  help  you  in  your  research.  I've  got  a  helluva  bibliography  in  the  back."  He
presented  it  to  Richard.  Heavy  slick  paper,  numerous  full  color  illustrations  and
photos,  the  leather  cover  looked  to  be  hand-tooled.  "Lemme  autograph  it  so  it'll
become a collector's item."
Nonplused, Richard said, "I  couldn't  accept  this. It's  far too  valuable an edition
for you to be giving away copies to walk-in strangers."
Neal dismissed the objection with another arm wave. "I gotta box of freebies from
the  publisher  just  for  that  purpose.  And  then  you  let  me  bend  your  ear  for  God
knows how long and looked interested the whole time. When I find a good listener I
cultivate 'em like crazy."  He took  the  book  back,  opened  it  to  the  title  page,  and
signed it with a flourish.
"Thank you," said Richard. "This is extremely kind of you."
"Just mention me in your book's acknowledgments page and we'll call it even."
"I will," he replied with a very slight twinge of guilt.
"I'll bag  it up  for  you.  Don't  want to  mark that lovely cover  before  it  hits  your
coffee  table."  Neal  scrounged  again,  this  time  coming  up  with  a  large  white  sack
bearing the logo of a chain of taco restaurants. "No grease stains, great." He put the
book in the bag, double-folded the top, and gave it to Richard. "You're gonna come
to my lectures now, I hope?"
"I shall do my best to try."
"Great."  He clapped  his  hands  together,  rubbing  them.  "Now,  I  don't  mean  to
hustle you outta here— it's been real—but I still got work to do and…"
They then launched into one of the present culture's parting rituals, punctuated by
mutual professions of gratitude and enjoyment, and before he knew it, Richard  was
once  more  escorted  past  the  sleeping  security  man  and  going  through  the  heavy
glass doors. The sound of nighttime traffic was a relief to his ears after the forceful
rush of  Neal's voice  and  enthusiasm.  His high energy  compressed  into  so  small  a
room was something of an assault to the senses, and the relative silence and cool air
were a very welcome respite indeed.
He  breathed  it  in  deeply,  relishing  the  break.  The  meeting  was  something  of  a
disappointment, but then whims sometimes turned out like that. At least he'd gotten a
book out of it, and a rather expensive one to judge by its weight and  trappings.  He
wondered  if the professor  had  gone  to  a vanity  house  to  have  all  those  extras.  A
leather cover, indeed. Hardly anyone went in for that sort of thing anymore.
He glanced back and saw Neal still standing behind the glass doors, looking out.
The  man  sketched  a  breezy  farewell  wave,  then  turned  away  into  the  darkened
corridors of the building. An interesting fellow, if exhausting, and Richard decided to
add him to his ever growing list of useful contacts. You never know when you might
again need on expert on Celtic legends. He made a mental note to send a thank you
card for the book. It might make up a bit for the lie he'd told about  his own fiction

project.
Bag in hand, Richard headed north on University and found a cab  easily enough
on Bloor. But settling into the vinyl clad  backseat  he became  aware of  yet another
car idling at the curb a few yards behind. A blue Dodge, one occupant.  As  his cab
pulled  away  and  into  what  traffic  there  was  at  this  time  of  night,  the  Dodge
confirmed Richard's fears by slipping into the stream two cars back and tailing them.
Indeed, it stuck with them all the way back to the Beaches.
The  computer  tap.  Was  Demarest  so  obsessed  he'd  actually  sent  someone  to
check  out  the  professor?  Evidently.  Enough  was  enough.  Demarest's  antics  had
gone too far. It was one thing to be a nuisance about the assassin hunt, quite another
to  poke  into  his  private  business  about  Sabra.  Richard  told  the  cab  to  stop  On
Queen several blocks from his home,  paid  the driver off,  and  quickly stepped  into
the sheltered doorway of a closed store. The Dodge stopped a little way back along
the curb, idling its fumes into the night air. Richard glanced around and saw that true
to form, this part of Queen was deserted at this time of night. Safe. His body was a
blur as he ran to the car and wrenched the door open.
"I want you  to  tell Demarest…"  he began,  and  got  no  further. The  driver's  seat
was empty. His surprise turned rapidly to dismay as he felt the sudden cold press of
a gun muzzle hard against the back of his neck. He froze.
"If I knew who Demarest was, 1 might be able to oblige. Now why don't you step
away and keep your hands out where I can see them?" The  voice  was  low, female,
and the tone deadly. With an Irish accent.
He cautiously turned his head just enough to get a look at her.
Well,  well,  the  leggy  redhead  from  Niagara.  He  smiled.  The  Goddess  at  work
again?
"I need to talk to you—" he began, slowly straightening and turning to face her.
"No," she interrupted, backing off  a step  and  centering her aim exactly between
his eyes. "I need to talk to you."
Chapter Five
Richard  decided  to  be  very, very  cooperative.  He  could  survive  a  bullet  in  the
head even at this close  a range, but  it would take time to  heal again—and hurt like
hell.  Definitely  something  to  avoid.  Besides,  after  what  had  happened  when  he'd
been  shot  in  Niagara…  the  young  woman's  presence  brought  the  nightmare
forcefully back  to  him, as  if he  needed  such  reminding.  He  would  not  risk  losing
control like that ever again if he could help it.
She was casually dressed now as she'd been then: dark shirt, denim jacket, snug
designer jeans tucked into serviceable combat-style ankle boots,  flat heels. Not  that
she needed any boost in height with those legs. A trim girl, and tall, nearly eye-level
with him. He wasn't used to  that, but  liked the effect.  Despite her grim expression,

she had a nice face, more than nice, quite beautiful in fact. Fashion model bones, but
with enough healthy skin over  them so  as  not  to  look  anorexic,  and  a  cascade  of
deep red hair falling about  her shoulders.  Very striking, very tempting—but  for  the
9mm Glock semi-auto she held so easily in her hand.
Had she  seen  his rush  across  the street?  There  was  no  expression  in  her  sharp
green  eyes  to  indicate  she'd  observed  anything  odd.  In  her  place  he  would  have
slipped out the passenger's side and kept the car body between them until ready  to
pounce.  He  glanced  within  and  was  gratified  to  see  the  door  opposite  had  been
pulled shut, but not all the way, so his guess  was  right. She'd  just missed  his swift
crossing. How fortunate for them both.
"Now keep still and tell me who you are," she ordered.
"My  name  is  Dun,  Richard  Dun,"  he  said,  seeing  no  reason  to  lie.  He  could
always edit her memory later if necessary. "And you are… ?"
"Never you mind. Just hand that package over."
He still held the bag in one outstretched hand. "You want this?"
"You'd better believe it."
"Introductions followed by armed robbery. Charming."
"Put it on the bonnet. Now."
He  assumed  she  meant  the  bag  and  did  so,  setting  it  gently  on  the  car.  She
side-stepped once so the vehicle's front corner was between them. One-handed—the
other still held the muzzle's aim solidly in place—she seized the bag and upended it.
The book inside slid out and kept sliding down the hood, landing on the street with
the kind of dense thud reserved for  massive tomes  on  serious  subjects.  She  glared
down at it.
"Oh, shit!"
Her  Irish  accent  became  more  pronounced  as  she  launched  into  a  series  of
expletives,  mainly  aimed  at  "that  bastard  Rivers."  Finally  she  kicked  the  book,
sending it a few feet into the road, and turned her full attention back to Richard.
"That's it? That's all he gave you?"
"The professor? Yes."
"Holy Mary, mother of  Jesus—"  she  began,  but  cut  off  before  the  air  got  too
blasphemous. "Who are you to Rivers?"
"A somewhat less than perfect stranger."
"What d'ye mean by that?"
"I only just met him tonight. If you've a quarrel with him, I suggest—"
"Why did you go see him?"
"Private business. I'm doing research for a book on King Arthur—"
Her eyes sparked with an unholy joy. "Oh, are you now?" She spared the street a

quick, apprehensive look. Empty as it was, as late as it was, their privacy could not
last forever.  She  gestured  with the gun. "Come  around  the front,  then  get  into  the
passenger side. No fast moves."
"Or you'll kill me?"
"Believe it." She sounded chillingly sincere.
"May I pick up my book first?"
"Finger and thumb only, and take your time."
Richard  did  as  instructed,  retrieving  the  book  from  the  gritty  pavement,  then
walked  slowly  around  the  car  to  stand  by  the  front  passenger  side.  Stepping
backwards, she circled before him, keeping pace with him like a dance partner while
carefully maintaining her distance and aim. She had him open his door as she opened
the rear door. They got in at the same time, shutting doors at the same time.
"Face forward and put your hands on the dash, and don't forget I can shoot right
through the seat If you don't want a half dozen bullets in your spine—"
"Yes, yes, you've covered that point already. I will behave myself. Who  the hell
are you and why are you holding up honest citizens in the middle of the night?"
"It's in a good cause, so never you mind, Mr. Dun."
"Who are you with?" He was  fairly certain she  was  IRA.  Whether she  was  with
the main body  or  the splinter group  that had  hired Charon  was  what he wanted to
know next.
"You for the moment. Answer a few questions and you'll be free to go."
Richard  had  a brief thought having to  do  with hell  freezing  over,  but  kept  it  to
himself. "All right."
He heard her take a deep breath. "Good. Now tell me where the manuscript is."
"What manuscript?" he asked, honestly puzzled.
"The one you boys pinched from the museum."
He shook his head. "I think we're at cross purposes here, miss. I haven't the least
idea what you're talking about."
She jabbed the muzzle hard against his skull. "Then start thinking before you lose
an ear, and don't be forgettin' I can move on to other body parts."
"No doubt, but I still don't—"
"You were with Rivers and you were with Webb at Niagara. I saw you, so  don't
be denying it."
Oh,  shit,  he  thought,  echoing  her.  His  heart  rate  shot  up  painfully.  Had  she
returned and witnessed what had happened? The cabin curtains had been drawn, but
he'd been thoroughly out of his mind during the killing. She could have seen or heard
some or all of it. Damn, but he wanted to turn and  look at her, freeze and  question
her.  Not  now,  though,  not  just  yet.  He  had  to  play  by  her  rules  until  he  got  his

chance.
The gun tapped his skull again. "Well?"
"Yes,  I saw  Webb.  I saw  you  with him, too."  That  shut  her  up  a  moment.  He
pressed  his lead.  "I  watched  him  throw  you  out  of  his  cabin.  Very  noisy  it  was.
What did you want from him? This manuscript?"
A long wait. Then a change in her tone.  "Yes.  I'll pay  good  money for  its  safe
return. Cash."
She'd offered Webb money as well. "How do you know he had it?"
"I have my sources."
"It would have burned up in the fire."
"No, it didn't. He passed it to someone else. Maybe to you before you set him on
fire and got away."
He held to a bland face. "You're sure about that?"
"I went over  every inch of  that cabin  after the  coppers  left.  Burned  or  not,  I'd
have found some trace."
"Unless the police took away the ashes as evidence."
"They didn't, or I'd have heard. However, they did take you away. Why'd they let
you go?"
"I have connections."
"I'm sure. Perhaps you can use them to get the book  back.  For  that favor  I can
put an easy five thousand in your pocket."
"Your top offer to Webb was ten thousand."
She hissed. "Right, but only if it's in good condition."
The view out the front window was really boring. Time to get creative. He paused
long enough to give her the impression he was thinking things over. Then, "All right.
But I'll need to make some calls."
"I'll wager you do. Just tell me where it is, and we'll go there and fetch it."
"Oh? And you've got that ten grand in your pocket  ready  to  hand  over?  I didn't
think  so.  For  each  of  us  to  obtain  what  we  want  one  of  us  is  going  to  have  to
compromise a bit, and since you're the one with the gun…"
"All right, but nothing fancy or—"
"I've gotten the idea. Where's the nearest phone?"
"You tell me."
"There's  a  petrol  station  ahead."  He  nodded  at  a  bank  of  garish  lights  a  short
block away.
"Too bright."

"All the better to see me by. They'll only be to your advantage. It's either there or
we can cruise around and hope to get lucky."
She snarled a reluctant affirmative, warned him once more against doing anything
he'd regret, then got out of the back. He emerged from the front and was instructed
to walk ahead. With his hands in his pockets.
"Where did you train?" he asked, obeying both directives.
" 'Tis common sense. You'd look daft holdin' 'em atop your head, not to mention
noticeable."
He set an easy pace and heard her keeping up. How close was she? He glimpsed
their forms  reflected  in the shop  windows  they passed.  Seven feet, perhaps  more.
Too wide a gap for a normal man to risk, but then being normal was not something
Richard had had to bother about for a very, very, long time.
Well, now or never. All he'd really wanted was a little elbow room.
Between heartbeats,  he yanked his hands  free,  whirled,  and  got  behind  her.  He
smothered her gasp of surprise with one hand and seized the gun with the other while
pulling her backwards and off balance. It worked, sort of,  but  instead  of  struggling
forward to get away, she seemed to relax and fell heavily against him, pushing hard.
His own balance went awry. She pushed again and down they went with her on top,
the force of her weight driving the breath from him. He felt a sharp jab under his ribs,
her teeth sank into one of his fingers, and she was twisting and snarling like a scalded
cat.
She shifted  to  roll  toward  her  gun  hand.  He  released  his  grip  on  her  face  and
caught at her other arm, pulling it back and wide, trying to hold her spread-eagled on
top  of  him. He'd  have found  such  a wrestling game to  be  rather arousing  exercise
except for the various painful jabs and kicks he was collecting.
She  snapped  her  head  back,  slamming  her  skull  against  his  face.  He'd  turned
slightly; most of the impact caught him on the jaw, stalling, but not stunning him. She
took  what advantage she  had,  lifted, and  shoved  a sharp  elbow into his ribs.  That
tore it; he'd been trying not to hurt her, but all bets were off now. He pulled the gun
from her grip and sent it skittering along the walk, then folded her arm in across the
front  of  her  body.  His  turn  to  roll,  and  he  did,  hauling  her  over  until  she  was
facedown on the cement with all his weight on top. He brought her other arm around
to the small of her back and pulled it up.  She  spat  some  choice  curses  at him, but
stopped struggling.
"There," he puffed. "My turn to ask questions."
She  began  to  shriek  bloody  murder  and  more.  He  clamped  a  palm  over  her
mouth, risking another bite, and put pressure on her arm. Her vocalizations abruptly
stopped, replaced by a grunt of pain.
He leaned forward  to  whisper in her ear. "Now  here's  my deal. You'll answer  a
few for me and I won't dislocate your shoulder."
He wasn't sure if the nasal growl she emitted was meant as  acquiescence  or  not,

but thought to give her the benefit of the doubt. Just in case, though, he raised her up
enough to pull her other  arm free and  held them both  in place  behind her. It made
things awkward while trying to stand, but they managed.
"I'll cut your fucking heart out, I will," she promised breathlessly as he propelled
her back to the car. Along the way he picked up the Glock  and  held it hard  on  the
back of her neck, but kept his finger parallel to the trigger guard. He didn't want her
to see him putting the safety on just yet.
This time they both got into the rear seat. No need to have her within reach of the
car's horn. It was a bit close, both of them taking up a lot of space. She tried to go
out the opposite door, but  a nudge in the belly from  the Glock  changed  her mind.
Oh, but what a potent glare she had. You could sear anything with that kind of heat.
"What's your name?" he asked, smiling.
It took another nudge before she spoke. "Geary."
"A good Irish name, to  be  sure,"  he said,  imitating her accent.  "Now  where are
the rest of the boys to be found? Surely they don't  let a lass  like yourself loose  on
the world without a bit of backup."
Another glare.
Nowhere  fast  with  this  one,  but  he  had  an  excellent  shortcut.  He  found  the
domelight and flicked it on. Yes, that was fine, more than enough to  work by.  The
silence stretched  for  a long moment as  he concentrated  on  her. Perhaps  he lacked
the  gift  for  hearing  thoughts,  but  this  made  up  for  it.  The  heat  in  her  green  eyes
gradually faded; the tension in her face and the rest of her body began to ease.
"That's very good, Ms. Geary," he told her in an approving tone. "You just calm
yourself. Everything's fine now."
Her breathing evened out, her eyelids flickered. He heard her heartbeat slowing as
his influence took full hold of her, body and mind.
"I'm your friend, and we're going to have a nice chat."
"Friend," she repeated in a soft whisper like a sigh of love.
Her tone, though unconsciously induced, was not lost on Richard.
This  was  every  man's  dream,  being  able  to  get  a  beautiful  woman  to  do  his
bidding,  but  Richard  had  ever  been  above  that,  having  always  found  pursuit,
capture,  and  mutual  seduction  to  be  far  more  rewarding  than  base  coercion.
However, he wasn't above enjoying the temptation of the moment and  gave himself
time to look at her from head to toe and all the lush places in between. Dear lord, but
she was a lot of woman. Too bad about her politics.
Back  to business,  old  lad, he told  himself firmly.  "Yes,  we're  friends,  and  you
were just telling me who you work for."
"Lloyds."
"Who is he and where is he?"

"London. Other branches, too."
Richard  blinked  as  all  his  mental  works  squealed  to  a  jolting  halt  and  abruptly
shifted over. "You work for Lloyds of London?"
"That I do."
Oh, shit.
 
The change in her was  remarkable. "I'm  sorry  about  the  misunderstanding,  Mr.
Dun, but when—"
"Quite all right. Could have happened to anyone. Look, here are my credentials."
"My God,"  she  said,  obviously  impressed  without any hypnotic  help from  him.
Apparently a triple A clearance from the government of Canada, signed by the Prime
Minister himself carried a lot of weight with her.
"And you?" he asked.
She unhesitatingly hauled out  a credit  card-sized  piece  of  plastic  from  her jeans
pocket. It stated she was Sharon Geary, Head of Recovery Investigations at Lloyds
of London. It also added that she was twenty-six years old,  along with a few other
vital statistics.
"You're rather young to be head of Investigations, aren't you?"
"And  you're  rather easily taken to  be  with the Prime Ministers Special  Security,
but I won't tell if you won't."
"Fair enough. What do you want a gun for? You know how restricted they are."
"I'm sure that will be news to the IRA. Why don't you tell 'em about it?"
Point to her. "Another time, perhaps."  He put  the safety  on  the gun, ejected  the
magazine, yanked the  slide  back  to  remove  the  chamber  round,  then  returned  the
weapon  to  her.  He  kept  the  bullets.  Any  law  enforcement  officer  would  have
confiscated the lot, but he could be a bit more flexible on things. Besides, he didn't
want to have to deal with getting rid of it himself. She could  still attempt to  use  the
gun as a club of some sort on him, but  her present  state  of  mind made that a very
small possibility.
"You  going to  turn me in on  this?" she  asked,  hefting it slightly, then tucking  it
into the waistband of her jeans.
"No need. Just don't go waving it about; it makes the police nervous."
It had  taken no  small effort,  but  once  Richard  had  recovered  from  the  surprise
and sorted out his mistaken impressions, he was also able to sort out Ms. Geary's as
well.  He  turned  a  few  things  around  in  her  recent  memory—like  leaving  in  their
scuffle to  account  for  their mutual bruises  and  dishevelment—but he'd  told  her  to
look favorably upon him as  a fellow professional  in the business.  By the time he'd
finished she  was  fully awake and  cooperating  beautifully. They'd  quit the  cramped
backseat of the Dodge and now stood on the sidewalk next to it.

"What are you doing here?" he asked. "What's this manuscript business, and why
don't you like Rivers?"
"I  came  here  trying  to  trace  down  an  item  stolen  from  the  Irish  Museum  of
Antiquities in Dublin. It disappeared about two weeks ago and looked to be an inside
job. One of the museum employees who had access to it quit his job and vanished at
the same time. The police later discovered he had IRA contacts."
"This item being a manuscript?"
"A very old one, one of the very rarest of antiquities, absolutely genuine seventh
century.  Unique  and  priceless,  but  insured  with  Lloyds  for  five  million  English
pounds."
Richard whistled. "Go on."
"Through our contacts I traced it to that smuggler Webb in Niagara."
"And offered him a mere ten thousand for it?"
"It was as much as I had at the time. You saw how he lived; ten was a fortune to
him."
"Not if he had another buyer waiting. So after he threw you out—"
"I came back on  the quiet and  kept  watch.  That's  when I saw  you  after the fire
started…" Her brows came down. "Wait a minute, you were in the—"
He fastened  another hard  stare  on  her,  then  told  her  the  story  he'd  told  all  the
others.  Her  face  smoothed  out  as  she—with  no  choice  in  the  matter—  accepted
every word of it.
"Well," she continued, "I saw you outside with the fire brigade and  the coppers,
then  they  took  you  away.  I  got  to  thinking  you  were  in  custody  for  what  had
happened."
"No,  I'm  one  of  them.  They  wanted  to  get  hold  of  you,  too,  you  know.  Why
didn't you come forward?"
"Because it would have been a bloody inconvenience to my job. As it is, I had to
dump the car and get scarce myself. With Webb dead  and  the manuscript  missing,
the only other  lead I had  was  either trying my luck with  the  IRA  and  hoping  they
wouldn't kill me, or keeping an eye on Professor Rivers. He's an expert on  the area
the manuscript deals with, is a rabid collector, and not above cutting corners  to  get
something he wants."
"Like receiving stolen property? Where's a professor get the money for something
so valuable?"
"His family in California is posh as hell. They've covered up for him more than a
few times, I'm  sure,  for  past  deals."  She  leaned back  against the car,  crossing  her
arms.
"And  his  area  of  expertise…"  Oh,  damn.  "The  manuscript  is…"  Oh,  damn,
damn, damn.

"The Abbey Book is what they call it, though which abbey  they're not  sure,  but
tradition holds that it was originally written in Glastonbury and taken away before the
fire  in  1184.  It's  probably  the  very  earliest  surviving  account  of  the  Arthurian
legend." Damn, damn, damn damn, damn!
The closest artistic and historical equivalent is the Book of Kells. The few experts
who have looked at it think the text is a transcription  form  of  the bardic  songs  that
were popular back then. Beautiful stuff, lots of illuminated letters and such. Actually,
Arthur's not even mentioned much; it's mostly mystical gibberish about the Grail…"
Sabra's book.
"… with lots of symbolism thrown in. Some of the more rarefied academic circles
are still trying to puzzle out the meanings of certain passages."
It's all in the old tongue,  of course—and  in  verse. I was  never  very good  with
verse, but was mad for it for a time, so please forgive my faltering efforts at poetry.
"Something wrong?" she asked, pushing away from the car.
He shook  his head,  trying to  hide the fact  that the bottom  had  fallen out  of  his
stomach.
"You're lookin' peaky."
"It's been a long night." Pick up the  threads,  Richard.  " So  you  think Rivers is
interested in this book?"
"If the chance came up for him to buy it, he would and no questions asked. When
I saw you coming away from his building, and you had that bag, I thought—"
"That I'd gotten it from Webb and was trying to sell it to Rivers?"
"Something like that. Of course, it was a mighty puzzle seein' as how you went in
with empty hands, then come  out  with 'em full when it should  have been  the other
way 'round. I had to know what was goin' on and followed you."
Probably thinking he was IRA himself. She didn't lack for guts.
"My bad luck, though," she complained. "While I'm here with you, Rivers could
have gotten the manuscript and hidden it by now, if he hasn't already."
"Is he the only buyer you're checking out?"
"There's a few other collectors, but not in Toronto."
"What about the IRA? Why are they involved with this?"
"Like as  not  they stole  it to  sell to  someone  like  Rivers  to  raise  money  for  the
boys."
"Seems a roundabout method to  do  things."  But a fast  way to  get major funds.
Enough to pay for a top  assassin?  Perhaps.  Even if Rivers paid  a fraction  of  what
the  book  was  insured  for,  it  would  be  a  hell  of  a  sum  to  play  with.  A  thorough
background check on the professor was called for to see how much he was  worth,
along with another talk with him about the manuscript. Perhaps this time to "question
him closely," as Philip Bourland might have said.

"And why were you seein' Rivers?" she demanded.
"I told you, I'm doing research for a book on Arthur."
She favored him with a highly skeptical face. "Y' can do better  than that. I don't
believe in coincidence, Mr. Dun."
Neither did he. A smuggler like Webb—a known associate of Charon— bringing
in a book about the Grail? Either the Goddess was working in a mysterious way, or
there was  more to  things than he was  aware of  yet. He  fixed  Sharon  with  another
look "You do now. And call me Richard."
She winced, eyes closing briefly. "Oh, but I think I've  been  up  too  long as  well,
Richard. I'm feeling the lateness."
"Yes, time to pack it in."
"Are y' going to be wanting me to talk to the coppers about Niagara?"
"Not just yet."
"Why were you there, anyway?"
"Webb was a lead in another case  I'm  working on.  Quite separate  from  yours."
Maybe.
"Well, he had a wide range of  business,  from  art treasures  to  weapons.  Lots  of
people were interested in him."
"What do you know about Webb's gun operation?"
"Nothing, just that he dabbled in it." Sharon Geary stretched, groaning. "It'll be a
hot bath for me tonight. I hope I didn't bruise you too much."
"I'll live. I need to know where you're staying."
"Just follow Professor Rivers and you'll find me right behind you."
"No,  I mean it. There  are  some  things  going  on  you  don't  know  about,  and  it
could get very dangerous."  He resigned himself to  the necessity  of  imposing more
hypnosis on her. He didn't need any loose cannons rolling about the city, especially
now.
"I think I've an idea of the danger. That's why I got this." She drew the Glock out
again. "I'm  no  amateur, Mr. Dun, but  you  need  some  more  practice  I'm  thinkin'."
Quick  as  thought,  she  pulled  out  a  second  magazine  of  rounds  from  her  jacket
pocket, slammed it into the gun butt, and racked back the slide to chamber a round.
The safety was off, and she had the damned thing in his face again.
"You're not with Lloyds," he observed with considerable disgust.
"Not exactly, no, but I've work to do and won't be havin' you muckin' it all up for
me." She backed away and around until the car was between them and fumbled for
the door handle. "I've had a lovely time, though.  I'd  walk you  to  your  door  an'  all,
but—"
"No, thanks," he said dryly. "I'm a big boy."

She grinned at him. Her gaze traveled suggestively up and down his form.
"Don't even think about saying it," he warned, trying not to smile.
She laughed once, nimbly slipped into the car,  and  gunned the motor  to  life. He
thought about rushing around and stopping  her, but  dismissed  the idea. It was  just
too much work and risk. Besides, if he kept an eye on Rivers,  the redoubtable  Ms.
Geary  would  not  be  far  away.  Richard  could  deal  with  her  again,  and  not  be  so
trusting of her apparent credentials.
She pulled out and made a U-turn with the car, cruising slowly past him, her eyes
alight as she waved. "By the way," she called in parting, "nice ass!"
He suddenly found himself grinning back at her.
Absolutely, he thought, returning the compliment. Absolutely.
 
The remainder of the night was rather more tranquil. Richard  treasured  it, for  he
was tired and wanted the rest. He walked home—it wasn't that far—slipped past the
oblivious RCMP man on watch, and in through his own back door with no one the
wiser. He trudged upstairs, pausing only long enough to strip to the skin.
Bruises.  Lots  of  them.  He  noted  their  presence  and  forgot  them.  By  his  next
waking  they'd  be  gone.  The  blood  he'd  had  tonight  would  speed  the  healing.  He
dropped,  sprawling  across  the  tangled  bedclothes  with  a  thankful  groan,  and
surrendered to sweet forgetfulness for a time.
 
His answering machine was  off,  a  necessary  evil  since  he  was  expecting  a  call
from  the  Judge.  The  damned  phone's  annoying  buzz  dragged  him  out  of  his
voluntary coma far too soon to suit.
"… m'lo?"
"Catch you napping, old boy?" Bourland. Thought you'd be at work by now."
Richard  squinted  at the  glowing  clock  face  on  his  night  stand.  It  was  past  the
midday meal for most people. He'd had a full eight hours and a bit more, but didn't
feel like it. "What's up?"
"Did a little pest control. Your fleas are gone. Don't know for how long, though."
Richard  went to  the window and  cautiously peered  past  the  lightproof  curtains.
The sunny glare blinded him a moment, then he could see the street below. No extra
cars  parked  where  they  shouldn't  be.  Good.  "Thank  you.  I've  had  some  wiring
problems as well, you know."
"Shall I get an electrician for you?"
"I'd consider it a great favor if you would."
"Mind you don't squawk when I call it in." He rang off.
Richard  set  his  shower  head  to  firehose  pressure  in  an  effort  to  wake  up.  His

system was better suited to sleeping-the daylight away, and when possible it was his
preference to do so. Now was not one of those times. He could certainly sympathize
with Neal Rivers about jet lag; another eight to ten hours in the sack  would be  very
nice, indeed.
With Ms. Geary, perhaps?
He smiled at that idea and  woke  up  a  bit  more.  She  would  be  something  of  a
challenge, but what a reward if he succeeded.
If. Circumstances were hardly favorable at the moment, and would become  even
less so after his next phone call.
A short time later, shaved and in comfortable  clothes,  he plunged into his office
work for five highly focused  minutes. His secretary  had  E-mailed him confirmation
of the schedule  changes  he'd  made.  Excellent. He checked  the computer  line.  The
tap  was  still  in  place.  Not  so  excellent,  but  he  could  wait  a  little  longer  before
booking  a  first-class  ticket  to  London.  He  had  to  wait  anyway,  until  the  Judge
reported in.
Speaking of reports…
He  punched  in  Demarest's  number,  identified  himself,  and  was  shot  straight
through to the man himself.
"Yes,  what is it?" Demarest's  manner had  gained no  shred  of  charm  since  their
last meeting.
"I saw the Geary woman last night. We had a chat, sorted out our credentials."
"Who is she? Why didn't you bring her in?"
"She's not involved with the assassination plot."
"Oh, really?" Demarest was good with a sarcastic tone.  Very good.  "It's  not  for
you to judge. You should have brought her in for questioning."
"I might have tried, but for her gun."
"Explain."
Richard summarized his encounter, skimming some  points,  such  as  exactly how
he and Geary had come to meet, altogether leaving out  certain items of  information
that were none of Demarest's business, such as the talk with Rivers. True, someone
might  connect  the  expert  on  Celtic  studies  now  lecturing  at  the  university  with
Richard's  Internet  mining,  but  they  wouldn't  find  out  from  him.  Let  them  do  the
work. "Apparently Webb smuggled in some sort of old  manuscript  and  Geary was
trying to buy it back from him. Claimed she worked for Lloyds of London, but I've
an idea she's working for herself, perhaps to return the thing for a finders fee off the
insurance."
"Or keep to sell it herself."
"It's worth checking on.  I think an all-points would be  a good  idea—if you  still
want to find her."

"Of course we do!"
Richard  gave  a  complete  description  of  Sharon  Geary,  her  current  car  and  its
plates,  and  added  in a minor request.  "If  you  check  the car,  you  may find  a  large
book in it, a new one. It's mine and I'll want it back." Demarest grumbled something
noncommittal, apparently busy  writing things down.  Richard  decided  not  to  press;
recovering the book wasn't that important to him.
"Where exactly did you go last night?" Demarest demanded after a moment.
"Just out for a drink," he said truthfully. "I'd have invited your man, but he was on
duty."
"Planning to go out again tonight as well?"
"I haven't checked my social calendar yet."
"Don't push too hard, Dun, or I will find a cell for you."
"I'll keep that in mind."  He hung up  before  Demarest got  annoying. At least the
fellow  had  taken  him  seriously  about  the  woman.  There  had  to  be  a  degree  of
competence  hidden somewhere  under  the  insecurity  and  bluster,  or  he'd  not  have
risen so high in rank. That, or he knew how to delegate to abler assistants.
Ah, well, Richard had fulfilled his duty. Nothing to do now but wait for the Judge
to come through.
He hated this sort of waiting. It blew hell out of his concentration for most tasks,
knowing that at any second  he'd  have to  drop  what he was  doing  and  answer  the
expected  interruption. In all his  centuries  of  survival  he'd  never  been  able  to  cure
himself of this particular type of impatience.
The  longer  the  wait,  of  course,  the  worse  it  got.  He  paced  about  his  house,
occasionally putting an out-of-place  item in its proper  spot,  and  doing  other  small,
unimportant chores, but little more than that. He did  trouble  to  repack  his travel kit
and suitcase to have it ready for his trip to England. Once this irksome business with
Charon was out of the way, or in some kind of a holding pattern, Richard would be
on the next flight out. He wanted to make the necessary  arrangements now,  but  the
tap on his computer prevented that Demarest would really go  'round  the twist if he
knew Richard was shortly planning to leave the country.
One  hour  passed,  then  three.  Richard  was  glad  he'd  slept  the  bulk  of  the  day
away. Through  it all he very determinedly did  not  call the Judge's  number.  Eugene
Mantalessa worked better when no one was looking over his shoulder.
Phone.
Richard  picked  it  up,  the  wretched  thought  flashing  through  his  head  that  it
wouldn't be the Judge but someone trying to sell aluminum siding.
"The  Judge is back  and  has  your  sentence  ready,"  announced  the  voice  on  the
other end.
Richard  kept  the  relief  out  of  his  voice.  "Let's  hear  it."  He  checked  his  tap
detector. The light showed green for clear. Thank God for Bourland.

"Uh-uh. This one cost me big. I need to get that back again."
"You know I'm good for it."
"Uh-huh, but if you get killed before I collect, then where would the Judge be?"
"Eugene…"
But the Judge had a smile in his tone.  The  distance  between them and  probably
another line of  snow  must  have given him the courage.  "You  meet me by  McGills
Pub and settle out, then you're on your own."
"I'm leaving now. Be there."
Richard had been ready to leave for far too long. His coat, hat, and  gloves were
laid out and ready; he swiftly donned them, checked that he had enough money for
the Judges expenses and more, then used the inside door leading to the garage.
This time he chose to leave the Jaguar in and take his other  vehicle, a late-model
Land Rover. It was lower profile. He usually drove it during the winter months when
the streets were icy, rather than risk the more valuable Jag to the scrapes and bruising
of accidents.  He started  the  Rover,  thumbed  the  remote  button  to  open  and  then
shut the garage, and was off to McGills.
The sun was a painful nuisance. He had to head into it, and its light blasted against
him like a fury. No amount of  sunscreen  would protect  him for  long. Hurriedly, he
yanked  a  heavy  woolen  scarf  from  a  pocket  and  wrapped  it  around  his  face,
covering the lower part  right up  to  his  eyes,  which  were  already  shielded  by  very
dark,  wrap-around  sunglasses.  The  glass  was  polarized  with  UV  blockers.  They
helped, but he still had to squint.
The evening traffic jam was off to an early start, compounding his discomfort, but
he got far enough along Gardner  to  turn north,  and  things eased  a bit. His hat and
turned up collar kept him from burning, though he could still feel the heat beating on
the side of his head and neck.
McGill's  was  not  one  of  his  favorite  recreational  spots.  They  supposedly  had
decent food and drink, the music was excellent if you liked it Irish, but the watchful
atmosphere always put his teeth on  edge.  Too  many eyes,  too  much suspicion  for
outsiders, certainly it was no place for him to hunt down his own kind of food. The
owner was more than a little sympathetic to the IRA and made no secret of it. Most
of his customers  were of  a like mind, and  if not,  then they were better  off  staying
away.
Richard found a parking space down the street and walked up slowly in the safe
shade  of  the buildings,  getting  a  look  at  things.  The  neighborhood  had  been  new
about a hundred years ago, but was now more than ready for retirement. Usually he
wasn't in favor of tearing down old edifices for modern replacements, he'd seen too
much beauty and history destroyed, but in this instance he'd make an exception. The
street was lined with mean little one- and two-story structures, stuffy and hopelessly
plain, huddling under  the tall  high-rises  that  overlooked  them.  Even  when  the  first
coat of paint had  been  fresh  these  affronts  to  architecture had  been  ugly, and  time

had not improved them one  whit. Windows  were caged  over  by  wire mesh,  doors
were obscured behind protective bars, or boarded up and covered with gang graffiti.
The exception was McGill's Pub. No gang in the area was  foolish  enough to  spray
their signs on its walls.
He'd nearly reached McGill's when someone hissed at him from the gap between
two buildings. The Judge. Looking nervous. Richard cast a cautious glimpse around,
saw things were clear, then went to join him.
"Thought you'd be in the pub," he said.
The Judge shook  his head  firmly. "Mon,  nobody  there ever mistake me f'  bein'
Irish. An' one thing I don't need is for the boys to know I even breathe; they might
want  to  change  it.  What's  with  the  getup?  I  almost  din'  know  you.  You  cold  or
somethin'?"
"Or something. What have you got?" He moved deeper into shadow to avoid the
slice of a last stray sunbeam.
"That depend on what you got."
Richard pulled out the envelope with the remaining cash and  let the Judge see  it.
"Only if what you have is good."
"It's good, you can trust me."
"Get real, Eugene," he said with a smile.
The Judge gave  a  half-hearted  laugh,  but  couldn't  keep  the  sudden  alarm  from
showing in his eyes. "Okay, there's a mon, IRA, call himself Sean, who deals with th'
guns,  any  guns.  He  collects  'em,  buys,  no  questions  asked,  'n'  ships  'em  out  to
you-know-where."
Sean. The same one Webb had called? "His last name, location?"
"Don' got a last name, mon, but he got a place you can check out. What I heard
was he got  a special  customer  wantin' a special  gun. It coulda  come  in by  now,  I
couldn't find that out for sure, but  him and  his boys  are freaked up  bad  an'  it ain't
because of the cops."
"Who, then?"
"A friend of a friend tol' me that one of their boys got  snuffed,  he check  out  so
hard and  nasty  his own mama wouldn't  know him. Happen  a couple  days  back  in
Niagara—"
Richard  held to  a stony  face  and  was  glad he still wore  his  concealing  glasses.
"What about it?"
"Well, this dead mon is the one who brought the gun over the border. He deliver
to  Sean,  then  someone  got  to  him.  Now  Sean  'n'  his  boys're  lookin'  over  they
shoulder so much they gonna get the whiplash."
"Give me a description of Sean."
"Big hairy bastard with a busted nose. They say he used t' fight heavyweight till he

kill a mon."
"In the ring?"
"In a bar. He cut someone up with a bottle, then hada run, get a new name. The
boys took care of 'im till he got set up again."
"Where can I find him?"
"It's real close, just across 'n' down. Used to be a store, but  they shut  it up  and
use it to hold stuff for shippin'."
"Which one?"
"Number 118, jus' short of the corner. It locked up good, though, mon. You ain't
gettin' in easy."
"I'll manage."
"Gettin' out be harder. You wanna pay up before you start?"
Richard handed him the envelope with the other portion of his payment, but didn't
release it. "I'll come  for  a refund  if this turns  out  to  be  a  waste  of  time."  He  was
smiling again.
The Judge swallowed, blinking hard. "I  know,  mon.  But this is th'  straight stuff.
Cost me big."
"Cost you more if it isn't." He let go and the Judge swiftly crumpled the envelope
into a pocket, not bothering to count  the contents.  "I'll see  you,  mon.  Maybe."  He
took off toward the alley's other entrance, not looking back. Richard lingered in the
shadows, listening, finally hearing the nearby thrum of a car motor coining to life. It
could be the Judge's, or not. No matter.
Damned sun. He checked the time. A few minutes to  go  before  it was  fully safe
for him to  move.  Not  long. He leaned against a dingy  brick  wall  and  watched  the
light fading, retreating. The sky was still very bright, but soon now.
People  passed  by  the  alley,  some  looked  in  and  moved  on,  most  didn't  even
notice his presence. Not very good urban survival skills on their part,  especially for
this  neighborhood.  Had  he  been  more  like  his  bloodthirsty  cinematic  cousins,  he
could have had his pick of them to drag in and feed upon. How lucky for them all he
knew the meaning of caution, restraint, common sense… and good manners.
The darkness got thicker, more comfortable. Some of the skin on his face stung a
bit from too much exposure, but not for long. Like last night's bruises, it would heal.
He briefly returned to the Rover to stash his outer garments to allow himself greater
freedom of movement, then went back along the twilight-washed street.
Artificial lights sprang up. No threat from them; they only made the shadows that
much darker.  The  sign over  McGill's flashed  on.  He passed  under  it,  catching  the
sound of voices  and  music.  No  live band  tonight. A pity. It would have improved
the place.
Like a good citizen he crossed the street at the corner and kept going around the

block, finding his way through the maze of walls to the delivery entrance of number
118. The trashy flotsam in the alley was old: crushed and tarnished beer cans, dusty,
broken glass. No oil stains from standing vehicles, indicating it was not much used.
He  tried  the  featureless  metal  door.  Locked,  of  course.  Several  deadbolts.  He
thought of picking them, but that would take too long.
The low window next to the door looked more promising. A sturdy iron grill had
been bolted into the brick as a deterrent. Discouraging to a casual intruder, but not to
him. Richard took strong hold of the lower part, braced his feet, and pulled.
A century of Toronto winters had had their way with the bricks. He heard a crack,
then a grinding sound, then the whole grill suddenly came away in a puff of dust He
recovered his balance, set  the thing aside,  and  tried the window.  One  of  the panes
was broken and someone had covered it with duct tape. He tore it away, put a hand
in to unlatch the thing, then slowly raised the sash.
It  protested  noisily,  but  lifted  enough  for  him  to  slip  inside  to  a  small,  bare
chamber. His eyes quickly adjusted to the gloom. He smelled chilled damp concrete,
moldy wood, and something sharper: metal oil, and sawdust. At his feet lay crushed
curls of  excelsior.  He left  the  window  up  and  quiet  as  a  ghost  moved  toward  an
open door that led further into the building.
No lights on,  but  he didn't  need  them. He saw  a number of  crates  in all shapes
and sizes, some open, others nailed shut. The aged labels declared some items to be
machine parts, others were supposedly  toys,  the boxes  bearing the logo  of  several
legitimate companies. In one partly packed  crate  declaring itself full of  fragile glass
ashtrays  he  found  a  goodly  quantity  of  hand  grenades  nestled  in  curls  of  wood
shavings.
Sound.
He froze, listening.
Yes…  someone  else  was  here.  He  could  hear  their  breathing.  Faint,  but…
Richard followed the sound, his senses stretched as he eased closer to its source.
Now he could hear a heartbeat drumming away strong and fast. The other person
knew he was here all right, only fear worked that kind of a strain on a human heart.
Richard softly changed course, gliding past a tall stack of boxes. His quarry was
behind them somewhere. It was hard to keep silent; the floor was filthy and  the grit
crunched between his shoe  soles  and  the concrete.  He reached  the last corner  and
cautiously peered around.
There he was. Richard could just see him standing a few yards off, back pressed
against the crates, holding to  a tense  listening posture.  A big fellow, bearded,  dark
hair down past his thick, bunched shoulders. Sean? Oh, yes, very likely. Gripped in
his  right  hand  was  a  short-barreled  revolver,  aimed  at  the  ceiling.  Finger  on  the
trigger. Nothing unexpected.
Very slowly, Richard stepped clear of his own concealment, intent on  rushing in
fast to take the other man down. Unfortunately, the unswept floor betrayed him. His

shoe audibly scraped over something; Sean whirled and fired. No time to duck, but
the shot went wild. Before he could get out another round, Richard surged forward,
grabbing the gun, first pushing it wide, then plucking it free. Sean  didn't  waste  time
trying  to  get  it  back,  and  instead  brought  a  strong  left  hook  in  under  Richard's
ribcage, knocking the breath quite out of him. He staggered, got his arm up in time to
block another punch, but the next one caught him square in the belly, doubling him
over. A knee shot up to crack Richard's chin. He reeled to  one  side  just in time to
avoid  it,  caught  Sean's  leg  and  pulled.  The  man  grunted,  lost  his  balance,  and
clutched Richard's shoulders as he fell, dragging them both to the floor.
Sean twisted,  landing on  top,  using his  greater  weight  like  a  wrestler  to  pin  his
opponent.  His  hands  went  around  Richard's  neck,  thumbs  locked  hard  over  his
windpipe and  gouging  deep.  Richard  heard  the  sudden  snap  of  his  own  cartilage
giving way and gagged against the heavy pain. Forty pounds of pressure, that's all it
takes, he thought  dimly.  He  still  had  the  gun  in  his  left  hand,  but  the  wrong  way
around. He used it like a club on the side of Sean's head. That helped. The agonizing
pressure abruptly lessened, but didn't stop. The breakage was still with him, choking
him. He retched and gasped, tasting blood in the back of his throat.
Sean recovered  rapidly. He rolled off,  clawing  for  the  gun;  Richard  stubbornly
held on to it. Sean caught his arm in both  hands  and  slammed his wrist against the
unforgiving  corner  of  a  crate,  hard  enough  to  fracture  the  bones.  The  gun  went
flying. He heard it strike the concrete with a dull clank. Sean pushed  away. Richard
turned over in time to see the other man pounce on the gun, turn, then the business
end of the thing was in his face.
He shut  his eyes,  expecting,  dreading the shot,  but  nothing happened.  When he
opened them a second later Sean was still there, catching his own breath.  Reaction
from the choking hit Richard, and he began to cough, trying to force air in and out.
God, it hurt. He tore at his collar and still the pain clung to him. Healing would come,
but never fast enough.
"Right," said Sean. "Now who the devil are you?"
Too soon for questions. Richard was in no shape to reply. He gagged again, air
wheezing in and out of his throat like a rip saw.  An ordinary man would have been
dying or dead from the damage. Richard wasn't so sure he was much better off.
When  no  immediate  answer  was  forthcoming,  Sean  walked  over  to  a
cardboard-covered window, peeled back  a flap, and  looked  out.  He grunted once,
then returned to stand over Richard.
"Who are you? Why'd y' come here?"
Richard could only manage shallow breathing. Damn, but  next time he'd  carry  a
gun himself. This bastard had been entirely too fast and strong. He fitted the Judges
general description;  add  in thickened ears  and  facial  scarring  and  a  well-broken  in
nose to clinch things. Definitely a former boxer and still very solidly in shape.
"Come on, or I'll blow your head off. Why're y'here?"
Things were a  shade  less  agonizing.  He  pointed  to  himself  and  coughed  out  a

single word. "Buyer."
"You're saying you're a buyer?"
Richard nodded.
Sean had  a singularly unpleasant smile. "No  way in  hell.  I  know  'em  all  an'  the
ones  I don't  always set  up  a proper  meeting. You're  a cop  is what I'm  thinkin'.  A
dead  'un."  He cocked  the gun, the muzzle touching lightly right between Richard's
eyes. He struggled, dragging in more air. "Charon. Sent. Me."
"Did  he  now?  That'll  be  news  to  him,  I'm  sure.  How  is  it  you  even  know  his
name? Eh?"
Richard held his hand up, palm out, a gesture to ask for more time. The man was
smart enough to be  curious;  he held off  shooting  and  eased  the hammer back  into
place. Richard rallied to the point where he noticed his injured hand. He gingerly felt
things. No  broken  bones,  he could  thank his changed  nature for  that,  but  hellishly
bruised. He looked forward to some payback time with Sean.
"Right, now tell me a story or two," Sean ordered.
"I'm looking for a special gun. Heard you  could  get it for  me."  His vocal  cords
felt like sandpaper.
"From Charon?"
"We're in the same business. You're the one to see, he said."
"Very flatterin', but I don't believe you."
"Then  believe  this."  Richard—very  slowly  and  with  great  consideration  for  his
hand—fished out his wallet. It was fat with hundred dollar bills. He drew out the lot
and placed  them on  the closest  crate.  "Downpayment.  I've  more  where  that  came
from."
Sean's  expression  remained  the  same,  except  for  his  eyes—something  was
different  there.  The  glint  of  greed.  Excellent.  Miraculous  stuff,  money.  It  could
almost  always  be  relied  upon  to  produce  instant  and  universal  understanding
between opposing  viewpoints when conditions  were  right.  And  if  not  that,  then  it
made for a marvelous way to stall for time.
"Thank you very kindly, I'm sure, but—"
"You don't want to kill me and take the cash," Richard advised him.
"I don't? An' why not?"
"Because you are a business man, and you're not stupid. This is a chance to turn
a hell of a deal."
Sean  worked  through  that  one,  taking  a  lot  of  time.  Good.  Richard  felt  his
strength reviving and with it his full concentration. The big fighter was now in a fairly
receptive  state  for  suggestion.  Sean  something-or-other,  probably  the  man  Arlie
Webb  had  called  for  help,  and  certainly  a  dealer  for  special  weapons.  Demarest
would be delighted, but Richard had him first and could question him first. Closely.

"You need to listen to me on this," Richard said,  locking his gaze hard  onto  the
other man's eyes. "You really must listen to me."
Sean's determined expression wavered. His eyes  clouded  slightly. He wasn't  too
deeply under, but enough to be able to work with. "I'm… listenin'."
"I'm here to make you very rich."
Sean nodded in dull agreement.
"I'm here to help you. But you have to help me as well."
"Yeah."
"Now,  I very much need  to  talk to  Charon  first. You  must  tell  me  where  he  is
before—"
Sean shook his head; his big frame shuddered from top to toe. Resisting. A tough
will to go with the tough body.
"Charon wants to contact me—it's important that—"
"No… I can't…"
"You can, Sean. You will." Richard stepped up the pressure.
Sean flinched, bunking fast, continuing to shake his head.
Something was wrong. The man should have been babbling his head off by now.
"Easy, Sean, you can relax, you're perfectly safe. Just tell me where Charon—"
Sean moaned  as  though in pain and  brought  the gun  up  to  fire.  Richard  barely
knocked  it  away  in  time.  The  roar  this  close  buffeted  hard  against  his  chest  and
deafened him for an instant. With his uninjured fist Richard  struck  the man a solid
one in the jaw, sending him right over. He instantly and soundlessly collapsed.
Damn.
Richard  pushed  away  from  the  body,  indulging  in  a  few  more  soft  curses  of
reproach. Now he'd have to try and revive the bastard and God knows how long that
would  take.  There  hadn't  been  time  to  pull  the  punch.  What  had  gone  wrong,
anyway? He'd never had anyone react quite that way before.
Standing and dusting himself off, Richard retrieved his stack of money, then went
to the cardboard-covered window and looked out as Sean had done a few moments
ago. The sky was much darker, the artificial lights more intense. The view was of the
street that faced McGill's Pub. One or two hard-looking men were filing in, intent on
an after-work drink and  certainly to  talk a  little  treason.  If  anyone  noticed  the  last
shot, no one appeared to be interested in investigating it. The neighborhood was not
the sort to encourage such curiosity.
Wait a moment, one person standing outside was looking this way.
Sharon Geary. What the hell was she doing here? Maybe Rivers had proved to be
a dead end. She'd said she might have to try her luck talking to the IRA. Her accent
would carry her a bit with them, far enough to get killed if she wasn't careful.

He glanced back  at Sean,  who hadn't  moved  a fraction  and  wasn't  likely  to  for
awhile. Richard sighed, thought, why not? and checked the front door of the place.
Lots  of  deadbolts  and  an  iron  bar  across  the  middle  to  keep  out  intruders,  but
nothing to  keep  anyone from  leaving. He undid  the bolts,  lifted the  bar  away,  and
slipped outside, pulling the door shut behind him.
Sharon was no longer to be seen. Inside the pub, then. He crossed the street and
pushed  through  the  entry.  It  was  early  yet,  and  few  people  were  inside.  He  was
invited to pay a cover charge and gave the man behind the counter a fiver.
"An'  something for  the  boys,"  he  told  Richard,  indicating  a  foot-high  glass  jar
with  a  slot  cut  into  the  plastic  lid.  A  hand-lettered  sign  taped  on  it  had  some
nonsense about the proceeds going to a charity Richard had never heard of; without
argument he put  another five into it. Anything less  would draw  attention, and  if he
chose not to "contribute" he'd be followed out of the pub when he left. Not that he
couldn't have taken care of  them, but  he had  more important things to  do  than get
into alley fights with Republican sympathizers.
Sharon  was  toward  the  back,  leaning  over  a  table,  talking  with  a  couple  of
uncooperative-looking  men.  They  were  shaking  their  heads  to  whatever  she  was
saying. The other men in the room were openly staring at her, their thoughts  clearly
on their faces. Richard would have been worried for her but for  the knowledge she
was probably still packing that Glock and a hell of an attitude.
Richard  got  close  behind  her.  The  men  at  the  table  looked  up,  triggering  a
reaction from Sharon, who straightened and turned, her eyes going wide.
"You—!"
He put  on  a brogue  again, talking loudly. "Why  if  it  isn't  Sister  Mary  Margaret
collectin' for the parish! The Mother Superiors been lookin' all over  for  you.  Come
along, Sister, or you'll miss the evening mass." He got a firm grip on  her near arm,
caught her other hand to keep it out of mischief, and  steered  her inarguably toward
the exit. Laughter trailed after them.
"You son of a—"
"Now, now, you'll have to do penance for that thought."
She gave up struggling until they were outside near the curb, then made a decided
effort  to  shake  him  off.  He  backed  away  half  a  step,  hands  out  to  show  how
harmless he was and collected a glare for his trouble.
"Lose interest in Rivers?" he asked.
"He's doing one of his lectures now; it was safe to talk to them."
"You've got a strange idea of what is safe, Ms. Geary."
"I've no need for you to be tellin' me how to run my business."
"And what might that be?"
She scowled.

"My guess is you're trying to recover the manuscript to  claim the finders  fee off
the insurance. Am I right?"
She gave a short laugh, then a short nod. "A quarter million pounds—an' I've no
plans to be sharin' it with anyone."
"I wouldn't think of interfering."
"You just did, you daft loon! I was almost—"
The interruption was a loud one, almost too loud to hear. Richard hadn't heard or
felt anything like it since the last time he'd been under cannon fire. Instinct cut in far
faster than thought; he grabbed Sharon and dragged her to the ground.
Too late. If you can hear it, it's already too late.
Chapter Six
His ears rang; one side of his face stung. The dust spray and mortar flinders were
yet to settle from the head-sized hole that had magically exploded into the brick wall
of the pub on his left. He brushed at the grit clinging to his skin, staring.
Sharon pushed him off and started to rise, then froze as her impossibly wide eyes
followed his gaze. She mouthed the word shit and scrabbled quickly backwards on
hands and knees to questionable shelter behind a parked car. Richard followed her.
As his hearing recovered, he caught the sound of screams and shouts coming from
within the pub. Some fool poked his head out the front door; Richard bawled at him
to get back inside. He spotted others standing confused on the street and yelled for
them to  run. They finally got  the idea and  removed  themselves from  the area.  Not
fast enough to suit, but he couldn't help that.
After  a  few  moments,  he  raised  up  a  bit  to  peer  over  the  car,  scanning  the
rooftops on the opposite side of the street. Clear. He looked at the hole in the wall.
God. Whoever  fired a round  like that could  have been  on  one  of  the more distant
high-rises. There was no way to tell.
"What the hell was that?" Sharon asked, rather loudly. Apparently her hearing had
also been affected.
"Long gun. Sniper." Charon, he thought. He remembered the other men who had
made a special project of hunting for Charon and the fate of three of them. All taken
out by  a rifle, the  last  catching  it  in  the  neck.  Richard  didn't  think  even  he  could
possibly  survive  such  a  massive  wound.  His  heart  skipped  once  and  shuddered
against his ribcage.
"Sniper?"  She  shrank  farther  behind  the  car.  Not  that  it  would  have  helped.
Whatever had gone through the pub wall could just as easily go through the vehicle.
"Against the IRA?"
"Against me."
Her face was set, in control, but she trembled. Flight or fight, but with nowhere to

go and no one to hit. He understood the feeling. "What lovely friends you have. And
lucky for you he missed."
Richard shook his head. "Not luck. He missed on purpose." The bullet had gone
right between  them,  or  so  his  impression  of  the  instant  told  him.  A  warning.  But
why? Why would Charon even bother? "Stay here, I have to check on things."
"Don't worry," she said with great sincerity.
He kept to normal human speed, but darted quickly from his cover to the entry of
the pub. There was no second shot. Inside,  people  were still on  the floor  or  under
tables, for all the good it would do them.
The exit hole of the bullet was a full foot across. Brick dust, plaster,  splinters  of
wood lay everywhere. He smelled blood.
"Anybody call nine-one-one yet?" he asked no one in particular. He had to speak
up, not for his ringing ears, but to be heard  over  the the pub's  sound  system.  Irish
folk music blared insanely from the speakers.
"I'm on the phone now," a woman in the back  replied, her own voice  tight with
the sudden stress.
"Tell them it's a sniper."
He got an affirmative snarl in return.
The smell of blood came from several people who had been caught by shards of
flying brick. The stuff had shot out from the bullet's passage  like shrapnel,  creating
the same devastating effect.  He spotted  one  man  clutching  his  bleeding  scalp  and
helped  lift  another  with  blood  streaming  from  a  gash  in  his  leg.  He  guided  both
toward  the  far  wall  where  the  others  were  moving.  Without  exception,  they  were
pale-faced and shaking with fear, but trying to aid their cursing and groaning fellows.
Someone found a cache of bar towels and began using them as makeshift bandages
on the wounded.
His corner teeth began to bud. Damn, not now! The beast inside, having scented
food, was scratching to be let out. It was too soon for him to feed again; this wasn't
hunger so much as gluttony. Control. He could control it. Had to control it. Richard
held still a moment, and briefly succeeded in shutting down the chaos  both  without
and within. It was very much like praying. When he was ready, he allowed the outer
noise  to  flood  back  again.  His  teeth  were  normal,  and  he  was  able  to  deal  with
mundane realities.
He began by herding the strays through the back hall and delivery area and out the
rear door, telling them to stay low in the alley until the police came. A few muttered
unanswerable questions,  but  no  one  argued with him. Probably  glad  someone  had
taken charge for the moment.  He went back  in. The  pub  area was  clear except  for
the mess: overturned chairs and tables, broken and scattered bottles and other minor
debris. No bodies,  thank God.  He was  quite sincere  in his gratitude; it had  been  a
miracle no  one  had  been  directly hit by  the bullet. They'd  have  gotten  cut  right  in
two.

He did find a sizable hole in the floor. There'd be hellish damage in the basement
for sure. He bent low, lining his gaze up to peer through the hole in the outside wall
to do  a rough calculation of  the angle. Yes.  He could  see  the roof  of  the  building
opposite.  The  sniper  had  set  himself  up  there.  Probably  gone  by  now.  At  least
Richard hoped he was gone.
Only one way to find out.
Sharon was in the same spot when he emerged and joined her, crouching again by
the car.
"What's—?" She indicated the pub.
"A few people cut up, no one killed."
"Thank heaven."
"Absolutely." He heard sirens. Hell. He didn't want to hang about  the rest  of  the
night trying not to talk to the law. "I think you should leave."
"It had crossed my mind, but is it safe?"
"Haven't the faintest. Where's your car?"
"Turned it in on the chance you got the plate numbers. I cabbed over."
Damn. "I have to do something first, but I still need to talk to you. My truck's just
down the road." He described the Land Rover to her. "Will you wait there for  me?
I'm not after the finders fee for your manuscript, so you needn't worry about that. I
just want to talk with you, and that's all."
"Talk about what?" she demanded, all suspicion.
Damn again. "About my nice ass," he improvised.
She puffed out with a single mirthless laugh, but nodded. Keeping her head down
and her body bent and close to the parked cars, she hurried away.
Nice ass, indeed, he thought with brief appreciation as she retreated, then rose as
well for a rush across the street to get to number 118.
He paused next to the door and gingerly pushed on it. It swung heavily open into
darkness and silence. Good. No gunfire. He slipped inside. Fast.
Another pause, to listen and so his eyes could adjust.
Stillness and more silence. The wrong kind of silence. He should have been  able
to hear Sean's breathing.
Then he smelled blood again, lots of it, as pervasive as  petrol  at a filling station.
He licked his lips—from nerves, not hunger. There was something else mixed in with
the blood, fouling it: the sting of digestive acid, the reek of bowel. He'd experienced
both stenches in the past on battlefields… and much more recently in Niagara.
His breath came short and shallow as he moved forward.
Sean's  body  sprawled  where  he'd  left  it  by  the  crates.  Richard  could  see
immediately the man was dead, quite thoroughly dead.

Blood everywhere. Lots of it. Footprints in the blood. The departing trail led off
toward the back entry. A man's shoe size, he noted absently.
The voice of his newly born daughter came back to him: Where it walks it leaves
a trail of blood .
She-Who-Walks had gotten that right enough.
Richard  forced  himself  to  study  what  was  left  of  the  body.  He'd  seen  death
before, countless variations of it, but this particular one  turned  his belly differently,
more profoundly than all the others.
Sean's exposed skin was torn, clawed, ripped… and bitten.
Oh, dear God.
 
Richard reached his Land Rover just as the first of the emergency vehicles arrived
on the scene: police, ambulances, even a SWAT team; they were gathering like flies
to a corpse. God, if they only knew.
They'll find him soon enough.
Within the hour they'd be all over that building.
Another horrific murder like the one in Niagara and himself, Richard, close on the
scene again. Demarest would have a perfect seizure; he'd—
But Richard could not complete the thought as the vision of  what he'd  just seen
crashed upon his mind's eye again, scattering all other worries to  the sky.  He knew
exactly what had made the mess in 118, the mess that was all that remained of Sean
the boxer. He recognized the tearing and the wanton spilling of blood and bile.
Another vampire.
A vampire at just about the same stage of degeneration as himself.
His hands were leaden as he fumbled to  unlock the door  and  hoist  his suddenly
chilled body  inside  the  cab  of  the  truck.  The  familiar  smell  of  leather  and  plastic
weren't enough to  dispel  what now permeated  his clothes,  clung  to  his  skin.  He'd
taken great care  not  to  touch  anything, but  the  stench  of  the  warehouse  was  very
much with him. He glanced apprehensively at his shoes. They were clean—at least of
visible  crimson  evidence—but  he  knew  he'd  throw  everything  away  at  the  first
opportunity. As before with Arlie Webb, he felt an overwhelming urge to wash it all
off. He'd see to it as soon as he was in the sweet sanctuary of his home.
He started the engine, gunning it to angry life, a reflection of his inner tension, then
protective  instinct cut  in and  he eased  off  to  let the  truck  merely  idle.  There  were
quite enough police around, no need to attract their attention.
He didn't half jump out of his skin when Sharon suddenly appeared at the driver's
door and pounded on the window.
"Here!  I  thought  you  were  wantin'  to  talk  with  me!"  she  shouted  through  the
darkened glass.

He stared, having utterly forgotten her.
"Well, come on, then! Your place or mine?"
It occurred to him that for her own good he should just drive away. Safer for her,
and  he'd  have  time  to  himself  to  think  this  one  through.  She  pounded  again,
impatiently, her face projecting annoyance, but her eyes showing fear as she threw a
nervous glance over her shoulder at the growing commotion down the street.
He undid the lock for the passenger side and  motioned  for  her to  come  around.
She did so with alacrity, hauling herself inside even as he shifted into first. The door
slammed shut  from  their abrupt  charge  forward,  and  she  was  thrust  hard  into  the
seat.  She  squawked  once,  clutching  her  shoulder  bag  to  keep  it  from  flying,  then
scrabbled for the seat belt.
In  silence  Richard  flung  the  vehicle  around  corners  and  through  stop  signs,
heading for  the expressway.  Sharon  stared  at him with a mix of  undisguised  alarm
and amusement. He ignored her and simply drove hard, as if the hounds of hell were
on his tail, and dear Lord, it felt to him that they were.
The Hounds of Annwyn, perhaps? His forebears, according to Sabra.
And who was  this other  vampire? A  relation,  perhaps,  some  cousin  he'd  never
heard of? It wasn't as though he'd met many of their kind over the span of centuries.
He racked his long memory, but no one suitable emerged from the mists of his past.
They either had no quarrel with him or were dead.
"Is this your idea of an encore, or some strange male ritual designed to thrill and
impress?" Sharon asked.
"What?"  He  dragged  his  thoughts  reluctantly  to  the  present.  He'd  barely  been
aware of her next to him.
"This wonderful Stirling Moss impersonation that you're giving."
Embarrassed, he immediately slowed, trying out a thin smile. "Sorry. I needed to
get away from there."
"That much is obvious. What happened?"
"Nothing."
"I doubt it. You were cool enough when I went off, then you turn up peaky as a
rabbit in a dog kennel, so something happened."
"I had a shock."
"Did you, indeed? When you went across the street?"
She'd seen enough to both annoy and alarm him, but  he saw  no  reason  to  lie to
her. "Yes. Found a body."
Her demeanor sobered. "Someone you knew?"
"Not exactly, but it was bad. Like… like Arlie Webb." Careful, Richard.
"Sweet Mary."  She  watched  him a moment,  made an uneasy  gesture,  and  said,

"Can't stand the sight of blood? No one will be blamin' you for that."
Wrong,  wrong,  wrong.  It's death.  This  kind  of  death.  That  kind  of  killing.  "I
suppose so. Yes." She started to speak again, but  he raised  one  hand  in a quelling
motion. "Please, if you don't mind, I need a few minutes." He swung the truck just a
little too wildly off the expressway ramp and down onto Lakeshore, tires protesting.
"We're nearly there."
She clamped her jaw shut and held on tight for the rest of the ride.
 
He was  not  in so  much of  a hurry as  to  forget  to  check  the rearview  mirror.  It
remained reassuringly clear. Just as well. He could deal with any such  problem,  but
Sharon's presence might limit his choice of action.
He hit the remote to open the garage doors and slipped the Rover in neatly next to
the Jaguar. Sharon got out, pausing an instant to gape once at the car, then hurrying
to catch up as he unlocked the utility entry. He made sure she did not see  the code
he punched in to deactivate the houses  security  system.  He was  taking her into his
home, true, but there were degrees of trust, after all.
He  ushered  her  in,  reset  the  system,  and  firmly  closed  the  door  behind  them,
feeling an illogical sense  of  relief for  what was  essentially a sham of  protection.  If
Charon was outside somewhere and wanted to he could level the whole place.
Maybe he doesn't want to. Not yet.
But why?
He guided his guest through the kitchen, across the hall, and into his office. It was
the center  of  his web,  the place  he  felt  safest.  Illusion  only,  he  knew,  but  for  the
moment illusion was enough.
Sharon  took  in the room  with its combination  of  expensive,  high-tech  toys  and
old-fashioned  comfortable  furnishings,  turning  to  look  carefully  at  everything,
perhaps trying to get a few clues about him, about who he was. He liked that; it was
something he did with other people. She dropped her purse on a table, then lingered
for a long time before the Botticelli, peering at it closely, too closely.
"Is this what I think it is?" she  asked,  finally breaking the silence he'd  requested
during their hasty drive.
"What would that be?"
"It looks to be very old and impossibly valuable."
As he'd  done  a few times before  with  sharp-eyed  clients,  he  allowed  a  glint  of
mischief to show in his expression. "You think so?"
"Tell me this is not an undiscovered Botticelli." Such an item hanging in a mostly
ordinary home in Toronto  would blast  through  the  art  world  with  the  force  of  an
atom bomb.
"All right, it's not."

"Then what is it?"
"I had  business  some  years  back  in Florence  and  met a charming young forger
who made her living doing  this sort  of  work.  She  could  imitate all the greats  from
Giotto to Surat. I commissioned it from her."
"Really?" Sharon looked  even closer  at the work.  "She  did  a bloody  marvelous
job, right down to the cracks in the varnish. It even smells right."
Not many would catch that detail. His regard for Sharon  went up  another notch.
"Her specialty."
"Quite the skilled charlatan, then. Who's the subject?"
"A lady I know."
She glanced over, interested. "You're attached?"
"Nothing formal." His ties to Sabra were far stronger than any signatures on a bit
of parchment,  certainly stronger  than any temporary  dalliance,  and  with  ephemeral
human women all dalliances could only ever be temporary.
"How 'nothing formal'?"
He chose to ignore the question. "Would you like a drink?"
Sharon's  eyes  flashed  once.  Too  bad,  but  she  was  on  a  strictly  need  to  know
basis for the time being. "Jamesons, if you have it."
Though he drank nothing but his special  stock,  his bar  was  well-supplied with a
variety of brands for the benefit of all visitors. He poked through the bottles until he
found the right label, pouring a generous double for her. From the built-in fridge he
selected one of the dark bottles from the front, checking the hand-lettered date he'd
taped on. Yes, it was still good. He filled a black-tinted wineglass close to  the brim
for himself.
The  scent  of  the  blood  tugged  at  him.  Strongly.  His  inner  beast  had  been
overwhelmed earlier, crowded from his thoughts by the sheer horror of Sean's body
and all the implications that went with it, but now seemed more than ready to emerge
again. Richard held it hard in check as he gave Sharon her whiskey, then, with social
duty out of the way, downed most of his glass in one shuddering draught.
The stuff  flailed through him,  fire  and  ice  together.  Sometimes  it  was  like  that.
Almost  as  good  as  sex.  Almost.  He  looked  at  Sharon,  then  looked  away  and
returned to  the bar  for  a second  glass.  He might have to  empty the bottle  to  keep
himself in control.
I should have left her behind.
Sharon  appreciatively  inhaled  the  whiskey  in  her  hand,  then  sank  a  healthy
mouthful. "Mother  of  God,  that's  good."  She  sat  back  in  an  overstuffed  armchair
near the painting, stretching out her long, jeans-clad legs, crossing them at the ankles.
She wore boots again and a dark green blouse that was open almost to her bra. Her
long red hair cascaded down over one shoulder, ending in a bunch at her breast.

She was much too beautiful for his own good. He became conscious of decided
stirrings in his groin. He shifted  his gaze to  Botticelli's portrait  of  Sabra.  Her smile
gently mocked him. He could almost hear her amiable teasing about his fondness of
fleshly pleasures. Though the acquisition of human blood did not absolutely require
lengthy intimate contact,  he  enjoyed  a  successful  seduction  as  much  as  any  man.
Happily, she'd  never had  a problem  over  his indulgence in his various appetites  in
that area, so long as he returned to her in the end. And he always did.
But now is not the time. Sabra was dying, slipping away forever even as he stood
staring at her portrait.
"So," said Sharon, diverting him from the darkness.
She fastened her gaze hard on him. Amazing green eyes. "What the hell was it that
nearly took our heads off?"
He gave an inward shrug. She had a right to a few answers. "I believe it's  what's
known in the trade as a BFG."
"And what is that? Some kind of bazooka?"
"It's a special sniper's gun, very rare, only used by experts. If it's what I think it to
be,  then  we're  dealing  with  something  that  can  fire  a  fifty-caliber  anti-tank  round,
about that big." He held his thumb and forefinger some seven inches apart.
Her mouth sagged open. "That's the bullet? My God,  is that what went through
the wall?"
"The wall, the floor beyond, and on into the cellar. For  all I know,  it's  probably
still tunneling to Java." He finished his second glass and debated over having a third.
There  was  a  fine  balance  to  strike  between  having  enough  blood  so  as  not  to
succumb to temptation and taking in too much alcohol as to negate his self-control.
"Rare, is it? Then can you trace it from the BFG company?"
He blanked a moment,  then understood  her and  smiled. "There  is no  company.
The initials stand for 'Big Fucking Gun,' a term of endearment the soldiers coined for
it. And excuse the French."
"Oh." She smiled back. Absolutely amazing eyes. Like green crystals catching the
light.
"One could probably trace it to the arms specialist who constructed it, there aren't
that many around, but my job is to find the man who has it now."
"Your job?"
He'd thought of lying to her as he'd done about the Botticelli, but something about
her  and  the  way  she  looked  at  him,  a  strange  mix  of  innocence  and  toughness,
changed his mind. He didn't want to lie. Didn't want to lie to her. He had no logical
basis for the desire, this was all instinct. He'd teamed to rely on  it, for  it seldom,  if
ever, betrayed him.
"I'm a security specialist, call it my day job. Now and then I get a contract for the
government. This is one of those times. Can I trust you not to talk about it?" He had

ways of insuring she would not, but thought they wouldn't be necessary.
"So long as you give me another of these." Her glass was empty, and she held it
at arm's length. As he took  it, his fingers brushed  hers  and  something akin to  pure
electricity crackled between them. She was still smiling. "Hurry back."
He did exactly as he was told.
She curled up in the armchair now,  glass  in hand,  head  tilted to  one  side,  green
eyes locked on him. "So who is this man you're looking for? Is  he an arms  dealer?
Or the shootist?"
"Not a dealer as far as I know, but certainly a very skilled sniper."
"Who missed? No, you said he missed on purpose. Why?"
"I'm still working that one out." He had an idea now,  but  it went contrary  to  his
instincts.
"Who is he?"
Richard shook his head.
"You  don't  know  or  you  won't  answer?  Or  perhaps  you  want  to  play  twenty
questions all night?"
"Hardly. I'm just not sure how much to tell you. What you know of this could get
you killed."
"I'm flattered that you care, but if this lad's any good, then I'm likely to be on his
list of errands already. What I don't know could get me killed."
An excellent point.
"I need to know who I'm fighting," she added.
"Very well, but I'll warn you that others have tried to go after him and died. Two
possibles and three for  certain. That  doesn't  count  all the people  he's  dropped  for
pay."
"A hired assassin? After you?"
"I'm a side issue. We're fairly certain he's after the Canadian Prime Minister."
"Huh."  She  shook  her  head.  "Silly  target,  why  doesn't  he  go  after  Revenue
Canada instead?"
"Because  the  people  who  hired  him  have  their  hearts  set  on  the  PM,  not  the
taxman."
"Is it the IRA? Is that why you were at McGill's?" She was too quick by half.
"Probably not the IRA. A splinter group of theirs— we think—since they hired an
outside man for  the job.  I was  in the neighborhood  of  the pub,  saw  you  going in,
and thought I'd check up on you."
"An' why were you in the neighborhood?"
"I had a lead."

"Like Arlie Webb was a lead?"
His  lips  thinned.  She  was  far  too  quick.  "Yes.  He  smuggled  the  gun  into  the
country  and  probably  passed  it  to  the  man  whose  body  I  later  found,  an  arms
dealer."
"All your  leads  dyin' on  you,  hardly seems  fair.  Should  I  really  be  worried  for
m'self?" She gave him a dark look.
"Worried,  yes,  but  not  where I'm  concerned."  Liar. "Which  brings  me back  to
the point where we were interrupted…"
Her eyes narrowed. "I said I'd not be sharin' the recovery fee with anyone."
"I don't want any part of that. In fact, it is my own fondest wish to  see  that you
safely rescue the Abbey Book and deliver it back to the museum."
"What would you be gettin' out of it?"
"An  altruistic  gesture  is  its  own  reward,"  he  said  in  a  pious  tone,  collecting  a
hearty laugh from her for his trouble. "All right, what I could get from it is a new lead
to  the  assassin.  You  said  the  professor  was  the  most  likely  buyer  for  the
manuscript."
"If he's not gotten it already. He could have it by now."
"Let's  make a worst-case  assumption  that he does  and  has  already paid  off  the
sellers, who turn the money over  to  Charon  for  services  to  be  shortly  rendered.  In
order to stop him I need a few undisturbed minutes with the professor."
"Durin' which you'll convince him to part with the book and—?"
"Perhaps the name and location of the thief or thieves who sold  it to  him. I'll go
after that person in turn to find the assassin, and you can hop a flight back to Lloyds
with the book to claim the finders fee."
"Which you say you want none of?"
He indicated the house around them with a lift of  his chin. "I  don't  need  it. The
living I make is more than sufficient for my needs."
"Then you're a man to be envied, Richard Dun. Very well, I'm willin' to try."
"Then let's go."
She glanced at her watch. "Too early yet. He'll still be  giving one  of  his famous
lectures  right  now,  and  I  think  you'll  not  want  to  draw  attention  to  yourself  by
interrupting it. In a couple of hours he might be finished. Sweet Mary, but  how the
man can prattle on forever once  he gets  started,  and  even when he's  through that's
not the end of it. He hangs about to sell his books,  then gathers  some  of  the more
masochistic  students  around  him  for  drinks  afterwards.  I  think  he  feeds  on  their
worship."
"You have followed him closely."
"More than enough for one lifetime. If we're lucky he could be free around eleven
or so.  He's  seen  you,  and  there's  a  chance  he  might  be  recognizing  me  from  my

sittin' in the lecture hall every night. If he spots  us  both  together it might strike him
strange."
"No, we don't need to put him on the alert. I've other means to cover that."
A call to the Judge was  in order  and  Bourland,  too,  but  not  Demarest.  Not  yet.
Better to put him off for a bit, or he'd haul them both in along with the professor just
to be aggravating.
"Was this dead man you found the one who shot at us?" she asked.
"No.  That  would  be  the  assassin.  He  probably  picked  up  the  gun  from  the
dealer…" The  bastard  had  probably  been  in the building the whole time,  watching
and listening to the business with Sean. He'd taken his opportunity, firing a warning
round, then killing and feasting upon Sean for  good  measure on  the way out.  Fast.
At least it had been fast, and Sean unconscious for it. Not so for Webb. He'd known
what was happening to him.
Scowling, because another particularly nasty idea occurred to him, Richard  went
to his desk, opening the drawer where he'd left the case file Bourland had given him.
He pulled it out and flipped over pages to the crime scene  photos  of  the murdered
undercover  man,  McQuin.  It  was  as  bad  as  he  remembered,  but  now  he  looked
more closely  at the damage to  the man's  body.  Yes,  he'd  been  torn  up  badly,  but
could  the trauma have been  inflicted by  an out-of-control  vampire? He studied  the
images, but could not be certain. Nor could he discount the possibility…
"The dealer?" Sharon prompted.
Richard  snapped  back  to  the  present.  Damn,  but  he'd  have  to  unwind  soon,
before he got careless.  He shut  the report  away in the drawer again. "Yes,  he then
shot  at  us  and  murdered  the  dealer  to  keep  him  quiet.  Charon  doesn't  like
witnesses."
"That's the assassin's name?"
He glanced once at his wineglass and decided against a third one for now. Down
to business. He stared hard at her. "Yes. After the Styx ferryman."
"I knew tha—" Then her face changed and she put the whisky aside, swinging her
long legs around  to  sit upright. "Half a minute—you're not…  you  can't  be  thinkin'
that I'm—"
"Well, the names are close,  Ms.  Sharon  Geary."  He set  his empty glass  on  the
desk, waiting, watching her.
She glared a long moment, then relaxed slightly. "If you really thought I was  this
Charon, you'd have taken me into custody, not home for a drink."
"Unless I wanted to get the shootist, too. Your partner or whatever could still be
out there, waiting for a chance at me. This time to kill." And if the round didn't take
his head off they'd both be in for a hell of a surprise shortly afterward.
"Then why not kill you earlier in the street? It'd have been easier."
"Absolutely, but this way you get the opportunity to  find out  how much I know

before you take me out permanently. You could have either arranged the whole thing,
or your partner just took advantage of the situation when it dropped in your laps."
Her face flushed red. "Then you're a bloody idiot! I have no partner! And do you
think  I'd  have  gone  within  a  mile  of  McGills  if  I'd  known  you  were  in  the
neighborhood? All I'm tryin' to do is find the blessed manuscript, collect my money,
and—" She bit off the last, eyes going to slits. "You misbegotten  son  of  a—you're
just hauling my lead, aren't you?"
"The  correct  American  phrase  is,  I  believe,  'yanking  your  chain.'  I  wasn't  sure
before, but I am now." Perhaps. "But just to be certain, I'd like some credentials to
verify. Real ones, if you don't mind. We can start with your passport."
"I don't need this," she grumbled.
"I'll  put  it  this  way,  you  can  deal  with  me  here,  or  I  can  take  you  to  meet  a
singularly unpleasant RCMP  officer  named  Demarest  who  would  delight  to  throw
you into a metal-lined room with a very efficient sink and toilet combination and the
sort of flat mates who—"
"All  right!  Here—"  She  pulled  a  wallet  from  her  purse  and  sorted  through  the
items there. Soon he had enough official paper and plastic to work with and took the
lot over  to  his computer.  He checked  for  a green light on  his tap  detector.  Good.
Demarest was no longer eavesdropping.
Sharon  looked  over  his  shoulder  as  he  played  with  the  keyboard,  calling  up
programs and entering in strings  of  data  from  her credentials.  It took  about  twenty
minutes before he hit the last command and sat back.
"What have you done?" she asked.
"Begun the most  thorough  background  check  you'll ever have  in  your  life,  Ms.
Geary."
"You've got software and the accesses for that sort of thing?"
"I have connections in the most surprising places. This is only to  confirm things
for the likes of Demarest I've already made up my mind."
"Indeed? And what have you decided?"
He stood. "That it's past time for you to sup. You are hungry, aren't you?"
"Yes,  now that you  mention it." He knew she  must  be  starving. He'd  heard  her
stomach rumbling as he'd worked and was only trying to be polite about it. Leading
the way to the kitchen, he opened the freezer, gesturing at the stacks of frozen items
within. "You should find something edible here. I never keep fresh food around; I'm
a miserable cook, so I don't bother."
"What'll you be having?" she  asked,  frowning at all the choices.  With no  recent
experience in consuming solid foods, he had a variety of the more expensive brands,
operating on the hopeful assumption that you got what you paid for.
He grimaced. "Sorry, I've not much of an appetite after what's happened. You go
ahead, the microwaves over there and you'll find soft drinks in the refrigerator, teas

and coffee in that cupboard, or help yourself to anything in the bar. Take  what you
like  and  take  your  time.  It'll  be  a  couple  hours  before  the  last  of  the  information
filters back. There's a spare bed and  bath  at the top  of  the stairs  on  the left if you
want a lie-down. Make yourself comfortable and at home for the duration."
"You sound like you're leaving."
"No, nothing like that. I—I just want to clean up a bit."
Then he left her, quickly, before  she  could  say  anything else  to  delay  him,  and
headed  for  the back  of  the house.  He  needed  immediate  solitude  to  deal  with  the
night's  stresses,  to  calm  his  beast  and  keep  it  contained.  Sharon  was  far  too
distracting.  And  tempting.  He  detoured  to  get  the  rest  of  the  bottle  of  his  stock,
partly to prevent the risk of her sampling it, and partly to finish it off. A bit of time to
himself, a bit of nourishing blood mixed with soothing wine, then he could keep his
beast safe and sated in its cage without danger to her.
He poured out a last glass and made two calls, one to Bourland's voicemail to say
that he was making progress, and the other to the Judge.
"You alive," he brilliantly observed once Richard got through to him.
"For the sole purpose of providing you gainful employment."
"Hah."
"I  want  you  to  go  to  the  university,  to  this  lecture  hall."  He  gave  detailed
directions on where to go and hoped the Judge was listening. "Are you sober?"
"Mon, I'm clean as a saint," the Judge assured him.
Richard had known a few saints in his time. Not all of them had been particularly
spotless prior to their canonization. "Cleaner than that, or I'll know the reason  why.
You're  to  find a Professor  Neal Rivers."  Richard  provided  a  physical  description.
"He'll be giving a talk about King Arthur there—"
"Wow, the bad mon with the cool sword, like Sean Connery?" The Judge actually
sounded interested.
Richard  raised  an  eyebrow,  but  suppressed  all  comment.  "Something  like  that.
Go there and keep an eye on him and follow him home without being seen. See who
he speaks to and where they go. I'm not talking about his students, but the big lads,
the nasty ones, you know the type. Bring along whatever help you need and tell them
to be completely invisible so they don't get into trouble. I'll pay for it."
"You got it, mon, th' Judge is on th' case." He sounded entirely too happy about
the work.
"Eugene?"
Brief silence. Then a cautious, "Yeah?"
"Keep your head focused on the business or I'll know the reason why."  He rang
off. Irritating man. Useful at times, but irritating.
Richard  took  a deep  swallow from  his  glass  and  let  the  red  heat  work  on  him

from the inside out. Good. But it could be better.
He wanted to wash the memory of finding Sean's body out of his mind.
Fat chance.
He had to try, anyway.
Though it meant the risk of interruption, he was technically on call, so he took the
phone with him so as not to miss anything important coming in. He pushed through
a last  door  into  the  tropic  mugginess  of  his  own  private  rest  and  recovery  zone.
Shielded  from  the  sun  as  well  as  triple-insulated  against  the  worst  of  Canadian
winters,  he  could  revel  year-round  in  heated  comfort.  To  the  left  was  the  large
redwood-lined  box  of  the dry  sauna,  to  the right was  the  always-ready  hot  tub.  It
was huge, large enough for half a dozen or more, and  fitted with every conceivable
convenience for those with a hedonistic turn of mind. The hot, clear water beckoned
to him, as compelling as a lover.
Richard  had  long  ago  developed  a  near-ceremony  for  relaxation  once  he'd
installed  the  thing.  It  was  simple  enough:  the  lighting  of  a  number  of  fat  candles
already in place and a few sticks of incense. Sandalwood and patchouli tonight. The
aromatic smoke began to rise in threads and drift over the room. He shut off the now
harsh electric lights, stripped, throwing every stitch of his tainted clothes in a corner,
and slipped into the steaming water with a grateful sigh.
He finished his glass, put it in one of the built-in holders, and hit the switch for the
pump.  The  water  bubbled  and  jetted  around  his  body.  Since  it  was  not  the
free-running stuff of nature, he had no  difficulty enduring it. Quite the contrary.  He
rested his head on the padded niche designed just for that purpose and shut his eyes.
Sweet Goddess, but he needed this. He stopped fighting and  let the buoyancy  take
his body,  arms  and  legs  spreading  just  under  the  roiling  surface.  The  hum  of  the
pump, the rush of the water, the heat, all had  their way with him, lulling him into a
kind of half-doze.  He was  safe  from  the immediate cares  of  the world,  though not
unaware of their threat.
Cats must feel like this, seeming to nap, but still alert to all that's around them.
He  liked  cats,  though  they  were  often  less  than  pleased  with  him.  Perhaps  they
sensed  the part  of  him descended  from  the Hounds  of  Annwyn. He had  the same
trouble with some dogs.
The door opened and shut. He felt the change in the air. He made no  move,  not
even to crack an eyelid. He knew it was  Sharon.  Damn. He thought his abrupt  and
graceless departure would have given her a clue that he wanted to be alone.
Yes, alone. Then. What about now?
Good question. Why had she come, anyway? Curiosity about the house? A little
harmless exploring, or  something more sinister? His instincts  had  said  to  trust  her.
They were rarely off.  It  would  be  a  sore  disappointment  if  she  attempted  to  take
advantage of his seeming vulnerability. He hadn't searched her purse to relieve her of
that Glock. If she betrayed him, tried to shoot him… he'd deal with it then and  not
before.

He dismissed the vile thought.
She was  being damned  quiet, though.  He could  hear little over  the  noise  of  the
pump and the bubbling water. He continued  to  float, letting the water gently buffet
him this way and that, continued, until something disrupted the rhythm created by the
flow.  He  opened  his  eyes  in  time  to  glimpse  Sharon,  quite  wonderfully  naked,
quickly easing into the tub with him.
Well, well.
She'd pinned her glorious hair up, but a few russet tendrils had escaped and now
floated on the water. She lay chin deep in it, eyes closed and arms behind her head,
her back arched enough so her hard nipples were just breaking the surface.
Goddess, but she is beautiful.
The  water  lapped  against  her,  both  hiding  and  magnifying  her  nakedness.  He
drank her in with his gaze, the hardness again growing in his groin.
"I hope you don't mind the intrusion," she said.
He looked up from her body to see her eyes, open now, regarding him softly.
She smiled. "Of course, you don't have to answer. I can see for myself."
There  didn't  seem  to  be  any  reason  to  remark  on  that.  Richard  went  back  to
admiring  the  view.  Sharon  returned  the  favor,  studying  him  as  closely  as  the
Botticelli.
"What's that?" She indicated his shoulder.
Many women had asked about that scar over the centuries. Like the one about his
ring finger, the reminder of an ancient sword thrust that had nearly cost  him an arm
was still with him along with others  he'd  collected  before  Sabra  had  changed  him.
"Knife fight, years ago."
"Must  have been  some  fight.  May  I?"  She  drifted  closer.  She  didn't  touch  the
long healed wound, only looked before lifting her gaze to  meet his. The  candlelight
cast  a  golden  sheen  upon  her  skin  and  glinted  off  her  hair  like  fire.  He  shifted,
reclining no longer, to face her.
"Indeed you may," he whispered.
"Ah,"  she  said.  Then her mouth was  suddenly  on  his,  her  lips  wet,  her  tongue
probing, gently at first, but then ever more fiercely. Her arms slipped around him, her
body pressing close, fighting the water. Her hand was on him, touching, stroking his
hardness. She pulled away and looked him up and down. "Oh, yes… oh, yes."
My thoughts exactly.
Water sloshed  over  onto  the floor  as  she  moved  up  his body  and  clamped  her
mouth once  more onto  his. Locked  together,  they slid ever  so  slowly  beneath  the
surface.
It seemed  an eternity before  she  wanted air and  lifted  away.  Their  heads  broke
free at the same time, each gasping, water cascading  from  their faces  and  into their

open mouths. She brushed at her wet hair, which was coming down, which he found
utterly tantalizing. Her breasts shone gilded in the candlelight, and  oh,  so  gently, he
drew  her  close  and  took  a  firm,  pink  nipple  into  his  mouth,  sucking,  teasing,
delicately rolling its hardness with his tongue,  nipping, biting. Sharon  held his head
against  her,  her  breath  stilled.  Despite  the  noise  of  the  water,  he  could  sense  the
silence within her, the concentration.
Then she pulled away again, smiling, to look him in the eye. "Ah, Richard, what a
comfortable man you are."
He found himself laughing and wondered at it, but not for long, for she smothered
it with another in a seemingly endless  procession  of  kisses,  each  one  better,  more
passionate,  more  loving  than  the  last.  Their  tongues  intertwined  helplessly,
deliciously, in total surrender. She licked the water from his face, from his ears, from
the small hairs  at  the  back  of  his  neck.  And  all  the  time  her  hands  were  on  him,
exploring, holding, moving, as his were on her, caressing  her breasts  and  her belly,
sliding down to the slickness between her legs.
And when she seemed more than ready he lifted her effortlessly so as to enter her,
but she held back, grinning at him, full of mischief.
"Say please."
He looked deep in her eyes.  "Please."  Never had  he said  it like this before.  The
need and the feeling had never been so strong, so raw upon his soul.
Perhaps  she  saw  it.  Suddenly  she  was  grinning  no  more.  Her  body  slid  down
onto him, her legs wrapping tight. He felt his hardness  pushing against her, sticking
on  the  water  on  her  outer  lips  until  he  encountered  her  own  sweet  moisture  and
slipped easily inside.
She  moaned  at  this,  holding  still,  then  leaning  forward  to  rest  her  head  on  his
shoulder. His hands soothed over the length of her back, down  to  the taut muscles
of her cheeks. He pressed on them, pushing her more firmly onto him. She lifted her
head and sat upright. They started to drift in the water; he grabbed  the sides  of  the
sauna to hold them in place.
"Look at me, Richard," she said, and cupping her breasts in her hands, she began
to move on him.
He did as he was bid, more than willingly, and it seemed to him that all his world
was contained  in those  bright green eyes  reflecting the flickering light.  Not  able  to
touch her for the moment, she did it for him. Her tongue licked around her lips, and
a groan escaped her as she pinched her nipples, rubbed them, squeezed them harder
than he would have ever dared.
He felt his heart beating faster and faster as she rode  him. Her body  heaved and
bucked, and he felt harder than he'd ever been… then another sensation. His corner
teeth began to bud, and a low growl escaped him.
No! Not this, not now!
Fighting to keep control, he stopped his own echoing movements and tried to pull

out of her.
"What the hell… ?" she began, her rhythm disrupted.
"I can't, I mustn't."
"It's all right, I'm safe, and my cycle is—"
"No, you don't understand."
"I understand a lot more than you think."
And she grabbed him roughly by the ears,  kissing him, thrusting her tongue into
his mouth, all the while her hips moving, pumping up and down on him. He tried to
think of something else to keep the beast fettered, to keep it from killing. He turned
his head  away, shutting his eyes  so  she  wouldn't  see  the change in them, wouldn't
see the flush of  red  flames within.  She-Who-Walks  had  assured  him  he'd  be  safe
with her, but with other women? He couldn't gamble Sharon's life on that.
But  his  control  was  breaking  down,  crumbling,  even  as  his  body  neared  its
climax. Try as he might, he couldn't fight both it and the beast at the same time.
Sharon held tight to him, pressing his head against her breasts, pushing her hips,
gasping from her mounting passion. Goddess, but she was so beautiful.
He  clamped  his  teeth  together  and  concentrated  on  that  beauty,  forcing  his
thoughts away from scarlet visions of death and killing. He dwelt on the feel of being
inside her, on her youth and strength, on the anticipation of his approaching release,
not the infliction of pain, the glutting of appetite.
Head thrown back, her body  shaking into a scream,  Sharon  burst  onto  him and
unbidden, unstoppable, his seed pumped forth, his own guttural cry adding to hers.
He could feel the dark creature claw at his soul, snarling, in thwarted rage or in carnal
triumph, he could  not  tell, nor  did  he care  as  the ecstasy  seized  him, tore  through
him, utterly consumed him. For a few precious moments in the dance of the universe
he was nothing and  everything, joined to  the woman,  yet separate,  giver and  taker,
feeder and  fed,  creator  and  creation.  A fierce cry  of  joy, of  bright  defiance,  burst
straight from that wounded soul,  searing his inner darkness  like a sun.  It freed  him
from all fear, succored and sustained him, healed him.
Sharon's last moans  slowly dwindled,  and  she  slumped  forward,  her head  again
on his shoulder, spent. Panting, he put one protective arm around her, the other still
holding fast to a grab bar to steady them against the churning water.
And then came the petite morte, the little death as, inevitably, the light inside paled
and faded to nothing. The darkness swelled once more.
He waited. Waited for some sign that things were settling within him. His muscles
ached from it as he held still, held his breath till it hurt.
Then he noticed his corner teeth start to recede.
Immediate  and  intense  relief  overwhelmed  him.  She  was  safe.  The  beast  had
spared her. Spared them both. Goddess and the blood wine be praised.

"Thank you," he murmured, resting his head far back on the padded niche.
"You're  entirely  welcome,  I'm  sure,"  Sharon  sleepily  responded,  unknowingly
answering for  the Goddess.  But then was  She  not  in all women as  God  was  in all
men?
Richard smiled, unseen by Sharon at least, and closed his eyes.
Chapter Seven
"I've  heard  of  afterglow, but  this is elephant,"  Sharon  said,  sitting  up  from  him
some  time later. Her movement nudged  him  to  alertness.  "I  want  to  be  lying  with
you,  but  I'm  noticin' the heat too  much  now."  She  drifted  away,  used  one  of  the
built-in seats as a step, and hoisted herself up  to  sit on  the edge  of  the spa.  Water
streamed from her fever-red skin and tangled hair.
"Why?" he asked, looking at her, marveling at her.
"Why what?"
"This." He gestured to indicate themselves.
"Because I wanted to."
"No more than that?"
"It's more than enough where I'm concerned. If you're  worried,  I don't  pass  my
favors to just anyone. I had a feelin' about you. A right one, I'm happy to say."
A feeling. He rolled that one around in his mind. Could it mean she had a touch of
the Sight as well? Possibly. Many people possessed it unawares, especially women.
"Then  there's  the  other  thing,"  she  added.  "There's  nothing  like  nearly  getting
killed for driving a person into bed… or whatever." She nodded at the spa. "I'm told
that's how my mum was conceived,  with Gram and  Gramp  going for  all they were
worth in their basement shelter during the Blitz when he wangled some leave time."
Richard  recalled  a  similar  incident  in  his  own  past…  well…  lots  of  similar
incidents, actually. She had that facet of human behavior down right enough.
"They moved back to Ireland not long after. Probably  wantin' a quieter place  to
shag. An' you'll be wantin' to get out of that cauldron yourself before you turn into a
giant pink prune."
"But  I  like  it  here,"  he  protested  mildly.  Extremes  of  heat  never  bothered  him
much, no more than extremes of cold.
"Ah, but I'm not in there with you now."
Excellent  point.  He  heaved  up  and  she  put  a  hand  out  to  take  his,  which  had
indeed become  rather prunelike. Despite this and  the shed  of  water  from  him,  she
drew close, body-to-body, and kissed him, making it last. It was more than enough
to inspire him to a second celebration, but…

Not a good idea. He'd escaped—they'd escaped—the threat of the beast once; he
was  reluctant  to  tempt  it  again  so  soon.  Perhaps  later,  after  he'd  fed  deeply  on
undiluted blood, they could—that is, if she wanted to—
"Tell me what that was all about earlier," she said. "All that 'I can't' stuff? It was a
bit of a surprise y'know."
Oh,  yeah,  I'd  love  to  do  that,  to  tell  you  the  truth,  that  I  was  this  far  from
tearing  out  your  throat  and  drinking  you  down,  then  I could  watch  you  run  for
your life from this lunatic.
"It's…  difficult  for  me,"  he  lied,  and  was  about  to  continue  when  her  gentle
fingers on his lips stopped him.
"I know, I know, my darling lover."
"You do?" His eyebrows shot upward. The Sight again?
"I've seen it before. You forget I'm from Ireland."
He tried to work that one  out  and  what it had  to  do  with anything when Sharon
kissed him on the cheek, whispering close in his ear.
"I can tell a Catholic boy when I see one."
His jaw dropped. A Catholic! Well, yes, she was right again for  so  had  he been
raised, though by now he was a severely lapsed one.
"It'll be easier next time, I promise."
His  heart  gave  an  unexpectedly  strong  leap.  "Next  time?  There's  to  be  a  next
time?"
She smiled in the dim light. "Oh, yes. If you want it."
"Oh, absolutely." A next time sounded good. It sounded very good, making him
feel  more  complete  than  he  had  in  many  a  day.  Inner  resolves  of  caution  to  the
contrary,  he began nuzzling her neck.  He was  in  control  now,  so  the  prospect  of
biting into it and sucking at the nectar  within… then after he'd  fed,  he'd  waken her
fully and they could…
But the phone trilled. Insistently.
"Damn."
Sharon stifled a laugh. "Go ahead."
"I wish." He punched the "on" button. "Richard Dun."
"I'm  so  glad  you're  home,  Mr.  Dun."  Demarest.  The  bloody  fool.  With  fairly
rotten timing. At least he hadn't called earlier.
"Yes, what do you want?"
"I'm sure you already know what that is."
"No games, Chief Inspector. We're both busy men."
"And you've been busier than most this evening."

Richard glanced around the room, suspicious. Ye gods, had  the little weasel put
in a surveillance camera?
"That incident at the pub?" Demarest reminded him.
"What pub?"
"Don't lie, Mr. Dun. We  got  a description  from  the bartender  and  she  identified
you from your  file photo.  You and  that redhead  made quite a show  just before  all
hell broke loose."
"Yes, the sniper—our sniper, Charon—sending me a warning I should think. It's a
miracle no one was seriously injured—"
"Charon. Charon takes a pot shot at you and you neglected to report in about it."
"I got involved with other threads of the investigation that couldn't wait. Until my
chance came to  break  away I thought your  people  would be  competent  enough to
deal with things."
Demarest made a familiar choking sound.
How—if he was so easily baited—in seven hells had the man risen this high in the
ranks? He couldn't have his head up that many asses, no one could.  Or maybe  it's
just dealing with me that sets him  off. Richard  decided  against giving him another
friendly reminder about  the dangers  of  high blood  pressure.  "So  did  they  find  the
body  across  the street?"  It seemed  best  to  get that detail on  the table first,  before
Demarest could work 'round to it.
"You know damned well they did. Two men torn to shreds and you  in the same
neighborhoods at the same time."
"Don't  get  your  hopes  up,  Chief  Inspector.  It's  only  because  I've  been  on
Charon's trail. He left a very messy spoor. Be glad he didn't set the place on fire like
the last time."
"Charon did that? Killed both of them?" Demarest's voice was high and strained.
"I  believe  so."  Might  as  well  shift  the  blame  for  Webb  onto  another,  more
deserving fellow. Hardly honorable, but certainly practical. "He may have also killed
the  undercover  man,  McQuin.  He  wasn't  as  badly  damaged  as  the  others,  but
perhaps  Charon  hadn't  quite  gotten  the  hang  of  things  yet.  You  might  have  your
medical  examiner  check  for  any  similarities.''  The  vision  of  Sean's  ravaged  body
floated over  his mind's  eye, blending with that of  Arlie Webb's.  Richard  shivered,
tried to suppress the image. Unsuccessfully. "What's your forensics team found  on
the new one?" 
"They're  still  picking  up  the  pieces.  Literally.  The  bastard  who  did  this  is
certifiable.''
"Agreed. He's also more than extraordinarily dangerous…" Damn, again. Another
vision rose up  to  replace  the first, but  it was  no  less  horrific. If he hadn't  been  so
distracted, he'd have thought of it before. He shouldn't have sent the Judge to  keep
an  eye  on  the  professor;  he  should  have  gone  himself.  Now  both  men  could  be

dead.
"Are you listening, Dun?" Demarest. Annoyed, more so than usual.
"What?"
"I want a full report on—"
"Right, first thing in the morning. I'll fax it."
"Morning, hell. You'll come right down to the—"
Richard  cut  the connection,  found  his watch,  and  put  it  back  on.  A  quarter  to
eleven. He'd have to hurry, but was heartsinkingly sure he was already too late.
Sharon  was  nearly  dancing  with  curiosity,  having  heard  but  half  of  the
conversation. "Well? What's going on? Who was that?"
"The singularly unpleasant RCMP man I mentioned to you. I have to get to your
precious professor." He strode into the hall.
"Why?" she demanded, following.
"He's a loose end, and we already know that Charon hates those."
"Mother of mercy." She ducked back toward the spa, presumably to grab up her
clothes.  Richard  took  the  stairs  to  his  room  three  at  a  time  and  hastily  threw  on
whatever was handy. He was still damp as he dressed, an uncomfortable reminder of
the aftermath of Webb's death.
Never mind that, just keep moving. Sharon was ready when he came down again.
She scrubbed at her wet hair with a towel.
"You'll stay here," he stated.
"The hell I will. If the professor is a loose end, then so are we both. 'Tis no safer
here than anyplace else, an' I'd rather be a moving target, thank you very much."
He  bit  back  any  argument.  In  light  of  their  situation,  hers  was  a  very  sensible
viewpoint,  one  he  wholly  shared  himself.  Instead,  he  went  to  his  work  area  and
checked the fax machine. Several responses to his queries on her had come in while
they'd  been  otherwise involved. A glance of  each  was  enough  to  confirm  that  the
credentials she'd given this time were authentic.
"What's the verdict?" She dropped the towel over a doorknob.
"That you're on the side of the angels."
"I'm  sure  they'll be  very relieved to  hear it." She  picked  up  and  shouldered  her
purse, which swung rather heavily for its size, banging against her hip.
"How many rounds in your shooter?" he asked casually.
"The clip's full—" She  glared at him and  pulled the purse  closer.  "I've  no  mind
for loaning it out, either."
"Keep it, just don't let the cops see the thing."
"I thought you were in a hurry to leave."

"Right." He headed for the garage.
 
The  Rover  had  a  mobile  phone;  Richard  made  use  of  it  as  he  negotiated  the
streets on the way to the university. The operator connected  him to  what he hoped
was the right rat hole in the academic maze.
"Medieval Studies." The answering voice was blank and uninterested to the point
where even its owner's gender was in question.
"I'm  trying to  locate  Professor  Neal Rivers,  the one  giving the lectures  on  King
Arthur."
"Sorry, can't help you." Its tone was an obvious prelude to hanging up.
"Wait, this is an emergency! He is there, isn't he?"
"Well, he was here." The crack of chewing gum garbled the line. "But he seems
to have gone."
"Gone?"
"Didn't rum up for his lecture tonight and no one knows where he is.  If you  ask
me—"
Richard  had  not  asked  and  so  he  rang  off.  The  dreadful  feeling  of  knowing
exactly what had happened to the hapless collector rose up  like a storm.  And what
about  the Judge? Richard  punched  numbers  into the keypad,  waiting with growing
anger and fear as the phone rang and rang.
I should have gone myself!
Then it stopped ringing and the Judge's voice slurred at him over the line.
"Yeah, mon. Ya know what th' fucking time is? What ya want?"
"It's Dun. Why the hell didn't you call and tell me?"
The voice  faded  and  came back,  definitely less  slurred,  with  an  edge  of  panic.
"Shit, mon, I watched like ya told me. I di'n' see nothin'." Silence a moment, then the
sound  of  sniffing. "That  place  was  empty,  nobody  talkin' King Arthur there,  but  I
went in and waited till they threw me out—"
"Then you should have called to tell me. What the hell were you thinking? Forget
it, you weren't."
"Chill, mon, don't you worry, I gonna put my best mon on it. I gonna kick th' ass
for you…"
Richard  listened, impatience growing as  the litany of  excuses  came  over  the  air
with ever more confidence  as  the coke  kicked in. Then he interrupted,  his tone  all
Arctic ice. "I told you, Eugene, I don't like it when people  fuck  with me. It makes
me very irritated, and when I get irritated I can sometimes be quite irrational."
Silence at the other end.
"Eugene. Leave."

The line went dead  before  Richard  could  cut  it first. Good.  The  Judge  had  the
sense to get out of the way for the time being, sparing him not only from  Richard's
wrath, but from being noticed by Charon.
"Who's  Eugene?"  asked  Sharon.  She  was  in  the  process  of  combing  out  her
damp locks and pinning them up again.
"An associate—ex-associate—of mine. He screwed up."
"Badly?"
"More than badly. He was supposed to be watching Rivers tonight, couldn't find
him, and  then managed not  to  inform me of  that little detail. Rivers  is  missing—at
least from the university."
Sharon was all attention now. "What about the manuscript?"
"Probably missing, too—if he had it."
"Perhaps he took delivery and ran out while he could."
"We'll see. Have you his home address?"
"I should hope I do." She gave him directions, and he altered course accordingly.
They were only minutes away, but Richard's instinct told him they were likely to  be
far too late to help.
A scarcity  of  spaces  forced  them to  park  a little distance  off.  They could  have
gone to the building's visitor lot, but Richard preferred  a more discreet  profile until
he knew what lay ahead. Still, it seemed  a much longer walk than it should,  mostly
because he kept scanning the nearby rooftops  for  the least sign of  a gun barrel. A
futile, irrational gesture.  If Charon  was  out  there  watching,  he'd  not  let  himself  be
seen.
Neal Rivers resided in a large, modern condominium block. A very expensive one
for the neighborhood, it was  all glass  and  steel, and  "every apartment with its own
balcony and sun room," or  so  declared  a selfconsciously  tasteful promotional  sign
on  display  in  the  landscaped  grounds.  They  hurried  past  and  entered  a  darkened
foyer with a bank  of  elevators.  A uniformed security  man looked  up  at them from
behind  a  reception  desk  festooned  with  surveillance  monitors.  Damned  things,
Richard  thought  sourly.  Well,  if  it  came  to  it,  he  knew  how  to  bugger  the  whole
system so as to leave no record of their presence, though at the moment he couldn't
imagine  the  necessity.  If  something  untoward  had  happened  to  Rivers,  then
Demarest would have to be informed.
"May I  help  you?"  asked  the  young  guard.  A  small  rectangle  on  his  uniform's
pocket declared his surname to be Adams.
Sharon  smiled  dazzlingly  and  moved  in.  "We're  here  to  see  Professor  Neal
Rivers, apartment 1004. He's not expecting us—we want to surprise him."
"I'm sorry, but our policy is to always call ahead." 
"Oh, but you can't. This is Neal's brother, and he's not seen him for twelve years.
We have to surprise him. He'll be so excited."

Adams, however, was not. He looked at Richard, and Richard  smiled winningly.
Deadpan,  Adams  looked  back  at  Sharon.  "I'm  very  sorry,  but  there  are  no
exceptions.  I'll  have  to  call  ahead  and  get  permission  for  a  guest  entrance.  It's  a
security thing."
There  was  no  arguing  with  that,  at  least  as  far  as  Adams  was  apparently
concerned.  He turned  his attention to  the  monitors,  clearly  dismissing  Sharon  and
Richard until they decided to come around to his point of view. They backed off out
of earshot.
"What now?' she asked.
"Wait outside a moment."
"Outside?"
"I'm going to reason with him. It's a guy thing."
She smiled. "Well, try not to make too much of a mess." She waved once at the
guard and strolled away.
Once he was sure she was well out of sight and hearing range, Richard went back
to the desk,  wearing what he hoped  was  a polite but  earnest  expression.  Adams's
face was wariness mixed with thinning patience as he looked up and…
An instant was all it took.
Richard popped his head out the main door and called Sharon back in.
Young Mr. Adams smiled glassily at them as they passed, looking a bit too happy
with the world, the only sign of Richard's unnatural influence on his mind. "Please go
on up. I'm sure  there will be  no  problem  bending the rules just this once,"  he said
cheerfully.
"Very impressive," Sharon muttered. "How much did it cost?"
"Nothing. I reasoned with him."
Her eyebrows bounced. "Ah, sweet reason."
The elevator arrived and they stepped into its mirrored confines.  Richard,  unlike
his cousins of legend and film, was fully reflected in the shining surfaces surrounding
them. Sharon took the opportunity to better secure her hair into a knot on top of her
head.
"You're lovely with your hair up," he remarked, putting his hands behind him for
the duration of the ride.
She paused, shooting him an intense look. "Thank you."
They were still looking at each another when the door hummed open on the tenth
floor.
"Back to business," she said.
"More's the pity. I'll go first, if you don't mind."
"Not at all."

Richard in the lead, they crept silently into a plushly carpeted hall toward 1004 at
the far end. He paused and listened a long time, his senses straining, but all he heard
were their own heartbeats. When he shook his head, Sharon reached gently into her
purse, removing a credit card and  her Glock.  With the gun ready  in one  hand,  she
inserted  the  card  quietly  between  the  door  and  the  jamb,  trying  to  slip  the  latch.
From the strained expression on her face it wasn't working.
"Deadbolt," she whispered. "I'll have to pick it open."
But Richard put a hand out, motioning for her to stand back, lifting a finger to his
lips.  As  soon  as  she  was  well  clear,  he  stepped  forward  and  in  one  smooth
movement kicked the door in. Wood splintered and cracked, the noise deafening in
the  morguelike  silence  of  the  hallway.  He  went  into  the  apartment.  Sharon  hastily
followed, pushing the ruined door shut behind them.
"That was subtle!" she sputtered, all outrage.
Richard ignored the comment as he surveyed the entry and living room. "He's not
here."
"How can you tell without the lights?"
He flicked the switch, bathing the room in artificial brightness  from  an overhead.
It  was  empty  of  all  furnishings  except  for  the  drawn  draperies  and  a  phone
abandoned in the middle of the floor. "Sure this is the right address?"
"On  my  life,"  she  said.  "I  don't  understand  this.  I've  been  following  him  all
week—when could he have moved out?"
"Perhaps he never really moved in." Then Richard caught his first solid  whiff of
it. The hair stood up along the nape of his neck and on his arms. Once again, and to
his very great alarm, his corner teeth began to bud.
"Richard?"
He shook his head, fighting for control. It's getting worse.
"What's the matter?"
The least stimulus and I begin to go.
Control. A few steadying breaths. Yes, there was the smell of blood everywhere,
but it need not affect him. It must not affect him.
"You're makin' me worried. What is it?"
"I—I think something's very wrong here," he said thickly. He swallowed hard.
She renewed her grip on her gun, staring around. "I'm listenin'."
But this was no time for words. He brushed past her, trying to locate  the source
of the blood.  The  first  passage  he  tried  led  to  an  empty  kitchen.  On  impulse,  he
opened the refrigerator. It was clean of all food except for a greasy bag bearing the
logo  of  the  Mexican  fast  food  restaurant  Rivers  favored.  Inside  it  were  several
paper-wrapped bundles.
Leftovers  from  a last meal?  He  tapped  the  bundles.  Petrified,  or  nearly  so.  He

slammed the fridge door shut and moved along.
The next room showed the remnants of occupancy.  No  furnishings except  for  a
thick futon, sheets all tangled, that lay on the floor in one corner, along with drifts of
discarded clothing. Pants, underwear, shirts… Richard picked up one of the latter. It
was  new,  had  never  been  washed,  but  was  wrinkled  enough  to  indicate  it'd  been
worn at least once before being tossed aside. Piled in another corner were crumpled
package  wrappings,  and  nearby were four  identical  white  shirts  still  crisply  folded
and pinned around  their thin cardboard  backing.  The  closet  was  empty except  for
some wire hangers.
"Did he do a lot of shopping for clothes?" Richard asked, mystified at the find.
She shrugged. "I don't know, but then I didn't catch up with him right away. He
must have bought out a whole store.  What a mess.  Maybe this posh  place  doesn't
have a laundry."
Or  he  couldn't  be  bothered  with  such  mundanities.  Richard  looked  past  the
heaps of clothes and noted  the drapes  were drawn shut  here as  well. The  scent  of
blood was stronger, but…
"Naught left but  the lav," Sharon  whispered;  she'd  obviously  picked  up  on  his
unease.
"I'll look. If it's what I think, you won't want to see."
He pushed  the last door  slowly  open  with  one  knuckle,  futilely  trying  to  brace
himself for the worst. It was dark  like the other  rooms,  to  the point  where even he
needed help. He felt for the switch and flicked it on.
Yes, this was the source. The air was heavy and very damp, as though someone
had  taken  a  long  shower  with  the  exhaust  fan  off.  Broad  red  streaks  and  drips
smeared the floor and shower curtain of the bathtub, its walls, and the sink. Soaked
towels were strewn about the floor, stained red. Lying next to the tub were yet more
cast off clothes, sodden from their bright gore.
But no body.
What the hell…?
Then he saw another bathroom  in his memory—just as  blood-streaked—only  in
that one the discarded clothes were his own.
Richard  hissed  and  abruptly  backed  from  the  room  as  though  it  burned  him.
Sharon stepped forward, all concern, but he waved her off with an impatient gesture.
Damnation!
She moved past him for a look and froze a moment to take it all in. "What the hell
is this about? Where is he? If he's not…"
"Oh, but he is."
"What d'ye—?"
"He's Charon. The thrice-damned bastard's Charon!"

"My God." The dawn burst upon her.
"Devil more like," he rumbled. "He killed the gun dealer, then came here to  clean
up."  Then Richard  had  to  work very hard  to  keep  from  smashing a wall in  as  the
anger welled and flooded inside.
Anger… no,  this was  far beyond  that, beyond  anything he'd  felt in a  very  long
time. Rage, humiliation, and self-scorn seethed freely in him, craving expression. He
wanted more than to smash a wall, he wanted to flatten the whole fucking building.
Sharon got one glance of his face and put space between them, alarmed.
Oddly enough, that helped steady him until the worst  of  his reaction passed.  He
had no desire to  distress  her in any way, but  it still took  him no  little time to  calm
down enough to be able to speak, and then his voice  didn't  sound  quite right from
the internal strain of holding things in. "I should have seen this when I first met him,"
he finally said.
"Indeed?" she asked, all caution.
"I was right there in his office. I should have—" What? Known him for  what he
was? Instinctively recognized one of his own kind? That was one trick none of them
could  do  except  for  Sabra,  and  she  only  because  of  the  Sight.  The  name  alone
should have tipped me off. Charon—ferryman—Rivers. He was  laughing at me the
whole time."
"Better than killin' you, but why should he hold back from that?"
"I think he likes to  play games,  to  see  how much  he  can  get  away  with  before
anyone tumbles to the truth." Yes, all the food leavings in the university office,  that
alone had  been  enough camouflage to  suit. Add  to  it the false background  Sharon
had discovered on him—what a pretty penny that must have cost to set up. He must
have laughed himself sick after Richards trusting departure, and that's what stung so.
Pride and overconfidence had always been his weak points, the only ones  Sabra
had ever really  chided  him  on.  Well,  they'd  once  more  worked  against  him,  even
more so  now than on  that  last  day  in  the  old  Roman  arena  when  he'd  faced  that
damned boy. Back then he'd not had centuries of experience to draw upon, now he
had no such excuse.
"He knows we're on to him since he shot at us," she said. "More game playin'?"
And what was that shot if not Charon throwing down the glove? "He knew I'd go
back to see his dealer afterwards. He knew I'd find the body, that you  and  I would
talk, and I'd make the connection to Rivers, that I'd come here to find this. The son
of a bitch is still laughing." More anger washed over him, but he had a better hold on
things; this was a cooler, more calculating kind, allowing him to  think more clearly.
And to fear. He looked at her. "I'm wondering how much he knows about you."
"I've been careful enough to stay low."
"He would keep links open to the people that stole the book you're after, and they
know you from your poking about. He's  been  wary of  hunters coming after him in

the past, and I doubt if things have changed. Sooner or later he'll come for you."
She snorted and didn't look as worried as she should have been. The threat either
wasn't real enough to her yet, or she was refusing to see it.
"Sharon, he could drop you the next time you walk outside. Or worse." Like tear
her to bits, as he'd done with Sean.
No.
"Or I could get hit by a drunk driver,"  she  said.  "What  would you  have me do,
skulk  in  a  basement  until  he  keels  over  from  old  age?  And  what  about  yourself?
You're marked as well."
"I've had more experience at this than you."
"Fine, then I'll rely on it to keep us both safe until we can catch him up."
"Sharon—"
"Don't be wastin' time with argument, man. I'll tell you now you won't be winnin'
with me on this. Our best hope to live is to find the misbegotten  son  of  a bachelor
before he can do for us."
He started to speak, but turned it into a sigh and a shake of his head. "All right."
"Good.  We'll  start  again.  We  know  he's  disappeared  to  God  knows  where,
manuscript,  monster  gun, and  all. We'll have to  backtrack  a bit. Some  of  that  gun
dealer's mates might know something we can use. If we find this splinter group you
mentioned we can find where he's—"
No, that wasn't it. Charon was a vampire, and starting to lose control of his beast,
starting to  die, and  apparently knew the Grail might help him even as  Sabra  knew.
That's why he wanted Sabra's book, to research it for clues to the Grails location. If
he had it, he'd be on the first plane to Heathrow. Because that's what I'd do.
There was still a chance to salvage things. He shook his head, waving to interrupt
her flow of ideas. "I've another course to take."
"What might that be?"
Richard went to  the front  room  and  tried the phone.  It was  still hooked  up.  He
called his 24-hour travel service.  The  news  was  not  good.  The  next  flight  for  the
U.K. was at dawn the next day. He looked into the possibility of chartering a private
flight,  but  none  were  to  be  had  any  sooner.  They  could  not  ascertain  if  other
transatlantic flights had been chartered. That was something Bourland or Demarest's
people  could  check  out,  but  asking for  their help at this point  would require more
explanations than Richard was willing to provide. Best to keep this quiet for as long
as could be got away with.
"Right," he said to the travel agent. "See what you can  book  for  me on  the next
flight, a first class if you can manage, but just get me aboard."
Sharon's eyes blazed. "And me as well!"
"What?"

"You know something I don't, or you'd not be haring off like this. I'm comin' too,
if I have to strap mesel' to the wing."
His inner debate took all of two seconds to resolve.
Yes, she might be safer here, and yes, he could hypnotize her into forgetting the
whole business and send her on her way, but no, he couldn't take the chance.  If he
was wrong, and Charon was still in Toronto, she'd be his next practice  target, only
then he'd  not  deign to  miss.  Either  choice  and  she  could  die.  Would  die.  Charon
would see  to  that no  matter what. At least if she  came along Richard  could  better
look out for her.
"Make that two tickets, whatever you've got, but it must be on that first flight." He
gave a credit card number and rang off.
"Now what's this about?" she demanded. "Why do you suddenly think he's going
to England?"
"Specifically, to Glastonbury."
"Glaston—why the hell would he go there?
"He's an Arthurian scholar and that place is solidly connected with the legends."
"Oh, now, you can't be serious."
"Rivers is, or  rather Charon.  I think he's  taken the Abbey  Book  as  his payment
for the hit he's to do. He needs it."
"Needs it? Whatever for?"
How much to tell her? "That book is absolutely unique with scholars debating on
the  meaning  of  some  of  its  passages,  right?  Suppose  it  has  information  Charon
needs to find something? Something very precious and important to him."
"What? Merlin's hat?"
He looked at her hard. "The Grail."
That stopped  her cold.  "The  Grail. The  Holy Grail?" She  gave  a  short  derisive
laugh, shaking her head. "Surely you don't believe in that rubbish, do you? You'll be
tellin' me about leprechaun hunts next."
"What  I  believe  in  is  beside  the  point.  He  does  believe  in  it  and  that's  what
matters."
"It's too  daft  for  words.  He's  got  his book—he's  only gone  to  ground  until the
time's right for him to go to work. 'Tis as simple as that."
"You've heard his lectures, heard how he talks on."
"Well, yes—"
"I  heard  some  of  it,  too,  that  night  in  his  office.  He's  truly  obsessed  with  the
subject."
"Enough to run out on the IRA before doin' his job for them?"

"Yes." If he's as desperate as I am to find it. And he is.
"Then he's right 'round the twist. The boys are not the forgivin' type."
"I  doubt  that  they  matter  much  to—"  He  stopped,  listening.  The  elevator.  He
signed her to  silence, hoping it only meant another tenant on  the floor  was  on  the
way home. But just in case, he swept  her along with him toward  the bath.  She  still
held the Glock  and  now grasped  it  expertly  in  both  hands,  left  cupping  the  right,
elbows slightly bent to absorb the recoil. It would be nearly useless against Charon,
though,  and  likely  only  send  him  into  a  killing  frenzy.  On  the  other  hand  if  she
pumped enough bullets into his heart it would slow him quite a lot and give Richard
a few moment's edge over him. There was nothing left in the apartment that could be
employed as a stake, but Richard was unnaturally strong. If he had to he could twist
Charon's  head  right  off  his  neck.  Messy,  but  effective,  and  he'd  worry  about
explaining things later.
Richard shut the bathroom light out and put  one  eye around  the corner.  He was
just able to hear footsteps whispering over the carpet in the outer hall.
At least two people. They paused  at the broken-in front  door.  A few heartbeats
later and the door slowly swung inward, but no one came through.
Then: "Come out, come out, wherever you are."
Demarest? Richard slumped, relief mixed with irritation, and Sharon stared at him
quizzically.
"Who is it?" she whispered.
"It's all right, I know him. You'd better put that away. He's supposed to be one of
the good guys, but he'll object to that little item." He indicated the gun, and  Sharon
obligingly tucked it back in her bag.
They stepped out of the bathroom to be confined by a large armed man—his gun
drawn and squarely aimed at them—standing next to Demarest.
Richard paused, uncertain. "How the hell did you—?"
Demarest bore  an expression  that was  miles beyond  mere smugness.  "After the
pub  shooting  I  sent  Doyle  here  to  watch  your  house  and  he  followed  you."  The
officer next to  him  nodded  politely.  Obviously  he  was  somewhat  more  careful  at
tailing than the previous two efforts.
"Who is he?" Sharon asked Richard in a stage whisper.
Demarest  smiled  and  gave  a  slight  mocking  nod  of  the  head.  "Forgive  me,
mademoiselle,  I  am  Chief  Inspector  Etienne  Demarest  of  the  Royal  Canadian
Mounted Police."
"Where's  your  red  jacket,  big  hat,  and  horse?"  she  inquired,  obviously
underwhelmed by his manner.
Before Demarest could frame an appropriate  reply, Richard  stepped  in. "What's
this about, Chief Inspector?"

"It's about the great specialist falling flat on his face, Mr. Dun, though I can hardly
blame you for  allowing her to  divert your  attention from  the job.  Your description
hardly does her justice." He looked her up and down, all but licking his lips.
"Descrip— What the hell is this?" Sharon asked, turning to Richard.
"There's  been  an  all-points  out  on  you  since  the  business  in  Niagara,"  he
explained. "You can call off the dogs, Demarest, I've checked her credentials. She's
clean and has been helping me on the case."
"No  doubt  she's  been  very  helpful,  more  than  helpful.  Please  put  your  purse
down, Mademoiselle Geary, and step well away from  Mr. Dun with your  hands  on
your head."  Under the threat of  the gun Sharon  did  exactly as  she  was  told,  even
though her searing look would have melted steel.
Richard glared at the man. "What are you—"
Demarest smiled. "I'm  placing you  both  under  arrest,  so  let's  be  civilized  about
this and the two of you come quietly."
"You've  nothing to  charge me with, you  great  fool,  you're  just  trying  to  harass
me."
"Oh, but I've a very solid charge against you. What about the willing collusion of
yourself with this terrorist in the assassination threat to our prime minister?"
Richard gave him a blank look. "What?"
"Dun, you  are so  short-sighted  you  cannot  see  what's  directly before  you.  This
woman. She is the threat to the PM, the one we've all been  searching for,  and  you,
unless you can prove otherwise, have been helping her. This  is Charon.  Didn't you
notice the similarity of names?"
"Sweet Mary," said Sharon, shaking her head. "I'd  not  have believed it, but  he's
as stupid as he looks!"
Demarest bristled. "I'm glad that you find a degree of amusement in this situation.
I hope that you will continue to do so after your trial. You'll need it."
Richard  started  to  speak,  but  Demarest  cut  him  off.  "I  suggest  you  save  any
objections  for  later,  Mr.  Dun,  and  you'd  better  acquire  some  legal  representation
very soon. I believe you know the part about anything you say being taken down and
used  in evidence against you.  You're  both  up  to  your  necks  in this so  don't  make
things harder than they are. Doyle, take her out  to  the car;  be  sure  to  caution her."
Demarest drew out his own gun to cover Richard.
Officer  Doyle  produced  some  handcuffs.  With  a  minimum  of  fuss,  he  pulled
Sharon's  hands  behind her and  locked  the restraints  into place.  This  way,  miss,  if
you please," he said.  He retrieved her purse,  tucking it under  one  arm, and  guided
her toward the door.
Sharon looked wildly back at Richard, who shrugged. "Do what he says, I'll sort
it out for us in just a few minutes."
"I think not,"  said  Demarest.  "Place  your  hands  against that wall, lean on  them,

and spread your feet."
Richard stalled long enough until Sharon and Doyle were out of the room and he
heard the elevator opening. "All right, have it your way. But there's just one thing you
need to know…"
"Really?" Demarest was very sure of himself, and that was a big help. It meant his
guard was down.
Richard went utterly still and  focused  his complete  attention upon  the man. For
the  briefest  moment  he  felt  no  connection,  then…  yes,  there  it  was.  Demarest's
chronically  bad-tempered  expression  went  slack.  His  gun  arm  sagged.  Richard
stepped forward to catch the weapon before it struck the floor.
Eye-to-eye with him now. "Demarest, you are a fool. A monumental fool."
"I am a monumental fool," he echoed in a faint monotone.
Well, that was satisfying. "Sharon Geary is not the one you need. You will cancel
the  all-points  out  for  her.  The  real  Charon  is  Professor  Neal  Rivers.  Do  you
understand?"
"Professor Neal Rivers."
"In fact, you never saw either of us. You were following up an anonymous tip and
came here. When you arrived, Rivers surprised you and locked you in a closet. This
one will do." He took Demarest to a coat closet by the front entry.
"Rivers surprised me…"
"Yes, yes, now get inside and have yourself a nice long nap. You're very tired and
need the rest."
Demarest did exactly as he was  told,  slumping down  on  the floor  and  breathing
deeply, gone  to  the world.  Richard  shut  the door,  wishing he had  a  chair  to  prop
under  the  knob,  though  it  hardly  mattered.  Demarest  wouldn't  wake  up  until
tomorrow. To prevent any disturbances, Richard thoughtfully relieved the man of his
radio  and  cell  phone,  putting  them  in  the  refrigerator  next  to  the  bag  of  petrified
tacos.
Then he shot out the door  for  the elevator. He debated  on  taking the stairs,  but
dropped  the idea. Sharon  and  Doyle would have reached  the ground  floor  by  this
time, too late now to head them off. He'd just have to catch them up at their car. He
pressed the down button and noted from the pointer above that the car was already
ascending. More police? He pressed his back to the wall, partially concealing himself
behind a potted plant.
The doors parted… and nothing happened.
Then the barrel of  a 9mm  Glock  peeped  out,  swiftly  followed  by  Sharon.  She
whirled, aiming at him in one fluid movement, and he crashed to the floor. But there
was no gunshot, only a half-stifled giggle. "At last, a man on his knees to me!" She
was quite unencumbered by handcuffs and looked to be well in control of things.
Richard  gave her a dark  look,  stood,  and  dusted  off  his trousers.  "Very funny.

What if Demarest had been here instead with his gun?"
She stuffed the Glock back in her purse. "Then I'd have gone to Plan B."
"Which is?"
"I'll let you know when I think it up. Where is the little git, anyway?"
"Busy. What about your man?"
"Havin'  a  lie-down."  She  gestured  at  the  elevator.  Doyle  was  crumpled  on  the
floor, quite boneless, with his arms behind him and  handcuffs  neatly locked  on  his
wrists.
Richard stared. "What the hell did you do to him?"
"Just a friendly Glasgow handshake is all. Not my fault he's got a tender skull and
surprises easy. We can't leave him there, so—"
"I'll take care of it, you go  fetch  the car;  I'll be  down  directly."  He gave her the
keys to the Rover, then bent to lift and drag Doyle out. He hoped he could revive the
lad enough to hypnotize him so his memories would match Demarest's.
"Are we still off to the airport?" she asked.
"Yes,  but  I'll have to  stop  home first for  my passport  and  some  cash.  We  can
pick up your things as well for the trip. There's plenty of time before our flight."
"What about the law here?"
"Not to worry. I've gotten it all straight with Demarest for the time being."
"Maybe you'll tell me how you managed that. Reasoned with him, did you?"
Richard grunted an affirmative as he pulled Doyle along the floor. Doyle moaned,
consciousness returning. Good.
"And are you sure about this Glastonbury thing?"
"Absolutely."
"If you're wrong we could all be in for a state funeral."
"I know."
"So we're really searching for the Grail? Honest to God?"
"Yes." Honest to Goddess as well, he thought, smiling inside.
She tsked, shaking her head as she slipped into the elevator. "I'll believe it when I
see it. Well, if we're on such a daft quest, can I be Guinevere and you be Lancelot?"
He paused,  looking at her with startled  bemusement.  "The  story  of  my life," he
wryly murmured as the doors shut.
Chapter Eight
"God, but I'm ready for bed," said Sharon as she resettled the shoulder  strap  of

her flight bag.
"I'm delighted to hear it."
"To sleep," she added, a smile twisting the corner of her mouth.
"You slept on the plane," Richard pointed out as they, along with the rest  of  the
weary, flight-stoned crowd, filed along toward Heathrow's version of customs.
"You've a strange definition for it, then."
"What are you complaining about? It was first class." And what a stroke of luck it
had been  to  get those  seats.  A  last-minute  cancellation  had  worked  in  their  favor.
Richard  didn't  care  if it was  mere  coincidence  or  divine  intervention  that  changed
their status from standby to boarding, but made a mental note to offer formal thanks
at the first chance. Of course, no matter the comfort,  he still hated  the flying itself.
He'd been very glad of Sharon's company  to  keep  him distracted  from  the horrors
of too much thought on the topic.
"Sorry. Just havin' a touch of nerves," she said, keeping pace with the herd.
He shot her a quick, sharp look. "You're not carrying anything you shouldn't?"
"Don't be daft. I left the shooter at your place. They'd have turned it up when we
went through Pearson's  security,  anyway." Despite popular  claims to  the  contrary,
Sharon's  plastic-handled  Glock  would  have  given  the  airport  X-ray  machines  and
their operators seven different kinds of fits. He didn't have to ask her twice to leave it
behind. "It's Demarest. If he wants to put a call out on us…"
So, she was worried the authorities on this side of the pond would be looking for
them. "It won't happen. I made sure of that, I told you."
Demarest had been of great help there, thanks to his scrambled memories on just
how he spent the night and much of the next morning ignominiously stuffed in a coat
closet  with  Officer  Doyle.  The  hapless  chief  inspector  had  been  predictably  livid
about the incident—once he regained consciousness—and was now rabid to find the
man he thought  responsible.  Now  everyone  in  Canada  was  looking  for  Professor
Neal Rivers, a.k.a Charon.
And  Demarest  had  met  with  some  minor  success  according  to  the  progress
checks  Richard  made  with  Bourland  during  the  long  flight.  The  tapes  from  the
surveillance cameras at the condominium block had proved fruitful. The ones in the
parking garage caught Rivers emerging from his car, his clothes  covered  with gore.
He'd  not  bothered  to  obscure  his  face.  About  an  hour  later  the  entry  cameras
recorded  him leaving with a bag  in hand  and  all  cleaned  up,  presumably  to  go  to
ground.
Or the airport.
So far no cab or bus driver admitted to picking up Rivers as a fare, but then none
would be able to if the memory had been hypnotized  out  of  their brains.  The  same
held true for any airline employees.
They'd  searched  his lease car;  the  blood  inside  matched  Sean's.  There  was  no

sign of a sniper's gun. He'd had plenty of  time to  stash  it, though,  prior  to  coming
home, and that worried Richard.
If I'm wrong, if he's still back there and this is a goose chase…
No, that didn't matter. Even if Charon was still in Toronto, Richard had to get to
Glastonbury.
"And just what tale did you spin to put us in the clear?" Sharon asked.
"A  damned  good  one.  We're  all  comrades  in  arms  again,  the  flowers  are
blooming,  the  skies  are  clear,  God's  in  His  heaven,  and  all's  right  with  the  stock
market."
"Sounds  like you've  a touch  of  nerves  yourself.  An'  I  thought  you  didn't  have
any."
"Impatience, not nerves. I want to get going. Do  you  really need  to  sleep?  I can
put you up in a hotel while I—"
"Not a chance. If Rivers has that manuscript, I'm going to be there to pry it from
his grasping fingers."
Good trick, he thought, considering what Rivers is. Having Sharon along for the
hunt  was  a  hellish  risk  for  her,  but  Richard  preferred  her  with  him  rather  than
crashing about on her own. At least while they were together he had  the chance  of
protecting her from Rivers. If I let him get that close.
Despite  Sharon's  misgivings  and  his  impatience  they  passed  through  customs
without incident, and Richard led the way to  one  of  the exits. The  sun  was  still up
and lethally bright. But this was England in the summer—of all the rotten times for it
not to be raining. Richard  called for  Sharon  to  pause  while he wrapped  up  against
the dazzling weather: coat, gloves, hat…
" 'Tis hardly a cunning disguise," she observed as he popped on  his sunglasses.
"You'll be drawing attention in that stuff."
"I told you I had an allergy to sunlight."
"Damnedest thing I've ever heard. What are you, a vampire?"
He pretended  shocked  surprise.  "My  God—my  secret's  discovered!  How  ever
did you guess?"
She rolled her eyes. "Get on with you."
He hefted his now much lighter carry-on  and  quickly led the way straight to  his
waiting Jaguar, unlocking the doors,  then slipping inside with a sigh of  relief at the
shade. The darkened windows weren't complete protection from the sun,  but  much
better than nothing.
"Didn't  we  leave  one  just  like  this  in  your  garage  in  Toronto?"  she  inquired,
fiddling with her seat belt.
"It's part of my company fleet."
"An  antique  like  this  that  gets  twenty  miles  to  the  tank?  You've  a  very

understanding crew of stockholders."
"Oh, they are. And by the way, a thing is only an antique when it's  been  around
longer than you've been alive."
"Then this qualifies for me, if not for you."
"I'm  an  antique,  then?"  he  asked,  removing  his  sunglasses  to  give  her  an  arch
look.
She put her hand firmly on his thigh, squeezing. "Ah, but I like a man with some
experience."  Then  she  moved  her  hand  first  north,  then  east,  making  him  squirm
when it reached its final destination.
Nothing to do for that but kiss her, which Richard did. Thoroughly.
"You can put me up in a hotel providin' you come yourself," she  told  him some
minutes later. She was beautifully breathless.
"I'll hold you to that when we have the time."
"You can hold me any way you damn well please," she said, getting comfortable
in her seat and patting her hair back into place.
Despite the diversions of the moment, Richard remembered something he had  to
check, got out again, and went around to open the boot. His part-time secretary  on
this side of the Atlantic had followed his telephoned orders exactly. Not only was his
London car serviced and ready to roll, but she'd seen to the other, special equipment
as  well.  It  was  all  there,  innocuous-looking  stuff,  very  much  like  gardening  tools:
picks,  shovels,  a  large,  mallet-style  hammer,  then  there  were  ropes,  chisels,
crowbars, several sharpened staves of yew wood in varying lengths… everything he
might  need  for  this  expedition.  Even  the  batteries  in  the  torches  were  fresh.  He
slammed the lid shut with a grimace of satisfaction, piled back  in behind the wheel,
and started the engine.
"Fancy  a trip to  Glastonbury?"  he asked  as  he negotiated the intricate tangle  of
traffic and roads to escape the airport. He put his sunglasses back on.
"If it goes past a take-away. I could use some fresh fuel."
"Right. Just point one out and we'll stop."
"But not for long. D'ye think Rivers will still even be  there? He's  had  a hell of  a
start on us."
"Perhaps  only  a  few  hours."  Then  there  was  all  this  sun.  The  brilliant  weather
might have worked in their favor to delay Rivers. He would have loathed getting out
in the stuff. "If we miss him there's an alert on  should  he try to  leave the country."
Philip Bourland had seen to that, acting on Richard's suggestion—for all the good it
would  probably  do.  If  Rivers  had  any  kind  of  experience,  he  could  slip  free  to
anywhere  in  the  world  as  easily  as  going  through  a  door.  Richard  had  done  so
himself countless times.
"Perhaps when we get there he'll still be digging for the Grail. After readin' all the
stuff he put  in  his  book  on  it,  I  see  now  that  he  really  believes  it's  there."  She'd

brought along Richard's signed copy and had read it off and on during the flight.
"Learn anything else?"
"Quite a lot. He made it interesting, I'll give him that."
"Tell me about it."
With a few prompting  questions,  he got  a full report  from  her  about  the  book,
concentrating on information connected with the Grail, rather than the literary works
about  Arthur.  Richard  compared  his  own  memories  of  the  time  with  Sharon's
gleanings.  Its  inaccuracies  amused  him,  but  there  were  enough  facts  mixed  in  to
cause  him  worry.  The  legend  Rivers  believed  in  was  that  the  Grail  was  buried
somewhere beneath Glastonbury Tor. Close enough to the truth for discomfort.
Originally the Grail had  been  kept  in that sacred  spot  under  the guardianship of
the sisterhood of the Goddess. The duty was  gradually passed  to  the monks  when
the Christians arrived and built their monastery on the same holy ground. The monks
did not  know the real import of  what they guarded,  only that it was  a sacred  relic
entrusted to their care. Those were simpler times, when faith was truly all consuming
and  blind.  If  you  asked  someone  to  do  something,  it  was  accomplished  without
question and they thanked you for the honor.
But tradition can break down and be forgotten in the span of a few lives. He had
seen  that  happen  again  and  again.  Sabra,  her  sisters,  their  followers,  and  their
descendants had ever kept a watchful eye on things, but sometimes even their power
wasn't strong enough to stand against the irresistible force  of  violent change.  Sabra
and  Richard  had  had  a  lively  time  of  it  just  trying  to  survive  when  that  bloody
usurper William took it into his head  to  wrest  the throne  from  Harold and  crossed
the channel with his band of freebooting Normans. It was  enough to  make Richard
ashamed of being one himself. What a century that had been.
"If  the  Grails  still  there,  why  haven't  they  dug  it  up  by  now?"  Sharon  asked,
dragging his mind back to  the present.  Now she  was  flipping through a guidebook
she'd found in the glovebox. His secretary had thought of everything.
"Not enough grant money, I suppose. Archeology's an expensive sport even with
volunteers doing the grunt work."
Or perhaps because the Goddess, with her servants dead or  scattered,  had  been
actively protecting it Herself for all those lost ages—that or the scholars believed the
whole business to be  a troubadours  dream and  chose  not  to  bother.  Either way, it
worked; the Grail had been kept safe. Until now.
"What I want to  know is  how  Rivers  expects  to  accomplish  what  centuries  of
pilgrims, historians, and archeologists haven't been able to do," said Sharon.
"Maybe he got  a lead from  that stolen  manuscript  of  yours."  Privately,  he  was
sure of it. Sabra would have disguised things in a web of words and  verse,  but  not
to the point where Richard couldn't have made sense of it, and if he could work out
the meanings, then so could another.
"Must  have been  a strong  one  for  him to  be  running out  on  the  IRA  after  they

paid him for a job he's not done. Why is he taking such a risk with them?"
"Who knows?" But if Rivers was a very old  vampire, beginning to  lose  control,
beginning to  die, he'd  be  desperate  to  find a cure.  God  knows  how  he  found  out
about the Grail's possible power to save him in that regard, but there it was. Maybe
he was only following a dream and a hope, like countless pilgrims before him. If the
Grail proved to be a disappointment, then maybe he'd try the waters at Lourdes next.
"If he's not cooperative, how will we find the thing?"
Richard shrugged.  He'd  just have to  trust  his memory and  the Goddess  on  that
one. It wouldn't be the first time. "I'm sure we'll work something out."
She gave him a long sideways look. "You know more than you're telling. Are you
planning to short me on this?"
"We're both on the same side, Sharon.  You want the museum manuscript  back,
and I'll help you on that, no question."
"But the Grail?"
He made no reply.
"You want it for yourself, don't you?"
"I want to keep it safe from Rivers, which is quite different."
"And  not  an  answer  to  my  question.  If  you  turned  up  with  the  honest-to-God
article,  you  could  write  your  own  ticket  for  life.  Everyone  from  the  National
Geographic  to  the Tattler  will want a piece  of  you  and  be  ready  with  the  cash  in
hand for the privilege."
"That's one path I don't plan to take."
"What then? Turn it over to the British Museum, or perhaps to the queen so  she
can put it in the Tower  with the rest  of  the Crown  Jewels? Or  will you  be  takin' it
directly to the Pope himself?"
"Sharon…"
"Tell me, then."
He  scowled  against  the  road  glare.  An  opening  presented  itself  in  the  lines  of
vehicles,  and  he  seized  it.  The  Jaguar  responded  as  smoothly  as  its  sibling  in
Toronto and surged effortlessly forward.
"Well?" she asked when the speedometer needle steadied again.
"There's no point in telling, because you wouldn't believe me."
"Takin' a lot on  yourself,  aren't  you?  Deciding  what  I'll  think  before  I've  heard
anything."
He could have pointed out that she'd been making some broad judgments on him
as well, but chose to let it pass.
"So what is it I wouldn't be believin'?"

"That I need the Grail for someone else."
"Who?"
"My… my mother."
"Your—whatever for?"
"She's  dying."  There.  The  absolute  and  pitiless  truth.  And  he  couldn't  hide  his
feelings about it. They rushed up, choking him with their unexpected strength.
Sharon's tone was softer, more subdued. Apparently she'd picked  up  a lot from
the husky tremor in his voice. "I'm sorry."
For  a second  he couldn't  see  the road  and  fought  to  blink  his  eyes  clear.  "No
doctor can help her."
"And you believe the Grail can?"
Again, he made no reply.
"You really believe in it—just like Charon?"
"My belief is beside the point, I can only try. It's the only hope she has left. I have
to get it to her and soon. I've given my word on it. That's why I went to see Rivers
in the first place—trying to do research. I'd no idea he was also on the hunt for it, or
that  he  was  the  assassin."  Or  that  he  was  a  vampire.  "Not  until  you  involved
yourself."
"An' here I'm thinkin' I was a spanner in the works for you by interruptin' things."
He spared a glance at her. "You're no interruption. I'm glad of your being here no
matter what."
Silence, then: " 'Tis  a flatterin' man you  are and  no  mistake, Richard  Dun."  She
said it lightly, but another glance at her face  proved  to  him that he'd  really touched
her.  Perhaps  more  deeply  than  he  anticipated.  For  either  of  them.  He  suddenly
wanted her, wanted to pull over and take her right then and there on  the side  of  the
road.
Be careful, Richard. How many women can a man be in love with at one time?
 
Blessed night finally eased over the land. When they paused at a British rendition
of an American fast-food franchise, Richard took the opportunity to divest his long
coat, trading it for a lighter zippered jacket. He quietly excused himself from ordering
anything to  eat, but  bought  a container of  coffee  for  show,  pretending to  sip,  and
then "forgetting" about it until it was too cold to drink. By that time they were miles
along  their  way  again,  with  the  Jaguar's  headlamps  cutting  swiftly  through  the
growing darkness.  He kept  a heavy foot  on  the pedal,  hoping to  make up  for  lost
time. It was hell on the petrol consumption, and he was risking police notice, but too
bad. This was an emergency.
Time  passed  in  comfortable  silence.  Sharon  had  tucked  into  her  food  like  a
starving chipmunk, then dozed, sometimes sleepily opening her eyes when there was

a shift in the car's momentum. Richard was very wide awake himself. As the distance
between him and  his goal closed  with  agonizing  slowness,  he  felt  more  and  more
tension for the task to come building inside, demanding release. If he wasn't  careful
he'd be overstrung on arrival, and that would be entirely too dangerous. Better to be
calm and receptive, ready to respond to whatever awaited, rather than nerved up and
jumping at every shadow. He tried breathing deeply and concentrating on the act  of
driving.  It  helped,  a  little,  though  more  than  once  his  thoughts  would  stray  into
useless speculation on what to do if Rivers had been and gone with the Grail by the
time they got there. If that proved true…
The road. Focus on the road, not on things you've no control over.
Another mile slipped  away beneath them. Then another,  until sufficient numbers
of them accumulated to the point of meaning something.
He  turned  off  the  main  highway  to  negotiate  the  meandering  turns  of  narrow
country roads, and then suddenly he felt it and had to  stop.  He pulled the car  over
onto  the  grass  verge,  doused  the  lights,  and  stepped  out.  A  brisk  wind  was  up,
sending clouds scurrying over  the face  of  the waning moon  like frantic ghosts.  He
crossed to a gap in the hedge and stood facing west, tasting the uncanny vibration in
the air. Through the blackness of the English night, his sensitive eyes  could  see  the
Tor  as  clearly  as  his  other  senses  perceived  the  presence  of  things  beyond  mere
sight.
Sweet Goddess, but there's magic afoot. Strong stuff, too, for him to feel it from
here.
A hand unexpectedly touched his shoulder and he flinched. Sharon stood next to
him in the darkness, rubbing sleep from her eyes.
"We're almost there," he told her.
She checked her watch in the fitful moonlight. "What'd you do, fly when I wasn't
looking?"
"Just about. You can see the Tor." He pointed.
She squinted, then shook her head. "I'll take your word for it." And she stumbled
back to the warmth of the car.
Richard's hopes had risen at the mere sight of the great hill. It was  the landmark
for miles around, always had been. Glastonbury, in legend and in language called the
Glass Place because of the waters that once went right up to its base. When the light
was right  and  the  day  calm,  they'd  perfectly  reflected  the  Tor  like  a  mirror.  Ynis
Witrin, the Island of Glass, the Island of Apples, Avalon… His heart began to  beat
fast and hard  at the prospect  of  walking there again, and  he didn't  try to  quell this
feeling of excitement. It was a sacred place to him, and he had every right to revel in
the joy it inspired, no matter the circumstances that brought him back.
But I've been away for so long. So much has changed.
The  waters  had  receded,  either  by  shifts  in  the  climate  or  from  man-made
draining. Only a faint memory of their presence lingered in the low places in the land,

collecting in wide sheets  upon  the  rain-soaked  earth.  The  Tor  appeared  to  be  the
same as ever, though, rising from the otherwise flat plain like a woman's  breast,  the
tower on top jutting up like a nipple. The comparison had once amused  Sabra,  and
she'd playfully chided him for having his mind ever on fleshly pleasures. He recalled
more than once  taking action  against her  teasing  on  that  particular  topic,  much  to
their mutual delight.
Then the thought of losing her stabbed through him, killing his joy.
Mouth  dry,  he  joined  Sharon  back  in  the  car  and  fed  it  more  petrol,  hurrying
forward.
The village of Glastonbury, like many in this part  of  the world,  nearly ceased  to
exist  once  night  had  fallen.  The  shops  were  all  closed,  their  owners  and  patrons
home, probably parked before their television sets or asleep. Excellent, there'd be no
inconvenient witnesses blundering about.
They entered the village from the east,  passing  a couple  of  silent farms  before  a
National Trust sign announced the abbey ruins to  the left, and  the Tor  to  the right.
The main body of the village—stores, hotels, and ugly modern housing—lay further
ahead. Richard took the left turn and pulled quietly into the parking lot of the abbey
ruins. He switched off the engine and  coasted  down  a slight slope  to  come  to  rest
silently in the deep shadow of  some  windswept  trees.  They climbed out,  both  stiff
from  the  long  ride,  and  Sharon  stretched  mightily,  loosening  her  long  immobile
muscles.
"How do we get in?" she asked, nodding toward the ruins.
"We don't need to. We go to the Tor. Around and from the far side."
"It's a bit of a walk."
"If he's here I don't want him to know we are as well."
The  wind  was  high,  running  over  the  grass,  turning  it  into  a  restless  sea;  it
whipped through the trees, gifting them with thready-voiced speech. Richard recalled
once  meeting  a  woman  who  could  understand  their  language.  Interesting  sort,
claimed she always felt like an eavesdropper.
Sharon  shivered,  pulled  a  dark  jacket  from  her  flight  bag,  and  slipped  it  on.
"Creepy place," she commented, tying a scarf firmly over her wind-blown hair.
"I suppose it is if you're not used to it." As changed as it was,  this was  still like
another  home  to  him.  He  could  no  more  fear  it  than  the  more  prosaic  one  he'd
created in Toronto. He opened the boot and handed Sharon a torch, putting another
in his coat pocket. "Don't use it just yet, not until we find him," he cautioned. "And
if you  should  see  him,  duck  and  run.  Don't  forget  how  he's  killed  before.  Stay
absolutely out of his way and let me handle him, I've had the training for it."
"Not  to  worry,  you're  welcome  to  him.  I  know  the  difference  between  an
off-guard RCMP officer and  a homicidal maniac, thank you  very much.  What's  all
this other stuff you've got?"

"Prospecting equipment. We might have to do a bit of  excavation."  He gave her
the crowbar and pick, then shouldered a coil of rope, hung the mallet and  a folding
grappling hook from his belt, and  hefted  the shovel and  a couple  of  the sharpened
yew staves. She shut the boot, and he led off along the line of the ancient stone wall
away from the abbey entrance and deeper into the darkness.
Richard  strode  quickly and  quietly, with Sharon  struggling  to  keep  up.  He  was
barely  aware  of  her  as  the  memories  of  the  place  flooded  back  to  him,  the  past
becoming more real than the present with every step he took. The very stones at his
feet seemed to smile up in welcome. Many was the night that he had trod this same
path rushing to meet Sabra at the base of the Tor, ready to be led along the mystic
way to Avalon.
And  yet,  how  much  it  had  changed.  The  glorious  abbey  was  in  ruins  now.  A
break in the clouds  gave him a moonlit glimpse of  the great arch  of  the  nave,  still
standing,  still  reaching  upward  in  its  futile  attempt  to  reach  heaven.  Little  else
remained,  save  bare  stone  walls,  crumbling  in  their  inevitable  return  to  the  earth
whence they had been torn, and empty shadowed windows staring malevolently like
skeletal eye sockets.
The  ruins  were  sad  enough  for  anyone,  but  especially  so  for  him  as  he
remembered them in their original splendor. And, ah, the times before the abbey had
even been built, when the sacred ground had been dedicated solely to the Goddess.
Over the years the Christians had gradually made a place for themselves on the same
spot,  coming  to  the  festivals  of  the  Goddess  to  speak  of  their  Savior  to  others,
making  converts,  and  finally  building,  ever  building.  But  the  Goddess  had  not
minded sharing the land or the people.
Her followers had  been  forced  to  accept  the changed  way of  things in order  to
survive, but still managed to keep the old worship alive simply by  integrating it into
the  new.  Certainly  they  had  much  in  common:  lighting  candles,  burning  incense,
saying prayers, chanting, celebrating with feasts and serving penance with fasts,  but
there had ever been conflict from both sides.  It usually resulted  from  insecure faith
and basic greed. Richard had often noted the ones most shrill about defending their
religion at any cost  were  either  plagued  with  inner  doubts,  or  wanted  power  over
others, or both. The people at peace with themselves and their deity he never had to
worry about.
The abbey took the place of the original church when the latter burned down in a
devastating fire that had  consumed  the priceless  books  in its keeping. It was  mere
chance  that he and  Sabra  had  gone  to  Ireland  that  year,  and  she'd  taken  her  own
book with her, thus sparing it. He'd asked if that had been her Gift of Sight at work,
but she'd only shrugged. "It serves me well for people, but not so well for  events,"
she told him.
Although  she'd  not  been  able  to  predict  the  time  the  monks  of  the  abbey
"discovered" the graves of Arthur and Guinevere. That had taken Sabra  completely
by surprise.
"Perhaps I should have tithed more," was her rueful comment.

For  centuries  afterwards  the  abbey  benefited  from  the  monetary  offerings  of
countless pilgrims who came to pay their respects to the long vanished king and his
queen. The sham angered Richard, for he knew their resting places to be very much
elsewhere than the plot of ground summarily chosen for them. Certainly Sabra didn't
approve, but she advised him to do nothing about the business, eventually leaving an
offering herself before they went on their way.
Unrest was the rule of  the land just then and,  forced  to  see  to  their own safety,
they had to move on, leaving the hidden Grail behind with its unknowing guardians.
For a time Richard worried that it might be discovered, but  Sabra  told  him to  have
faith.
"The Goddess will look after things," she said with serene certainty.
And  so  it  had  proved  for  the  last  eight  hundred  years.  Even  Henry  Tudor's
ravagings—which  had  destroyed  the  beautiful  abbey,  reducing  it  to  the  present
ruin—had failed to find the sacred cup. He'd have likely denounced it as papist and
destroyed  it,  the  hell-bound  butcher.  Talk  about  a  prime  example  of  greed  and
insecurity…
The Tor stood a little way off  and  above  the abbey,  across  the road  they'd  just
driven along. The  tower  of  the Church  of  St.  Michael  had  been  built  on  the  very
summit in some last mad attempt to drive out the old ways, only to become  itself a
victim of the swift progress of violent times. It also stood in ruins, in defiance of the
elements for many centuries, but wearing away nonetheless.
Stealthily, he moved  out  from  the shelter of  the abbey  wall  and,  pulling  Sharon
along with him, sprinted across the road and once more into the welcoming darkness
of the other side. A little way along the road  in the direction of  the town,  and  they
would be at the yew groves with their twin springs, one red, one white, their sacred
waters colored by the earth itself. It's so good to be back.
They  came  to  a  narrow  laneway,  emptying  out  onto  the  main  road,  and  he
stopped. Richards heart plummeted.
Oh, Goddess, what have they done now?
It  had  been  many  years  since  he  had  been  at  Glastonbury,  and  he'd  expected
some change, but he'd underestimated the capacity of modern  man for  destruction.
The beautiful yew trees  were gone  and  of  the  White  Spring  and  the  Chalice  Well
there was  no  sign.  Where  once  the  Druids  had  walked  barefoot  in  this  holiest  of
places,  now there ran a road,  winding gently along the side  of  the  Tor,  with  large
buildings at this end, and farmer's fields further along.
Sharon sensed his hesitation. "What's the matter?"
How could he ever explain? "It's… different from what I expected. There should
be a well here, and a spring. At least, according to my research."
"This is the White Spring, here." She indicated a building standing empty and  in
darkness at the junction of the lane and the main road.  The  Water Board  capped  it
and  built  a  reservoir  long  ago,  but  it's  not  used  anymore.  It  got  clogged  up  or

something. And the Chalice Well is further along the lane, on the left. I read it in the
guide."
"Oh, yes. Yes, of course…" He trailed off, unable to conceal his disappointment
and sorrow for that which was lost.
There was a moment of awkward silence, then Sharon touched his arm. "Well, I'd
love to stand here in the moonlight with you, but isn't there something that we should
be doing?"
He shook himself out of it. Time to grieve later. "Yes, there is, come on."
Richard  led the way along Well House  Lane to  the site of  the  Chalice  Well.  It,
too,  was  capped.  The  rough  stone  surrounds  were  surmounted  by  a  metal  grill
secured  with  a  formidable  looking  padlock  and  chains,  and  standing  almost
incongruously next to it was a modern drinking fountain.
"The  water's  reputed  to  have  curative  powers  since  the  Grails  supposed  to  be
linked to it somehow," she said. "Maybe we should have brought diving equipment."
She descended the few steps down to the well, pulled out her torch and, cupping her
hands around the light so as to shade it from anyone else's view, inspected the stout
metal grating. "Is it deep? What's this for? To keep people from stealing the Grail?"
"More likely to keep fools from falling in and drowning themselves."
"But the Grail could be down there."
"That's only a story, no one really believes it or they'd have found it by now."
"Rivers might. I'm going to have a better look." She put down the pick and swung
the crowbar, bringing it to bear.
He was about to point out that if it were true, Rivers would already be  trying to
break in, then stopped himself. "Good idea. You work on that, while I check the rest
of the area. I'm going to make a circle of the Tor, so it may be  a while. Try  not  to
make too much noise."
"You think he could hear anything with all this wind in his ears?"  She  shone  the
light again in the well, then energetically set about destroying National Trust property.
Richard  left  behind  the  rope  and  the  other  things  he  carried,  keeping  only  the
torch in his pocket and one of the sharpened yew tree staves. He walked unhurriedly
away, taking a roundabout route toward the Tor and using what cover was available.
While Sharon  was  focused  on  the  well  he'd  glimpsed  a  shadow  moving  there,
moving against the wind—and at vampire-fast speed.
There was no way of knowing if Rivers was aware of their presence, so Richard
assumed the worst, moving cautiously and keeping his eyes wide open. Hearing was
next to useless with the row from the wind, but he crept along silently, just in case.
Looking back,  he checked  on  Sharon.  He grimaced,  unhappy  at leaving her alone,
but he'd been aware of that risk from the start. Better to have her busy and out of the
way while he looked things over, than smack in the middle of things. He didn't know
what to expect from  Rivers,  but  again, assumed  the worst,  remembering the man's

other name was Charon.
He crossed Well House Lane, and started up the gentle slope toward the base of
the Tor. The wind was fairly howling now, growing stronger by the second, and the
moon dipped and sailed between the flying clouds. Most of the way to the Tor was
open field, littered with a few sheep, yet there were low trees and bushes enough to
give him cover, and in a few minutes he reached it.
You must use the True Way.
The voice of She-Who-Walks came unbidden to his mind, as clear and real as  if
she stood  next to  him. It was  more than enough to  make him freeze in his  tracks,
glancing to one side, then the other, chilled to the bone. He knew she was not there.
Not  physically.  Very  well,  then  she  was  close  by  in  another  sense,  either  from
thinking of  him or  as  part  of  his unconscious  mind's  own protective  instinct.  Past
experience with Sabra had taught him to  always pay  attention to  such  occurrences.
He did so now, crouching in the thick turf behind a shattered wall and surveying the
area very carefully.
He knew well what was  meant by  the True  Way.  It was  the way that Sabra  had
always led him, blindfolded, to the wonders of Avalon. He had asked her often why
he was  not  allowed to  see  it for  himself, but  she  only  said  that  it  was  part  of  the
mystery and the power of the place and must always be respected.
There's  a reason  for  following the old  rituals.  We  must  honor  them  even  if  we
don't understand why," she told him time and again.
All she allowed for him was that it began at the Living Rock, as she called it, and
he knew where that was—if the ravagers of the present century had left it alone.
Keeping low, he scrambled along the base of the Tor in the direction of the road
that he and Sharon had driven along earlier until he could see the rock gleaming in the
moonlight.  It  was  smaller  than  before,  or  so  it  seemed  when  compared  to  his
memory and  for  a second,  he  was  unsure,  but  then  like  a  scent  on  the  wind,  the
feeling came to him, the old power that had slumbered for so long in the land turned
in its doze and reached out to him, and he knew.
The  true  magic  of  the  Goddess  had  ever  been  Sabra's  domain,  but  he  wasn't
entirely immune to it, sensing it as  a deaf  man senses  the beat  of  a drum in the air
about  him. For  all the despoilments  visited upon  the place  for  good  or  ill, nothing
could change the basic forces  that lived here unseen and  unmarked by  any but  the
most  attuned.  He was  hardly in that number,  but  centuries of  time with  Sabra  had
taught him much, including being able to recognize such presences.
There is something in the path ahead of you.
She-Who-Walks's voice came to him once more, and in obedience to its warning,
Richard flattened himself against the damp grass in the lee side of the rock. Slowly,
he lifted his head and looked around.
The darkness keeps me from seeing anything but where its shadow has been.
The place was full of shadows in the fitful light of  the waning moon.  A shadow

had drawn him this way in the first place. They all seemed alive because of the wind.
Its voice rushed between the broken stones, whispered over the grass; tree branches
creaked, adding faint laughter to the night.
There.
His roving gaze fastened on a single moving patch of darkness in the trees.
It drifted, halted, then pressed on. Richard spared a short curse for the wind that
masked  whatever  sound  the  thing  might  have,  made,  but  took  it  back  as  he
comprehended it could work in his favor as well. So long as he kept out of sight he
had the initial advantage.
The shadow took on more definition, but was still far enough away that he could
only determine it was  a man. His sturdy  figure  strode  purposefully  along,  pausing
now and then to stare at some object along his path, looking for all the world like a
tourist determined to see the sights.
And he was coming in Richard's direction.
Chapter Nine
Closer… close enough. It was Neal Rivers all right, and if Richard had entertained
any doubts of him being a vampire, they vanished now.  The  man had  a small, flat,
square  object  in one  hand  and  often  stopped  to  look  at  it,  holding  it  like  a  book,
reading from it. The moonlight was fair, but not nearly enough to read by, not if one
were a normal human.
Rivers  passed  Richard's  hiding  place,  working  his  way  up  the  hill  toward  the
tower at its peak.  He carried  something in a sack  slung over  one  shoulder.  It  was
clearly heavy, even for him, and he paused, put down the book, and hefted the thing
across  to  the other  shoulder.  Picking up  the book  again, he  checked  it  again,  and
moved on upward in a straight line along the spine of the Tor.
Sabra's  book?  Most  certainly.  It  was  about  the  right  size.  Sharon  would  be
pleased.
As soon as he felt it was safe, Richard stood and watched Rivers disappearing up
the hill. He had to quickly get to the summit as well, yet hesitated. True, he could go
around to the other side, racing at preternatural speed and easily reach the top  first,
but the—warning?—from She-Who-Walks made him pause. The True Way was not
short or easy, but anything else would dishonor  the holiness of  the place,  and  with
the restless  energies flowing about  him like the wind,  he'd  be  a  fool  to  ignore  the
ancient tradition.
But Sabra had ever been the one to lead him, only she knew the path.
He had no idea. He' stood next to the Living Rock and faced up along the spine,
full of inner doubts. And as ever, when they consumed him, he turned  to  her in his
heart.

I am in your hands, my dearest love. If you have ever helped me, help me now,
and if not you, then let she who is my daughter be my guide in your stead.
Richard closed his eyes. He became very much more aware of the wind, of how it
roared in his ears, nipped at his clothes. He waited, hoping to hear a voice as before,
but  no  one  spoke  into  his  mind.  Perhaps  instead  he  would  receive  some  sort  of
unmistakable revelation that would carry him along.
Nothing. Only the wind. Wind that tugged insistently at him  until  an  errant  gust
sent him staggering forward  a few stumbling paces.  His eyes  popped  open  and  he
started  back  to  the  rock,  but  another  strong  gust  pressed  him  forward  again.  Its
force culled tears from his eyes. He turned away, rubbing them, for it felt like a spray
of dust had struck him blind.
The True Way…
He stopped, frozen with the realization. Of course he would have guidance, but in
a manner best suited for him and his limitations. He grinned at the simplicity of it all,
stopped fighting, and let the wind push him forward this way and that. It was not as
smooth  a walk as  it might have been  had  Sabra  been  there  to  take  his  arm,  but  it
worked, and that was all that mattered. He stumbled more than a few times, but  the
yew stave helped him keep his feet for the most part.
He spared  a brief thought that Rivers might spot  him out  in the open,  mark  his
progress,  and  take action,  but  that  threat  did  not  seem  so  great  against  what  was
happening. This was  magic, the old  kind he'd  lived with for  so  very long; Richard
trusted it, and in his heart knew all would be well regardless of whether he was seen
or not.
After a few yards  he veered off  to  the left, picking up  speed  as  he got  used  to
things, threading along the age old labyrinth, through the maze that lay all around the
Tor, overlooked by most. Faster  he went until he was  running, actually running  at
his  best  speed.  He  almost  laughed  from  the  sheer,  joyous  exhilaration  of  it.  He
spiraled  upward  and  upward,  eyes  closed,  never  faltering,  safe  in  the  care  of  his
Sabra, along the path that they had trod so often together on the way to Avalon.
Then abruptly the land became level under his feet, and he came to  a swift stop,
opening his eyes. Though still rocked by  the screaming wind, he was  at the top  of
the Tor and facing the open entry of Saint Michael's tower. It was also in ruins, the
same as  the abbey,  but  not  so  far  gone,  its  broken  stones  glimmering  faint  in  the
moonlight.
In past visits Richard had been content to  wait outside  while Sabra  had  entered,
such was the compelling power of the place.  His comparing  the Tor  to  a woman's
breast  wasn't  so  far off  after  all,  for  the  feeling  around  him,  from  the  living  earth
under his feet, to the wide sky overhead, and the lands stretching below was that of
overwhelming femininity,  powerful  and  sacred.  It  had  always  been  so,  sometimes
making him, the man, feel superfluous. His duty and privilege was to be guardian and
protector to Sabra and her sisters, and that had ever been more than enough for him.
But  tonight,  though…  that  might  have  to  change.  He  hoped  the  Goddess  would

understand the necessity of it.
There. Only a little way ahead was Rivers, for the moment completely unaware of
Richard's presence. Once more he lay flat in the grass and watched.
Rivers looked up at the niches in the face of the tower above the vanished door.
There were seven altogether, three on the right, three on the left, and one in the center
above  the  doorway.  One  of  the  three  on  the  right  still  held  its  statue  of  Saint
Dunstan. The lowest on the left contained the lower half of a statue of Saint Michael,
left foot pinning down his dragon for all eternity, but the rest were empty. Rivers had
put aside the sack he'd been carrying and now took from it a statue, laying it on the
turf next to him. In what was left of the moonlight, Richard could plainly see  that it
was a statue of Saint Bridget. Rivers must have found it in the abbey ruins below.
Like a  body  left forgotten  on  a  battlefield, Richard  thought.  Memory tugged at
him. Saint Bridget. But before that she'd been Brigid, the goddess  of  fire, and  very
important to Sabra and the others. How they would dance around  the flames in the
early spring  to  celebrate the change of  the  season;  Richard  could  almost  hear  the
music again, the pipes and drums.
Gone now. Perhaps never to return.
Rivers produced  a small plastic  bag  and  slipped  the book  inside it, drawing his
finger  and  thumb  across  the  top  to  seal  it  shut  before  tucking  all  into  a  pocket.
Unencumbered,  he now closely  regarded  the statue,  slowly circling,  then  suddenly
bent and lifted it and began walking toward the tower.
More  of  Richard's  memories  flooded  in.  Yes,  the  goddess-saint  needed  to  be
returned to her place. He recalled Sabra reading that bit aloud  to  him to  see  how it
sounded:  "When  Brigid  is  home  and  thrice  to  widdershins  turns…  something,
something… she looks now to the mystery below, holy and secret…" He forgot the
rest, but Rivers had the book and would take it from there.
He was  climbing now,  using the carvings as  footholds,  clinging  precariously  to
the remains of the wall with one hand, while trying to push the statue back into place
with the other.  Clearly he had  understood  Sabra's  instructions  well enough,  for  he
had headed  straight for  the center  niche, and  Richard  recalled that  that  was  where
Brigid  always  stood.  A  short  ladder  would  have  helped,  or  a  tall  assistant,  but
Richard patiently waited to  see  what happened.  Even over  the wind, he could  hear
Rivers's grunts of effort. Good, let him do all the work.
He finally got it settled. A moment's rest to get his breath…  now he was  turning
the statue, turning… damnation, that was the wrong direction. He held his peace until
Rivers  figured  it  out  and  corrected  things.  One  turn,  two,  three—but  the  statue
stopped  and  would not  go  any further. Rivers tried to  force  it,  then  gave  up,  and
dropped to the ground.
Taking stock, Richard thought.
Rivers paced back and forth a few times, then climbed up to try another turning.
It didn't  work.  Brigid was  stuck  fast  now,  not  quite  on  center  and  angled  so  she
faced inward toward the wall of the niche.

The mystery below, holy and secret…
Richard  grinned  to  himself,  and  blessed  Sabra's  early  efforts  at  verse.  The
reference could only be for the Grail, which he'd always known to be  hidden under
the  Tor  even  if  he  didn't  know  precisely  where  or  how  to  get  to  it.  Brigid  now
pointed the way—at least to those who understood the clue. Rivers was now closely
examining the area over Brigid's head, probably wondering where the mystery below
came into things—until he gave up in disgust and dropped down again.
He paced completely around the structure, checking every inch of the area, going
out of  sight for  a  few  moments.  Richard  took  the  opportunity  to  rise  and  scurry
inside the tower. He leapt lightly up onto a stone ledge that ran the length of one wall,
pressing himself into the inky blackness of  one  corner.  He held his breath,  waiting.
Sure enough, Rivers, too, came inside.
After all the noise of the wind, the relative quiet within the sheltering walls was  a
soothing respite. It was also quite dark, so much so that Rivers needed the aid of a
pocket  torch  to  look  around.  Richard  heard  him  muttering  aloud  to  himself  as  he
played the light over  the floor.  How strange  it was  to  hear  the  old  tongue  spoken
again, though his pronunciation was atrocious. Obviously, it was not the professor's
native language. He sounded as though he'd learned it by  memorizing an inaccurate
dictionary.
"The accent's on the second syllable," Richard said loudly.
Rivers gave a satisfying yell of  surprise,  turning fast,  mouth and  eyes  comically
wide. He frantically threw the  torchlight  around  until  it  picked  out  Richard's  form
crouching  on  the  ledge  like  some  latter-day  gargoyle.  Rivers  gaped  for  a  long
moment in undisguised shock with one hand to his heart. "Jeez! You scared the shit
out of me!"
"Mind your language, if you please, this is a church."
"What the hell are you doing here?" he demanded, disregarding Richards request.
"I think we both know the answer to that one, Neal. Is  that your  real first name?
Your last one is certainly a fake."
His  surprise  had  been  genuine,  but  Rivers  recovered  fast  and  grinned  up  with
unpleasant humor. "Took you long enough to figure it out. I was wondering if I was
that good or if you were just too thick in the brains department."
I'll ignore that. "Having much success?" he inquired innocently.
Rivers  snorted  and  waved  the  torchlight  around.  "I  followed  the  goddamned
manuscript,  turned  the  statue  and  all—nothing.  Another  rucking  fake—unless  you
know something I don't. You must or you wouldn't be here."
"And you accuse me of  being thick."  Richard  clapped  his hands  together once,
rubbing them. "So… what shall we do now?"
"How the hell should I know?"
Just to  be  irritating, Richard  was  about  to  admonish  Rivers  yet  again  about  his

lack  of  reverence,  but  events  took  their  own  course.  The  wind  outside  abruptly
stopped howling, and an eerie silence descended upon the tower,  as  solid  and  final
as the shutting of a door.
Rivers hurriedly put his back to the far wall, staring every which way and holding
the torch out like a weapon. "What the—"
Richard did much the same thing, instinctively grabbing the yew stave,  holding it
tightly in one fist. The hair on the back of his neck stood on end, and he had to fight
an almost irresistible urge to  run away. There  was  vast  energy  surging  here,  basic
and primal—and no one around to control it.
"What is it?" Rivers demanded, his voice rising. "What's out there?"
"The power of the Goddess, I'd say," Richard whispered.
Rivers  face  flashed  uncertainty  for  a  moment,  then  he  shook  his  head  with  a
nervous laugh. "I don't think so. You're not spooking me with that scam. This is just
a break in the windstorm—like the eye of a hurricane. A coincidence."
"Are  you  so  sure?"  Why  shouldn't  the  Goddess  use  the  elements—Her
servants—to Her best advantage? Richard pressed hard against the cold stone wall,
all eyes and ears and drumming heart.
Then the sound began, and he flinched from it. It was as if the Earth herself was
groaning aloud,  finally reacting to  the outrages  worked  upon  her by  generations of
presumptuous  humans—a  long,  low,  rumbling  moan  that  shook  the  whole  of  the
Tor, hollow and lonely beyond comprehension.
Richard could hardly breathe for the heaviness of the restive Power stirring about
him. His limbs went thick and sluggish just when he most wanted to run, and denial
of that instinct only made his growing fear blossom all the faster. His panicked beast
threw itself against the gates  of  his self-control,  bursting through them like a paper
screen. His teeth began to bud, and he knew his eyes shone red as hellfire.
And I'm only on the edge of it!
He looked down at Rivers, who was much closer to the source of the sound, and
saw that he was completely changed: his hair now dulled and coarse, nails turned to
rending claws, his sturdy form gone even thicker with blood-flushed muscle, and his
face…  dear  God.  Were there nothing human left in it, that might make it  easier  to
bear, but vestiges of the man remained, twisted and corrupted, and unfortunately not
beyond recognition. This was no longer Neal Rivers, though, that illusion was  quite
gone. This was a killer; this was Charon.
The revelation gave Richard no joy, for it was just like looking into a mirror. He
felt  the  changes  coursing  through  him,  his  shaking  hands  also  going  rigid  and
clawlike as he tried to fight it.
This  is my  present,  my  future,  and  finally  my  death.  Sweet  Goddess,  preserve
me!
She made no reply, but the earth continued  to  tremble. Pieces  of  the wall flaked

off, raining upon him. Then suddenly the grinding of stone upon stone drew his gaze
to the center of the floor. Cracks appeared around a single great slab there, growing
wider with each  passing  second.  With a rush  of  centuries-old  pent-up  air, the slab
split  down  the  middle,  and  its  two  pieces  fell  inward,  crashing  noisily  into  the
darkness below. From his higher vantage, Richard  glimpsed the top  of  worn stone
stairs leading down to the very heart of the Tor itself.
Silence closed upon them once more. A very dreadful silence, the kind that exists
only in the tiny spaces between eternities.
Then as abruptly as it had  stopped,  the wind began again, with more force  than
ever, screeching  and  howling  around  the  tower.  Echoes  reverberated  up  from  the
opening in  the  floor.  It  was  the  voice  of  the  Hounds  of  Annwyn,  Richard's  own
dread progenitors, awakened out of turn, before the proper time of the Wild Hunt of
winter. Though of their blood,  he was  not  immune to  their cold  terror,  and  hid his
face from their furious storming passage. The gale shrieked for  uncounted  seconds
about him, the force of it first slamming him against the wall like a leaf, then dragging
him  away.  Helpless,  he  spun  and  fell,  arms  flailing,  before  he  landed  with  a
breath-stealing jolt upon the hard stones.
Then the Hounds were gone, tearing madly through the skies at one with the flying
clouds, their wild cries merging with the wind.
Richard  lay  still,  panting,  trying  to  master  his  fear,  and  only  marginally
succeeding.
Someone will die this night, he thought.
He shivered and renewed his grip on the stave that had come with him, startled to
see  his  hand  was  normal  again.  Perhaps  his  own  beast  had  been  cowed  by  the
presence of energies so much greater than itself and retreated. No matter the reason,
he  was  grateful;  he  needed  to  be  thinking  and  acting,  not  mindlessly  reacting  to
whatever was to come.
A few yards away he could see Charon lying half-curled on the floor. He seemed
to be in pain, his marred features slick with sweat as his body shivered and twitched.
His talons slashed at the floor, leaving scratches in the stone flags.
He's fighting his own beast.
And  having  far  more  difficulty.  He  was  farther  along  in  his  degeneration  than
Richard, but not so far as Sabra. Richard  watched,  fascinated  as  Charon  struggled
with the demon, until slowly, ever so slowly, he came back. His hair smoothed,  his
nails receded, his very body seemed to shrink. The effort left him pale and  gasping
for breath  for  minutes afterward.  Unsteady,  but  determined,  he  managed  to  sit  up
and looked at Richard with a ghastly grin, eyes gone black with fear.
"Well, now you know, buddy." He swiped at his brow with one arm and made a
sound that was halfway between a laugh and  a sob.  "This  is what's  in store  for  us
both, sooner or later."
Richard found his feet and edged around the gaping entrance to the nether world

until he was opposite the other man. "I knew already."
"You did, eh? Yeah, you had to.  That  old  lady of  yours,  Sabra,  she  must  be  in
about the same state or even worse, huh? Tell me I'm wrong."
Richard's surprise must have shown, for Charon smiled up at him and continued.
"Yeah, I know all about  her. And you,  too,  d'Orleans  or  Lancelot or  whatever the
hell your name is now. I've been watching you for centuries, old buddy."
"You couldn't have. I would have known."
Charon  smiled again as  he slowly stood,  dusting his hands,  an unnerving smile,
too close to a snarl for comfort. "Well, maybe you were just too busy having a good
time to notice. And I wouldn't say we shared the same circle of friends. Soldiers and
academics  don't  exactly mix, y'know.  Could  have knocked  me over  with a feather
when you called my office that night."
"You covered it well."
"I've had lots of practice. But you? You need to work on your act more, be better
prepared when you're trying to feed a load of crap to somebody like you tried with
me. I mean, researching a book? I almost choked  when you  gave me that one.  I'm
surprised  you  can  even read  a book.  I'd  always figured you  for  a jumped-up  jock
who'd struck it lucky, and I've never had much time for jocks."
Richard wanted to say that he'd never had much time for self-satisfied intellectuals
either, particularly cocky ones, but let it lie. The man was afraid, and all his babbling
was his way of dealing with it. Richard was also afraid, but his fear had shrunk in the
last few minutes, encompassed in a cold glass ball hiding deep in his belly. He knew
the feeling well, was quite comfortable about it even, because of its familiarity. He'd
known his portion of fear in the past, but could spare no time or effort  for  it at the
present. It would just have to wait until later.
He gestured at the stairs. "Do you want to throw insults all night or go exploring?
This could take a lot of time and dawn isn't all that long away."
"Exploring?" Charon  shook  his head  in incredulity. "You  mean you  don't  know
where it is?"
"I'm a guardian. It is enough. I've never needed to know."
"Holy shit, I don't believe this! All these years and you never—?"
Richard gave a small shake of his head, smiling at the other man's reaction.
Charon slapped his hands on his sides. "Of all the blind, bone-headed—oh, Jeez,
you take the cake."
"The frosting, too," Richard politely added.
"And proud of  it, yet. That's  the difference between us,  I've  never gotten  much
satisfaction out of being ignorant on anything."
Not ignorance, faith. Faith that's always been proven out and fulfilled.
"Are you behind the times. Didn't you ever get tired of being pushed around by a

lot of skirts spouting mumbo-jumbo and calling it religion?"
"Now who's behind the times?" Richard said evenly. "You felt the power  of  this
place, heard it. I know you did. I saw you fighting it."
"Oh, don't start on me. That was no more than a freaking gust  of  wind and  bad
nerves. Save the fairy stories for someone else, I'm immune, Blackstone."
"Apparently not to the point of discounting the power of the Grail, though, or else
you'd not be so keen to get it."
Charon's mouth popped wide.
Gotcha.  Richard  showed  his  teeth,  enjoying  the  moment,  then  pointed  at  the
opening. "Shall we get on with things?" He stepped down onto the first of the stone
flags, but with incredible speed, Charon was before him and growling into his face.
"We? I don't think so, buddy boy. Since you don't know where it is, we doesn't
come into this. I will go and get the Grail."
Richard,  determined  to  be  civilized,  mastered  his  developing  anger.  Negative
emotions would not serve him well in this of all places; besides, he didn't much relish
the prospect of crawling around in the unknown that lay below. "Whatever you want.
I'll take it after you've finished, if you don't mind."
Charon stepped closer,  forcing  Richard  back  onto  level ground.  "Oh,  but  I do,
very much. If you think I've done all this work just so you can waltz in and take the
prize—"
"You'll have no reason to keep it once you're done."
"Man, you are a dinosaur! You think I'd let anyone else use it?"
"Why not? What harm would it do you?"
"Competition, Elwood—competition! Something I don't need."
"The world is big enough for us."
Charon laughed. "Are you really this dumb or just being irritating?"
"I'm trying to give you a chance to live—call it an honor thing."
"To live? Oh, I see, if I don't share then you'll kill me because you're the guardian
of the brass ring?"
"Absolutely." He spun the yew stave once like a baton. "And you accused me of
being thick."
Charon looked at the sharpened wood, eyes glittering. "Golly gee, I'm wetting my
pants."
"Your choice."
"Yeah, that thing will do the job just fine. A bull's-eye in my heart and it's bye-bye
birdie. The truth is that so many have already tried, both  humans and  our  kind, but
none—and I mean none of them—even came close."

Now it was Richard's turn to smile. "You forget who I am—a trained fighter with
over a thousand years of experience—the jock who got lucky. There's a reason  for
that luck."
"Oh, yeah, but the problem for you is you don't know who I am. I've been killing
people  for  a  long  time—I've  made  a  regular  art  form  of  it,  I'm  a  goddamned
Rembrandt  when  it  comes  to  death.  If  you  think  you're  facing  some  puffball
academic, think again, Lance-baby."
Richard did, but not for long. Bragging was one  way to  throw an opponent  off,
one way of  winning a fight before  it ever  started.  He  shifted  his  weight,  dropping
forward slightly for balance, bringing the stave to bear.
"Oh, I'd hoped you'd go dumb on me." Charon shifted as well, stepping up onto
level ground. "I could use a workout. But since I'm such a sweetheart of  a guy, I'll
give you one more warning to take a hike."
"Really?"
Charon  mimicked his disdainful tone.  "Really?  Yeah,  you  know  anything  about
the original assassin's cult of the East? They'd get high as kites on the best pot in the
world then cut  loose  for  fun  and  games.  Nasty  bunch  of  boys,  and  I  taught  'em
everything there was to learn."
"So?"
"So don't tell me you've never heard of The Old Man of the Mountain.'"
Richard had indeed heard of the legendary founder of the assassins, and his smile
faded. Perhaps this won't be as easy as I thought.
Charon spread his arms wide, wearing a madman's grin. "Come to papa!"
And  why  not? thought Richard,  but  as  he'd  done  many times before  held  off  a
moment to take the full measure of the man he faced.  Charon  was  stocky,  but  fast
on his feet for his build, and  certainly miles faster  than any normal human. He was
unarmed, but that didn't mean a damned thing. He'd be strong as  a bull, could  take
an  otherwise  killing  blow,  and  still  get  up  for  more.  His  eyes  were  alight  with
unfeigned  pleasure.  Not  good.  He'd  likely  be  unpredictable  and  that  much  more
dangerous.
Richard held the yew stave firmly with both hands. It had been some years since
he'd wielded a spear or quarterstaff in combat, but his body still remembered the old
drills. Without warning he tried a lightning quick  thrust  at Charon's  midsection  for
starters,  just to  see  which way he'd  jump. He didn't,  but  parried  it out  of  the  way
with one swift arm block,  bringing his other  hand  around  to  grab  the end.  Richard
pulled back just in time.
"That the best you can do, kid?" Charon asked, still grinning.
Only testing the waters. Then Richard  twisted and  launched a head  kick, which
was dodged,  followed by  a swing with the stave,  which connected.  Not  hard,  just
enough to glance along Charon's skull and break the skin near his receding hairline.

He hissed,  but  didn't  slow  down  and  tried  again  to  grab  the  stave  away.  Richard
ducked,  brought  the  sharp  end  up,  and  struck  once  more,  but  this  time  got  only
empty air. Charon's thick body blurred as he went full speed for a second.
Something caught Richard  hard  on  his  right  side,  sending  him  staggering,  as  if
he'd been hit by a bus. He felt a strong tug on the stave, but froze his hands solid to
it and  pulled.  Charon  came  with  it,  using  his  onrush  and  weight  to  push  Richard
back toward the opening. He knew it was  somewhere  behind them, just waiting for
him to stumble in.
He pivoted hard, lifting his arms and bringing up one knee where it would do the
most  good.  Charon  anticipated that and  broke  off,  releasing  the  stave.  He  missed
falling in himself only by some very last-minute foot work.
"That the best you can do, 'old man'?" Richard found himself laughing. All those
centuries  past  and  gone  and  nothing  had  changed:  it  was  ever  youth  against  age.
Though in this case the overall difference of years was bound to be only marginal. If
so, then this was  also  a matter of  skill. And he had  him there. For  all his boasting
Charon  was  not  the  best  of  fighters.  His  assassin's  talents  were  obviously  better
suited for more subtle employments.
Unless he wants me to underestimate him.
Nasty  thought,  that,  then  he  had  to  concentrate  on  the  task  of  staying  just  far
enough from  Charon's  reach  to  keep  out  of  trouble,  but  close  enough to  stab  out
with the stave when opportunity presented. Not easy, since Charon frequently put on
speed, moving almost too fast even for Richard to follow. If not for his own quick
reflexes he'd have come to grief several times.
"We could be at this all night," he remarked. "Why not be sensible and—"
"Share the goodies?" Charon paused. "No thanks."
"Why not? You'll have no further need of it."
"Yeah, like you're really going to let me ride off into the sunrise? I don't think so,
not with the job I've got."
True. Richard had rather purposely overlooked that point.
"Square one, Lance-baby. You're not about to let me go finish the gig in Canada,
are you?"
"I will if you forget it and find other things to do with your time."
"No way. I keep my commitments. I gotta  reputation to  hold  up.  Besides,  I like
the work. Always have. Killing people isn't what I do, it's who I am."
He blurred again, but Richard saw what was coming and jabbed hard backwards
with the rounded end of the stave.
And  connected.  When  he  turned,  Charon  was  staggering  away,  clutching  his
stomach. Richard flowed through with another stab, but Charon got his left arm up
and took the blow in the flesh above his wrist. The scent of blood swept past on the
wind. Charon  hissed,  clutching  his  bleeding  arm  as  he  retreated.  Richard  pressed

forward,  taking  his  advantage  and  struck  again,  this  time  in  the  shoulder.  Charon
blocked the fourth strike and  lashed  out  with his right hand,  catching Richard  with
his claws on the side  of  his head.  Pain and  blood.  He ignored them for  something
more important
Claws. Charon's eyes were flushed red; his corner teeth were extended and bared.
He was giving in to his beast.
The  change  was  appallingly  rapid:  from  one  second  to  the  next,  from  man  to
monstrosity. Then the thing launched itself at Richard. He barely got out of the way
in time, and his tardiness worked in Charon's favor. As  he whipped  past  he caught
hold of the sharp  end  of  the stave  and  with shocking  strength,  snapped  off  a foot
long length for himself.
Richard went for him before he could turn, ramming the blunt end of  the broken
stave into Charon's moving legs. He was going too fast to dance clear, and down he
went, but only for a heartbeat. He rolled as he hit the flags, just before Richard could
plunge the stave into his chest.  Wood  struck  rock  with a hollow thud.  He raised  it
for another try, but Charon surged up and was on him. His weight threw Richard off
balance, and then they were both  down  and  tumbling crazily over  the stones,  each
trying to stab the other. It lasted until Charon landed a sledgehammer force blow of
his fist to  Richard's  kidneys.  The  world lurched and  suddenly  Charon  was  behind
him, the arm with the stake  around  his throat,  his other  clawed hand  scrabbling  at
Richard's head, tearing hair out by the roots and carving deep bloody gashes into his
scalp.
"Going to kill me? You fucking amateur." Charon's breath stank as he hissed the
words into Richard's ear, then hauled his head back even more.
Richard  rightly guessed  what was  coming and  frantically fought to  get free. His
struggles were enough to  throw off  Charon's  aim. His teeth clamped  down  just as
Richard  pulled sideways.  Instead  of  his throat,  Charon's  fangs  tore  into  and  clean
through Richard's ear, severing it halfway down. Richard stifled his roar of pain and
blindly thrust the stave backward into Charon's face.
It  hit.  He  felt  the  bones  crack  satisfyingly  under  the  impact,  heard  the  yell  of
outrage. More blood. The stuff from his own wounds streamed into his eyes, turning
the night world red. He scrabbled clear, blinking. A jolt of pain lanced through him.
The side  of  his head  was  on  fire,  and  there  was  something  wrong  with  his  ankle,
wrenched or something. Why do the little things always hurt the most?
He made out  Charon's  form.  He  was  hunched  over,  kneeling,  one  hand  to  his
face,  the other  still holding his part  of  the wooden  stake.  Charon's  hand  dropped,
revealing a mask of blood; white bone jutted through what was left of his nose.
The  stave—where?  Discarded  a  few  yards  away.  Too  far.  Better  to  take
Charon's,  now,  while  he  was  trying  to  recover,  but  even  as  he  started  forward
Charon was suddenly on his feet and rushing him at unnatural speed.
Richard  threw himself to  one  side  just  as  fast,  kicking  his  leg  out—the  injured
one, damn—and caught Charon, neatly tripping him while clubbing him hard across

the back with one arm as he passed.
The  extra  push  of  momentum  sent  him  crashing  brutally  into  the  wall  behind.
Charon hit the unyielding stone with a massive thump and grunt, bounced away, and
dropped.
"Yield, old man," Richard panted out. The words echoed back to him through the
centuries, and despite his pains he laughed, reveling in the irony. For once he was the
younger man outlasting the older champion.
He tried to  stand,  but  could  only manage a half-crouch.  Charon  wasn't  moving,
though, and  in  truth,  did  not  look  like  he  was  about  to  in  the  near  future.  Blood
pooled on the ground  from  his shattered  nose  and  open  mouth,  and  from  the odd
angle of  his head  Richard  thought his neck  might be  broken.  He wouldn't  be  truly
dead,  but  the damage  would  force  him  out  of  things  long  enough  for  Richard  to
finish the job.
Weary, he limped over. Now that he had a respite, all his hurts were clamoring for
immediate notice.  His ear  was  the  worst.  Blood  streamed  freely  from  the  burning
wound, and lay cold on his skin where the air struck it. He would need time to  heal
before returning to the Chalice Well, and though fast, the experience would hardly be
pleasant.
But first, Charon.
Richard  had  lived  far  too  long  and  seen  too  much  to  be  at  all  troubled  in
conscience  about  killing when and  where it was  required,  and  this  particular  death
was certainly long overdue. He had the stomach for it but to do so here, in this holy
place… it hardly seemed right.
Just do it. The Goddess will understand.
He reached  down  for  the broken  stake.  As  he did  so,  Charon  opened  his  eyes
and grinned maniacally through the blood sheeting his face.
"Ain't life a bitch?"
Then Charon's near hand—still firmly clutching the yew stake like a sword—made
a strong, convulsive move upward.
The pain, the utter blinding agony of  impact was  all enveloping. Richard  felt his
breast and rib bones snapping before the sharpened wood like brittle twigs, and the
tissue of his body tearing apart like so much paper. His blood spurted out in a great
rushing flood onto the flagstones of the floor. Charon pushed the yew stake deeper
and deeper, gouging and twisting it as he did. Richard's hoarse shriek ripped across
the landscape and was caught up and lost in the lonely wind.
He fell back  and  looked  down  in horror  at the end  of  the thing jutting from  his
chest.  The  strength  instantly  went  from  his  legs;  his  knees  buckled.  He  choked,
tasting his own blood as it filled his throat and mouth. He started to tumble forward
and threw his arms out at the last second, turning to land on his side to  prevent the
stake from driving itself further into his body. Another scream wanted to cut its way
clear, but there was no air left in him. A convulsion took him instead; it struck from

the inside out,  coiling down  his body  like an electric shock.  He rolled face-up,  his
spine arching until only his head  and  heels touched  the ground,  until he thought he
would  break  in  two  from  the  spasm.  Then  it  abruptly  subsided.  He  collapsed
completely.
He tried to lift his hand, to get the thing out of him before—
Another seizure. A bad one.
His limbs jerked uncontrollably; he was helpless as  his arms  and  legs hammered
against the stones with bone-cracking force.
It finally released him, an infinity later, leaving him stunned, exhausted, and unable
to breathe.  He desperately  sucked  at air, trying to  force  it  in,  then  out,  and  could
only  manage  short,  inadequate  gasps.  He  heard  the  stuff  wheeze  and  bubble
sickeningly past the stake. With each breath more precious blood trickled and pulsed
from him.
And he could not move.
Control  was  gone.  He  was  well  and  truly  paralyzed,  and  that,  not  the  rending
pain,  not  the  inevitability  of  dying,  was  what  sent  the  panic  rushing  through  him.
Panic that could find no expression, that lashed him like a whip. He frantically tried
to move his arms, to lift them enough to grasp the stake, to pull it out, but it was as if
the threads of all his muscles were snapped dean through. He could breathe, barely,
and move his eyes, and that was all.
Sabra, help me!
But his cry was silent, unheard. Only more blood came out, a thin rivulet from the
corner of his sagging mouth that trickled down to stain the stones under him.
His whole being was compressed under the weight of the stake, his body leaden,
utterly  inert.  What  waning  strength  he  had  became  focused  on  taking  one  short,
choppy handful of air after another. He could  spare  concentration  for  nothing else.
To do so was to die.
Putting off the inevitable. Charon stood over him.
His beast  had  retreated,  and  his face  was  starting to  heal.  He'd  forced  the  skin
back over the bone and it was already knitting itself up into something recognizable
again. He was actually smiling, smiling down at Richard.
"What  a  mess.  You  should  see  yourself."  He  reached  out  and  experimentally
tapped the end of the stake.
Richard's  body  flinched.  He  made  a  gagging  mewl  of  pain.  What  rhythm  he'd
achieved to breathe was disrupted, and he frantically struggled to reestablish it.
"Hoo, boy, this is soooo tempting," said Charon. "It's been awhile since I've had
one of us like this. I'd love to stay and see how long you last, maybe play a little, but
you know how it is.  So  much to  do,  so  little time. Too  bad  for  you  I left my pen
knife at home," he drew a finger lightly over Richard's vulnerable throat, "or I could
have put you out of your misery, but them's the breaks."

He moved off a few paces,  and  when he came back  had  his discarded  torch  in
hand.
"Well, it's been real, Lance-baby,  but  all good  things and  so  on.  Wish me luck,
I'm off to see the wizard." He leaned close. "Word of  advice—don't  try fighting, it
just  makes  the  whole  process  worse.  Just  give  in  and  let  it  happen."  He  patted
Richard's shoulder. "Thus endeth the lesson. Hasta la Winnebago."
And he disappeared down the stone steps.
Richard  could  not  move,  speak,  or  even groan.  The  struggle to  take  in  air  was
overwhelming; giving in and giving up seemed quite perfectly reasonable. He had to
resist the temptation on an instant-to-instant basis.
But his blood still dripped away. He could hear the last throes of his pierced heart
beating in his ears, weakening, fluttering like a bird's wing.
One more breath, one more minute, one more second…
Time enough to experience a universe of regret.
He'd failed Sabra.
Tears lay cold in the corners of his eyes. He could weep an ocean and still change
nothing. And the worst  was  she'd  never know.  She'd  wait and  wait  and  hope  and
look for him in vain until her own beast finally consumed her.
Failed.
The ending of his life was  nothing. His death  was  swift and  sweet  compared  to
hers.
Sweat  covered  him.  His  flesh  prickled  against  the  chill  night  air.  More  blood
seeped  away  into  the  earth.  His  shattered  heart  beat  all  the  faster,  trying  to  work
despite the terrible damage. Were he a normal man he'd  have been  dead  in the first
few seconds, but this was the price for his difference from others. His body wasn't
yet ready to give up. Only he could  do  that in his mind, and  it still wouldn't  speed
things.
Goddess have mercy. Release me.
But he had no right to ask anything of her. A moment's misjudgment and all was
lost.  His  damned  overconfidence  had  betrayed  him  once  again.  This  was  his
punishment.
Very  well,  punish  me,  but  have  mercy  on  your  servant  Sabra.  Don't  let  my
failure hurt her.
No one answered. No other  sound  but  the wind, which was  on  the rise. How it
moaned and howled between the stones. Howled like…
The Hounds of Annwyn.
They were coming for him.
In between gasps he fancied them running toward him, their clawed feet slapping
swiftly against the  grass  and  stones.  But  no,  that  was  his  heart  shuddering  away,

palpitating fit to burst. In a last effort to pump the dregs of his blood,  it beat  faster
and still taster, or so it seemed for a few awful moments, until he realized that it was
another heartbeat he heard It was far from him and out of sync, but  coming closer,
closer. Its rhythm gradually blending and  finally merged with his own,  became  one
with his.
Light. He blinked. It was strong, like the dawning sun, but it came from the north,
not east.  An utterly beautiful silver light,  coming  toward  him,  coming  for  him.  He
wanted  to  rush  up  to  meet  it,  it  was  so  lovely,  but  could  not  quite  escape  the
restraints of his flesh.
His breathing faltered.
Not long now. If it meant he could go into that light…
"Richard."
His heart continued  to  beat,  as  if supported  by  the  other,  stronger  one.  But  he
wanted it to stop so he could—
"Richard!"
What? Who?
"Stay with me, my love."
No mistake. He heard  Sabra's  voice,  his  lady's  voice,  ringing  clear  in  his  ears,
coming from the light which was  very close  to  him now.  It was  like looking into a
moonlit stream, the water ever shifting, moving too fast for the eye to fix upon. Then
its  motion  began  to  slow,  coalesce,  take  on  form.  The  beginnings  of  a  face,  the
shape of an arm, a reaching hand.
Sabra? He was beyond speech and his thought was hardly more than a whisper.
"Yes, my Richard."
And she was suddenly there, standing above him, as serene and glorious, as noble
as  she'd  been  on  that  day  of  his  first  defeat.  As  he  had  then  he  forgot  his  own
wretchedness in the presence  of  something greater than himself. He tried to  speak,
but a cough came out instead, spewing more blood over the earth. Sabra only smiled
her angel's smile and put one finger to her lips to still his efforts.
"I can hear you. I've always heard you."
I failed you, my lady. I'm sorry.
"Not you. Never."
I love you.
"And  I  you,  my  Richard."  Her  gaze  dropped  to  the  stake  and  still  she  gently
smiled. "Is it a bad hurt?"
The centuries shifted.  He was  standing in her tent again by  the west  wall of  his
father's  castle,  for  so  she  had  spoken  to  him  then  about  his  wounded  hand.  He
remembered his reply.

Indeed it is.
She caressed him along his face. He felt and yet could not feel it, for this time her
hand was made of moonlight, not flesh.
All  his  hurts,  great  and  small,  melted  away  from  her  shimmering  fingers.  He
wanted to sigh out his relief, but it was too much for him. His next breath would not
come, nor did he try to take it. It was time to let go and leave with his lady.
"Not yet. Stay a little longer," she told him, her tone urgent. Her hand closed hard
around the source of all his torment. As easily as if it had been a feather, she plucked
the stake from his chest and sent it spinning through the night air.
But not even her sweet touch could block out that kind of pain.
He hissed in reaction, felt and heard  the air rush  down  his windpipe and  out  his
chest with a spray of crimson drops. Sabra's hands were on his gaping wound now
as if to hold the blood into him, but it was too late for that.
He closed his eyes. Couldn't help but close them.
It was all too much to bear.
Too…
Much…
And Richard slept.
Chapter Ten
The  absence  of  sound  brought  him  back  to  awareness;  the  absence  of  pain
persuaded him to remain there.
Just for a little while.
He had the strong feeling he was supposed to be very much elsewhere. The exact
where and why would come to him shortly, he was sure. For the moment he wanted
only to collect himself, and when he was ready he would move on to… someplace.
His present location was the cause of a certain mild confusion for him as he was
viewing the surrounding lands from a considerable height.
I must be atop the tower.
But the ruin of St. Michael's was gone. No trace of it remained except  for  a few
slabs of stone in the same spot. As for the rest, there was only a vast dark landscape
far below him. He tried to work out how he could be so high above ground without
benefit of support It was strange, but not especially frightening. He had no sense of
danger, no feeling of falling. He seemed to simply float on… what?
No matter.
He accepted the peculiar situation. He was safe and  free from  pain, far removed
from the turmoil that had  delivered him  to  this  odd  sanctuary.  He  did  try  looking

about,  but  saw  only the bulk of  the Tor  and  the gleam of  the fading moon  on  the
shallow marsh waters around its base.
That's not right.
His recent memory of the place was that of the nearby town with its streetlights,
paved  roads,  and  scatter  of  houses.  Now  he  saw  only  wandering  tracks  and  thin
paths leading far away into the immense country darkness. The  only light remaining
was a wan silvery glow by the stones on the peak  of  the Tor.  A thin, near-invisible
thread of it extended up toward him, puzzling him until he understood it was actually
connected  to  him  in  some  manner.  Its  anchor  point  he  couldn't  quite  determine,
though it was somewhere in his midsection. The thread moved with him, seemed to
keep him from drifting, yet it flexed, stretching if he went farther away.
He wanted to go lower to find the other anchor  point  and  was  gratified when he
could do just that merely by thinking about it. The thread did not slacken, but  grew
marginally thicker the nearer he came to its source. He was a little surprised to see its
origin attached to a solitary man lying sprawled on the virgin grass. His forlorn body
was quite broken. A savage hole pierced  his chest,  one  ear was  torn  away, and  he
was drenched with blood from those and  other  terrible injuries. His blue eyes  were
wide open, but fixed and unblinking. He looked dead.
It's me, Richard thought, without the least flicker of alarm. In this silent place  he
was  beyond  such  mundane  worries.  He  observed  the  pathetic  remains  with  only
detached  curiosity  and  an  unwillingness  to  go  any  closer.  There  was  no  obvious
need to do  so,  and  his inner instinct told  him it would only bring a return of  pain.
He'd had quite enough of that.
With some of the mystery explained he vaguely wondered if others were present.
He  saw  no  one,  high  or  low,  though  he  did  become  conscious  of  a  bright  light
somewhere behind him. Each time he turned to face it, it seemed to  turn along with
him. He glimpsed only its edges, but never the center. Frustrating,  that. And,  again,
strange, for the light cast no shadow below him, nor did it really illuminate anything
there. Perhaps if he rose higher he could finally turn and go toward it.
Then he saw movement below.
Not from the mangled body, but  from  the flanks of  the Tor.  Lights, fainter than
the glow of the smallest candle were coming up the ancient maze path. They hugged
the earth, yet moved smoothly as though skimming over it. He remembered walking
that path himself, recently and in times long past Very long past, before they built the
tower. Sabra had led him…
Pain. Emotional pain lanced  through him.  He  was  not  immune  to  that  here.  He
wanted to leave. The closer he stayed  to  his body,  the stronger  became  the feeling
of… of… loss. That he'd left something very vital unfinished.
I failed you, my lady.
Though not fully understanding why, he wanted to weep from the hollow grief of
it but found he could not, and  that made him all the sadder.  He didn't  want to  feel
this way any longer. Better he leave now and  let  matters  of  the  earth  take  care  of

themselves without him.
But the little lights were growing as he watched. They held his interest, distracted
him from his burst of sorrow.
They were nearly to the top and  had  taken on  definition and  form  if not  distinct
features.  Women,  nine of  them, nine ghosts  in long white robes  that  covered  their
flesh, yet revealed their lithe  shapes  as  they  walked.  Their  serene  faces  shone  the
purest white he'd ever seen.
The Nine Sisters of Avalon. Cerridwen's priestesses.
They formed a circle around his body, facing outward. Each held a sword in one
hand and a cup in the other. He recalled other ceremonies done here, but could  not
place this one. They walked in an earthwise circle around him, neither fast nor slow.
Their bare feet hardly seemed to touch the ground.
Their lips moved, either in a chant or a song; he could not hear, not at first. If time
passed in this reality, then it was some few minutes before he began to  pick  up  the
faintest of sounds. He thought it was the wind starting to rise until he looked around
and saw them floating like clouds against the moon.
Hounds. The Hounds of Annwyn.
Panting and snarling, their massive bodies danced effortlessly on the moonlight as
they milled impatiently about one another. Some paused to look at him, but  nothing
more. He had no fear of them now, in fact, he thought of them as friends who would
guide him to wherever it was he was supposed to be. He turned and started toward
them.
A thin, piercing cry  from  below stayed  his movement. One  of  the sisters  broke
away from  the circle and  threw herself  onto  his  mangled  body.  She  obscured  his
view of  the connecting  thread,  but  as  she  did  some  of  her  own  glow  merged  and
rushed  up  it. He felt something tugging strongly,  insistently at him. It was  the  first
real physical reaction he'd had in this place.
She  looked  up—right  up  at  him  as  though  she  alone  of  the  nine  could  see
him—and formed his name with her lips. He thought he could almost hear her. She
stretched her arms toward him, beckoning, begging him to come closer.
He temporized, glancing at the waiting Hounds.
I should go with them.
But the woman below called to him again, and this time he heard her voice.
Sabra?
Now did he tardily recognize her. How had she come here? He'd left her in a land
very far away, setting out to do something very important for her.
And failed. His failure costing them both their lives.
His inner pain returned. No, I don't want this.
But memory began to return as well, and with it, growing understanding. Memory

of his fight with Charon,  his wounding, and  ultimately his shameful  failure  washed
swiftly over his mind. But despite that failure Sabra had  still come  to  him as  if in a
dream, appearing in a dying man's vision to comfort him at the last.
"You  are  my  champion,  Richard  d'Orleans,  and  I  will  not  let  you  die!"  she
shouted up at him.
But  he  was  not  dead,  only  the  shell  that  once  held  him  was  gone  beyond
recovery. No matter what she wanted, it was ended. How could he make her accept
it? He pointed at the Hounds, not knowing if she could see them.
"It is not your time, Richard!" she insisted, her voice shrill with desperation.
Never in all their years together had he ever purposefully tried to hurt her, but now
he had no choice. The Hounds had come for him, and they would not be denied.
"Not. Your. Time!"
A trepidatious look at the Hounds. They couldn't, wouldn't let him return, but this
was Sabra calling, pleading with him, and he could not  deny  her, either. He had  to
try even if the Hounds tore his essence in this reality to shreds.
He began to descend along the silver thread, it becoming shorter the lower he got,
thickening to  a string, then a cord,  then a fat twist of  rope.  The  closer  he  got  the
more horrific his own discarded  body  became  to  him. He didn't  want to  touch  its
base clay.
The Hounds began howling their hunters song, their voices wild. He paused.
"All will be well," Sabra promised him. "Just come!"
But he did not see how that could be possible.
Then the Hounds broke off their howling—
"Hurry!" she screamed.
—and flew toward him like a storm.
"Now, Richard!"
He  heard  their  growls,  the  click  of  their  snapping  teeth;  he  dove  desperately
toward the cooling lump of flesh below.
Dizziness as he spun into the thing.
Blackness for an instant, then shrieking cold.
But his first breath was fire.
His next almost would not come as the pain of life overtook him.
He could  dimly see  Sabra  above  him  now,  her  sword  at  the  ready,  her  sisters
also.  As  the Hounds  approached  the  women  lashed  out  with  their  blades  to  hold
them  at  bay.  Richard  wanted  to  rise  and  help  them,  but  his  body  was  unable  to
move. Once more he had  to  lie helpless and  waiting for  death  to  deliver him away
from the travail of living.

"Not yet, my Richard." Sabra knelt by him, putting down the cup she carried. She
held her hand  over  it, then quickly ran the edge  of  the sword  over  her inner wrist.
Her blood, pale as her glowing face, dripped into the cup until it was full to the brim.
She raised it high, a salute to her goddess, then slipped an arm around his shoulders,
lifting him that he might drink.
Her  blood  was  earth  and  honey,  birdsong  and  firelight,  mountain  flowers  and
winter dusk. He'd never tasted its like before. How it rushed through him, filled him,
sustained him.
But there wasn't enough. As soon as it was gone, his head lolled to one side. He
hadn't the strength to even look at her one last time.
"Not yet," she whispered.
One of her sisters broke off fighting and backed toward them, turning at the last
second and kneeling. She, too, cut her wrist and let her blood fill the cup she carried.
She put its edge to his lips and he drank.
More life. Such a tiny portion of it, though. Not nearly enough.
But another sister  came as  the first rose  up  to  return to  her place,  and  she  also
gave of her blood to Richard. Then another and another, turn on turn. He lost count,
concentrating on the slow, the so very slow return of  life to  his battered  form.  Life
and healing. His breathing ceased to be so labored, the hurts  great and  small began
to ease, until they ceased altogether. He heard the sounds of the earth once more, the
whisper of the wind rather than the baffled snarling of the Hounds.
The  women  expanded  their  circle  around  him.  As  Sabra  protectively  held  him
close, he watched as her sisters gradually herded and finally surrounded the Hounds.
The beasts  had  become  smaller, as  if their power  were being taken  from  them.  In
turn, the light around the sisters grew stronger, brighter for their efforts.
Richard saw there was an opening in the face of the Tor, a hole with sharply cut
steps  leading  down,  and  the  women  urged  the  Hounds  toward  it.  With  a  last
grumbling bark, they scuttled inside.
He looked again at Sabra. He'd never seen her so beautiful, like an angel she was,
but infinitely greater.
Now could he reach up and touch  her. His fingers, silhouetted black  against her
white skin, brushed upon her cheek. She smiled down at him, brown eyes clear and
alight and loving. She said nothing, but simply bent and kissed him, her lips soft and
tasting of the stars. She lay him back flat upon the turf and caressed her hands over
his eyes, forcing him to shut them.
When  he  opened  them  again  she  was  gone.  Only  the  tingling  aftermath  of  her
touch remained.
He sat up cautiously.
The Tor  was  as  it had  been  when  he'd  fallen  asleep:  St.  Michael's  Tower  very
solidly back in place along with the unforgiving stones under him. The only changes

now were in himself.
Though  still covered  in drying blood,  his  chest  wound  was  quite  vanished,  the
skin firmly knitted up and restored, the broken bones beneath sound  and  solid.  His
ear was whole, and all his other  hurts  were healed as  well. He felt curiously heavy,
though. So odd it was to have a body again. He'd rather liked floating about.
Of course, breathing without agony was nice, too.
How had Sabra managed it? Or was that a foolish question? Probably so. Here he
was in the seat  of  her power,  her goddess's  stronghold,  strange  it would be  if she
could  not  do  something  to  help  him  in  this  of  all  places.  How  she  had  reached
halfway around the planet to  touch  him he did  not  know,  nor,  he supposed,  did  it
matter much, so long as he had been touched. Few of the mysteries of  Avalon had
ever been revealed to him; if this was part of it, then so let it be. Sabra and her sisters
were more than welcome to their secrets.
He stood and carefully checked himself over, stretching a bit. Everything seemed
to be working to specs, so to speak, but instinct told him he shouldn't push himself.
He was back together again, but low on reserves. Best to get started and get on with
it  while  he  was  able.  Sabra  had  gifted  him  with  a  second  chance;  he  would  not
receive another.
He found the yew stake  some  yards  from  where he'd  lain and  gingerly picked  it
up. Coated with his blood, of course, but in the middle he saw  the clear outline of
her handprint where she'd grasped it. Somehow  that made it easier for  him to  hold
the damned thing.
Richard  went back  to  the opening  where  the  Hounds  had  gone.  The  steps,  no
longer sharp and newly cut, were worn again and slippery from the damp. Taking his
time, he slowly descended, feeling his way until the entry was well over his head. He
listened hard. To him there was no other silence quite like that of the deep earth, and
it was  very thick here, much thicker than the darkness.  For  that, at least, he had  a
small remedy. His torch  was  still tucked  away in his jacket pocket.  He drew  it out
and switched it on.
No sign of the Hounds. Something of a relief, that.
Though he'd never been here before, it was very much as he expected: a naturally
formed cave, not large, not small, stalactites and stalagmites vying to meet each other
in the middle and some having succeeded. The surrounding countryside was riddled
with  similar  places,  many  of  them  sacred  spots  and  many  others  nothing  in
particular. The only sign of  human intrusion in this one  were the stairs,  which now
took a turning to the right, and appeared to spiral down into the heart of the Tor. He
stepped around the fragments of the flagstone that had fallen in earlier and followed
them. In the dust coating the steps was the imprint of Charon's footsteps.
This shouldn't be too terribly hard.
He hoped.
It was more than dark here. It was  absolutely black,  as  solid  as  lead and  just as

dense to his seeking soul. The blackness seemed to eat up the faint sky glow coming
from the opening and gave nothing back, and did much the same for his torch light.
He felt very out of place here, the back of his neck prickling in anticipation of some
alien  touch.  His  feeble  twentieth-century  illumination  would  not  have  much  effect
upon or last long against this sort of power. He hoped the Goddess  wouldn't  mind
his invasion; he thought it likely else he'd  not  be  here now.  It seemed  certain she'd
rather have him than Charon barging about in her holy of holies.
At least I'm  not  a  thief, he thought virtuously as  he made his way down.  Every
few turnings he paused to cut his light and listen, hearing no other sounds but those
he made himself, which could  be  both  good  and  bad.  What if Charon  had  already
left? It hardly seemed possible, for not that much time had passed according to both
Richard's watch and the position of the moon, but he was well into a worrying mood
by now. This cave was a decided inspiration for galloping anxiety.
Natural formations  gave way to  artificial tunneling, very old  and  somehow  more
unsettling to his imagination. How many years, how many lifetimes had gone into the
making of this place? He could almost sense the presence of the ancient people who
had determinedly executed  the work using only the meager light of  small oil lamps
and the most basic of tools. Blistered hands and aching backs, constant dust, sweat,
and  certainly  blood,  generations  of  it,  all  for  the  glory  of  their  deity.  Their  only
reward on this side of the veil was whatever fulfillment came from serving that deity
in such a manner. Richard felt quite humbled by it all.
The  stone  walls  narrowed,  pressing  close  on  either  side,  clearly  showing  the
marks of carving. Several times he saw where an enterprising cutter  had  left behind
an intricate knotwork motif in the rock.  He recognized  the patterns  from  long past,
having seen Sabra's careful copies of them in her book. From the ones on the wall, if
from nothing else that had  happened,  Charon  would  know  he'd  come  to  the  right
spot.
As best he could, Richard increased his pace, though he risked losing the element
of surprise. Charon's hearing was every bit as good  as  his own.  But one  important
particular  was  in  Richard's  favor:  he  was  absolutely,  positively  the  last  person
Charon would expect to see down here.
 
Twice  the  spiraling  tunnel  widened  to  natural  caves  leading  along  to  deeper
chambers within the Tor. Part of him wanted to  explore,  while another part  wanted
only to leave as quickly as possible.  If he didn't  find Charon  fairly soon,  he'd  give
serious thought to making a fast exit and simply wait for the bastard to emerge again
above. Somewhere down  here the Hounds  slept  and  only the Goddess  knew what
else hovered in the dark just out of the reach of his torch beam.
You're getting  a  fine  case  of the  creeps,  old  lad,  he  chided  himself.  But  being
aware of his weakness didn't make it any easier to endure. That, and the knowledge
the  Hounds  were  entirely  real.  What  terrible  creatures  they  were.  He  remembered
their eyes the most vividly, the ghastly way they flashed green sparks while reflecting
the moonlight.

And Richard gave himself quite a start when his torch plucked out a similar flash
of green at the next turn of  the passage.  His recently pierced  heart frantically leapt
halfway up his throat, settling only when tardy reason told him the flash did not, after
all, belong to a supernatural hound, but to something rather more prosaic.
Sabra's book. One of the gems embedded in its leather cover had caught the light
just right and glinted through the plastic bag. Richard stopped cold in his tracks and
listened.
No sound came to him, and he was sure that if Charon was nearby he'd be able to
hear him breathing. Hell, in this silent place he could hear the blink of a flea's eyelid.
Had Charon left the book behind as bait for some  sort  of  trap?  But why should
he bother  if he thought Richard  to  be  dying or  dead?  Then Richard  saw  a  freshly
broken away portion from the next step  down  and  scuff  marks in the dust.  So  the
stone  had  cracked  underfoot,  Charon  had  slipped  or  staggered,  and  the book  had
fallen unnoticed from his pocket.
Not good. Might he miss it soon  and  retrace  his path  to  find it again? He could
have already started to do so and be waiting just out of sight and sound at the next
turning. Richard zipped the book safely away in his own jacket pocket and debated
on the wisdom of switching off  his light and  making the rest  of  the way by  touch.
His blunderings would be noisy though, and alert Charon to his presence just as well
as the torch glow, and if there should be other broken steps ahead…
Scowling, Richard kept the light on  and  moved  forward.  He wryly thought how
convenient it would be if he could turn into a bat and thus navigate in total darkness
and stealth like his literary cousins. Those buggers had all the advantages.
Sound.
So very faint, but constant. After a moment he identified it as the gurgle and rush
of water. He knew two streams ran under the Tor, the White and the Red. The Red,
rich  with  the  iron  that  gave  it  color,  eventually  ran  to  the  Chalice  Well…  and  to
Sharon Geary—if she was still there. He hoped so, for her sake.
Very slowly, Richard  continued,  covering his  light  with  his  fingers  until  he  had
barely enough to  see  by.  He thought he was  very close  to  the base  of  the Tor  by
now, if not below it, his conclusion coming from intuition rather than logic because
of the invisible thrum of power surrounding him. The presence of the Goddess? Or
something else?
The Grail?
The air, which should have been quite still, to him fairly quivered with some form
of energy. He wished Sabra could be with him for this. She'd know what it was and
what to do if anything needed to be done. Again, he wanted to simply leave. He was
superfluous here. The place itself didn't welcome his intrusion, he was quite certain.
Well, if so, then such went double for the likes of Charon. How was he faring? Was
he aware of what was around him, or being purposely obtuse as before?
Another few steps.  The  water sound  grew  proportionately.  Heart  beating  faster

and faster, he sensed a large chamber looming ahead.
Light. And not from Richards torch. He shut the thing off completely and  let his
eyes adjust to the change.
There. The faintest glimmer bouncing off the curve of the wall. One more turning
and  it  was  stronger  still,  as  was  the  sound  of  water.  The  latter  was  easily  loud
enough to cover any noise Richard made as he moved.
The passage  ran  straight  now,  became  slightly  wider,  and  the  dank  tang  in  the
cool air more pronounced. The ceiling also came down much lower, forcing him into
a half-crouch. The walls shone from the damp until cut stone gave way to  a sizable
section  of  earth  shored  up  by  timbers.  He  didn't  like  that.  The  wood  had  to  be
utterly ancient by  now.  He carefully touched  a supporting  beam.  Damnation, but  it
was as soft as a sponge. The only thing holding up  the whole weight of  the Tor  at
this point  was  force  of  habit. He passed  under  it with much caution,  scrupulously
avoiding all contact with the walls.
An archway, made of stone, thank goodness. The passage suddenly opened into
an unexpectedly  huge natural cave.  He picked  out  brilliant colors  hidden for  eons,
released for the time being by the harsh light of another torch. It lay on its side,  the
beam  reflecting  a  thousand  subtle  shades,  mineral  rainbows  frozen  forever  in  the
rock. They fairly danced about the chamber, dazzling him. He thought about Merlin's
crystal cave and wondered if this was it or a close relation.
The  light  also  played  brightly  off  the  shifting  patterns  of  a  cascade  of  water
emerging from the chamber's far wall. From its red tint he knew it to be the Chalice
stream. It poured  out  of  a  substantial  crevice,  splashed  down  about  three  feet  to
hurry along another twenty or so before vanishing again into a second opening on its
underground journey. He was surprised at the strength and swiftness of the flow. It
was  nearly  two  yards  across.  He  wondered  if  that  was  natural  or  had  also  been
carved out by ancient worshipers.
No matter.
He'd found his quarry.
Unlike Richard, Charon hadn't had the benefit of a miraculous healing, so he still
looked  much  the  worse  for  wear  from  their  fight.  Clothes  torn  and  covered  with
muck and blood, his movements were slow, but determined. Half turned away from
the entry, he knelt by the foot of the falls, staring intently at the roiling water, wearing
a grimace of distaste mixed with naked fear.
As before, Richard opted to quietly watch and wait and let someone  else do  the
hard  work  for  the  present.  He  tucked  his  torch  away  and  brought  the  yew  stake
around  to  an up-and-ready  position,  and  felt  a  cold,  hard  smile  creeping  over  his
own features. He was very much looking forward to payback time.
Charon  braced  one  hand  on  the  stream  bank  for  balance;  after  taking  a  deep
breath, he thrust his other arm into the running water.
That's going to hurt.

Indeed. Charon held back his reaction for several long moments, then could take
it no longer. He yanked his arm clear and screamed, the noise shockingly loud in the
confined space. It struck the earthen walls with enough force  to  make them quiver,
and Richard  fancied he heard  the echoes  traveling right up  the  spiral  stairs  behind
him.
Charon's  initial  vocal  expression  gave  way  to  unrestrained  cursing  before  he
finally wound  down.  He rubbed  and  shook  his injured arm, hissing and  flexing his
fingers. It would have felt cold,  unbearably  cold,  Richard  knew,  for  he  was  quite
familiar with their shared vulnerability to free-flowing water. That  was  one  point  the
legends had gotten right about their kind. When Charon  recovered,  he glared at the
stream a bit longer, then scowled and tried again.
It took  less  time for  him to  break.  Screaming,  he  fell  back,  but  now  there  was
something large and square in his hand that clanged when it fell heavily to  the cave
floor.
Richard couldn't make it out at first for all the flurry of movement and distracting
noise. Then his impressions sorted themselves, and he saw the thing was some kind
of metal cage about a foot square with a heavy chain attached leading back into the
stream. The cage bars were thick strips of metal riveted together like a lattice. From
the design and workmanship he could tell it was old even by his standards.
Charon was going through the same motions as before about his injured arm, but
it  didn't  last.  He  quickly  came  upright  and  with  his  left  hand  began  tearing  and
scrabbling at some object on the cage. A simple latch it proved to be, for as soon as
he worked  it loose  he was  prying back  the thing's lid. The  stiffened  hinges gave a
brief, metallic squawk and the cage was open.
He stopped, grabbed up his torch, and shone the light inside.
A long  stare,  then  his  unrestrained  whoop,  laughter,  and  triumphant  grin  gave
Richard all the answer he needed concerning the nature of the contents.
Charon reached in and pulled it out. It was not very big, being all but engulfed in
his grip. There was a glint of metal, gold or brass in color, between his fingers.
The thrum Richard picked up from his better attuned senses increased in intensity
and then suddenly ceased. He watched Charon, but the man seemed utterly unaware
of it.
Bloody  Philistine.  The  damned  interloper  was  positively  gloating  over  his
treasure.  Not  for  long. It  was  payback  time;  however,  Richard  wouldn't  leave  the
body here to defile this holy spot; he was more than willing to drag it every inch of
the way up the stairs and get rid of it someplace else.
Pushing  the  cage  out  of  the  way,  Charon,  still  on  his  knees,  went  over  to  the
stream and dipped his hand into the water. He lifted his arm high, revealing the Grail
as he balanced it on his fingertips, admiring it. He brought it down, brought it down
to his lips to drink.
But Richard was already moving, silent, swift.

The idea of Charon merely touching the Grail was  more than enough to  set  him
off—but to drink from it—
He was at full speed when he slammed into Charon's very solid body.
Their  collision  made  a  quite  satisfying  thump.  Also  a  thud,  grunt,  and  other
sounds of pain and effort as they tumbled over  and  over  the cavern floor.  Richard
knew  he  wasn't  precisely  in  control  of  himself,  but  not  doing  too  badly  as  he
pummeled with one hand and  stabbed  with the stake  in the other  in those  first few
decisive  seconds.  Charon  got  the  worst  of  it;  his  moves  were  for  defense,  not
attack, and hampered by his own complete  surprise.  Richard  was  dimly conscious
of someone cursing, but not sure if it was himself or Charon.
Then he was violently pushed away. He curled and rolled, tucking his chin down
and came up on his feet like a cat. Charon was doing much the same, though not as
fast. For the second time that night he gaped at Richard.
"How in hell—?" he gasped.
"Not hell," Richard assured him.
Charon pointed at Richard's healed chest. "You son of a bitch, you had help."
"Oh, yes, I've friends in high places."
"Who?"
He pointed straight up, grinning. "Very high places."
"No way." But there was  that same mix of  disbelief and  near hope  on  Charon's
features as before. Perhaps he wanted to buy into it, but was afraid to try, afraid of
the consequences to himself. "No fucking way."
The  Hounds  will  feast  tonight  after  all.  "As  you  wish."  Richard  rushed  him
again. Full speed.
Charon's panicked dodge was barely adequate. As it was  he caught the glancing
blow of Richard's passage in the back and went flying as  though struck  by  a train.
His  body  slammed  against  the  opposite  wall  and  dropped,  but  he  still  had  some
strength  left  in  him.  He  was  up  and  scrambling  toward  the  entry  and  the  stairs.
Richard intercepted him, throwing one arm around his neck and lifting him back. His
free  hand,  gripping  the  stake,  came  firmly  down,  connecting  hard  with  flesh  and
bone. Charon bucked and screamed  in reaction—and  continued  to  do  so.  Richard
knew he'd missed his heart.
He felt the impact of an elbow dig into his belly, caught the smell of  fresh  blood
and stale sweat tainting the air, and heard another outraged scream as Charon ripped
the stake from his chest. Bleeding, he staggered, fell against the wall, but kept going,
still  trying  to  reach  the  stairs.  When  Richard  caught  up  to  him,  Charon  whirled,
striking out blindly with the point of the stake while backing away. He made it to the
arch, ducking low.
Richard darted forward into the dimness. Something struck his arm; he noted the
blow and ignored it, reaching. He grasped sodden cloth, a sleeve, perhaps. It ripped

free. He clawed and  got  an arm this time, but  a bruising fist came out  of  nowhere
and sent him reeling.
The wall, damp and soft, gave under the impact as he hit it, as if it were made of
living flesh. He felt rather than heard something around him shifting mightily.
Oh, shit!
He  threw  himself  out  of  the  way  as  a  torrent  of  mud,  earth,  and  rotted  wood
collapsed  into the space  he'd  been  an  instant  ago.  More  rolling  as  he  desperately
tried to get clear. Darkness, then light Instinct drove him toward the light, scrambling
on hands and knees.  The  force  of  the sound  of  the fall itself seemed  to  physically
push him forward—that, and pure terror.
Dust,  rocks,  the stench  of  old  decay  overtook  him,  choked  him.  The  universe
shook  and  moaned.  The  sound  was  really  too  loud  to  hear,  but  how  he  felt  it
thundering over every inch of his body.  He pressed  his face  into his crossed  arms
and braced for the rest of the collapsing cosmos to pulverize him.
Which,  after  many  strained  heartbeats,  he  slowly  realized  was  not  going  to
happen. Not just yet, anyway.
When he dared  open  his eyes,  he saw  through a cloud  of  settling  dust  that  the
earthen section  beyond  the entry had  thoroughly fallen in. A giant,  with  his  giant's
shovel, had dropped what looked to be several lorry loads of rock and dirt into the
opening. It was blocked right up to the top of the stone arch, and fanned out over a
wide area of the cavern floor and even into the stream. Richard lay on the edge of it.
For a moment all he could do was stare, making no attempt to take it in, to think it
out. There was no need, really. All the ghastly factors galloped through his stunned
mind in the first instant.
He was well and truly a dead man, now.
Still breathing, still aware, but dead nonetheless.
Buried alive.
 
Gradually, the first cycle of alarm and horror gave way to a small degree of calm
and reason, neither having one whit of favorable influence on the overall situation.
Appalling, he decided. It was all quite terribly appalling.
Cautiously, as though his least move would bring the rest of the ceiling down, he
cast about and picked up Charon's torch. The batteries were still strong, but  would
give out long before he was—
Let's not think about that just yet, old lad. His hands were shaking and not likely
to stop anytime soon. Best to keep busy then.
He brushed dirt from his hair, checked himself for damage. There was blood, not
his own for  a change,  though  he  was  bashed  around  a  bit.  Nothing  that  wouldn't
mend itself.

Next he looked for the cup that had  been  knocked  from  Charon's  hands.  That's
what the whole fuss was about, wasn't it? Find the Holy Grail and save Sabra, save
himself, save—
Shut up.
The place was littered with rubble  and  polluting dust.  The  glorious colors  in the
rocks were muted or obscured completely. Gone was the magic, gone like so many
other things, forever. Soon he would be gone as well.
Had to face that. No way to escape the fact—in more ways than one.
Yes, he had air, water—for all the good it would do him—but nothing that could
be remotely considered  food.  He had  no  hunger  now,  but  over  the  course  of  the
next few days it would awaken and impatiently start making demands that could not
be met. And then what? His beast finally emerging, ravenous, needy, with naught to
feed upon  except  that which he carried  in his veins. Would  he then mindlessly  rip
into his own flesh, or be too weak to try?
Damn that bastard to hell, to worse than hell. Damn him to this kind of death,
to this kind of…
Richard stopped and had to force himself not to think about anything until he got
his breathing and racing fears under control. He closed his eyes tight, but only for a
few seconds.  The  world was  too  dark  that  way,  and  before  long  he'd  have  more
dark on top of it, the kind that wouldn't be dispelled with the blink of an eyelid.
Yes, I'm scared. I'm scared shitless, but that won't help me.
Help of a kind—to his spirit at least—came  when he saw  the cup  lying near the
stream bank. It had nearly fallen in.
On his knees, he inched toward  it as  quietly as  he could,  almost afraid it would
take fright and skitter from his reach like a bird. He was being foolish, he knew, but
given the circumstances he allowed himself the indulgence. He needed it.
He got quite close, playing the light over the little shining prize, and froze, staring
in abrupt wonder.
Despite the dust  and  a smear of  mud,  it was  utterly  beautiful.  Beautiful  beyond
petty fears for his own ephemeral hide, for compared to this he was no more than a
candle  burning  itself  away  to  nothing.  This  thing,  this  extraordinary  treasure,  had
been around longer than memory and would continue to be long after memory itself
was gone.
It wasn't a cup  so  much as  deep  bowl,  like a sphere  cut  in half with a flattened
base so it would not roll when set down. Not large, no more than five or six inches
across and made of brass rather than gold. A wise choice by the ancient crafter who
had shaped it. Gold was too easily coveted, melted down, and made into something
else. Brass was much better, though it would corrode away with age.
Except there was no sign of it on this precious piece. It looked new, shimmering
through  the  grime  as  though  it  had  just  gotten  a  final  polish  from  skilled  fingers.

Magic again? Some supernatural gift to preserve it? No doubt.
With  a  humble  mental  apology  to  the  Goddess,  he  gently  picked  it  up  and
brushed  it  clean.  It  was  unexpectedly  heavy.  Inside,  the  finish  was  even  brighter,
smoother,  though at the bottom  he saw  evidence of  what looked  to  be  a very  old
staining, like undrunk wine left to dry in a glass.
Or blood?
He shivered at the thought of his own Savior's connection to the relic, and for the
first time in more than a century, reverently crossed himself in the old way, the way
he'd been taught in his youth.
So long ago. So terribly long…
He felt tears  sting  his  eyes  and  swiped  at  them  with  the  back  of  his  trembling
hand.
Around the upper edge of the cup was a band of knotwork, fluid, intricate, in an
unending circle of truly amazing artistry. Just beneath, a row of rounded nubs stood
out from the surface, five in a line, then a cluster of three forming a triangle, then five
again, three, five three. Sacred numbers. The three groups of three he could guess to
stand  for  the  nine  sisters  of  Avalon.  The  rest  he  wasn't  sure  about,  but  Sabra
would—
Well, actually Sabra wouldn't. Not unless he could dig his way clear sometime in
the next week or  before  he  starved  to  death.  Sharon  would  miss  him  right  away,
though it was a thin hope. Perhaps she'd find the entrance hole at the top of the Tor,
guess what had happened, and send a rescue party down to find him.
Unless Charon discovered her first.
If he got out himself.
Richard found himself grinning at the utterly delightful idea of Charon trapped and
smothering under a few tons of mud. It cheered him greatly. A good end  for  a bad
soul. How dare he have deigned to touch—
"Hey! Lancelot? You still kicking?"
Hell, damnation and all the fiery stops in between.
Charon's voice was very muffled, though he must  have been  shouting at the top
of his lungs to be heard through the barrier between them.
"Hello! Earth to Lancelot, come in, come in, over and under!"
The great twit risked bringing down more of the roof with all that row.
" 'Allo-'allo!"
Though his legs were barely up  to  it, Richard  stood,  getting well away from  the
arch, and yelled back, "I'm here, now shut the hell up!"
A pause, then: "Well, well, you can't beat that with a stick. You all right?"
"Why should you care?"

"Good point, Elwood. I should have asked is the Grail all right. Is it?"
Richard's heart leaped. This could be my ticket out. "Yes, it's fine. I have it in my
hand now."
"Whoa, that's just peachy. I'm so glad to  hear it Now what I want is for  you  to
hang onto it like a good little guardian until I can come back and dig you out."
"Uh-huh. What's the catch?"
"You  wound  me,  Lance-baby.  Twice  now,  as  a  matter  of  counting.  But  I'm
feeling better by the minute. I'm down  a quart  but  should  be  able to  top  things off
before sun-up, which is more than what you can say."
Too true.
"Yeah, you may have the magic whatsis, but I have an exit sign. I wouldn't advise
you to try digging free from that side, you'll just make it worse."
"You can't know that, you've no light."
"I got ears, and it don't sound good. Mommy Nature is royally pissed about this
one and  no  mistake. I'm  going  to  boogie  in  a  minute,  but  I'll  be  back,  don't  you
worry."
"And the catch?"
Laughter, faint and  unpleasant.  "Weeeeell, I've  got  a  really  busy  schedule  lined
up.  There's  an important job  I have to  do  in a couple  days,  and  you  know how  I
love my work. I'm gonna have fun with it, too. I'm gonna do something special and
dedicate this one to you, good buddy."
"What do you mean?"
"I always cover my tracks, but I think I'll leave a few for that asshole Demarest to
find. Before I'm done messing with their heads, the Kennedy Conspiracy's going to
look  like  amateurs  night.  The  cool  part  is  that  all  the  pointers  are  going  to  lead
straight  to  you.  I'm  in  the  clear,  and  you're  branded  suspect  number
one—Charon—who has conveniently disappeared. I can't thank you enough."
Richard licked his lips. They tasted of the earth. "The Grail, Charon. You need it.
You'll die without it."
"You'll go before I do. You know, that's one thing I never researched—how long
one  of  our  kind  can  last  without  feeding  before  we  go  nuts  or  croak.  Your
contribution  to  science  will  not  be  forgotten,  my  son.  The  way  things  are,  I  can
afford  to  wait.  I'll  come  back  in  a  month—make  it  two  months,  I  can  last  that
long—with  proper  equipment,  do  a  little  excavation  and  find  out  then  if  there's
enough left of you to autopsy. Oh, and I'll look after the magic dingus real good, no
fear of that."
"I'll destroy it first."
Silence. Then, "No you won't."
Dear God and sweet Goddess, but the son of a bitch was right.

"Vista la hasta, O Great Guardian of the Coconut. I'll see you in the bye and bye,
so bye-bye!"
"Charon!"
But no answer came. The bastard was probably feeling his unsteady  way up  the
long  spiral  stair.  A  nasty  trip  in  total  darkness—and  Richard  would  have  given
absolutely anything to be on it.
Anything but the Grail. And Charon would have that eventually.
Richard  thought of  hiding it somewhere,  of  burying it in the cave-in debris,  but
knew the attempt to  be  futile in the  end.  Charon  would  bring  metal  detectors  and
who knows what else on his next trip in anticipation of just such a ploy.
Throw it into the Chalice Stream? He'd think of that, too, and would have divers
along to recover it for him.
The stream…
That eventually led to the Chalice Well.
Richard's heart began to pound rather too heavily and hard at the awful idea that
came  to  him.  He  had  to  sit  down  and  did  so  right  in  his  tracks  as  the  physical
reaction seized him and his legs gave way. He clutched the Grail to his breast, hands
shaking more than ever, his whole body shaking at the prospect.
It'll kill me.
But he'd die here anyway.
It was a diabolic choice: a slow, painful death or fast, painful death. Pick one, no
returns, no refunds. Starvation and madness or…
He looked up, half-laughed.
Oh, Goddess, why me?
To which the old response of "why not you?" popped into his mind.
He laughed again, forcing himself to stop when it began to turn into sobbing.
 
It took him ten minutes to work up to the task. Not too terribly long, considering.
During that time he let his mind wander over  many different paths,  nearly  all  of
them leading to Sabra. A few went to other aspects of his life, the things he'd done,
the  people  he'd  known.  He  thought  wistfully  of  She-Who-Walks,  the  lover  and
daughter in  blood  that  he  barely  knew,  of  Sharon  Geary,  a  woman  he  wanted  to
know better  but  would not  now have the chance.  If  she  survived  this  night,  she'd
never find out  what really happened  to  him. Any  rescue  party  would  discover  the
cave-in and be met with silence to their shouted  questions  about  his well-being, for
he would be gone.
Toward  the end  he  gave  himself  over  to  a  bout  of  prayer,  one  to  the  deity  to
which he was born, another to the one he worked for, asking both for the blessing of

success to his endeavor and the strength to accomplish it, but nothing more for  the
preservation  of  his soul.  He was  content  to  leave  such  judgments  in  wiser  hands.
Having glimpsed the light on the other side of the veil he had  no  real fear of  death,
only in his manner of conveyance to that state, and  this one  promised  to  be  a very
bad journey, indeed.
Once  more he crossed  himself in the old  way, stood,  and  paced  the  few  steps
over  to  the  edge  of  the  Chalice  Stream.  He  held  the  Grail  close  in  one  hand.  It
seemed lighter, now.
He left Charon's torch  on  the cavern floor  and  took  out  his smaller model.  Into
the same pocket he slipped  the Grail, firmly zipping it in. Then he began breathing
deeply, striving to  flood  his body  tissues  with oxygen.  He  stretched  this  way  and
that  to  make  sure  everything  was  warmed  up  and  working.  He  was  no  skilled
swimmer, not  since  he'd  met  Sabra,  but  physically  strong,  and  that's  what  would
count most here.
When he was ready, he took the deepest breath he could manage and stepped off
the edge, dropping into the racing stream.
The sheer  agonizing shock  of  it drove  the air right out  of  him again in a  potent
scream.
He staggered and writhed, from both the burning force of the water and his every
instinct shrieking for him to get out, get out, getoutgetoutgetout!
Panting, he fought it off until the initial trauma passed.
Yes, I can live with this, I have to.
But not for very damned long.
The water was  just up  to  his chest  and  threatening to  throw him off  his  feet  to
drag him downstream. It was what he wanted, but it had to be controlled.
He got his breath back again, took another, this time to hold,  and  dove  headfirst
into the swift flow.
God, but it was cold. Worse than icy, worse than anything he'd ever experienced
in all his life. It was like swimming in freezing acid. He wanted to scream  again, but
that was an unaffordable luxury. He needed to hang onto what air he had for as long
as he could.
Beneath the flow, the water was absolutely clear. The torch beam briefly revealed
the rust-colored  sides  and  bottom  of  the stream.  He  saw  smooth  rock  and  ahead
glimpsed a black opening, like a huge greedy mouth. The current pushed him toward
it at a frantically fast pace.
Then the beam went out.  Blackness  closed  over  him.  The  mouth  engulfed  him
completely and on he rushed, blind.
He dropped the torch and spent all of his limited energy and concentration trying
to keep from being smashed against the endless walls of the tunnel. And all the while
it  felt  like  his  skin  was  being  unendingly  peeled  away,  layer  by  layer  in  the  frigid

water.
His  questing  hands  unexpectedly  broke  the  surface  once,  and  he  rose  hastily,
cracking his  head  on  low  rock.  The  air  in  this  little  pocket  of  heaven  wasn't  that
good, but sufficient to use. He gasped and wheezed for a moment,  recovering until
the pain of the water became too much, took in another breath, then hurriedly moved
on.
Unrelieved  blackness  met  his  wide  open  eyes  the  whole  time,  a  minor  thing
compared to the fire crawling over every inch of his being.
How  far  had  he  come?  A  hundred  feet?  Two  hundred?  Or  less?  Not  nearly
enough. He must achieve as much distance as possible. His body  and  the precious
burden he carried must be lost so deep in the course as to never be found—at least
by Charon. Hopefully the son  of  a bitch  would be  dead  and  gone  to  earth himself
before  he could  ever reach  the  Grail.  After  that  it  was  out  of  Richard's  ken.  The
Goddess could look after it Herself.
Hand-over-hand,  half-swimming,  half-tumbling  in  the  rush,  the  air  in  his  lungs
swelled beyond tolerance. He wanted immediate release and replenishment for them.
But there was  none  to  be  had.  His hands,  reaching  upward,  found  only  rock,  not
air—if it was indeed up. He couldn't tell. He pushed the panic away and kicked with
the flow, driving himself another few yards further along.
His chest ached, then burned, then felt ready to explode.
Just a bit more, a few yards, a dozen… just a bit more.
But the burning, biting agony was  overwhelming. Bubbles  leaked from  his  nose
and  mouth.  Regardless  of  his  will,  the  trapped  air  finally  burst  forth,  and  the
insidious water clubbed at him, trying to take its place. He tried not to breathe in, but
some of it had got in anyway and that triggered a cough, which allowed more water
to pound  into his lungs. He bucked  against it until it numbed  him. His movements
faltered.
A bit more…
His arms were so heavy. Hard to lift. He had to give up on his legs. They dragged
at his progress. The iron numbness spread  out  from  his chest.  The  cold  wasn't  so
bad as before…  neither was  breathing water. After the first choking rush,  after the
first protesting struggle, it was almost soothing.
He drifted now, mind and body, the two starting to separate again. He dreamed of
floating and idly wondered if he could float away through the rock to find the sky, or
if he had to continue on until the water finally surfaced above ground level.
A bump, then a startlingly painful knock on his shin, then a terrible jolting plunge.
Only partly drawn from his stupor, he flailed out, and felt the slap of spraying water
on his face.  Instinct  told  him this was  very important,  and  this time he listened, or
tried to—his limbs weren't cooperating too well.
He gagged and  sputtered,  vomiting  water.  It  felt  like  his  lungs  were  being  torn
inside out.

His body spun in the current. His face submerged again.
No, raise up. Swim, dammit! Air. Lovely, glorious air. And with it, reviving life.
The next few minutes—as his sluggish brain labored hard to deal with necessities
for survival—were anything but pleasant. The  terrific cold,  the fire in his chest,  the
feeling that someone had rammed an ice pick into the front  of  his skull, all blended
into a singularly awful dose of wretchedness. And he'd thought that his death would
be fairly quick.
His  fingers  brushed  rock.  Clumsily,  he  grabbed  at  its  slick  surface.  His  body
drifted,  still going with the  stream,  but  he  made  this  point  an  anchor.  By  random
touch he determined that it was some kind of low ledge, perhaps a foot  or  so  wide
and only a few inches clear of the water. More than sufficient.
He let his body come up parallel and with much splashing and  effort  got  an arm
and a leg onto the ledge. God, he was so  weak. It seemed  to  take hours  before  he
finally heaved clear of the deadly water and rolled panting onto his back.
And then he just could not move.
He  coughed  and  choked,  ridding  himself  of  the  stuff,  wheezing  one  minute,
retching the next. Gradually, breathing became more common than coughing and he
dimly took stock of himself.
His skin tingled, burning the same as when he got too much sun. Perhaps it would
heal and pass in a like manner now that he was free of the water. His chest hurt, but
not  as  badly  as  before.  Then  there  was  the  growing  nausea,  but  that  was  also
familiar.  It  was  the  kind  he  got  when  forced  by  social  requirement  to  partake  of
normal  food  and  drink—in  other  words,  he'd  swallowed  some  water.  Sweet
Goddess, but it felt like he'd taken in the whole bloody stream.
I should be dead.
Not  that  he  was  complaining.  Had  he  been  a  normal  human  he  would  have
certainly met with his mortality much farther back  in this mad place.  This  was  like
any other wounding, he supposed, take the damage and wait through the misery until
he healed again.
He trembled from head to foot, teeth chattering. Reaction, he told himself, and let
it happen. He'd just had a reprieve from dying; it was perfectly understandable.
Temporary reprieve, old lad.
He'd have to go back in again.
But that wasn't worth thinking about for the time being. It could wait.
This chamber wasn't nearly as large as the other one, if his judgment of the sound
quality was accurate. He listened to the noise  of  the waterfall, rested,  and  now and
then touched  his  pocket  to  make  sure  the  Grail  was  still  there.  He  found  Sabra's
book again, having quite forgotten it. As far as he could tell the seal on its plastic bag
was  unbroken.  Damn,  he  really  should  have  left  it  behind  for  Sharon  Geary  to
someday recover. Charon might have gotten it, though. Oh, well, it hardly mattered.

Not to me, anyway.
When the latest wave of  nausea passed  Richard  slowly sat  up,  his hands  out  to
determine what was around him. Not very damn much. Stone and more stone, damp
and smooth. He faced upstream, but corrected that, turning round. Ready or not, he
started  to  crawl.  He  had  no  idea  how  far  the  ledge  ran,  or  how  long  he  could
physically continue, but had to play both out while he could.
Impossible  to  keep  track  of  the  distance.  He  tried  counting,  each  number  to
approximate one foot of progress, but lost things somewhere around thirty. Or was
it forty? If only he could see. He imagined the comfort of light and with the imagining
saw ghostly flashes of color, creations of his mind, nothing more,  his eyes  starving
for input.
The ledge slanted a bit toward the water. He expected it would continue to do so,
forcing him back into the flow. Then the question would be of how far he could get
before it finally consumed him.
His  movements  were  mechanical  now,  his  concentration  focused  on  pushing
himself forward. Damn, but his bruised shin ached. Palms and knees, too.
The passage  narrowed,  the ceiling getting lower. Not  long now.  The  water flow
was considerably  slower here. The  passage  had  widened and  the depth  must  have
increased,  that or  the stream had  divided,  the major part  of  it going elsewhere. He
wouldn't have to fight the current so much, but then he'd have to put more effort into
forward motion to compensate.
The ceiling reached a point where he couldn't push through without the danger of
getting stuck. Here he paused to collect himself again, to brace up for the last bout.
He knew it to be the last from his waning endurance.
One more sick-making pang of nausea delayed him. He curled into a ball, hugging
himself. More reaction from his body to the abuse he'd put it through, and there was
naught to do but shudder in his own sweat until it subsided.
As he waited it out and listened to the water he came to be aware of another faint
but  regular  sound,  like  a  dripping  tap.  No,  that  wasn't  quite  it.  What,  then?  The
heartbeat  of  the  Goddess  of  the  Underworld?  He  could  believe  it  in  this  place.
Perhaps  they  were  the  footfalls  of  the  real  Charon,  not  his  murderous  namesake,
coming for him at last.
Richard shook his head, trying to clear it. The  air was  so  stale here. He listened
more carefully, realizing there was  a metallic quality to  the sound,  and  at that point
his heart gave such a jump in his chest that he went dizzy for a moment.
Waiting suddenly  cut  short,  he half-slipped,  half-fell into  the  water  and  slogged
forward. As before, it was so cold it seared, but he ignored the pain.
The ceiling got  much lower, no  matter, he still had  air.  He  pressed  on  with  the
current,  and  the  stuff  gradually  became  shallow  enough  for  him  to  push  his  feet
against the bottom to send him on. He made too much noise to hear beyond it, nor
could he stop to listen.

The stream bed widened, got much more shallow. Soon the level dropped to his
hips,  his knees,  then he stumbled  over  another ledge of  some  sort  and  was  nearly
free of the water. He still had to crouch low, but it was a place to rest.
Clink-clink-clink. Steady, like a hammer on metal, and getting louder.
He felt his way along, sometimes splashing, sometimes clear.
The air freshened.
Then he saw light. So pale, so ill-defined as to be nonexistent, and nearly blinding
to his straining eyes.
"Sharon!"
The sound stopped. He kept going and called out again. It had to be her. Had to
be. She was still working away at the Chalice Well, God bless her stubborn heart.
He now saw  signs  of  past  intrusion by  the Water Board,  their  reshaping  of  the
stream's  path,  bits  of  trash  dropped  in  by  boorish  tourists.  He  hurried  on,
encountering  an  artificial  barrier  meant  to  slow  the  stream.  He  squirmed  over  it,
dropping into deeper water. The stuff was hardly moving, though he barely noticed
it.
"Sharon!"
A long pause, then: "Richard?"
He bawled up  a joyous  affirmative, hurrying until he breathlessly made  it  to  the
base of the well. He squeezed through a small opening and shouted upward when he
saw her head and shoulders silhouetted against the sky. So near, so far. The actinic
beam of a torch light blasted at his eyes and was whipped to one side as he raised a
protective hand against it.
"Mother of God, man, what the hell are you  doing  down  there?" she  demanded
with near-palpable astonishment.
A reasonable question, that. "I'll explain later, just get me out!"
It took time, of course, but they worked through it. In his absence  she'd  broken
the grating free and had been  methodically hammering anchor  spikes  into the stone
and concrete base to hold the ropes she would use to descend into the well.
"Never mind," he yelled. "Use the grappling hook!"
"There's  naught  for  it  to  hold  to,  or  I'd  have  done  it  by  now.  Wait!  I've  just
thought of a brilliant improvisation." She bobbed from sight a moment.  More metal
sounds, then the opening above  was  obscured  by  the grating. She'd  put  it back  in
place, but not quite on center. Next, she started  feeding one  end  of  a knotted  rope
through  the  slats  until  it  reached  him,  tied  the  other  to  the  grappling  hook  and
jammed it onto the grate.
"Are you able to climb?' she asked.
"I'll manage." Anything to escape. He'd levitate up the damn thing if need be.
The knots helped, but the rope was rough on his sore and unprotected hands. His

feet occasionally  found  purchase  on  the uneven sides,  and  he  made  progress,  but
God, he was so tired.
Then he was within reach of the lip of  the well. He hooked  first a hand,  then an
arm.  Sharon  dragged  the  grating  off  to  give  him  more  room  and  pulled  at  his
shoulders as he emerged with many a grunt of effort and pain, until, miraculously he
was sitting on the ground, back to the well, blinking and befuddled. He'd been in hell
for centuries it seemed. This sudden normalcy would take getting used to.
She knelt by him with her torch  and  checked  him over.  His long immersion had
cleaned him up, washing the blood and muck away, leaving behind only torn clothing
and violently reddened skin.
"You look all right," she announced  tentatively, but  sounding  relieved. "How  do
you feel?"
"I feel incredibly fragile," he confessed, staring at the ground and not really seeing
it. "Everything hurts."
"Well, if you're in pain, it means you're alive."
"Oh, God," he groaned, slumping bonelessly to one side, "then am I ever alive."
Chapter Eleven
"That is the daftest, most idiotic thing I've ever heard," said Sharon, torn between
anger  and  wonderment.  "You  could  have  been  killed  and  no  one  the  wiser  for
months."
"Better than letting Charon win. Besides,  I made it through,"  By the  grace  of at
least two deities and the devil's own luck, Richard added to himself.
He had—in his sketchy explanation to her of just how he gotten to the bottom of
the Chalice Well—omitted the little detail that he'd honestly not  expected  to  survive
at all. He was himself still taking it in.
"It was a bloody miracle," she pronounced sternly, then her anger melted and she
pressed her head against his shoulder, one arm going around  his chest.  Because  of
his recent bashings it hurt a bit, but he endured,  feebly patting her thigh with a free
hand.
"I know it was. Now would you mind very much bringing the car round as close
as you can? I don't fancy a long walk just now."
She straightened and shifted back to practicalities. "Keys?"
He tried one pocket, then another, before finding them zipped away in his jacket.
"There's another miracle," she said, accepting them. "It would have been a shame
to have to break in and wire it. Back in five, darlin'."
"Just a minute, I've something else for you." From another pocket he drew out the
plastic-sealed Abbey Book and placed it carefully in her hands. It may have gotten a

dent or two, but I think it's—"
Sharon let forth a wild crow of delight and threw herself enthusiastically upon his
bruises in demonstration of her appreciation.
"Careful, woman! You'll kill me for sure!" he cried out in weak protest.
Her verbal response was rather unintelligible, but she did ease off her more violent
expressions of joy and settled for simply kissing him. Quite a lot.
Much better, he thought, sighing with inner contentment. How nice it would be to
stop everything right here and stay awhile.
But she eventually broke off and all but danced away for the car. When she drove
back he was almost asleep and reluctant to stir again.
"You're too big to carry, so shift yourself," she urged, helping him up and guiding
him to the open back door of the Jaguar. "And let's get you out of those wet rags."
Richard  let  her  fuss  and  meekly  followed  orders.  It  was  rather  nice  having
someone  else  in  charge.  He'd  expended  so  much  energy—mental,  physical,  and
emotional—that  he  had  none  left  to  spare  for  such  mundane  matters.  He  badly
needed some down time. He did manage to keep track of the jacket with its precious
burden still safe in a sealed pocket while she got him stripped and  into a change of
clothes from his flight bag, wrapping his long coat about him.
"Right, that should hold you until I can find a hospital," she said.
Now his eyes opened wide, fully alert. "I'm not going to a hospital."
"The hell you're not. After what you've been through?"
Instinct  told  him  this  could  be  a  long  discussion  unless  he  offered  a  logical
counter-argument. Happily, he had one. "I only need a bit of rest, which I can get on
the road, but we can't  afford  to  waste  time with any doctors  because  Charon's  on
his way back to Toronto."
"So we'll make a few phone calls and have the police lookin' out for him. You've
done more than your share for one night."
"If it was anyone else but Charon I'd agree, but he's an expert at disappearing. If
he gets past the authorities here, then I absolutely have to—"
She raised both hands to stop him. "All right, no lectures. I had enough of those
from him. Let's be off, then."
He paused. This was too easy. "Just like that?"
"Not really. You made me remember something. When I went for the car I saw a
little sports job tear by and race up the main road like a bat from hell. I didn't see the
driver, but wouldn't it be just the thing for us if he was the professor? So let's see if
we can catch the bastard."
Sharon quickly tossed  the remains of  their gear into the trunk, dropped  into the
driver's  seat  and  got  them  moving  at  top  speed,  but  it  soon  became  evident  that
Charon had had too great a head start or taken another route. After the first hour of

peering ahead and seeing nothing but more road, Richard gave up, stretched his long
frame as best he could on the backseat and went to  sleep  again, hugging the jacket
with the Grail close to his chest. It only seemed like a few dreamless minutes passed
before Sharon was shaking him and loudly calling his name.
"We're at Heathrow," she said. "What d'ye want to do with the car?"
Phone calls and  paperwork:  prosaic  details requiring his personal  attention—not
one of his favorite activities. Welcome back to the twentieth century, old lad.
He rallied and  emerged to  deal with things, noting with regret that the night was
almost gone. The rest had done him good, though. He could  move more easily, so
his  stiffening  muscles  were  healing.  Even  in  the  unflattering  artificial  lights  of  the
terminal Sharon told him he looked better than before.
" 'Tis mostly in the eyes, but the rest of you is white as a toad's belly," she said.
He refrained from comment over her honesty and made some calls. The first was
to  Bourland,  waking  him  up.  Richard  gave  him  a  brief  report  containing  the
essentials: he'd followed a lead on Rivers, now definitely Charon, found and lost him
again.
"He said he was going to go through with the assassination—and  see  to  it that I
got blamed for the job," Richard concluded.
"That sounds a good trick. Wonder what he's planned for you?"
"I'd just as soon not find out. Look, I have to get back as soon as possible, what
can you do to cut the red tape for me and my associate?"
"Your associate?"
"She's been of tremendous help to me."
"Ohhh, that associate. The one Demarest was looking for."
"The  same.  We've  sorted  our  credentials.  I  hope  Demarest  hasn't  gone  back
on—"
"No, no, he's all right where your Ms. Geary is concerned, but he's  still hopping
mad  about  Charon.  That  closet  business  was  something  of  an  embarrassment  to
him—it's inspired no end of bad jokes around here."
Richard all but smirked. "I can imagine. If he wants something constructive to do,
you can have him checking for  Neal Rivers on  all incoming flights originating from
Europe  todays—all  of  them.  Go  by  his  physical  description,  not  name.  I'll  start
things at this end, but I need some of your clout to  help do  it, so  would you  mind
very much waking up a few other people? Oh—and I need a diplomatic pouch  and
the papers to go with it."
"Good God, whatever for?"
"It's to carry through a weapon against Charon."
"A  weapon?  You're  not  smuggling  another  one  of  those  fifty-caliber  jobs  are
you?"

"Sorry,  poor  choice  of  words  on  my  part.  What  I  have  is  a  small  article  that
Charon would very much like to get his hands on. I may be able to use it as bait to
draw him out in the open, but the customs authorities on both sides might take a dim
view of my borrowing it. I need across-the-board clearances from as high up as you
can manage and as quickly as possible."
Bourland sighed.  "I  hope  you'll provide  me  with  a  full  explanation  once  you're
here."
"Oh, absolutely," Richard assured him, while mentally crossing his fingers against
the lie. "But about the next flight back—"
"I'll take care of it, not to worry. Now be a good lad and  just stand  by  so  I can
start things on this end. Of course, if Charon  should  happen  to  turn up  in front  of
you in the boarding line you'll save us a bit of bother and head him off, won't you?"
"More like take his head  off."  A  risk  making  that  statement,  but  it  was  entirely
true. Bourland only chuckled.
Richard's second call was to the head of Heathrow's security and that took much
longer. Once he actually got through to the person on duty he then had to convince
him  that  the  gravity  of  a  budding  situation  required  an  immediate  conference.  A
meeting was arranged and  someone  would be  by  shortly.  Richard  hung up,  having
gotten the distinct impression the fellow on  the other  end  of  the line thought him a
perfectly insane nuisance. Ah, well, I'll set him straight when he's here. Nothing like
a face-to-face encounter for a little persuasive hypnosis.
Sharon had not been idle, either, having made use of another phone. She dropped
the receiver into place  just as  Richard  came up.  "I'm  all fixed with the book,"  she
announced, her face glowing.
God, she was beautiful. He wanted to kiss her, saw not a single reason not to and
proceeded to do so, wrapping his arms around her.
"Talking with Lloyd's?" he inquired a moment or two later.
"That  I  was.  They're  sending  someone  over  to  take  charge  of  it.  Once  the
paperwork's sorted I'll be finding my bank account in a healthier state  than it's  ever
known  before.  I'd  love  to  thank  you  for  it."  She  pressed  close,  sliding  her  arms
about him and down, resting her palms on his backside and squeezing gently.
He  squirmed  against  her  in  response  to  the  pleasantry  and  grinned.  "I'll  look
forward to it. I've arranged for our return to Toronto—that is, if you  want to  come
back. Now that you've got the book—"
"Oh, I'm coming back all right, to pick up my gear and settle some details, then I
have to  get back  to  London.  But  I  can  spare  a  day  or  two,  if  for  naught  else  to
satisfy my curiosity."
"Curiosity?"
"Well, I've an idea of how much fun you are in a spa, now I've a mind to see how
you do in a proper bed with sheets and pillows." Another squeeze. Lovely.

"Nothing less than my best, I assure you." 
"Ah, Richard,  you  do  fill  me  with  confidence."  Before  he  could  offer  a  highly
suggestive  rejoinder  he  spotted  several  grim-faced  men  marching  purposefully
toward them. The  one  in the lead wore  a conservative  dark  suit with an airport  ID
badge  clipped  to  the  front  pocket;  the  others  were  in  security  uniforms  complete
with radios. Richard gave Sharon a quick kiss. "There, that's on account. Time to go
back to work."
 
The red tape cutting took a little more than two hours,  much faster  than Richard
expected,  but  Bourland  had  obviously  woken  up  some  very  important  people,
indeed. A few more phone  calls—this time made from  the now highly cooperative
security man's office—settled things. Richard and Sharon were escorted to a private
waiting area and generally coddled and cosseted until it was time to board the day's
first transatlantic flight, a direct to Toronto.
No sign of Charon, though, but then Richard didn't really expect to see him. The
man was too careful by half.
"First  class  again,"  Sharon  commented  as  she  belted  herself  in.  "How  do  you
manage?"
"It helps  to  have some  very good  friends."  Excellent  friends  to  be  sure,  to  get
these  seats  the  airline  had  quietly  bumped  a  million-a-year  fashion  model  and  her
budding film star boyfriend to a later flight. Richard hoped the paparazzi lying in wait
for  the  couple's  arrival  at  Pearson  would  not  be  overly  disappointed  by  the
substitutions. Then the plane began moving, and the long, bouncing lurch as it taxied
along  had  him  grabbing  reflexively  for  the  chair  arms.  The  leather  bag  in  his  lap
began to slip away. Sharon caught it before it fell.
"Steady on, we're not even airborne yet," she cautioned.
"Tell me something I don't know, why don't you?"
"What is this, anyway? I saw that office man give it to you before—" She read the
discreet notices printed on it and felt the outside of the thing, where it bulged slightly
from the object within. Her eyes went wide. "Richard, is this what I think it is?"
He  managed  a  brief  show  of  teeth,  more  of  a  wince  than  a  smile.  The  plane
paused, as if trying to make up its mind whether to proceed or not. "And what might
that be?"
Her  fingers  went  white  around  the  bag,  and  she  glanced  uneasily  about.  "Why
didn't you tell me?" she whispered.
"Well, you know now, don't you?"
She thumped his shoulder.
"Ow!  Are you  going to  be  like this for  the rest  of  the flight? If so,  I'll  take  my
chances in coach." Another lurch, the engines started  to  howl as  they powered  up,
and the plane began moving forward, faster and faster.

"You bloody beast! Open it up, I want a look."
The howl changed in pitch, and they were suddenly off the ground.
"All right, but give me a minute." One, two, three…
"Why—?" She took in his face. "Oh. That."
"Yes, that." Seven, eight, nine…
"Honestly, there's nothing to worry about, the chances of our crashing are—"
"Sharon,  darling,  my  own  dear  love,  please  and  for  God's  sake—shut  the  hell
up." Seventeen, eighteen…
She snorted, but kept quiet until he reached the magic count of sixty and opened
his eyes again. "All better?"
"Only when we're on land again. Safely on land."
"Then take your mind off the flying and show me."
He hesitated, thinking perhaps it might be unwise to display it so openly; after all,
the Grail had been guarded, then kept  utterly secret  for  all those  centuries,  and  not
without good reason. On the other hand, if anyone deserved a peek, it was  Sharon.
And, he  admitted  to  himself,  he  wanted  another  look  as  well.  He  didn't  think  the
Goddess would mind. Not too terribly much.
Turning halfway in his seat to block the view of others in their section,  he fished
out the key for the pouch and opened the lock, then carefully pulled free its contents.
"What's that?" she demanded. "Surely not one of your spare shirts?"
"Sorry, but I didn't have any red samite on me, and I had to wrap it in something.
Don't worry, I put the buttons on tie outside so they wouldn't scratch it"
Then he peeled  back  the fabric,  and  Sharon  caught  her  breath.  Transfixed,  she
stared in silence for many long moments.
He understood  perfectly.  His own heart seemed  to  catch  upon  itself,  recovered
and  went  on,  but  just  a  bit  faster  than  before.  After  a  time,  he  lightly  touched
Sharon's cheek, startling her. "Well? What do you think?"
"Sweet Mary, 'tis not for me to judge."
"Want to hold it?"
She  shook  her  head,  once,  very  quickly.  "No.  This  is  enough.  More  than
enough." She continued to stare and made not the slightest move to touch it.
"Sharon?"
But the cup held her rapt attention. When she  finally spoke,  her voice  was  thick
with emotion. " 'Tis not what you'd expect, not from the legends, nor the art, nor the
films, but it's perfect. The most perfect thing I've ever seen in my life." She  sucked
in a fast breath and it shivered out again. Her green eyes glittered with sudden  tears
and she blinked, swiping at them. "Ah, man, you'll be thinking me a fool."

He leaned over, brushing his lips against her temple. "Never. I feel it, too."
She looked around. "Can no one else sense it?"
"I don't know. Perhaps those with the Sight—" He bit off the rest.
Now  she  looked  at  him,  looked  for  a  very  long  time,  her  face  solemn,  but
otherwise quite unreadable.
"What?" he asked, genuinely puzzled.
"Nothing." She folded the shirt gently back over the little brass cup. "Only that I
see why you did so daft a thing as swimming the Chalice Stream to  keep  this away
from that damned Charon. Seein' it here, seein' what it is, feelin' what it is—I'd have
risked all and done the same thing myself."
"You would?"
"In a heartbeat. So wrap it up, sweet Richard, and keep it safe from the Philistines
of this sad world."
 
Someone shook his shoulder and called his name.
But we've left Heathrow.
The blanket he'd pulled well over his head  to  shield him from  the brutal daylight
seeping  through  the  many  windows  slipped  down.  He  came  sluggishly  awake,
groaning in protest.
"Whazit?" he rumbled. He peered blearily up, first into the pleasant and apologetic
face of a hovering flight attendant, then over to Sharon.
"Ye've skipped breakfast for all your sleepin'," she told him. "I'll not have you be
missin' the noontime meal as well."
Long practice  kept  him  from  registering  automatic  disgust  at  the  suggestion  of
solid food.  He  rubbed  his  grit-clogged  eyes  instead.  "All  right,  I'll  have  whatever
you're having."
Sharon decided on the steak instead of chicken, tucking into it with evident gusto.
Richard regarded his own meal with well-suppressed revulsion and listlessly pushed
the  food  around  with  his  fork.  He  was  hungry,  for  much  of  the  blood  the  Nine
Sisters  had  given  to  him  had  been  used  up  by  now  in  healing.  Hungry,  yes,  but
certainly not for this exanimate garbage.
"What's wrong?" Sharon asked. "You're not a vegetarian, are you?"
"Hardly. This just doesn't appeal to me."
"Your taste buds are still asleep. Just try some and you'll come round." She lifted
a sauce-drenched forkful to his lips.
He grimaced, drawing back. "Um, thank you, but no. All the schedule disruption,
the physical stress, this damned light's playing hell with my allergy—it's really thrown
me."

"But you have to have something."
"I will, just not this." He handed the food tray to her and lifted his seat-back tray
so he could stand. "Here, you eat it. I'll—ah—go see if the attendant can help me."
He released his seat  belt and  got  unsteadily  to  his  feet,  experiencing  an  instant  of
lightheadedness. He recognized the symptoms. Yes, his body had recovered quite a
lot in the last few hours  and  was  in very sore  need  of  replenishment. The  problem
was,  even on  a plane this  size,  hunting  opportunities  were  bound  to  be  extremely
limited and dangerous. He'd have to improvise, but with caution.
He made his way forward to flight attendants' territory: a small, curtained alcove.
It looked promising. The young woman who had  served  them a few moments  ago
was there, busy with a coffee machine. No one else was about. Very promising.
"Excuse me?" he said, stepping in. It was a restrictive space and put him in closer
quarters with her than what was considered socially acceptable between strangers in
this day and age. That registered quite strongly on her features as she turned toward
him, but she smoothed over her surprise with the professional veneer of her training.
"Yes, sir? Mr. Dun, isn't it?" Of course she'd have heard his name from someone
because of the sudden passenger change.
"That's  right, Ms.—uh—Ms.  Patterson,"  he said,  reading  her  badge.  Doubtless
her next response would have been to inform him about this area being off limits to
passengers, but he'd already fixed his gaze hard upon her, coupling it with his best,
most winning smile.
Full force.
She froze  for  one  instant, then returned a dazzling, if  rather  blank,  smile  of  her
own. The poor woman never had a chance.
Richard prudently whisked the curtain shut behind him and moved in.
The devil of it was  he didn't  know how much time he had.  She  could  be  called
away at any moment, or another attendant could interrupt them, otherwise he would
have  drawn  out  the  enjoyment  for  them  both.  As  it  was,  he  rushed  through  the
preliminaries more quickly than was  normal. Like anyone else, he preferred  to  take
time with his meals, but he dared not chance it here. He left nothing out, though,  as
he  soothingly,  compellingly  whispered  for  her  to  shut  her  eyes,  relax,  and  stand
perfectly still, which she  did,  even as  he swiftly unbuttoned  the cuff  of  her blouse
and pushed the sleeve up her arm.
"There, now, you won't feel a thing," he assured her, trailing his fingertips lightly
over her forehead. His hands trembled a bit, and his heartbeat was  high, thundering
hard from excitement and anticipation.
But she must  have felt something,  for  he heard  her sharp  intake of  breath  as  he
buried  his  extended  corner  teeth  in  the  taut  skin  on  the  inside  of  her  elbow.  She
remained still and quiet, however, as he fed—except for an occasional  long sigh of
pleasure.
It was like that for a few of  them. They were dimly aware of  an unusual activity

taking place but of little else, save that it was extremely pleasant. He ever and always
made sure to plant that suggestion with them, for why should he not share the intense
delight he felt himself?
God, but it tasted good.  When had  he last really fed  from  a living woman? Not
since She-Who-Walks,  but  that had  been  different, and  he'd  been  fearful of  losing
control of his beast with her. This  time was…  was  like it had  always been  for  him
with  its  hot,  sweet  sharing,  with  the  headiness  of  another's  life  flowing  into  and
enriching his own. He shuddered, head to toe, as the latest wave of  it washed  over
him. There was nothing, absolutely nothing else quite like it.
When he'd finished, he gently kissed away the last seepage from the small holes in
her  arm  and  inspected  the  damage  narrowly.  No  bruising,  no  obvious  capillary
damage; he'd done it just exactly right.
"Thank you, Ms. Patterson, you've been of great help," he whispered, and he was
sincere about it. He felt much better now.
Digging in his back pocket, he drew forth two small adhesive bandages,  such  as
he always carried for these occasions, breaking their seals and placing them carefully
on the wounds. "There, you needn't give these a second thought. You happened  to
see a blood donation center on your way to work and surrendered to an impulse to
contribute. Very generous of you, to be sure. Now I'm going to slip out so you can
get on with your job, and you're going to forget all about me, aren't you?" He pulled
her  sleeve  down,  rebuttoned  the  cuff,  and  was  gone  before  she  could  wake  to
answer.
He paid a brief visit to the toilet for a quick check in the mirror to  make sure  no
traces of blood smeared his face. It was all part of his usual feeding routine, honed
by  over  a  thousand  years  of  practice,  but  as  he  washed  his  hands  and  peered
thoughtfully  at  his  unshaven  reflection  he  came  to  understand  that  there  was
something distinctly different about this one.
Well, he told himself, I suppose I have finally joined the Mile-High Club—albeit
with a new twist.
Certainly  for  him  the  taking  of  a  woman's  blood  was  sensually  comparable  to
making love, but  there was  something else, something less  obvious  nagging  at  the
edge of his mind. He knew the signs; whatever it was would come in its own time, so
he let it go and went back to his seat.
Sharon had finished her lunch and was nearly through with his. "You were a time.
Didn't she have anything?"
"Yes, she turned up a little something to tide me over, and then we got to talking."
"Did you now? Why doesn't that surprise me?"
He shot her a quizzical look.
"You're a handsome, charmin' man, Richard Dun, an' most women would have to
be dead not to notice. I'll wager you spend most of your free time being chatted up
by them."

"Not anymore."
"Eh?"
"Only because I'll make a point of spending all my free time with you."
That  pleased  her.  He  gave  her  knee  a  friendly  squeeze,  then  glanced  down  to
check on the leather pouch at his feet. Still there and quite safe. He reclined back in
his seat, content for the moment with his portion of the universe. His beast was well
sated, all he wanted now was to resume his nap and…
His beast.
Oh, my dear God… and dear Goddess, for that matter.
The elusive thought teasing on  the edge  of  consciousness  abruptly came square
to the front and center.
He'd fed as he normally did, without the cold dread that had haunted him since his
madness at Niagara. His beast had behaved itself. He'd not had the least sense  of  it
escaping from his control; it was as obedient as it had ever been to his will.
And he did not have to wonder why that was so.
Richard picked up the pouch, felt the solidity of the precious object  within. And
more. A whisper of its power thrummed up through his fingers.
All that fiery immersion in the Chalice Stream—  with  the  Grail.  The  water  he'd
swallowed,  nearly  drowned  in.  It  had  to  have  affected  him,  reversed  the
degeneration for him in some manner, perhaps even cured it.
He  suppressed  his  laugh  of  astonished  joy,  not  wanting  to  catch  Sharon's
attention and have to answer questions. It was bard going to hold such stuff inside;
he wanted to jump up and shout about it. Talk about miracles…
Drastic cure, though. Not unlike chemotherapy,  in that it was  almost worse  than
the ailment.
If it would—oh, but it must—do the same miracle for Sabra.
He hugged the pouch to his chest, eyes shut as he silently offered up thanks again
and again until sleep took him once more.
A bright, sunny day in Toronto.
Miserable weather.
And jet lag. Richard preferred sleeping late when he could, it was part and parcel
of what he was, but unavoidable intrusions often made it impossible. They'd gained
some time over the Atlantic as well; this was turning into one of the longest days he'd
endured in recent memory.
Sharon had finally given in to the toils of travel, and for a change he had to wake
her when they landed. Gathering their carry-ons,  they marched  slowly forward  with
the other exiting passengers.
"Thank you for flying with us, Mr. Dun. I hope you enjoyed your trip."

Startled,  he  glanced  up,  right  into  the  smiling  face  of  the  flight  attendant,  Ms.
Patterson.  She  was  positively  beaming  with  warmth  for  him.  Sweet  heavens,  how
much did she remember?
"Do  come  again, and  have a  nice  day,"  she  said  with  unusual  sincerity.  It  was
rather beyond what was required by the airline.
"Ahh—thank you… yes… and you, too."
Sharon  did  not  miss  this  exchange  and  flashed  him  an  arch  look,  probably
thinking he'd done a bit of "chatting up" himself. At some point he'd have to  find a
quiet moment and persuade her not to worry about such things.
A  varied  crowd  clustered  around  the  arrival  gate  outside  of  customs:  several
hungry-looking  newspaper  types  clutching  cameras  and  peering  hard  at  each
passenger, ordinary folk come  to  greet friends  and  relatives, and  a trio of  men not
unlike the fellows at Heathrow,  one  in a conservative  suit and  the others  in  airport
security uniforms. They spotted Richard right away. They must have been told what
to  look  out  for  his  unseasonably  heavy  clothing,  extra-dark  sunglasses—and  the
diplomatic pouch.
The  Suit  approached,  made  rapid,  and  to  Richards  daylight-befuddled  mind,
largely meaningless introductions, then led the way past customs to one of the exits.
Bourland  had  sent  a  car  and  driver  for  them,  along  with  a  message  to  call  him
immediately.  Richard  used  the  vehicle's  built-in  phone  as  the  driver  guided  them
smoothly out of Pearson's maze and onto the Macdonald-Cartier Freeway.
"We're back," he said when he got through to Bourland.
"Glad to hear it. We'll want your help tonight."
"Is this a secure line?"
"Quite secure. We may talk freely."
"What's tonight, the trade conference?"
"At the Royal York Hotel. We'll have people all over the place, but—"
"I know,  I'm  still on  retainer. I'll be  there, if you  think this is the right event for
Charon to show. There may be other opportunities for him to take, don't forget."
"It's attracted world-wide press and TV, what better place  for  the splinter group
to make a point?"
"What are you doing to cut down the PM's vulnerability?"
"All we can, but he insists on making a front door entrance along with the rest of
the VIP's. Says it won't reflect well on the country or his faith in our security if he's
smuggled in through the kitchens."
"Is he aware of the danger?"
"Thoroughly. I even showed him photos of that wall from that pub shooting, but
he will have his way. Won't be budged."
"One can admire his idiotic courage, but at least put him in a bullet-proof vest or

he'll get a lot more than fifteen seconds of coverage on CNN."
"I think we can do that much."
Not nearly enough, Richard thought. A vest was no more than a gesture. Charon
always went for head shots. It was standard procedure for snipers: go for the head,
then if the bullet dropped  over  the distance  it could  still kill by  hitting the  neck  or
chest.  Of  course,  with a .50 armor-piercing round  able  to  punch  a  large  hole  into
anything up to  and  including most  tanks  the question  of  anyone,  with or  without a
vest, surviving such a hit was hardly worth considering.
"Has Demarest any news on flight arrivals?" Richard asked.
"Actually, yes. He went up to Newfoundland."
"What the devil's he doing there?"
"Beating the bush for Charon. We're fairly sure he originally chartered a jet to the
Bahamas,  then  hijacked  it  to  Gander  Field  instead,  since  one  made  a  very
unscheduled landing there earlier today. From there we think he had  other  transport
standing by, but Demarest is having a lot of trouble getting people to talk. Says even
the pilot is pretending not to remember anything about the business."
Not surprising, that, if Charon was any good at hypnosis. Its coercive effect on a
vulnerable  human  mind  was  far  more  profound  than  any  commonplace  loyalty,
bribery or fear.
"He  and  the  crew  may  have  been  drugged,"  said  Richard.  "There  are  some
tailor-made exotics on the market that could have such an effect.  Assume  Charon's
an  expert  and  see  if  you  can  turn  up  a  hypnotherapist  who's  got  some
deprogramming experience. Demarest might have better luck that way."
"That will take time."
"Yes,  we're  shutting  the  barn  after  the  horse  is  gone,  but  we  can  at  least  be
thorough about it for the investigation later."
A long silence, then, "You don't expect to get him, do you, Richard?"
"To be perfectly honest, I don't, not here. He's had too long to prepare and there
are too  many variables. He's  been  successfully  doing  this  sort  of  thing  for  a  very
long time. He takes a positive pride in his work. And you can be sure it will be nearly
impossible to track  him afterward.  A long gun means he'll be  a safe  distance  from
the scene  and  have a well-prepared getaway. If you  want any clues  to  finding  him
later, then you must work with what you have at hand this moment. But if you really
want to prevent a kill this time, then persuade the PM to do a bit of handshaking with
the hotel's kitchen staff. Have them cleared first. Just  because  Charon's  been  hired,
doesn't  mean  he's  the  only  assassin  on  the  job.  He  could  be  a  high-profile
distraction, y'know."
Bourland made grumbling noises, indicating he was not at all happy with what he
was  hearing.  "I'll  have  another  go  at  it.  After  all,  we're  paying  you  to  be
professionally paranoid."

"Absolutely."
"What about that 'weapon' you brought in? Bait, you said?"
"It's the sort of thing that will be more useful later when the hunt is on. It requires
a bit of preparation, unfortunately." Richard glanced at his watch. Damn, it was still
on English time. He looked  over  the seat  at the dashboard  clock  and  reset  things.
"When does all this start tonight?"
"Delegates will be filtering in between eight and  nine for  the banquet.  The  PM is
scheduled to arrive at eight twenty-five."
The sun would still be up. Damnation.
"We'd like you at the York as soon as possible, though."
"I'm going home to get presentable first. Is this a black tie thing?"
"Afraid so, old boy. That is, if you want to blend in and not look too very much
like a security man."
"Right. See you shortly." He rang off and gave the driver fresh directions.
"That sounded intense," Sharon commented. "Your half of it, anyway."
"It's a terrific nuisance. Waste of effort for everyone except Charon."
"You said something about variables. Those apply to him as well."
"Not when he's planned for them."
"He'll not have planned for this one."
"Oh? Which is?"
She  tapped  a  light  finger  on  his  chest.  "He  thinks  you're  safely  rotting  under
Glastonbury Tor."
Richard  allowed himself a short  laugh. "Yes,  there's  that."  For what  it's  worth.
But he still thought the whole  business  a  waste  of  precious  time  that  was  not  his
own, and it would likely consume even more in what looked  to  be  a vile aftermath,
time he would much rather use getting the Grail to Sabra. 
The  Royal  York  Hotel—which  had  much  experience  in  such  events—had
outdone itself for the evening reception: a perfectly turned out staff, red carpets, live
music, special decor, almost enough to  distract  from  the dozens  of  uniformed and
plainclothes  security  people  moving  among  the  well-dressed  delegates  who  had
already arrived. Important-looking men and  women,  dressed  to  the  teeth  and  then
some,  drifted  about,  some  shaking  hands  and  talking,  others  eyeing  the  doors  as
newcomers were ushered in.
"This  place  is a bloody  zoo,"  said  Sharon,  scowling at the splendors.  She  was
quite splendid herself, having in the space of a few hours piled her red  hair up  high
and kitted out in a sort of shiny black stretchy thing that covered her from wrists to
ankles.  It  might  have  been  meant  for  gymnastic  use,  but  she'd  hung  a
near-transparent black lace skirt from her naturally nipped-in waist and  trimmed the
lot  with  flashes  of  cut  onyx  jewelry.  Chic,  but  still  practical,  right  down  to  her

flat-heeled shoes. If she had to move fast, she was ready. The only real sign setting
her  apart  from  the  other  visitors  was  the  security  ID  badge  she'd  clipped  to  one
shoulder.
Richard,  attempting  to  complement  her  elegance  in  his  custom-tailored  tuxedo,
very much regretted that he could not pay more attention to her, though many of the
other men were trying their best to make up for it. One of them had actually tripped
and fallen into a potted plant when Sharon glided past.
"Why such a huge fuss?" she asked. "It's only a trade conference."
"It's the largest one to be held in this hemisphere in the last twenty years. There's
also a touchy  ecological issue  on  the table and  that's  attracted  some  civic-minded
film stars. Don't think all this is for a few politicians and business types."
"But so much attention, even for some actors?"
"Perhaps someone let slip to the media about the free buffet in the lobby."
She shot him a crooked look. "Sometimes I can't tell if you're shaking my crate or
not."
"Rattling your cage," he corrected.
"As I said: this is a zoo."
"Agreed. But which are the animals and which the keepers?"
"Oh, we're the keepers, leastwise all the ones  with badges…  and  headsets."  She
nodded at the one Richard sported.
It was about as discreet as a foghorn, but a necessary evil so he could keep track
of  what  was  going  on.  He  tended  to  miss  Sharon's  frequent  observations  as  he
listened  to  broadcast  exchanges  from  the  rest  of  the  security  team.  One  incident
proved to be rather interesting when several zealous female fans of an expected film
star were discovered lurking in a freight elevator and  summarily taken into custody.
For some mysterious reason they'd each been carrying pink plastic garden flamingos
and cans of Macadamia nuts, all of which had been confiscated as being a possible
bomb threat. Closer inspection  indicated the things were exactly what they seemed
to be; now the guards were having a lengthy debate on what to do with the items and
their disappointed T-shirt-clad owners.
Richard  impatiently pressed  the Send  button  on  his  set.  "Hallo,  this  is  Control
Three. Do their IDs check out?"
"Yes, sir. They're just tourists in from the States."
"Is there any immediate and obvious threat from those damned flamingos?"
"Uh… no, sir," someone answered after a moment
"Or the Macadamia nuts?"
"No, sir," chimed in another sheepish voice.
"Then  I suggest  you  pitch  the lot out  of  them out  the back  door  and  get on  to
something more important; you're cluttering up this channel."

"Yes, sir!"
"Flamingos and Macadamia nuts?" asked Sharon,  baffled  from  hearing only one
side of the conversation.
Richard shrugged, shaking his head. "I'm terrified to ask."
That  distraction  out  of  the  way,  he  and  Sharon  made  a  circuit  of  the  area,
occasionally pausing as he dealt with one thing or another filtering into his headset.
"It's like you're telepathic and I'm not," Sharon complained mildly. "Your eyes go
strange an' then I know you've phased out."
He laughed once.  It was  comparable  to  all  those  years  of  dealing  with  Sabra's
Sight. Certainly this was as close as he'd ever get to  achieving the Gift for  himself.
"Gome on, let's get some elevation."
He found a back stairs and they went up to a hotel office that had been taken over
as a command center for  the security  team. More uniforms here, which he thought
ridiculous;  they  were  needed  elsewhere  for  crowd  control.  Instead  they  were
standing around and gossiping,  the tightest knot  gathered around  a table piled high
with doughnut and pizza boxes.
"What's the holdup?" he demanded of the harried-looking coordinator.
"We're short of radios, sir. There's a new batch coming in later."
"Then  hand  them  out  later,  and  get  these  people  to  posts  that  don't  require
radios."
"Yes, sir." Orders were barked and the ranks instantly thinned.
"You enjoyed that," said Sharon.
"I despise inefficiency."
She followed him to one of the windows where they had a grand view of the front
entry,  which  was  packed  with  members  of  the  media  awaiting  the  coming  of  the
more newsworthy delegates. The sun was still in the sky, but lowering. The  bulk of
the York and other buildings cast a vast shadow over this section of the street.
Thank God for small favors. "Hand me those field glasses, would you?"
Sharon plucked a set from a nearby desk and gave them over.  He couldn't  open
the window, but was still able to focus beyond the glass to Union Station across the
street. There were men on the roof, but they were supposed to be  there, being part
of the security  team.  He  scanned  everything  within  view  that  could  be  a  potential
hunting  blind  for  Charon:  from  the  needle-sharp  CN  Tower  on  his  right  to  the
twenty-five  anvil-shaped  stories  of  the  Esplanade  on  his  left,  and  all  the  area  in
between. There was  far too  much of  it Bourland had  been  unable to  convince  the
Prime Minister to use more caution. Unless Charon chose another time and place, he
would probably succeed tonight.
Richard  watched  a  helicopter  buzz  past,  sweeping  the  rooftops  for  anything
suspicious. If Charon wanted to he could knock the thing right out  of  the sky  with

one well-placed shot. Hopefully, he would concentrate on his prime target rather than
a high body  count.  A  chopper  crash  in  the  downtown  area  did  not  bear  thinking
about.
"You're looking grim."
He glanced at Sharon. "I've every right to be."
"Well, I'll not try to buck you up with cheerful patter, 'tis a grim situation. I'm only
sorry you have to be the one to deal with it."
He smiled, lifted the headset  out  of  the way a moment,  and  placed  a  swift  kiss
right on her mouth. "I knew there was something about you I liked."
"Only the one thing? No, don't answer that."
"Mm. I could be here all night doing inventory."
"Back to work with you." Smiling, she broke away to inspect the pizza boxes and
helped herself to some of their contents.
Richard  crossed  to  one  of  the  radio  coordinators.  "I  want  another  post  check
before the PM's arrival. Make sure everyone reports in by name and number and tick
them off against your list. Anyone who doesn't have the right passwords—"
"Yes, sir," she said briskly, picking up a clipboard.
He went back  into the relative quiet by  the  front  window  to  better  listen  to  the
check-through  while watching the outside.  Sharon  joined him again  and  apparently
recognized his distracted look, for she made no conversation. She did silently offer
him pizza, which he turned down with a brief head shake.
Post Seven, Post Seven, report in, over.
Post Seven, over.
Check in.
Roger that. Clarkson reporting. The password is "zenith." All quiet here.
Richard  looked  to  the right. Post  Seven would  be  on  the  CN  Tower.  It  was  a
highly  public,  therefore  unlikely,  place  for  a  sniper,  but  he'd  placed  extra  people
there for just that reason and had had the tower's own security staff double-checked
before  putting  his  team  inside.  It  took  the  coordinator  some  little  time  to  work
through them all, but apparently nothing was amiss.
She moved on to the next post and the next. There was a short false alarm when a
man didn't respond right away, but one of his teammates located him a few minutes
later being sick in a lavatory. Richard didn't bother to gather details and simply broke
in on the exchange to order a replacement sent out.
All the rest were routine and happily boring. The different voices cluttering his ear
almost started  to  drone  together,  and  he  had  to  fight  to  stay  alert  to  each  and  to
visualize as best he could their locations. Of course the coordinator had a map for all
that,  which  Richard  had  pored  over  earlier  when  he'd  observed  the  setting-up
process, but he was striving to match the flat map with the three-dimensional reality

outside his window. Not easy.
Post Fifty-eight responding, over.
Check in.
Roger that. Marquand on post, and the password is "globe."
Richard jerked as though from an electric shock.
Everything's right-a-rooney here.
No mistake.
Nothing's shaking. Over.
It was Charon's voice.
The  coordinator  blithely  ticked  him  off  her  list  and  went  on  to  the  next.
Dry-mouthed,  Richard  strode  unhurriedly  to  her  to  look  over  her  shoulder  at  the
clipboard. He got the location code for fifty-eight and checked it against the map on
one  of  the  desks.  Good  God,  Charon  was  on  top  of  the  Esplanade.  A  rough
calculation  of  the  distance  put  him  within  easy  shooting  range  for  one  of  his
experience.
Time. How long until—the PM would arrive in less than a quarter hour.
Richard held a necessarily fast inner debate on what to do next. A radio message
to the team assigned to the Esplanade could interrupt Charon. That was what the job
was all about, stopping him before he could fire; that was all that was needed On the
other  hand,  Charon—being  what  he  was—could  likely  overcome  any  such
interruption and continue or escape and go to ground for another try later. He'd have
allowed  for  such  a  variable.  Who  knows  but  he  may  have  not  only  substituted
himself for  the real Marquand,  but  done  the same  for  the  rest  of  rooftop  security
team. A little hypnosis to get the names and passwords as  he'd  obviously  done  for
himself—hell, they could all be IRA.
With this in mind—assuming the worst—then Richard could gather some people
and  weapons  together  and  go  in.  Large  and  distracting,  but  messy.  There  would
certainly be casualties. The lives of a dozen of his team against the single life of  the
target. Yes, he was the Prime Minister, but for one of Richard's years all human lives
were much the same to him, being equally ephemeral. Who was he to  judge from  a
crowd of strangers whose was the more valuable life?
Or he could handle it quietly himself. As Sharon had noted earlier, he was the one
variable that Charon could not have possibly allowed for.
The debate was over and done in less than a second.
Richard was out the door and heading for the street in the next.
Alone.
 
Once away from the crush of the Royal York Richard went to full speed, tearing
past the Royal Bank Plaza and the glass and steel needle of the Canada Trust Tower.

He slowed slightly crossing Front Street, then blazed down Yonge to  veer hard  left
toward the Esplanade. He was seen, of course, it couldn't be avoided, but  he knew
he was moving too fast for anyone to get a clear look. He'd have registered as a blur
of black and white, nothing more. The sun caught him once or twice, but not enough
to affect him.
He  did  have  to  cut  back  to  normal  as  he  approached  the  building's  sheltering
entry, and there was a check as he flashed his ID to the police on duty in the lobby.
He said he was on a personal inspection round, and after giving the senior officer  a
slight hypnotic push got the full and unquestioned run of the place. It was  primarily
shops and other businesses on the lower floors, above that, condominiums.
More lives to worry about.
Richard  went  straight  for  the  service  elevators.  He  could  negotiate  twenty-five
floors of stairs somewhat faster running, but even he would be left rather breathless
at the end. Better to conserve until he knew what was ahead. He had the time. Barely.
When he emerged in the utility hall at the penthouse level, he found a man on post
there who reported with a smile that all was quiet.
"Everything's right-a-rooney," he said cheerfully. "Nothing's shaking."
Oh, yes,  Charon  had  gotten  to  him  all right. He hadn't  a clue. Richard  had  him
shut off the automatic alarm and open the fire door to the stairs leading to the roof.
The lowering sun was the first thing to hit him as he stepped outside. He fumbled
for his dark glasses before recalling they were in his coat at the York. Squinting, he
raised an arm to shield his eyes, eased the door shut, and stepped quickly around to
the merciful shade on the east side of the stair's kiosk.
The next thing he noticed was the wind. Not nearly as strong as it had been on the
Tor, but still an environmental factor to consider.
The breadth of the sky made up  his next impression.  One  could  not  see  all that
much of it in the man-made canyons below, here it just went on and on, interrupted
only by the taller towers of the city.
The fourth  point  to  register was  the  uniformed  cop  also  standing  in  the  shade,
staring straight ahead like a Buckingham palace guard. He took absolutely no notice
of Richard—another man turned into an obedient and oblivious robot by Charon.
Richard glanced warily about the roofs otherwise flat expanse, spotting two other
officers  at  its  north  and  easternmost  points  next  to  the  low  rampart  wall  of  the
buildings perimeter. They also  stood  still, not  even remotely marking his presence.
The far west  side  was  another story,  he found,  peering  around  the  corner.  At  the
small end of the building, the point of the anvil, a stocky figure knelt by the rampart,
looking intently west. Just on his right, all set to bring to bear, was something that at
first glimpse seemed to be a length of  piping with other  pipes  attached.  They soon
resolved  into  the  recognizable  shapes  of  a  long  muzzle,  telescopic  sights,  and
shoulder stock. Instant and inarguable death in the hands of an expert.
Charon. With his back turned. As vulnerable as he'd ever be.

Pay-back time.
Richard focused a moment on the officer and spoke quietly. "Right, I want you to
go on standing here, but I should  like to  borrow  this and  this, there's  a good  lad."
Richard relieved him of his firearm and wooden baton. He checked the gun to make
sure the safety was off and a round racked in the chamber. Good. Excellent, in fact.
Not  wanting  any  sudden  distractions,  he  took  off  his  headset  and  gave  it  to  the
officer to hold, which he did.
A quick check. The other men held their posts, and  Charon  still faced  west,  but
he was reaching for the rifle. Yes, the PM would be arriving just about now. Charon
placed  the barrel on  the rampart and  peered  into the  sight  before  pulling  back  for
another unaugmented look.  He must  have been  satisfied,  for  he  settled  into  place,
making his body  comfortable  for  a  moment's  total  immobility.  In  that  moment  he
would  time  himself  to  move  his  trigger  finger  only  in  the  crucial  instant  between
heartbeats, sending the bullet out to precisely smash into another man's brain, turning
live, thinking matter into so much dead tissue.
Richard eased from cover into the crashing red heat of the sunset,  his borrowed
gun up and ready, and stepped slowly forward. His shoe soles crunched against the
grit on the roof, but the wind carried the sound away. He was able to get quite close;
he didn't  need  to  worry much about  shooting  between the beats  of  his own  heart.
Good thing, too, for it was hammering away far too fast.
He paused.  His peripheral vision briefly noted  the other  high buildings, the  vast
blue void of Lake Ontario on his left, the fading sky above, then everything slid away
from  his  consciousness.  His  mind  dismissed  all  the  rest  of  the  world,  centering
entirely upon Charon, not five paces away.
Now or never.
Richard double-tapped twice with his gun: two  bullets into the base  of  Charon's
spine, two more into his upper back for his heart.
The man's body bucked and twisted, and he let forth  an ugly tearing scream,  an
animal's screech of pain and outrage. The sound lanced through Richard, right to the
bone.  Charon  collapsed  and  rolled away from  the rampart,  sprawling on  his back.
He wore  a  full  ski  mask  and  dark  glasses  against  the  sun.  Richard  walked  close,
bent, and plucked the glasses away for his own use.  He settled  them in place,  then
peeled the mask from Charon's head. The smell of fresh blood tainted the wind.
The first burning jolt of pain from the shots would not be swift to leave, but it was
obvious  when  it  eased  slightly,  for  Charon  froze  and  stared  up  with  undisguised
shock. And despite his obvious agony, he tried to speak.
"You… you—"
Richard grinned. "So nice to see  you  again. Can't  stay  long, though,  you  won't,
anyway."
"You… don't. Give up. Do. You."
"I've some good news: I still have the Grail."

"Gra—?"
"And it works, I'm happy to say. I'm ever so much better than I was."
"Glad to. Hear. It.  You sonova…  I—"  But a spasm  took  him. "Oh,  God!" His
strangled cry cut off as he arched backward.
The  spinal  wounds, Richard  thought.  Then the truth of  it dawned: Charon  was
starting to change.
Time to end things. A few more bullets in his heart to  slow,  then ram the baton
into the holes in his chest to finish him and worry about smuggling the body out for
cremation later.
Richard brought the gun to bear, but it was already too late.
Charon's beast swiftly emerged, whipped on by the pain.
Lightning  fast,  the  thing  launched  itself  at  Richard,  claws  out,  fangs  extended,
slamming bodily into him. Richard got off one last futile shot  and  they were rolling
across the roof.
No  time  to  think  or  plan,  this  was  on  the  level  of  pure  instinctive  reaction:  be
quick or  die. Richard  got  his arm up  just  as  Charon  bit  down  trying  to  reach  his
throat.  His teeth tore  through the  sleeve  like  paper  and  ground  deep  into  the  skin
beneath.  Richard  snarled  and  pushed,  trying  to  get  on  top,  but  Charon's  greater
weight,  frenzied  rage,  and  complete  desperation  gave  him  the  advantage  here.  He
was neither beast  nor  man, but  with  the  qualities  of  both,  and  wholly  focused  on
killing.
His jaws closed hard and he pulled his head back, intent on ripping the flesh right
from Richards  arm. Richard  had  done  the same  himself  in  his  frenzy  with  Webb.
Charon  needed—craved—the  blood.  Grunting,  Richard  went  with  the  move,
pushing hard. He lost the gun as it slipped from nerveless fingers, but it bought him a
second.
He still clutched  the nightstick in his left hand.  He slammed one  blunt end  hard
against the side of Charon's head. A deathblow to anyone else, but little effect here.
Another strike. There, the bastard felt that. His jaws loosened  and  Richard  yanked
his arm free. Bloody and it hurt like hell, but still fairly intact.
He struck again, now against Charon's temple. The force impelling him seemed to
slacken, then recovered. His claws tore into Richards  shoulder,  raked  his neck,  his
face. More blood. Lots more pain.
Forget it. Fight!
He rolled to his knees, lashing out with the baton.  Charon  avoided  the blow and
dodged to one side, feinting to the right, driving in on the left. Richard lunged away,
gained his feet, but  staggered,  vision blurring as  his blood  streamed  into  his  eyes.
Half-blind,  he  managed  another  strike,  this  one  square  in  Charon's  face,  breaking
bones and cartilage. That stopped him.
Nothing fancy, now, just beat him insensible and kill him. Richard raised the club

again,  but  Charon  reeled  from  him,  running  unsteadily.  He  turned  once,  got  in  a
vicious swipe that connected, making thin, razorlike cuts along Richard's  abdomen.
He folded over, trying to keep the baton up to ward off the next strike, but  it never
came.
Through a veil of blood he saw Charon's sporadic but swift progress toward the
eastern rampart.
No!
Richard pressed after him, staggering himself from his hurts and  the brutal press
of the dying sun.
Too late.
Charon was up and over the low wall. Richard reached the edge seconds later and
saw the ropes,  the pulleys. Some  sort  of  rappelling  gear,  only  Charon  was  in  too
much a hurry to do it properly. His distorted hands were wrapped around the rope,
and he slipped dangerously fast down its length to a secondary roof some ten stories
below.
Richard had no knife handy, had lost the gun, and undoing the knots would take
too long. He grabbed the rope and hauled it back as hard as he could. It was no light
load.  His shoulders  strained,  his wounds  burned.  He grunted and  kept  pulling.  He
felt hard tugs from the other end, like a fish struggling against the hook.
Then the weight suddenly vanished and he fell flat on his back, banging his head
hard enough to make lights flash behind his eyes.
Get up!
But the breath had been knocked right out of him. By the time he returned to the
wall to look down Charon was quite gone.
But where? Inside the building?
Then Richard saw  another piece  of  rope  attached  to  a similar rampart below.  It
snaked over the edge, leading down to the narrow space between the Esplanade and
its much shorter neighboring structure, the Novotel Hotel.
Oh, Damn. Damn, damn, damn!
Weary and sick from the sun and the fighting, Richard knew he'd have to follow.
Somehow.
The  descent  was  a  nightmare.  Horizontally,  crossing  a  hundred  feet  was
insignificant,  vertically  was  something  else  again.  Especially  now.  He  tried
handover-hand, bracing his feet against the wall. It reminded him uncomfortably  of
the Chalice Well. At least he wasn't fighting gravity in quite the same way this time.
The last five yards he skipped by simply letting go the rope and dropping. He was
wasted enough to have to roll with the impact, but found his legs again and tottered
to the second rope.
Fifteen stories below in the shadows of the alley he saw  Charon's  foreshortened

figure  lurching  toward  the  curb  and  a  waiting  car.  A  frigging  limousine  no  less.
Because of the reception at the Royal York the streets were all but choked  with the
damned things, making one more in the area all but invisible. Its back  door  popped
open at his approach; he half fell inside, and it immediately sped away.
Richard  thought of  several things  he  could  do  to  get  the  alarm  out  and  initiate
what would likely prove to be a futile pursuit. None were remotely practical for him,
though. Not in the shape he was in. What the hell. He'd stopped the assassination. It
would have to serve.
But dear God, how he hurt.
The reaction swept  over  him, gave him the shakes,  forced  him  to  sit  down.  At
least it was shaded here. His exposed skin was cherry-colored and itching madly. It
was almost enough to distract him from the wretchedness  of  the other  injuries he'd
taken.
He'd have to feed soon to compensate for the healing.
As would Charon.
Richard groaned.
Chapter Twelve
God, what sad places airports are.
Richard sat in a plastic chair at Pearson looking morosely at his hands lying in his
lap. He idly rubbed the white scar at the base of his left ring finger as the latest wave
of it washed through him.
He felt empty, a feeling he knew rather too well. It was always like this after battle.
Amid the fierce guilty joy of  survival was  the hollowness  inside, the strange  barren
sadness  overwhelming  him,  dragging  him  down  to  immobility  of  body  and  spirit.
Centuries past  when he still walked in  the  sun  he  used  to  numb  it  with  drink  and
whoring and  finally the blessed  escape  of  sleep,  but  now…  that  kind  of  numbing
was beyond him and had been so for a very long time.
But since  then Sabra  had  ever shared  with him the burden;  her unwavering love
keeping him from  plummeting wholly into the  darkness  at  the  bottom  of  his  soul.
And when they'd been apart, he'd always heard her voice speaking in his mind soft
words of comfort to ease the heaviness in his heart.
Not now, though.
Not a single murmur of her presence  stole  upon  him, even when he slept  and  in
dreams was more receptive to her thoughts.
The silence frightened him.
Had he taken too long? She'd said she would not  survive the next turning of  the
moon,  but  he was  well ahead of  that deadline. Her appearance  to  him  on  the  Tor

might have changed things, though. Her use of her Gift often  drained her much the
same as healing drained him. Could she have used herself up beyond recovery?
No, if something had happened to her I would feel it. I have not the Gift, but I
would know.
He held fast to that thin piece of hope as he waited for Sharon and tried to  push
the doubts from his mind.
With indifferent success.
The aftermath of the assassination attempt had proved to be  as  complicated  and
exhausting as he'd expected. Thank God for  his ability to  hypnotize people  or  else
he'd have been forced to abandon this particular life and move elsewhere.
His first subjects  were the officers  assigned  to  the  Esplanade's  roof.  When  his
hurts had healed enough to allow it, he climbed back up the rope and  begun a kind
of detoxification  process  for  them,  determining  the  level  of  influence  Charon  had
committed on each, then correcting things. By the time he was done he was ready to
collapse  for  a  month,  but  the  four  of  them—including  the  man  in  the  service
hall—were convinced they'd been knocked out for the duration by someone with an
ether-soaked  rag. How  Charon  managed  to  get  all  the  passwords  from  them  was
someone else's problem.
Richard then had to face the rest of officialdom.
Over the next  few  hours  he  had  to  tell  over  and  over  of  how  he'd  recognized
Charon's voice on the radio, gone to the Esplanade, and fought with him before he'd
escaped. The blood on his clothes, he explained, was Charon's. That satisfied a few
of them. However, others—the armchair generals—demanded to  know why he had
not followed procedure and taken along backup.
Bourland had been of their number.
"Suppose you'd failed and Charon made his shot?" he asked.
"The whole point is that I did not fail," Richard wearily answered.
"I'm glad for that, and  I can  understand  you  taking a personal  interest in getting
the bastard, but cowboy tactics are not the done thing in a case like this, y'know."
"Yeah, right. I'll remember that next time."
"God forbid there should be one."
"Just make sure someone pays my bill when I send it in."
"Of course, though you might expect a dinner invitation from the PM as well. He
wants to thank you."
"A card will do nicely."
"Oh,  remember  you  said  Charon  was  going  to  frame  you  for  this?  The  local
office of The Globe and Mail got an anonymous parcel about an hour ago and they
contacted  us.  Full  of  papers,  had  a  lot  of  rot  in  it  about  you  being  behind  the
assassination  along  with  some  other  stuff  implicating  a  number  of  people  in  the

government.  Of  course,  it  would  have  only  worked  in  conjunction  with  your
unexplained disappearance  and  had  the  PM  actually  been  killed.  We've  asked  the
newspaper to hush it up as a security matter."
"Sending it in without confirmation of the hit— someone in the splinter group had
crossed signals, then."
"Yes, nice to know that. One is better able to deal with things when one  realizes
that they're only human after all."
A fat lot you know about it, my friend.
One bright point in the whole business was that he managed to get out of the thick
of  it  before  Demarest's  hasty  return  from  his  goose  chase  in  Newfoundland.
Richard,  all too  obviously  battered  and  shaken,  had  had  no  trouble  presenting  his
excuses to Bourland and demanding a few days off to recover in Vancouver.
"Not  sure  if  it's  a  good  idea  for  you  to  get  that  far  from  things,"  he  drawled.
"Demarest will—"
"The devil with him. My mother is seriously ill, and I need to be with her. There's
absolutely nothing more important than that. If he tries throwing his weight around
with me again, I'll put his head up his own ass."
Bourland suppressed a laugh and acquiesced.
Before anything else could intervene, Richard called his travel service and booked
two flights. He would go to Vancouver, and Sharon was bound for London again to
finish her business with the Abbey Book.
Her  bright  presence  had  helped  to  push  back  some  of  his  fear,  to  fill  the
emptiness,  but  Richard  took  care  to  conceal  from  her just  how  deep  and  black  it
was. The night before he'd made love to her as  though she  was  the last woman on
earth. He'd been gentle, intense, giving, and gotten the same and more in return from
her, but lain wakeful long after she'd dozed off in his arms. When morning came, he
loved her again, slowly rousing her from drowsiness to laughing, gasping delight. It
had been  extraordinary,  and  far too  brief, but  then a decade  of  doing  nothing  but
making love to Sharon would be too brief.
So it was on the drive to the airport a little later that morning that he asked her to
come back when she was finished in London.
"Come back?" she asked. "And… ?"
"Anything you want." His throat was tight and hot, his face flushing like a boy's.
He could hardly breathe.
"And what is it you want?"
"You. I love you."
There. He'd been quite unable not to say it. He had  said  it before,  in the heat of
passion,  or  using  the  word  as  an  endearment,  but  this  time  it  was  something
altogether serious. The declaration hung between them, naked and vulnerable, waiting
in agony for a reply.

Her long silence told him straightaway her answer.
His heart sank to an even lower level as the seconds of that silence stretched out
between them to an unbreakable length. He felt foolish  and  stupid  and  tried to  hide
his raw hurt by focusing on the drive. He parked in one of the underground lots, cut
the Jaguars motor, and started to get out, but Sharon put a hand on his.
Her eyes were filled with tears.
Yes, answer enough. No one weeps like that when the news is good.
"Its not you, Richard, it's me. You are a wonderful man, the best  I've  ever met,
but I know me. It'd be the finest for a month or two, maybe even a few months, but
then I'd  have to  be  up  an'  goin' who knows  where, an'  I'd  feel badly  about  leavin'
you, an' that'd make me angry an' I'd start to resent you, an' that would turn to hatin'
an'…"
He put  one  hand  up  and  she  trailed  off,  leaving  the  rest  of  the  decline  unsaid.
"Sharon, it—it's all right."
"No, it's not, an' we're both smart enough to know it."
He brushed  at a tear trail on  her cheek and  managed a smile. "Well, if we're so
smart, then maybe we can get around all this."
"Oh?"
Richard looked at her, fixing her face in his mind.
He  didn't  need  the  Gift  of  Sight  to  tell  him  that  suggesting  anything  remotely
resembling a commitment would drive her away forever. Either it was not for her or
she was simply not ready yet. He could force a change upon her, but had  long ago
learned the brutal futility of such a selfish ploy.
"I want you, Sharon, and I love you, that is the given fact of it for me. The given
fact for you is that you are your own woman."
"That I am."
"It's the way it should be."
Her brow puckered. "What are ye leadin' to, Richard?"
"A  suggestion,  nothing  more."  He  swallowed,  hoping  the  right  words  would
come. "If it pleases you, and only if it pleases you, would you  share  some  of  your
time with me? When and  how long is up  to  you,  and  when you  choose  to  leave I
won't make a fuss."
She  was  shaking  her  head  before  he'd  finished.  "No,  I've  done  that  before.  It
never works."
"With someone like me?"
That made her stop  and  think. "No,"  she  admitted.  "But when it comes  to  it,  I
don't know you all that well."
"I can say the same about you, Ms. Geary."

She thought again, staring out the windshield. "I— I just don't know."
Well, it was better than an outright refusal. "Then when you do, give me a call. Or
just drop in. I promise you no demands, no obligations, no arguments. I swear it."
"I've had such promises before."
Another  smile  twitched  across  his  face,  and  he  suddenly  reached  into  the
backseat and brought forward a sturdy aluminum camera case.
"Oh, now ye' can't be thinkin'—" she began, eyes going wide.
"Oh, but I can," he said, popping the latches and lifting the lid. Nestled within the
protective  foam padding  was  a  small,  rounded  object,  carefully  wrapped  in  white
silk. His hand hovered over it, barely touching the fine fabric. "I'm serious enough to
swear on  this. Knowing what it means to  each  of  us,  believe in the Grail, if not  in
me."
She breathed out an oh, half-astonishment, half-alarm. Within the confines  of  the
car he heard the fast thrum of her heart, and it was a minute or two before it settled
to something like a normal pace.
He shut the case lid, having made his point and then some.
She shook  her head,  but  now it was  in wry admiration, not  rejection. "You're  a
once  in a lifetime man, Richard  Dun. An' I  will  drop  in  for  a  visit.  Not  just  now,
though. I'm wantin' some time." 
He nodded. "Then whenever."
She  leaned  forward  and  kissed  him.  Soft  lips,  a  whisper  of  her  scent,  fingers
warm on  his face.  Sweet and  loving. But most  importantly,  it  was  not  a  goodbye
kiss. Not yet, anyway. It would have to do.
They  walked  slowly  to  the  entry,  passing  through  the  security  check  without
incident. Sharon had again left her Glock at his place, saying she could get another if
she had need. He didn't doubt it.
He had to open the case again for inspection, but it excited no comment from the
people  on  duty.  In  addition  to  a  story  of  transporting  a  valuable  antique  to  a
collector, Richard was more than prepared to use hypnosis on the lot of them to get
through, but glad to find it unnecessary.
Another slow walk. They would have to part at customs. Sharon excused herself
to  the  ladies'  room,  and  he  found  an  unoccupied  and  desperately  uncomfortable
chair to wait for her. At least it was in a sliver of shade.
He stared at his hands a lot, trying to ignore his inner darkness, and occasionally
glancing at the shiny case at his feet. Strange, he could feel its power like the warmth
of  a  winter's  fire  against  his  leg.  He  reached  down  and  touched  the  case,  fully
expecting to encounter the heat, but all there was was the cold of its metallic exterior.
"I don't think it's going to go anywhere." Sharon,  back  now with fresh  color  on
her lips, smiled down at him.

Maybe not. He wasn't going to take any chances.
"Y'know, Richard, at first, I didn't want you to have it. I was sure it should be in a
museum somewhere, or at some university to be studied. Sweet Mary, it's a national
treasure. It'd make us famous, to be sure. But I don't feel that now. Something tells
me you're the one to keep it, and I'm heartened that you do. It feels right somehow,
if I'm makin' myself understood."
Richard simply nodded and stood, taking her hand.
"I hope it helps with your mother. I truly do."
Sharon  was  silhouetted  against  the  morning  sun,  and  he  blinked  against  its
intensity, feeling the exposed skin of  his face  tingling in the first stages  of  burning.
Absently, he thought that he should  move,  but  he stayed  where he was,  looking at
her. Dear Goddess, she was so special, so very rare.
They lapsed into a sweet,  sad  silence, holding hands  like two  children hearing a
storm in the distance, waiting for its arrival. Giving each  other  strength,  giving each
other love in the face  of  things beyond  their  control.  And  so  they  stood  until  the
storm arrived: the harsh reality that they were finally out of time.
He could not remember walking close with her to the customs entry, but suddenly
they were there, and her face was pressed upon his neck, her breath hot and wet with
tears.
"Expect  me when you  see  me,  Richard  Dun."  Then  she  was  gone,  and  he  felt
more alone than he ever had. He stood silent as the wetness on his neck turned cold
and dried. Stood silent until the announcement of his own flight pierced his churning
mind, and brought him roughly back to the world. Then he turned and hurried to his
flight.
Goddess, what sad places airports are.
 
A letter from  Bourland was  waiting for  him at the gate.  Richard  opened  it  only
after  he  boarded.  No  official  stationery,  no  salutation,  not  even  a  signature.  Very
discreet.
"Found abandoned escape car. Two bodies. Same condition as the others. IDs
pending, but think they're in the same club. Likely our man again.
Watch your back."
He  already  knew  to  do  that.  He'd  not  seen  the  last  of  Charon.  Not  until  the
bastard was well and truly dead would Richard feel safe again.
The  takeoff  was  slow  and  gut-wrenchingly  turbulent.  Sweat  stood  out  on  his
forehead, and he gripped the arms of his seat, staring at the closed  window shutter
next to him. Deep inside fear scurried in the shadows like a rat, malevolent, gnawing
at him.
He counted to sixty, and when he'd finished thought how nice it would be to take
a train for the return trip. Perhaps, just perhaps, he could talk Sabra into coming with

him. She wasn't fond of modern cities, not with their sprawls of concrete and  filthy
air,  but  he  might  tempt  her  away  with  the  promise  of  a  lengthy  hunt  through  the
bookstores. If she had a weakness for anything it was for the printed page.
He read Bourland's note again. Not one word of it had changed.
Foolish  of  him  to  make  plans  until  he'd  finally  dealt  with  Charon.  It  would  be
soon, but that problem could wait until Sabra was better.
If she can get better, he thought, his heart going cold  for  an instant. He glanced
down at the case where it rested between his leg and the wall panel of the plane. The
sight reassured him.
After his usual instructions  to  the flight attendant he  closed  his  eyes  and  willed
sleep to come. Easy enough, since he was exhausted. Slowly, like an old lover, sleep
took  him  in  her  arms  and  carried  him  sweetly,  gently,  into  the  all-enveloping
darkness.
Until a heavy hand clapped hard on his shoulder, jolting him wide awake. His seat
mate, a besuited businessman, stared up in abject terror at the sturdy figure looming
over them both.
Charon, utterly immersed in his beast-form, grinned down at them. With a casual,
effortless movement, he raked his claws savagely across the man's throat. He made a
terrible coughing scream, hands coming up in a hopeless attempt to stop the blood,
but it speared out regardless, its dark red scent filling the air. The man slumped.
"You're  next,  Lance-baby."  Charon  pulled  the  man's  head  up  by  the  hair  to
display the seeping wounds. "But how about one last meal? No? Maybe you  prefer
something fresher."  He let go  the  man  and  seized  the  white-faced  flight  attendant.
She began to scream, but he slapped a fist against her temple and her eyes rolled up.
Frantic, Richard tore at his seat belt.
Too late. Charon bowed briefly over the young woman's throat, worried at it, and
pulled sharply away. He laughed as the blood sprayed out across Richard's chest.
"Shucky darn. I guess I owe  you  a new set  of  threads."  Another laugh, then he
shoved the woman's body at Richard. "Catch me if you can, Mr. Lusk!"
Charon  darted  through  the  curtains  to  the  coach  section.  Richard  untangled
himself and sobbing with rage, followed.
It was dark on the other side. All the shutters  were pulled closed.  The  only light
came from  the emergency strips  running  the  length  of  the  deck,  but  there  were—
things—covering them. He tripped  over  one  of  them.  A  man.  Dead.  Beyond  him,
another huddled shape in the narrow aisle. A little girl.
Not Please, God, no!
But Charon  had  gotten  to  them  all.  Row  after  row  of  them.  Dead.  Eyes  open,
eyes shut, some shamming peaceful sleep, others…
And blood.  Everywhere. The  deck  was  awash,  the  seats  soaked,  the  overhead
compartments painted with it.

Charon stood at the far end and spread his arms.  They,  too,  were red.  "I  said  I
was a goddamned Rembrandt at this. Tell me I'm wrong!"
Richard rushed at him, stumbling over the bodies, sight clouded. All he could see
was  Charon's  distorted  face,  mouth  wide  with  laughter.  He  closed  on  him,  was
almost within reach, but Charon, using unnatural speed, turned into a blur of motion.
Richard whirled to meet… nothing. He turned again. Clear.
Where?
Charon came at him hard out of nowhere, knocking him flat. Richard didn't care,
he was  within reach  now.  He fought,  frenzied madness  taking him, heedless  of  his
own injuries, heedless of everything but  the need  to  kill. He felt bones  break  under
his hands, tasted hot blood, but it wasn't enough. The  damned  thing still lived as  it
wrenched  free of  his grasp—still  lived  as  it  staggered  to  its  feet,  looked  down  at
Richard, and laughed again.
A huge hole in Charon's  chest  gushed  blood,  and  one  arm hung useless  by  his
side; one eye was swollen shut, the other shone red in the dim light.
"That was a nice warm up, but what-say we get serious? I'm gonna make you my
own special magnum opus, buddy-boy. I'll stuff you full of sawdust and put you on
display, then do  the same for  your  old  lady. You'll  make  a  hell  of  a  conversation
piece."
Richard tried to get up, but something was  wrong.  He couldn't  move.  Pain shot
up his spine  like fire. Before he could  work past  it, Charon  launched forward  and
was on top of him.
And Richard couldn't—absolutely could not move.
Charon's canines were fully extended, dripping scarlet. His breath stank of rotted
meat. He pushed Richard's head to one side, exposing his neck, and sank down for
the kill.
No!
With desperate effort, Richard twisted away. Or  tried to.  Something gripped  his
waist, kept him from—
"Sir! Mr. Dun! Mr. Dun!"
His  eyes  shot  open,  his  first  sight  that  of  the  shocked  and  fearful  attendant.
Standing next to her in the aisle was the businessman. Except for their anxious faces,
both were perfectly all right. Richard glanced around. People  stared,  but  everything
was  normal,  intact.  The  air  was  the  usual  dry  recycled  stuff,  untainted  by  the
slaughterhouse.
He put  his hands  to  his  face  and  scrubbed  away  the  sleep.  Looking  down,  he
noticed  the  covers  of  his  chair  arms  were  ruptured,  the  stuffing  blossoming  out
where  his  nails  had  torn  through.  Embarrassed,  he  mumbled  an  apology  to  the
woman.
"Bad dream," he added.

"Are you all right? Would you like some water?"
"I'm fine. Please don't bother." He had  to  repeat  himself a few times before  she
reluctantly moved on.
He rubbed his eyes again and realized he was soaked with sweat;  he could  smell
the  stale  stink  of  his  own  fear  rising  from  his  damp  clothes.  Fingers  trembling
uncontrollably, he undid his seat belt, picked up the camera case, and made his way
to  the  toilet.  Once  inside,  he  splashed  his  face  clean  and  tried  the  airline's  cheap
cologne to cope with most of the smell.
He stared at himself in the mirror, for a moment unsure of who was looking back.
The face is familiar, but I forget the brain.
The dream had  come  out  of  himself, of  course,  based  on  his own anxieties; so
how had the Richard he'd known for so many centuries come up with such a horror?
Damn Bourland for sending that note.
Richard made his way back to his seat. The businessman moved his legs to give
him space.
"You can blame me for sending for the stew," he said in a low voice.  "I  thought
you were having a cardiac."
"Thank you, but it's nothing, just a dream."
"Must have been a real bear. I get 'em sometimes. You in the war, too?"
Richard glanced sharply at him.
"Thought so. You've got the look." He nodded at the other people in first class,
the ones  who were keeping themselves carefully occupied  as  though nothing  at  all
had  happened.  "Don't  mind  them.  There's  no  way  anyone  can  understand  unless
they been through it themselves."
"Indeed."
Richard belted in and stowed  the case  under  the seat  in front  of  him just as  the
landing announcement came. He held tightly to the torn chair arms as  the great bird
dipped sickeningly. Then he closed his eyes and waited for it all to be over.
His seat  mate spoke  again, sounding  sad  and  tired. "Guys  like us,  we  might  as
well be from another world when the stuff kicks in."
Quite another world altogether, my young friend, he thought.
The man had not asked Richard which war. No need for it, since every generation
had at least one to scar it, one to make instant brothers of strangers.
 
Until  the  boat  taking  him  to  Kingcome  docked,  Richard  held  the  camera  case
safely between his feet. When the craft finally bumped against the buffer line of  old
tires tied to  the small pier he picked  up  the case  and,  thanking  the  boat's  captain,
stepped out into a fine, all-drenching drizzle. The pilot behind the wheel did not even

look at him, but was somehow able to determine that the boat's only passenger had
safely disembarked. He gunned the motor and sped away into the gathering gloom.
Richard stalked toward the shore, looking around, but seeing no one.
The  place  was  as  depressing  as  ever.  Here  and  there  smoke  half-heartedly
struggled up into the sodden air from the ramshackle buildings, but not a light shone
from any of them. Not a sound could be heard above the dripping of the rain and the
fading ripple of water from the boat's wake.
Odd  that  someone  had  not  come  to  meet  him…  unless  they  were  reluctant  to
present him with bad news.
"There is great power in rain."
Black Eagles voice came from behind him, and Richard, heart in his mouth, spun
to see. The old man stood at the end of the dock near the water's edge. How he had
got to the end of the dock, Richard  had  no  idea. Black Eagle had  not  passed  him,
and  no  other  boat  had  come  along,  for  Richard  would  have  heard  it.  Both  men
stared at each other, silent for awhile, sharing the little mystery.
The  ceremonial  robes  Black  Eagle  had  worn  to  greet  Richard  previously  were
gone.  Instead  he was  clad  in  faded  blue  jeans,  a  dirty  red  plaid  shirt,  and  cheap,
filthy sneakers, yet power still flowed effortlessly from him. He seemed not to mind
the drizzle soaking him to the skin.
"It is the life-blood of the world," the old man continued, his ancient eyes looking
up, "the purest gift that Wakan Tanka can give. At the end of the rain is the rainbow,
the  sacred  bridge  between  here  and  the  other  place.  You  will  accomplish  much
before the end of this rain, dark father."
"The dark mother, is she—" Richard hesitated. He didn't  quite know what word
to use.  To  ask  if she  was  still alive risked  the response  that  she  was  not.  And  he
couldn't bear to think of that, especially not now when he was so close.
"I have not seen her since long before you first came. I do not see her. That is the
task of  She-Who-Walks.  You ask  her. She  is at the dark  mother's  house.  You  go
now."
Richard  tucked  the  camera  case  under  his  arm,  and  headed  off  along  the  trail
toward Sabra's cabin. Mud soon slimed his boots as he sped up the unpaved street
and began to ascend the rise that would lead him into the forest.
"Dark father!"
Richard stopped and looked back.
Black Eagle yet stood at the end of the dock. The  old  man obviously  wanted to
say something, was struggling with it. He waved a hand in front  of  his face  as  if to
brush away an annoying insect. Then his shoulders  slumped,  and  he looked  down,
shaking his head. He made a dismissive gesture.
Fearful, Richard debated on going back and questioning him, but now that he was
here  a  desperate  hurry  to  find  Sabra  and  give  her  the  Grail  overcame  all  other

considerations. Whatever needed to be  said  could  wait. He moved  on,  passing  the
lodge house and its guardian totems, going up the trail he had so recently taken with
She-Who-Walks.
He'd  just entered the first rank of  trees  when a swirl of  icy  mist  wrapped  thick
around  him, obscuring  his view. A  single  word  was  hissed  in  his  ear,  making  the
hairs on his nape rise.
"Beware!"
When the mist  cleared  he  turned  back  once  more.  Black  Eagle  was  gone,  and
Kingcome lay below Richard as desolate and deserted looking as it had been on his
arrival. The old man could not have possibly moved from sight that quickly. Perhaps
he was  very much  elsewhere  and  the  figure  on  the  dock  but  an  apparition  of  the
reality. Richard had known stranger things to happen.
Thank you for your words, old man. I will beware. But nothing will stop me.
Richard  continued  up  the  trail,  gathering  speed  until  he  was  no  more  than  a
phantom threading through the trees. The rain was not so  heavy under  their shelter,
but stray drops stung his face with his swift passage. It was full dark  now,  country
darkness, unlit by either moon or stars, with none of the bright comforts of so-called
civilization to leaven the gloom. His eyes were well used to it.
He hurtled forward until the yellow glimmer of a lantern in Sabra's  window came
into sight. He slowed to an abrupt standstill before the closed door of the little cabin,
quite drenched, heart pounding. Then suddenly the door opened wide, spilling a soft
golden glow into the night, and a woman's shape cast a shadow across him.
For a breath-stealing instant his heart tried to mislead him into believing that it was
Sabra  standing there, welcoming him  home  as  she  had  so  often  in  the  past  in  so
many  other  places.  But  his  head  knew  better,  and  was  right:  the  woman  in  the
doorway was She-Who-Walks.
She gave no greeting, only drew back so Richard could step inside to the warmth
and dryness. Like her father, she was no  longer in ceremonial dress.  Frayed  shorts
showed off her long brown legs, and she wore a man's shirt, the front  tails knotted
around  her waist. Her feet were bare,  one  behind  the  other  like  a  nervous  child's.
Then she stood on tiptoe and kissed him, once on each cheek, chaste as a virgin.
"Welcome,  Father.  Your  journey  has  been  long—sit  by  the  fire  and  warm
yourself."
But Richard wanted none of this. "Where  is Sabra?  I have the Grail, I must  see
her."
She-Who-Walks smiled gently. "When the time is right, Father."
But Richard  was  not  to  be  put  off,  and  he grabbed  her roughly. "No,  no  more
waiting, girl. Sabra  has  no  time.  I  must  see  her  now  to  save  her  life.  Understand
that!"
She-Who-Walks  simply  took  his  hands  from  her—she  had  the  strength  to  do

so—and  calmly  eased  onto  the  rocking  chair  by  the  blazing  fireplace.  The  cabin
smelled of herbs and apple wood.
"You cannot see her now. She is not to be seen now. Even I do not see her now.
This is the part of night when her affliction is at its worst. We must wait for the hour
before  dawn,  when the beast  finally leaves her and  she  is  herself  for  a  little  while.
When  the  rain  ends,  the  door  will  be  opened  between  the  worlds  to  allow  her
through. That is the time when she  will need  this… Grail… you  have brought.  But
for now, you must wait."
"It's  not  necessary,  I've  already  tested—tried—it,  and  it  saved  me.  There's  no
need to wait, she can—"
"Not when the beast  has  her.  You  of  all  people  know  what  hold  it  has  on  the
spirit."
And in his sinking heart, despite all his headlong worries,  Richard  knew she  was
right. He turned away a moment to master himself, then finally put  the camera case
on the table next to some books. They were the same ones as  before,  all about  the
legend of Arthur. His conscience twinged, for he'd forgotten to bring back the thick
volume by Malory.
"How has she been?" he murmured.
"She feeds well, though not on any other than me. All the animals have gone, even
the birds. Did you not notice the silence? None in the village can withstand her when
the beast is in her. So, I feed on them, and she on me."
Pushing back the loose sleeves of her shirt, she  held out  her arms.  Richard  saw
huge jagged scars on both, still red in their healing.
"It is this bad?" he asked, humbled.
"Ever since the Spirit Walk. She came to me a few days ago as clear and beautiful
as she had ever been, and said she needed to go to you… to save you. I helped her,
and she made the journey, but her hunger was very great when she returned. I almost
didn't have enough for her."
"I'm sorry you had to suffer. It was my fault."
"It was the fault of  the one  who kills." She  let her gaze wander to  the fire for  a
time, then rose to stand by the table. "Show me the Grail."
Richard  could  not  refuse,  and  carefully  opened  the  case.  He  lifted  the
silk-wrapped  object  out  onto  the  books,  and  the  white  material  slithered  away,
revealing the cup in all its simple glory. She-Who-Walks stared at it for  a long time
as it glinted in the firelight, but made no effort to touch it. When she finally moved it
was to wipe the back of her hand across her face to brush at the tears.
"This is worth the pain," she pronounced.
"It will help her," he said.
She nodded. "When the time comes. We must wait."

And wait Richard did. He stripped from his wet clothes to let them dry before the
fire, and She-Who-Walks found  a towel and  then a blanket for  him to  wrap  up  in.
She invited him to take the rocking chair, for which he was grateful. The bed would
have  been  much  too  comfortable.  He  didn't  want  sleep,  not  if  it  held  any  more
dreams like the one on the plane.
She  piled  more  wood  in  the  fireplace  and  sprinkled  into  it  dried  herbs  and  a
quantity of sweet grass. The cabin filled anew with its wholesome green scent and he
breathed deeply of it, watching the flames as they grew and faded to embers and ash
through the whole of the long night.
He had held vigil once before when he'd taken his vows for knighthood, but it had
not  been  like  this.  Then  he  had  been  young,  excited  by  the  wild  game  of  life,
invincible  in  his  youth.  Now  the  dying  embers  spoke  to  him  of  life  passing,
inevitably, finally into nothingness. Outside, the sound of the rain's steady pour made
his very soul ache.
The minutes stretched into hours,  and  a deeper  silence than that of  the deserted
forest took hold of Richard's body and mind. All the shrill voices of the world that
had nagged at  him  through  the  last  days  one  by  one  hushed  with  each  breath  he
took.  His heartbeat slowed,  and  his eyelids drifted  shut,  though  not  for  sleep.  He
was aware of everything around him, the quiet of the night, the heat of  the fire, and
She-Who-Walks's  steady  breathing,  and  yet  there  was  something  more.  One  last
small insistent voice remained.
A small child's voice, weeping.
In  his  mind  he  followed  the  sound  down  stone  passages,  the  voice  growing
clearer and louder until Richard found himself in a great gray stone room.
It was cold and dark, the only illumination coming from a window set too high in
the wall to reach. No shred of comfort eased the place, not a single cushion, not the
most threadbare blanket. This was a prisoner's cell. He was  afraid here, though the
only other presence was a small fair-haired boy. He lay across a low wooden bench
in the center of the flagged floor, face hidden in the crook of one arm, his little body
racked with sobs.
Richard heard a man speak, and it was a moment before he realized that it was his
own voice, speaking the old language of his long lost youth.
"What ails thee, boy?"
The child did not reply at first, only sobbed louder.
"Boy?" He knelt by the bench and reached out with both  hands  to  gently lift the
child's  face  into view. It was  red  and  streaked  with tears.  Richard's  hair  stood  on
end as recognition sparked; his breath came short. Answering through the tears was
a voice he knew, oh so well; a voice that he'd stifled for so many years.
"My mother left me. She  hates  me. They said  so.  They all hate  me."  The  tears
flowed anew, and Richard held the frail little body close, so close,  fighting his own
tears and failing.

"Your mother has indeed gone, Dickon, yet she did love you."
"They said I killed her."
"Oh, no, never. 'Tis a cruel lie. She  gave her life for  you,  that you  might live. It
was her willing gift."
"But I miss her," said the boy.
"I know,  I know.  Yet she  is with you  always, she  sees  you,  she  glories in you.
Truly, she will never leave you."
The boy pulled his head away from Richard, and looked up to him, his eyes intent
and piercingly blue. "Never?"
"Never." Richard held him by the shoulders  to  look  at him squarely.  He was  so
young, so  terribly defenseless.  He needed  something to  shield him  from  the  harsh
world. "No matter what happens, you are loved. You are always loved. Know that in
your heart. I love you, Dickon."
Through the streaming tears the boy smiled. "And I love you, Richard."
Then the delicate little arms wrapped hard around his neck and man embraced his
child, and both knew peace.
No matter what happens, you are loved, Richard.
Like a swimmer from  a deep  dive, Richard  slowly came up  from  within himself
back to the lowly, one-room cabin. He opened his eyes. The fire was dead; the last
embers  gone  out.  There was  a change in the  air.  The  sweetgrass  smell  was  gone,
replaced by the freshening unique to the dawn.
Why had he had that particular vision? He could  work out  its obvious  meaning,
but was there another one beneath the first? One he dared not consider?
She-Who-Walks stood by the open door looking out into a faint gray world. The
rain still fell steadily.
"It is time," she said.
Richard rose, leaving the blanket in the chair, and hurriedly dressed. Tying the last
lace of his boots, he straightened and picked up the Grail from  where it had  rested
undisturbed  in its silk nest  all the long night. It felt cold  and  weighed  heavy  in  his
hand.
"There is one more thing," she added.
Something in her flat tone filled him with sudden dread.
"The mother would have your promise that should all else fail, you will ease her of
her burden. She has ever trusted you in the past, and begs you  to  give her one  last
comfort." She-Who-Walks  turned.  She  had  a stake  of  sharpened  yew in one  hand
and a sword in the other and held them out to Richard.
Panic and terror crashed against him. "I cannot!"
"You can, and you must. Promise her, Father."

" 'Tis too much to ask. I cannot!" To drive the stake through her body,  through
her heart in one swift brutal blow, then to take the sword and cut off her head… and
this to Sabra, his mother, his sister, friend, and lover, the woman he loved above all.
He would surely go  mad.  His mind was  already reeling with the  hideous  vision  of
what he was being asked to do.
She-Who-Walks's  eyes  glittered with tears.  "I've  lived  with  her  pain  for  all  this
time. Her spirit cries and cries and cries without pause because of it. I'd have gladly
done  the task  to  ease  her passage,  but  she  has  held off  from  asking it of  me  until
your return. This is only if the Grail should not work."
"But it will!"
"Then you've no reason not to make the promise."
Richard choked off his next words. Logic and faith together. God and Goddess,
what demands you make of your servants. "Very well. I swear it," he whispered, all
too aware that he was holding the Grail.
"Come, then." She-Who-Walks quickly wrapped the sword  and  stake  in a piece
of buckskin. He followed as she stepped out into the soaking darkness.  She  strode
forward without hesitation, mud staining her bare feet, the splashes  creeping up  her
strong legs. Within minutes they were both wet to the skin and he glumly wondered
why he'd bothered to dry off in the first place.
They  walked  a  quarter  mile  perhaps,  until  reaching  a  fern-lined  clearing  in  the
shape  of  a  rough  circle.  Richard  noticed  four  large  flat  stones  at  each  compass
point, but could not immediately determine if they were natural or  had  been  placed
there on  purpose.  On  the  other  side  of  the  circle  ran  a  stream,  pregnant  with  the
nights rain, the flow bursting forcefully over the rocks in its course. The chill sound
of it reminded him of the Chalice Stream under  the Tor,  and  he had  to  suppress  a
shiver.
The smaller  ferns  nodded  from  the  rain,  but  around  them  the  inner  forest  was
preternaturally still, holding its breath, waiting. Waiting. Then his ears picked  up  the
faintest sound over the water flow. It came from the black under the trees and almost
at the same time She-Who-Walks's hand clasped his arm.
"See!"
A small patch of shadow detached itself from the greater darkness around  it and
moved hesitantly across the open  ground  before  them. It stopped  in the middle of
the clearing and  waited, a tiny, distorted  figure, loosely wrapped  in  a  thin  blanket,
swaying.
"Sabra?" The figure lifted its head and looked toward him. Her voice came to him
across the night, a voice filled with weariness, fear, and pain.
"Oh, my Richard…"
Unresisting, he  entered  the  circle.  He  started  forward  to  embrace  her,  but  was
brought up short by her imperious shout.

"No!  Do  not  come  near!"  Now  her  voice  possessed  a  hard  edge  that  truly
frightened him. There was madness and hunger here, both barely held in check. Her
tone softened. "It is for your own sake. The beast is wild in me, and I may do  you
harm. I would not hurt you for all the world."
Richard  nodded.  "I  know,  my  love,  I  know."  What  there  was  left  of  Sabra
lingered most in her eyes, and he tried to look only at them, not the ravages her beast
had committed on the rest of her body.
"The Grail." Hers was not a question, but a statement.
He held it out to her, arms shaking from the weight of it.
"Fill it from the stream."
Richard  did  so,  dipping  the  brass  cup  deep  into  the  water.  It  rushed  over  his
hand, and the pain was exquisite. He gasped and nearly let it go.
"There is always pain," she murmured. "There is always pain. Bring it to me."
He steadied himself and  crossed  to  her, holding the Grail well before  him. Only
now did he see clearly her face, twisted, scarred, racked by the beast.
"Oh, my love…"
"Say no more, Richard, I know what I am. I thank you for coming—you are and
ever were a brave and noble soul, and my one greatest love. Now trust the Goddess
and her ways."
Sabra took the Grail from him with trembling hands and raised it high, first to the
north, then the lightening east,  and  on  around,  saluting each  compass  point  in turn
before  bringing the cup  to  her lips. She  drained it in one  long  draught,  then  knelt,
placing the Grail in the thick grass  before  her in the center  of  the circle. For  many
seconds, she remained motionless, as if waiting, then her head snapped  back  and  a
scream  more  horrible  than  any  Richard  had  ever  heard  escaped  her.  She  fell
convulsing to the ground.
He was  by  her in an instant, trying to  hold  her down,  to  keep  her  from  hurting
herself. She made terrible little mewling sounds, and the panic swelled in him to  the
bursting point.  He held her, tried to  hush  her, shouted  her name, and  it seemed  to
work for she went suddenly still, so very, very still in his arms.
"Sabra? No… no, you mustn't—Sabra!"
Her head lolled away from him. She was utterly limp. He bent low, his mouth on
hers, and he breathed into her, again and again.
Take me instead or us both together, he pleaded to the Goddess, but not this!
No answer came from the dull silence surrounding him.
No!
He pressed his ear to her breast, but heard no reassuring thump of her heart.
Nothing… nothing at all.

For an awful moment, he felt the brush of cold things sweeping around them. The
Hounds?  Was  Sabra  already  being  led  away  by  them  to  the  light  he'd  seen?  He
looked up, straining to catch some glimmer of her or of the silvery cord such as had
anchored him before to his body. All he saw was the rain streaming down out of the
grayness.  He shouted  her  name,  hoping  she  might  hear  him  and  return  as  he  had
returned. He shouted, screamed, pleaded, sobbed.
Then  he  used  his  nails  to  tear  open  his  right  wrist,  and  let  the  flow  from  the
wound run into her lax mouth. It welled full, then trickled out the side. When the tear
began to heal, he opened it again.
Useless. All useless.
He combed  the tangled hair from  her  face,  kissed  her  forehead,  her  eyes,  then
held her close, rocking back and forth, moaning.
The rain fell and gently cleansed his blood from her, washing it into the earth.
The rain fell, washing them both clean.
She was gone. He held her, yet had no sense of her. Where her presence  should
have  been  in  his  soul  there  was  now  a  vast  empty  space,  rapidly,  agonizingly,
collapsing upon itself.
She was  gone.  He went numb with the awful realization of  a world without her.
Forever.  Sabra,  who had  ever and  always been  there, who had  given him  new  life
and a reason for living, was gone. She was dead and all hope dead with her.
He raised his head and like the hound that was part  of  his soul,  howled his grief
and fury to the endless sky.
Then it was  beyond  such  expression.  Beyond  tears.  Beyond  exhaustion.  There
was nothing left in him.
Nothing—
"Well,  howdy  doody,  good  buddy."  The  alien  voice  sliced  crudely  across  his
anguish like a  dull  knife.  This  really  is  a  touching  scene.  Brings  a  tear  to  my  old
jaundiced eye."
Charon stood across the clearing, grinning like death.
He  held  She-Who-Walks  tightly  before  him  with  the  point  of  the  yew  stake
pressed  up  under  her breastbone.  The  tableau was  too  much  like  Richards  dream
from the plane. He stood up. She struggled briefly and was rewarded with a jab that
made a trail of blood down her belly. Her face and hair half obscured his form, but
Richard could  see  Charon  was  in bond  to  his beast;  that was  how he managed to
hold her with such  ease.  His crazed  eyes  glowed red  in the gloom,  and  his corner
teeth were fully extended.
"Listen, buddy,  maybe you  should  tell  little  Pocahontas  here  some  of  the  stuff
you learned about  me on  top  of  that damned  hill. You know? Like how mean and
tough I  am,  and  how  much  I  know  about  anatomy,  and  how  I  really  hate  being
pissed off!"

Richard  held up  one  hand  in a  placatory  gesture.  The  girl  struggled  regardless.
Her own strength was formidable now, but no match against Charon's while he was
in this state.
He drove the stake in enough to make her gasp, and she froze. "One more twitch,
painted sister, and you'll be joining the old broad! You savvy?"
She made no  reply, but  there was  a murderous  gleam  in  her  eyes  to  match  his
own.
Richard spoke to distract them both, voice thick with anger and grief. "You  saw
what happened to Sabra. It killed her. It didn't work."
"I saw,  and  it's  only because  your  old  lady screwed  up.  It's  the water from  the
Chalice Well that you have to drink, dumbfuck! I didn't figure a mega-jock like you
would catch on, but she was something else again. Really surprised  me she  missed
that little trick. Guess she was too far gone to think straight. Too bad. Maybe if I'd
thought you'd have asked nicely I'd have shared some of mine with her, but  them's
the breaks."
Richard  felt the beginnings of  a tremor just under  his  heart.  He  fought  the  fury
back  before  it could  seethe  up  beyond  his control.  Charon's  baiting was  meant  to
keep him off balance, to make him too enraged to think or plan.
"There's no need to hurt the girl. I'll give you the Grail," he said, stooping to pick
it up. He carefully did not look at Sabra's body.
"Mighty  white  of  you,  Kemosabe,  but  I've  got  my  hands  full—just  gimme  a
sec…" He brought the stake around and slammed the blunt end  against the side  of
the girl's head. Her body abruptly went slack, and he let it fall, dropping on one knee
to center the point of the stake exactly over her heart. "There, one thing at a time, I
always say. Now take three giant steps—don't forget to say 'mother, may I,' okay?"
Richard walked slowly forward until he stood just within arm's  reach  of  Charon.
A quick lunge and—
Charon's  left hand  blurred.  "Well, well, old  habits  die  hard,  don't  they,  Lance?
Were you figuring to celebrate her recovery with a party,  maybe do  an Errol Flynn
impersonation?"  He'd  pulled  the  sword  free  of  its  buckskin  wrapping,  hefting  it
lightly. "Nice piece  of  work.  I'm  impressed."  He  swung  the  blade  up,  bringing  its
razor edge to Richards neck. "Snicker-snack."
"You'd be doing me a favor."
"Hey,  I'm  a  big-hearted  guy,  anything  to  please.  Besides,  I  owe  you  for  the
screwing over in Toronto."
Smiling, Richard  lifted his chin, leaning into the sharp  pressure  on  his throat.  "I
know."
But Charon  hesitated.  "There's  a catch  here  someplace.  You're  not  the  type  to
give in."
"Without Sabra I've nothing left to live for."

"Heartbreaking. What about Pocahontas?"
Richard glanced down at her, then shook his head.  "You'll kill us  both,  anyway.
You don't dare not kill us thinking we'd come after you later."
"You got that right, buddy boy."
"Just…" His face twisted as the grief tried to overwhelm him. He shuddered  and
pushed it back.
"Just  let me be  with her."  Without  waiting  for  an  answer,  Richard  turned  from
Charon and went to Sabra.
"Wait a second!"
He ignored the man and still with his back  to  him, sank  to  his knees  by  her. He
lifted one of her cold hands, then the other, bringing them together across her body.
How thin and wasted she'd gotten. How had she endured it for so long?
Some distant small part of him that still gave half a damn for  such  details noted
Charon's  snort  of  disbelief  and  the  sound  of  movement  as  he  stood  and  walked
over. He stopped a pace  or  two  off.  Plenty of  room  to  allow for  the swing of  the
sword.
Tenderly, Richard stroked Sabra's forehead and waited.
Not long, my love.
Not long at all. He heard Charon's intake of breath as he prepared to swing.
And also  a soft,  very soft  whisper of  sound,  hardly audible above  the rain, but
then he'd  been  listening for  it. Richard  turned  to  smile beatifically up  at  Charon  in
time  to  see  She-Who-Walks  seize  him  from  behind  and  rake  her  nails  across  his
face.
He'd badly underestimated her ability to recover, perhaps from too many years of
dealing  with  frail  humans.  Richard  had  seen  her  eyes  flutter  open,  and  for  a  tiny
instant they'd locked gazes, wordlessly uniting to common purpose and plan.
Bloody  flesh  shredded  from  bone  and  Charon's  right  eye  gushed  fluid.  His
maddened shriek of agony cracked through the forest like a gunshot.  He twisted to
lash out at her with the sword, but Richard lunged up and dragged it away, breaking
the man's arm in the process. Another cry and a louder curse. Richard's memory of
the dream superimposed itself upon this reality. In both Charon had a damaged  eye
and a useless arm; only one thing remained—
As  Charon  staggered  around  to  face  him,  Richard  grabbed  up  the  sword  and
thrust the point deep into his chest. The beast screamed and flailed and tried to slide
off of the blade, but Richard drove forward until it stumbled and fell sprawling on its
back by the stream. The metal was not as effective as yew wood, but good enough
for  the  purpose.  As  in  the  dream  blood  gushed  from  Charon's  chest.  His  limbs
twitched, gouging the earth.
"Bring me the cup!" Richard ordered.

She-Who-Walks  plucked  it up  and  hurried  to  him.  He  jerked  his  head  and  she
knelt by the stream filling the Grail with water.
He glared down at Charon's  wrecked  face.  It had  begun to  heal. "You  want the
Grail, Charon? You really want the Grail?"
"You fucking, sonova—"
"Not  exactly  what  you  had  in  mind,  but  what  the  hey,  I'm  a  big-hearted
guy—anything to please."
"No! Don't!" He writhed against the sword pinning him down, frantic to escape.
She-Who-Walks  seized  him  by  his  tangled  hair  and  poured  the  water  into  his
gaping mouth. He retched and coughed and spat, trying not to swallow, but some of
it  got  into  him.  His  cursing  turned  to  unintelligible  shrieks,  and  finally  the  terrible
convulsions took him. Laughing, Richard wrenched the sword from Charon's  body
and stood  back  to  watch the ugly spectacle  with an unholy joy. Watched  until the
last  spasms  subsided,  the  last  whimpering  cries  faded,  and  sweet  silence  again
settled on the forest.
 
The thick clouds  shielded them from  the killing light of  dawn,  but  not  for  long.
High above  the wind began to  shred  at their billowing forms.  Soon  they would be
mere tatters  and  the sun  would flood  the  land  and  make  the  forest  steam  with  its
heat.
They  hurried  back  to  the  cabin,  Richard  carrying  Sabra  and  She-Who-Walks
bearing  the  Grail,  sword,  and  stake.  They'd  left  Charon  by  the  stream  for  the
present.
Richard  held Sabra's  small form  easily, lightly, but  his  walk  was  that  of  an  old
man with too heavy a burden. I shall always feel this moment, he thought. It would
never leave him. He had horrors beyond count imprinted forever in his long memory,
but none like this, not with Sabra.
You asked me to trust the Goddess, but I trusted you instead. Always you.  May
you both forgive me.
He had  loved  her for  so  long.  She  had  given  him  his  life,  shared  all  with  him,
filling  him  with  joy  and  beauty,  but  without  her,  his  continuance  was  an  empty
mocking thing. He knew that he could not live in such a world without her love.
No matter what happens, you are loved, Richard.
That was  the true meaning of  his vision. It was  meant to  prepare  him  to  go  on
regardless. It was enough for a small boy, but not so for the man. Not after all this.
He knew exactly what he had to do.
The easternmost clouds suddenly broke apart, and hammerlike, the sun struck the
land. Where the burning light pierced through the trees to heat the earth, patches  of
mist rose like ghosts. She-Who-Walks gasped and hurried faster. Richard stumbled
as the glare blinded him.

They made it to the shade of the cabin,  hobbled  inside, weak and  blinking in its
dark shelter. He kicked the door  shut,  shuffled his way to  the bed,  and  gently laid
Sabra's body there, pulling a blanket up to her chin.
He would not cover her face.  Distorted  as  it was,  he could  not  bear  to  perform
that finality just yet.
She-Who-Walks  put  her own burdens  on  the  table,  then  sat  right  on  the  floor,
breathing hard. Her exposed skin was red and blotched from the sun.
"It hurts," she said, staring at her hands, then gingerly touched her face.
"You'll be better in a few minutes. Next time wrap  up."  He bent  low and  kissed
Sabra's lips. They were cold. The shell was empty, her soul was gone, truly gone.
He turned  from  her and  went to  the table, picking up  the Grail. He dropped  on
one knee to be level with She-Who-Walks and held the cup between them.
"Why?" he demanded.
Her dark eyes were blank.
"It renewed me, tamed my beast, healed me. Why did it kill her? Why did I live?
Why did she die?"
"Dark father, I do not know. She could not tell me everything."
He  had  to  work  to  master  his  frustration,  for  she  spoke  the  truth.  How  could
Sabra with more than a thousand years of knowledge even begin to impart it to  this
young girl in the space of one short lifetime?
She-Who-Walks  hesitantly  reached  out,  caressing  his  face.  "Perhaps  it  was
because you were not so far along as she."
He caught her hand, turning his head enough to kiss her palm. "Perhaps.  I drank
of the water, but not from the cup itself. Maybe that was it."
They  slumped  toward  one  another,  foreheads  touching,  sharing  the  grief  for  a
long moment.
"Do you love me?" he asked.
"Yes."
"Then I am sorry."
"For what?"
"For what I shall ask of you." He stood and drew her to her feet. She looked hard
at him, confused—until he put the Grail down and picked up the stake instead.
She shrank away. "No, I cannot!"
He held fast to one of her arms and forced it roughly into her grasp. "You will."
She broke  from  him and  retreated  to  the shadows  against the far wall, throwing
the stake down. "I cannot. The mother made me promise!"
"The mother is dead!"

"But you—"
"I will not live without her."
"But how will I live without you?" Her eyes  glittered with tears.  "I  am a child to
this life; you are my maker, would you abandon me?"
"You have a family, a village full of friends to care for you and to be cared for in
turn. They will teach you more of life than I can.  Mine is over.  All I had,  all I ever
had was Sabra. It's over now. If you won't release me I'll find someone who will, or
I'll sit in the sun until it burns me to the bone and you have to kill me out of pity to
take away the pain."
"No!" She turned to the wall, sobbing.
"Yes," he whispered, and went to the door. The porch and steps faced west. All
he need do was go around to its east face, sit, and wait. It was a hellish thing he was
asking of the girl, but when she  got  the worst  of  it out  of  her system  and  was  too
listless with exhaustion to  think, he would persuade  her. In a few hours,  the burns
would turn him into something she could more readily kill.
He opened the door, but She-Who-Walks sprang forward, leaning her weight on
it. He snarled and pushed her back.
"Richard."
He froze.
"I would not have thee do her harm."
Her voice. It stopped his heart.
"You have done well, as has your daughter. Do not quarrel about death."
He turned.
Sabra was by the table, holding the cup in her hands.
Hands. No longer twisted claws.  Her body  was  straight again, unblemished, her
long  brown  hair  fell  shining  over  her  bare  shoulders  and  down  her  back.  Her
face—restored, beautiful, glowing, eyes bright and clear and loving.
He went to her, fell on his knees before her. He pressed his head against her white
belly, holding her while she stroked his hair.
"The Grail has indeed saved me, my lover, my son, my best of all friends."
Tears sheeted his eyes, clogged his throat. He held her the more tightly.
"Be gentle, my Richard. I am not as I was. The world has turned for me."
"My world is restored," he said, voice husky.
"Changed," she gently corrected.
He looked up, trying to understand her.
"You will see." She gradually pulled from his grasp and went to the door, opened
it, and, still carrying the Grail, went outside.

He unsteadily followed. She-Who-Walks followed as well to stand next to him in
the shade.
He watched in horror as  Sabra  stepped  naked into the full force  of  the morning
sun.  He  started  after  her,  but  she  held  one  hand  up  to  stay  him,  smiling  that
wonderful smile, so full of joy and love and life.
"My  time  in  the  darkness  is  over.  The  world  has  changed  for  us.  A  new  one
begins this day."
She-Who-Walks whispered in his ear, pointing. "The gateway, Father.  From  this
world to the other."
A last pale curtain of rain still fell just to the west. The sunlight caught its veil and
a rainbow, perfect in color and shape  formed,  arching from  one  side  of  the sky  to
the other. A second one appeared within it, then a third. They formed  a vast  frame
for the roiling clouds behind them. Richard drew a sharp breath. Within their shifting
forms he saw a face, a woman's  face,  beautiful, serene,  smiling down.  It was  there
clear and  solid  but  a moment,  then gone,  and  he was  ready  to  doubt  his eyes.  He
glanced at She-Who-Walks. Her expression was that of exultation and wonderment.
She'd seen it, too.
Standing beneath the rainbows,  Sabra  raised  up  the Grail, offering it to  the sky.
Her head  thrown  back  in  joy,  she  began  to  sing  one  of  the  old  songs  in  the  old
tongue. Sweet and swift, her strong voice rose to greet the day.
The shimmering fires above  her dipped,  engulfing  her,  and  she  laughed  at  their
touch, spinning in a wide, earthwise circle. Arms high and head thrown back in wild
elation, she danced before them in the light.
 
In the small clearing in the forest,  the  light  also  touched  on  the  prone  body  of
Charon.  A  small  smile  crept  across  his  face  as  some  memory  of  dozing  in  the
sunshine came to  him,  and  he  rolled  comfortably  onto  one  side,  content  with  his
dream.
Then he was aware of pain, a great deal of it. His arm, his face, and a heavy ache
in his chest. His one eye fluttered open, and he gasped from the effort of it.
The sun! Jesus palomino, get out of the sun, you jerk!
He  staggered  to  his  feet.  There  was  running  water  behind  him  and  the  circle
before  him. He started  to  cross  it, but  an  invisible  something  slammed  him  back,
almost into the deadly stream.
What the hell? More of Lance's goddess crap?
Charon decided not to test it. He needed shade before the real frying started.
He edged around the circle and ran.
Tired. He was really, really tired. Puffing like a whale. Weak. That  shit-for-brains
jock and  his new  girlfriend  had  done  one  hell  of  a  number  on  him.  Charon's  run
changed to a weary, stumbling walk and finally stopped altogether when he reached

the protective shade of the forest.
Leaning on a tree, trying to catch his breath, he took stock of himself. He'd healed
a bit. Still couldn't  see  from  one  eye and  it hurt like hell. His chest  had  recovered
some, else his heart wouldn't be giving him such fits. His arm, well, he just wouldn't
use it for  a couple  of  hours.  Be hell to  pay  trying  to  pilot  the  boat  to  get  off  the
island again, but he'd manage. Maybe he could  hypnotize one  of  the locals  as  he'd
done the old shaman to keep him from spilling the beans to Lance…
Charon looked at his hands. They should have been cherry-red in reaction, itching
so bad as to burn. He'd been out in the sun long enough to bring on a bad spell of it.
But his skin… his skin was not burning.
No, no, it's just a fluke.
The  longer  he  thought  about  it,  the  less  he  liked  it.  There  might  be  something
seriously wrong here. He had to be sure, and there was only one way to find out.
He stepped back into the full strong sunlight and waited.
Nothing. He shaded  his eyes  and  squinted  up  at  the  golden  life-giving  orb.  He
could not look directly at it, no one could, but he should not have been  able to  get
away with this.
He stared in wonder, then amazement, and finally horror at his unharmed skin.
Then, he knew.
"Oh, no. Oh, no. NO-NO-NO-NO-NOOOOOOOO!"
Scanned by Highroller.
Proofed by Roundears.

