DRACULA IN LONDON
Edited By
P. N. Elrod

CONTENTS
Introduction - P. N. Elrod
To Each His Own Kind - Tanya Huff
Box Number Fifty - Fred Saberhagen
Wolf and Hound - Nigel Bennett and P. N. Elrod
The Dark Downstairs - Roxanne Longstreet Conrad
Dear Mr. Bernard Shaw - Judith Proctor
The Three Boxes - Elaine Bergstrom
Good Help - K. B. Bogen
Everything to Order - Jody Lynn Nye
Long-Term Investment - Chelsea Quinn Yarbro
"Places for Act Two!" - Bradley H. Sinor
Beast - Amy L. Gruss and Catt Kingsgrave-Ernstein
A Most Electrifying Evening - Julie Barrett
An Essay on Containment - Gene DeWeese
Berserker - Nancy Kilpatrick
Curtain Call Gary - A. Braunbeck
Renfield or, Dining at the Bughouse - Bill Zaget
About the Authors

The Contributors
Julie Barrett… Author of Quantum Leap A-Z and several short stories
Nigel Bennett  …  Winner  of  the  Gemini  Award  for  his  portrayal  of  vampire  patriarch
LeCroix on the series Forever Knight
Elaine Bergstrom  …  Author  of  the  vampire  novels  Blood  to  Blood:  The  Dracula  Story
Continues and Mina
K. B. Bogen … Holds a degree in Computer Science and Engineering and has a taste for
the macabre
Gary
 A.
 Braunbeck
 …
 Prolific
 short
 story
 writer
 and
 author
 of
 the
critically-acclaimed collection Things Left Behind
Roxanne Longstreet Conrad … Author of seven novels including Exile
Gene DeWeese … Former technical writer who has authored over thirty novels
P. N. "Pat"  Elrod  …  Author  of  over  sixteen  novels  including  the  continuing  Vampire
Files series, and editor of two vampire anthologies
Amy Grass … Award-winning poet and professional scriptwriter
Tanya  Huff  …  Author  of  over  sixteen  novels  including  the  Victoria  Nelson  vampire
series
Nancy Kilpatrick … Award-winning author of  fourteen  novels,  over  125  short  stories,
and editor of seven anthologies
Catt Kingsgrave-Ernstein … Prolific short story author
Jody Lynn Nye … Author of twenty-two novels including four collaborations with Anne
McCaffrey
Judith Proctor … A Shakespeare- and theatre-inspired author who lives in England
Fred  Saberhagen  …  Author  of  the  popular  Berserker  science  fiction  series,  and  the
famous vampire novel, An Old Friend of the Family
Bradley H. Sinor … Short story writer and media tie-in author
Chelsea  Quinn  Yarbro  …  Author  of  the  acclaimed  Saint-Germain  vampire  novels,
cartographer, musician, and tarot reader
Bill Zaget… First-time author who lives in Ontario, Canada

Ace Books by P N Elrod The Vampire Files
 
BLOODLIST
LIFEBLOOD
BLOODCIRCLE
ART IN THE BLOOD
FIRE IN THE BLOOD
BLOOD ON THE WATER
A CHILL IN THE BLOOD
LADY CRYMSYN
 
RED DEATH 
DEATH AND THE MAIDEN
DEATH MASQUE 
DANCE OF DEATH

Dracula in London
Edited by
P. N. Elrod
ACE BOOKS, NEW YORK

This  is  a  work  of  fiction.  Names,  characters,  places,  and  incidents  either  are  the
product of the author's imagination or are used fictitiously, and any resemblance to actual
persons, living or dead, business establishments, events, or locales is entirely coincidental.
 
DRACULA IN LONDON
 
An Ace Book / published by arrangement with the editor
 
PRINTING HISTORY Ace trade paperback edition / November 2001
 
All  rights  reserved.  Dracula  in  London  anthology  copyright  ©  2001  by  Patricia  Nead
Elrod and Tekno Books.
Introduction by P. N. Elrod copyright © 2001 by Patricia Nead Elrod.
"To Each His Own Kind" by Tanya Huff copyright © 2001 by Tanya Huff.
"Box Number Fifty'" by Fred Saberhagen copyright © 2001 by Fred Saberhagen.
"Wolf and Hound" by Nigel Bennett and P. N. Elrod copyright © 2001 by Nigel Bennett
and P. N. Elrod.
"The Dark  Downstairs"  by  Roxanne  Longstreet  Conrad  copyright  © 2001  by  Roxanne
Longstreet Conrad.
"Dear Mr. Bernard Shaw" by Judith Proctor copyright © 2001 by Judith Proctor.
"The Three Boxes" by Elaine Bergstrom copyright © 2001 by Elaine Bergstrom.
"Good Help" by K. B. Bogen copyright © 2001 by K. B. Bogen.
"Everything to Order" by Jody Lynn Nye copyright © 2001 by Jody Lynn Nye.
"Long-Term Investment" by Chelsea Quinn Yarbro copyright © 2001 by  Chelsea  Quinn
Yarbro.
" 'Places  for  Act  Two!'  " by  Bradley  H.  Sinor  copyright  © 2001  by  Bradley  H.  Sinor.
"Beast" by Amy L.  Gruss  and  Catt  Kingsgrave-Ernstein  copyright  © 2001  by  Amy  L.  Gruss
and Catt
Kingsgrave-Ernstein.

"A Most Electrifying Evening" by Julie Barrett copyright © 2001 by Julie Barrett. "An
Essay on Containment" by Gene DeWeese copyright © 2001 by Gene DeWeese.
"Berserker" by Nancy Kilpatrick copyright © 2001 by Nancy Kilpatrick.
"Curtain Call" by Gary A. Braunbeck copyright © 2001 by Gary A. Braunbeck.
"Renfield or, Dining at the Bughouse" by Bill Zaget copyright © 2001 by Bill Zaget.
 
Cover art by Bill Dodge. Text design by Tiffany Kukec.
 
Visit our website at www.penguinputnam.com
 
Check  out  the  ACE  Science  Fiction  &  Fantasy  newsletter  and  much  more  on  the
Internet at Club PPI!
 
ISBN 0-441-00858-5 (alk. paper)
 
ACE®
Ace Books are published by The Berkley Publishing Group, a division of Penguin Putnam
Inc., 375 Hudson Street,
New York, New York 10014.
ACE and "A" design are trademarks belonging to Penguin Putnam Inc.
 
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

Dracula in London
Introduction
Okay, I confess it—I love Dracula! He IS the man!
The first time I remember seeing him was in Universal's House of Dracula with elegant
John Carradine in the role. I was instantly addicted. From then on, I couldn't get enough of
all the variations out there, good and bad, sublime and silly. Umpteen years pass and it still
gives me a charge!
Hence this book. I wanted to put together a collection of stories with the Count as the
focus, not a mere cameo, and ask  the  question,  "What  ELSE  was  Dracula  doing  in  London
when he was not being chased by Van Helsing and company?"
I feel very fortunate that some of the best writers in the business decided to answer.
To have the chance to read so many delightful variations on a theme has been a dream come
true. My sincere  thanks  to  all  of  you  for  contributing  your  time  and  imaginations  to  this
project. It's been an honor.
*    *    *    *    *
In  1897  the  original  novel  Dracula  was  published,  bringing  little  note  or  notice  to
author Bram Stoker.
Writers hate when that happens.
But  over  the  next  century,  as  though  to  make  up  for  it,  Dracula  turned  into  an
honest-to-God  cultural  icon.  You  say  the  name  nearly  anywhere  on  the  planet  and  you're
bound to get a reaction of some sort. "What are the odds?" one might ask Mr. Stoker, who
would likely be astonished. Or amused.
I like  to  think  that  somewhere  he  knows  his  tale  eventually  achieved  an  immortality
greater than that which his character met in that dark and thrilling opus.
My hope is that he might  well  have  enjoyed  this  "tip  of  the  hat"  collection  of  stories
centered around his best-known creation.
P. N. "Pat" Elrod

To Each His Own Kind
Tanya Huff
London  was  everything  the  Count  had  imagined  it  to  be  when  he'd  told  Jonathan
Harker of how he'd longed to walk  "through  the  crowded  streets…  to  be  in  the  midst  of
the  whirl  and  rush  of  humanity."  Although, he  amended  as  he  waited  for  a  break  in  the
evening traffic that would allow him to cross Piccadilly, a little less whirl and rush would be
preferable.
He  could  see  the  house  he'd  purchased  across  the  street,  but  it  might  as  well  have
been across the city for all he  could  reach  it.  Yes,  he'd  wanted  to  move  about  unnoticed
but this, this was wearing at his patience. And he had never been considered a patient man.
Even as a man.
Finally, he'd been delayed for as long as he was  willing  to  endure.  Sliding  the  smoked
glasses  down  his  nose,  he  deliberately  met  the  gaze  of  an  approaching  horse.  In  his
homeland, the effect would have been felt between one heartbeat and the next. Terror.
Panic.  Flight.  This  London  carriage  horse,  however,  seemed  to  accept  his  presence
almost phlegmatically.
Then the message actually made it through the city's patina to the equine brain.
Better,  he  thought  and  strode  untouched  through  the  resulting  chaos.  Ignoring  the
screams of injured men and horses both, he put the key into the lock and stepped inside.
He'd
 purchased
 the
 house
 furnished
 from
 the
 estate
 of
 Mr.
 Archibald
Winter-Suffield. From the dead, as it were. That amused him.
His belongings were in the dining room at the back of the house.
"The dining room?" He sighed. His orders to the shipping company had  only  instructed
that  the  precious  cases  be  placed  in  the  house.  Apparently,  here  in  this  new  country,  he
needed to be more specific. They would have to be moved to a place less  conspicuous,  but
not now, not with London calling to him. He set his leather case upon the table and turned
to go.
Stepping  around  a  chair  displaced  by  the  boxes  of  earth,  he  brushed  against  the
sideboard, smearing dust across his sleeve. Snarling, he brushed at it with his  gloved  hand

but only succeeded in smearing it further. The coat was new. He'd sent his  measurements
to Peter Hawkins  before he'd started his journey and had  found  clothing  suitable  for  an
English  gentleman  at  journey's  end.  It  was  one  of  the  last  commissions  Mr.  Hawkins  had
fulfilled for him. One of the last he would fulfill  for  anyone,  as  it  happened.  The  old  man
had been useful, but the necessity of  frequent  correspondence  had  left  him  knowing  too
much.
Opening the  case,  he  pulled  out  a  bundle  of  deeds—this  was  not  the  only  house  that
English dead had provided—and another bundle  of  note  paper,  envelopes,  and  pens.  As  he
set them down, he reminded himself  to  procure  ink  as  soon  as  possible.  He  disliked  being
without it. Written communications allowed  a  certain  degree  of  distance  from  those  who
did his bidding.
Finally,  after  some  further  rummaging,  he  found  his  clothing  brush  and  removed  the
dust from his sleeve. Presentable at last, he tossed the brush down on the table and hurried
for the street, suddenly impatient to begin savoring this new existence.
"… to share its life, its change, its death, all that makes it what it is."
The crowd outside on Piccadilly surprised him and he stopped at the top of the stairs.
The crowds he knew in turn knew better than to gather outside his home. When he realized
that the people were taking no notice of him and had, in fact, gathered to watch the dead
horse pulled up onto a wagon, he descended to the street.
He thrilled to his anonymity as he made his way among them. To  walk  through  a  great
mass of Londoners unremarked—it was all he had dreamed it would  be.  To  feel  their  lives
surrounding him, unaware of their danger. To walk as a wolf among the unsuspecting lambs.
To know  that even should he declare himself, they would not believe. It was a freedom  he
had never thought to experience again.
Then a boy, no more than eight or ten, broke free of his minder and surged forward to
get a clearer look. Crying, "Hey now!" a portly man stepped out of the child's way.
The pressure of the man's  foot  on  his  meant  less  than  nothing  but  he  hissed  for  the
mark it made on his new shoes. And for the intrusion into his solitude.
The portly man turned at the sound, ruddy cheeks pale as he scanned the ground.
By  the  time  he  looked  up,  the  Count  had  composed  himself.  It  would  not  do  to  give
himself away over so minor a thing.
"You  aren't  going  to  believe  this,"  the  man  said  without  preamble,  his  accent  most
definitely  not  English,  "but  I  could've  sworn  I  heard  a  rattler."  Then  he  smiled  and
extended  his  hand.  "I  do  beg  your  pardon,  sir,  for  treading  on  you  as  I  did.  Shall  we
consider my clumsiness an introduction? Charlie March, at your service."
The novelty of the situation prodded him to take the offered hand. "I am…" He paused
for an instant and considered. Should he maintain the  identity  that  went  with  the  house?
But  no.  The  Count  de  Ville  was  a  name  that  meant  nothing;  he  would  not  surrender  his

lineage  so  easily.  Straightening  to  his  full  height,  he  began  again.  "I  am  Dracula.  Count
Dracula."
The  smile  broadened.  "A  Count?  Bless  me.  You're  not  from  around  these  parts,  are
you?"
"No. I am only recently arrived."
"From the continent? I could tell. Your accent, you know. Very old world, very refined.
Romania?"
The  Count  blinked  and  actually  took  a  step  back  before  he  gained  control  of  his
reaction.
Charlie laughed. "I did some business with a chap from Romania last year. Bought some
breeding stock off me. Lovely manners you lot have, lovely."
"Thank you." It was really the only thing he could think of to say.
"I'm  not  from  around  these  parts  myself."  He  continued  before  there  was  even  a
chance  of  a  reply.  "Me,  I'm  American.  Got  a  big  spread  out  west,  the  Double  C—the
missus's name is Charlotte, you see. She's the reason we came to England. She got tired of
spending  money  in  New  York  and  wanted  to  spend  some  in  London."  His  gaze  flicked  up,
then down, then paused. "That's one hell of a diamond you've got stuck in your  tie,  if  you
don't mind my saying so."
"It  has  been  in  my  family  for  a  long  time."  He'd  taken  it  from  the  finger  of  a  Turk
after he'd taken the finger from the Turk.
"Well, there's nothing like old money, that's what I always say." Again the smile, which
had never entirely disappeared, broadened. "Unless it's new money. Have you plans for this
evening, Count?"
"Plans?"  He  couldn't  remember  the  last  time  he'd  been  so  nonplused.  In  fact,  he
couldn't remember if he'd ever been so nonplused. "No."
"Then if you're willing I'd like to make up for treading so impolitely on your foot. I'm
heading to a sort of a soiree  at  a  friend's."  His  eyelids  dropped  to  a  conspiratorial  level.
"You know,  the sort of soiree you don't take your missus to. Oh, you needn't worry about
the company," he added hurriedly. "They're your kind of people." He  leaned  a  little  closer
and dropped his voice. "His Royal Highness will be there. You know, the Prince of Wales."
About to decline the most peculiar invitation he'd ever received, the Count paused. The
Prince of Wales would be in attendance. The Prince of Wales. His kind of people. "I would
be pleased to attend this soiree as your guest," he said. And smiled. 
"Damn, but you've got some teeth on you." 
"Thank you. They are a… family trait."

*    *    *    *    *
The party was being held in a house on  St.  James  Square.  Although  only  a  short  walk
from his own London sanctuary, the buildings were  significantly  larger  and  the  occupants
of the buildings either very well born or very rich. Seldom both, as it happened.  It  was  an
area where by birth and power he deserved to live but where it would be impossible for him
to remain hidden. Years of experience had taught him that the very rich and the very poor
were equals in their thirst for gossip, but the strange and growing  English  phenomenon  of
middle class—well researched before he'd left his homeland—seemed willing to keep  their
attention on business rather than their neighbors.
He  followed  Charlie  March  up  the  stairs  and  paused  at  the  door,  wondering  if  so
general an invitation would allow him to cross the threshold.
Two steps into the foyer, March turned with his perpetual smile. "Well, come in, Count.
No need to wait for an engraved invitation."
"No,  of  course  not."  He  joined  the  American  in  removing  his  hat,  coat,  and  gloves,
handing them into the care of a liveried footman.
"I expect you'll want to meet His Highness first?"
"It would be proper to pay my immediate respects to the prince."
"Proper to pay your immediate respects,"  March  repeated  shaking  his  head.  "Didn't  I
say you lot have lovely manners. Where would His Highness be then?" he asked the footman.
"The green salon, sir."
"Of  course  he  is,  the  evening's  young.  I  should  have  known.  This  way  then."  He  took
hold of the Count's arm to turn him toward the stairs. "Say,  there's  not  a  lot  of  meat  on
your bones is there? Now me, I think a little stoutness shows a man's place in the world."
"Indeed."  He  stared  down  at  the  fleshy  fingers  wrapped  just  above  his  elbow,  too
astonished at being so held to be enraged.
Fortunately, he was released  before  the  astonishment  faded,  for  it  would  have  been
the height of rudeness to kill the man while they were both guests in another's home.
At the top of the stairs they crossed a broad landing toward an open doorway through
which spilled  the  sounds  of  men…  and  women?  He  paused.  He  would  not  be  anonymous  in
this crowd. He would be introduced and be expected to take part in social discourse. While
he  looked  forward  to  the  opportunity  of  testing  his  ability  to  walk  unknown  and  unseen
amongst  the  living,  he  also  found  himself  strangely  afraid.  It  had  been  a  very,  very  long
time since he had been a member of such a party and it would have been so much easier had
the women not been there.
He  had  always  had  a  weakness—no,  say  rather  a  fondness,  for  he  did  not  admit
weakness—for a pretty face.

"Problem, Count?" March paused in the doorway and beamed back at him.
On the other hand, if this man can move amongst the powerful of London and they  do
not see him for what he is… "No, not at all, Mr. March. Lead on."
There  had  been  little  imagination  involved  in  the  naming  of  the  green  salon,  for  the
walls were covered in a brocaded green wallpaper that would have been overwhelming  had
it not been covered in turn by dozens of paintings. A few were surprisingly good, most were
indifferent, and all had been placed within remarkably ugly frames. The furniture had been
upholstered in a variety of green and gold and cream patterns and underfoot was a carpet
predominantly  consisting  of  green  cabbage  roses.  Everything  that  could  be  gilded,  had
been. Suppressing a shudder, he was almost overcome by a sudden wave of longing for the
bare stone and dark, heavy oak of home.
Small  groups  of  people  were  clustered  about  the  room,  but  his  eyes  were  instantly
drawn  to  the  pair  of  facing  settees  where  half  a  dozen  beautiful  women  sat  talking
together,  creamy  shoulders  and  bare  arms  rising  from  silks  and  satins  heavily  corseted
around impossibly tiny waists. How was it his  newspapers  had  described  the  women  to  be
found  circling  around  the  prince?  Ah  yes,  as  "a  flotilla  of  white  swans,  their  long  necks
supporting delicate jeweled heads." He had thought it excessively fanciful when he read it
but now, now he saw that it was only beautifully accurate.
"We'll introduce you to the ladies later," March murmured, leading the way across the
center of the room. "That's His Highness by the window."
Although  he  would  have  much  preferred  to  take  the  less  obvious  route  around  the
edges,  the  Count  followed.  As  they  passed  the  ladies,  he  glanced  down.  Most  were  so
obviously looking away they could only have been staring at him the moment before, but one
met his gaze. Her eyes widened and her lips parted but she did not look away. He could see
the pulse beating in the soft column of her throat. Later, he promised, and moved on.
"Your Royal Highness, may I present a recent acquaintance of mine, Count Dracula."
Even before March spoke, he had identified which of the stout, whiskered men smoking
cigars  by  the  open  window  was  Edward,  the  Prince  of  Wales.  Not  from  the  newspaper
photographs,  for  he  found  it  difficult  to  see  the  living  in  such  flat  black  and  gray
representations,  but  from  the  nearly  visible  aura  of  power  that  surrounded  him.  Like
recognized  like.  Power  recognized  power.  If  the  reports  accompanying  the  photographs
were true, the prince was not allowed much in the way of political power but he was clearly
conscious of himself as a member of the royal caste.
He  bowed,  in  the  old  way,  body  rigid,  heels  coming  together.  "I  am  honored  to  make
your acquaintance, Your Highness."
The  prince's  heavy  lids  dropped  slightly.  "Count  Dracula?  This  sounds  familiar,  yah?
You are from where?"
"From the Carpathian Mountains, Highness," he replied  in  German.  His  concerns  about
sounding  foreign  had  obviously  been  unnecessary.  Edward  sounded  more  like  a  German

prince  than  an  English  one.  "My  family  has  been  boyers,  princes  there  since  before  we
turned back the Turk many centuries ago. Princes  still  when  we  threw  off  the  Hungarian
yoke. Leaders in every war. But…" He sighed and spread his hands. "… the warlike days are
over and the glories of my great race are as a tale that is told."
"Well  said,  sir!"  the  prince  exclaimed  in  the  same  language.  "Although  I  am  certain  I
have heard your name, I am afraid I do not know  that area well—as familiar as  I  am  with
most of Europe." He smiled and added, "As related as I am to most  of  Europe.  If  you  are
not married, Dracula, I regret I have no sisters remaining."
The  gathered  men  laughed  with  the  prince,  although  the  Count  could  see  not  all  of
them—and  Mr.  March  was  of  that  group—spoke  German.  "I  am  not  married  now,  Your
Highness, although I was in the past."
"Death takes so many," Edward agreed solemnly.
The  Count  bowed  again.  "My  deepest  sympathies  on  the  death  of  your  eldest  son,
Highness." The report of how the Duke of Clarence had unexpectedly died of pneumonia in
early  1892  had  been  in  one  of  the  last  newspaper  bundles  he'd  received.  As  far  as  the
Count was concerned, death should be unexpected, but he was perfectly capable of saying
what others considered to be the right thing. If it suited his purposes.
"It was a most difficult time," Edward admitted. "And the wound still bleeds.  I  would
have given my life for him." He stared intently at his cigar.
With predator patience, the Count absorbed the silence that followed as everyone but
he and the prince shifted uncomfortably in place.
"Shall I tell you how I met the Count,  your  Highness?"  March  asked  suddenly.  "There
was a bully smash up on Piccadilly."
"A bully smash up?" the prince repeated lifting his head and switching back to English.
"Were you in it?"
"No, sir, I wasn't."
"Was the Count?"
"No sir, he wasn't either. But we both saw it, didn't we, Count?"
The  Count  saw  that  the  prince  was  amused  by  the  American  so,  although  he  dearly
wanted to put the man in his place, he said only, "Yes."
"And  you  consider  this  accident  to  be  a  gutt  introduction  to  a  Carpathian  prince?"
Edward asked, smiling.
If March had possessed a tail, the Count realized, he'd have been wagging it; he was so
obviously pleased that he'd lifted the Prince of Wales's spirits. "Yes, sir, I did. Few things
bring men together like disasters. Isn't that true, Count?"

That, he could wholeheartedly agree with. He  was  introduced  in  turn  to  Lord  Nathan
Rothschild,  Sir  Ernest  Cassel,  and  Sir  Thomas  Lipton—current  favorites  of  Prince
Edward—and  he silently thanked the English newspapers and magazines that had  provided
enough facts about these men for him to converse intelligently.
He  was  listening  with  interest  to  a  discussion  of  the  Greek-Turkish  War  when  he
became aware of Mr. March's scrutiny. Turning toward the American, he caught the pudgy
man's gaze and held it. "Yes?"
March blinked, and the Count couldn't help thinking that  even  the  horse  on  Piccadilly
hadn't taken so long to recognize its danger. It wasn't that March was stupid—it  seemed
that old terrors had been forgotten in his new land.
"I was just wondering about your glasses, Count. Why do you keep those smoked lenses
on inside?"
Because the prince was also listening, he explained. "My eyes are very sensitive to light
and I am not used to so much interior illumination." He gestured at the  gas  lamps.  "This  is
quite a marvel to me."
Prince  Edward  beamed.  "You  will  find  England  at  the  very  front  of  science  and
technology. This…" he echoed the Count's gesture, trailing smoke from his cigar, "is nothing.
Before not much longer we will see electricity take the place of gas,  motor  cars  take  the
place of horses, and actors and actresses…" his smile was answered by the most beautiful
of the women seated across the room, "replaced by images on a screen. I, myself have seen
these images—have seen them move— right here in London. The British Empire shall lead the
way into the new century!"
Those close enough to hear applauded, and March shouted an enthusiastic "Hurrah!"
The Count bowed a third time. "It is  why  I  have  come  to  London,  Highness;  to  be  led
into the new century."
"Gutt  man."  A  footman  carrying  a  tray  of  full  wine  glasses  appeared  at  the  prince's
elbow. "Please try the burgundy, it is a very gutt wine."
About to admit that he did not drink wine, the Count reconsidered. In order to remain
un-noted, he must be seen to do  as  others  did.  "Thank  you,  Highness."  It  helped  that  the
burgundy was a rich, dark red. While he didn't actually drink it, he appreciated the color.
When  the  clock  on  the  mantle  struck  nine,  Edward  led  the  way  to  the  card  room,
motioning that the Count should fall in beside him. "Have you seen much of my London?" he
asked.
"Not yet, Highness. Although I was at the zoo only a few days past."
"The zoo? I have never been there, myself. Animals I am  most  fond  of,  I  see  through
my sights." He mimed  shooting  a  rifle  and  again  his  immediate  circle,  now  walking  two  by
two down the hall behind him, laughed.

"And  he'd  rather  see  a  good  race  than  govern,  wouldn't  you,  Highness?"  Directly
behind Edward's shoulder, March leaned forward enough to come between the two princes.
"Twenty-eight race meetings last year. I heard that's three more visits than he made to his
House of Lords."
The Count felt the Prince of Wales stiffen beside him. Before the prince could speak,
the Count turned and dipped his head just far enough to spear March over the edge of his
glasses. "It is not wise," he said slowly, "to repeat everything one hears."
To his astonishment, March smiled. "I wouldn't repeat it outside this company."
"Don't," Edward advised.
"You  betcha,"  March  agreed.  "Say,  Count,  your  eyes  are  kind  of  red.  My  missus  has
some drops she puts in hers. I could find out what they are if you like."
Too taken aback to be angry, the Count shook his head. "No. Thank you."
Murmuring, "Lovely manners," in an approving tone, March stepped forward so that  he
could open the card room door for the prince.
"He is rough, like many  Americans,"  Edward  confided  in  low  German  as  they  entered.
"But his heart is gutt and, more importantly, his wallet is deep."
"Then for your sake, Highness…"
The game in the card room was bridge and Prince  Edward  had  a  passion  for  it.  After
two hours of watching the prince move bits of  painted  card  about,  the  Count  understood
the attraction no better than he had in the beginning.
Just after midnight, the prince gave his place to Sir Thomas.
"It was gutt to meet you, Count Dracula. I hope to see you again."
"You will, Highness."
Caught and held in the red gaze, the prince wet full lips and swallowed heavily.
One last time, the Count bowed and stepped back, breaking his hold.
Breathing heavily, Edward hurried from  the  room.  A  woman's  laughter  met  him  in  the
hall.
The  Count  turned  to  the  table.  "If  you  will  excuse  me,  gentlemen,  now  that  His
Highness has taken his leave, I will follow. I am certain that I will see you all again."
In  the  foyer,  only  for  the  pleasure  of  watching  terror  blanch  the  boy's  cheek,  he
brushed the footman's hand with his as he took back his gloves.
He very nearly made it out the door. 

"Say,  Count!  Hold  up  and  I'll  walk  with  you."  March  fell  into  step  beside  him  as  he
crossed the threshold back into the night. "It's close in those rooms, ain't it? September's
a lot warmer here than it is back home. Where are you heading?"
"To the Thames."
"Going across to the fleshpots in Southwark?" the American asked archly.
"Fleshpots?" It took him a moment to understand. "No. I will not be crossing the river."
"Just taking a walk on the shore then? Count me in."
They walked  in blessed silence for a few moments, along Pall Mall and  down  Cockspur
Street.
"His  Highness  likes  you,  Count.  I  could  tell.  You  have  a  real  presence  in  a  room,  you
know."
"The weight of history, Mr. March."
"Say what?"
He  saw  a  rat  watching  him  from  the  shadow,  rat  and  shadow  both  in  the  midst  of
wealth and plenty, and he smiled. "It is not necessary you understand."
Silence reigned again until they reached the riverbank.
"You  seemed  to  be  having  a  good  time  tonight,  Count."  March  leaned  on  the  metal
railings at the top of the embankment. "Didn't I tell you they were your kind of people?"
"Yes."
"So." A bit of loose stone went over the edge and into the water. "Did you want to  go
somewhere for a bite?"
"That  won't  be  necessary."  He  removed  his  glasses  and  slid  them  carefully  into  an
inside pocket. "Here is fine."
The  body  slid  down  the  embankment  and  was  swallowed  almost  silently  by  the  dark
water.  Replete,  the  Count  drew  the  back  of  one  hand  over  his  mouth  then  stared  in
annoyance  at the dark smear across the back of his glove. These were his favorite gloves;
they'd have to be washed.
He turned toward home, then he paused.
Why hurry?
The night was not exactly young, but morning would be hours still.
As he walked  along the  riverbank  toward  the  distant  sound  of  voices,  he  smiled.  The
late  Charlie  March  had  not  been  entirely  correct.  The  prince  and  his  company  were  not

exactly his kind of people…
… yet.

Box Number Fifty
Fred Saberhagen
Carrie had been living on the London streets  for  a  night  and  a  day,  plenty  of  time  to
learn that being taken in charge by the police was not the  worst  thing  that  could  happen.
But  it  would  be  bad  enough.  What  she  had  heard  of  the  conditions  in  which  homeless
children were confined made her ready to risk a lot in trying to stay free.
A huge dray drawn by two whipped and lathered horses rushed  past,  almost  knocking
her  down,  as  she  began  to  cross  another  street.  Tightening  her  grip  on  the  hand  of
nine-year-old  Christopher  as  he  stumbled  in  exhaustion,  she  struggled  on  through  the
London fog, wet air greasy with burning coal and wood. Around the children were a million
strangers, all in a hurry amid an endless roar of traffic.
"Where we going to sleep tonight?" Her little brother sounded desperate, and no doubt
he was. Last night they had had almost no sleep at all,  huddled  against  the  abutment  of  a
railway bridge; hut fortunately it had not been raining then as it was now. There had been
only one episode of real adventure during the night, when Chris, on going a little way apart
to  answer  a  call  of  nature,  had  been  set  on  and  robbed  of  his  shoes  by  several  playful
fellows not much bigger than he.
Their wanderings had brought them into Soho, where they  attracted  some  unwelcome
attention. Carrie thought that a pair of rough-looking youths had now begun to follow them.
She had to seek help somewhere, and none of the faces in her immediate vicinity looked
promising. On impulse she turned from the pavement up a flight of stone steps to the front
door of a house. It was a narrow building of gray stone, not particularly old or new, one of
a row, wedged tightly against its  neighbors  on  either  side.  Had  Carrie  been  given  time  to
think about it, she might have said that she chose this house because it bore a  certain  air
of quiet and decency, in contrast to its neighbors, which at this early stage of evening were
given to lights and raucous noise.
Across  the  street,  a  helmeted  bobby  was  taking  no  interest  in  a  girl  and  boy  with
nowhere  to  go.  But  he  might  at  any  moment.  These  were  not  true  slums,  not,  by  far,  the
worst part of London. Still, here and there, in out-of-the-way corners, a derelict or two lay
drunk or dying.
Carrie went briskly up the steps to the front  door,  while  her  brother,  following  some

impulse of his own, slipped down into the areaway where he was for the moment concealed
from the street. Glancing quickly down at Christopher from the high steps, Carrie thought
he was doing something to one of the cellar windows.
Giving a long pull on the bell, she heard a distant ringing somewhere inside. And at the
same  moment,  she  saw  to  her  dismay  that  what  she  had  thought  was  a  modest  light
somewhere  in  the  interior  of  the  house  was  really  only  a  reflection  in  one  of  the  front
windows. There were curtains inside, but other than that the place had an uninhabited look
and feel about it.
"Not a-goin' ter let yer in?" One of the youths following  her  had  now  stopped  on  the
pavement at the foot of the steps, where he stood grinning up at her, while his fellow stood
beside him, equally delighted.
"I know  a house where you'd be welcome, dear," called the second one.  He  was  older,
meaner-looking. "I know some good girls who live there."
Turning  her  back  on  them  both,  she  tried  to  project  an  air  of  confidence  and
respectability, as she persisted in pulling at the bell.
"My  name's  Vincent,"  came  the  deeper  voice  from  behind  her.  "If  maybe  you  need  a
friend, dearie, a little help—"
Carrie caught her breath at the sound of an answering fumble in the  darkness  on  the
other  side  of  the  barrier—and  was  mightily  relieved  a  moment  later  when  her  brother
opened the door from inside. In a moment she was in, and had closed and latched the door
behind her.
She could picture the pair who had  been  heckling  her  from  the  pavement,  balked  for
the moment, turning away.
It  was  so  dark  in  the  house  that  she  could  barely  see  Christopher's  pale  face  at  an
arm's-length distance, but at least they were no longer standing in the rain.
"How'd you get in?" she whispered at him fiercely. Then, "Whose house is this?"
"Broken latch on a window  down there," he  whispered  back.  Then  he  added  in  a  more
normal voice, "It was awful dark in the cellar; I barked my shin on something trying to find
the stair."
It was a good thing, Carrie congratulated herself in passing, that neither of them had
ever been especially afraid of the dark. Already her eyes were growing accustomed to the
deep  gloom;  enough  light  strayed  in  from  the  street,  around  the  fringes  of  curtain,  to
reveal the fact that the front hall where they  were  standing  was  hardly  furnished  at  all,
nor was the parlor,  just  beyond  a  broad  archway.  More  clearly  than  ever,  the  house  said
empty.
"Let's  try  the  gas,"  she  whispered.  Chris,  fumbling  in  the  drawer  of  a  built-in
sideboard, soon came up with some matches. Carrie, standing on tiptoe, was tall  enough  to
reach a fixture projecting from the wall. In a moment more she had one of the gaslights lit.

"Is anyone here?" Now her voice too was up to normal; the answer seemed to be no. The
sideboard  drawer  also  contained  a  couple  of  short  scraps  of  candle,  and  soon  they  had
lights in hand to go exploring.
Front hall, with an  old  abandoned  mirror  still  fastened  to  the  wall  beside  a  hat  rack
and a shelf. Just in from the hall, a wooden stair, handrail carved with a touch of elegance,
went  straight  up  to  the  next  floor.  Not  even  a  mouse  stirred  in  the  barren  parlor.  The
dining room was a desert also, no furniture at all.  And  so,  farther  back,  was  the  kitchen,
except for a great black stove and a sink whose bright new length of metal pipe promised
running water. An interior cellar door had been left open by Chris in his hurried ascent, and
next to it a recently walled-off cubicle contained a water closet. A kitchen window  looked
out on what was no doubt a back garden, now invisible in gloom and rain.
Carrie  was  ready  to  explore  upstairs,  but  Christopher  insisted  on  seeing  the  cellar
first, curious as to what object he had stumbled over. The  culprit  proved  to  be  a  cheaply
constructed  crate,  not  quite  wide  or  long  enough  to  be  a  coffin,  containing  only  some
scraps of kindling wood. Otherwise the cellar—damp brick walls; floor part pavement, part
dry earth—was as empty as the house above.
Now for the upstairs. Holding the candle tremulously high ahead of her, while dancing
shadows  beat  a  wavering  retreat,  Carrie  returned  to  the  front  hall,  and  thence  up  the
carved  wooden  stair.  Two  bedrooms,  as  unused  as  the  lower  level  of  the  house  and  as
scantily  furnished.  The  rear  windows  looked  out  over  darkness,  the  front  ones  over  the
street—side walls were windowless, crammed as they were against the neighbors on either
side.
From an angle in the hallway on the upper floor, a narrow service stair, white-painted,
went up straight and steep to a trapdoor in the ceiling.
"What's up there?" she wondered aloud.
"Couldn't be nothin' but an attic." Only a short time on the street had begun to have a
serious effect on Christopher's English, of which a certain Canadian schoolmaster had once
been proud.
Carrie  spotted  fresh  footprints  in  the  thin  layer  of  dust  and  soot  that  had
accumulated on the white-painted stairs. A clear image  of  the  heel  of  a  man's  boot.  Only
one set of footprints, coming down.
The trapdoor pushed up easily.  The  space  above  was  more  garret  than  attic;  it  might
once  have  been  furnished,  maybe  servants'  quarters.  The  floor  entirely  solid,  no  rafters
exposed, though now there were dust and spiderwebs in plenty. The broad panes of glass in
the  angled  skylight,  washed  by  rain  on  the  outside,  were  still  intact,  and  it  was  bolted
firmly  shut  on  the  inside;  if  you  stood  tall  enough  inside,  you  could  look  out  over  a  hilly
range of slate roofs and  chimney  pots,  with  the  towering  dome  of  St.  Paul's  visible  more
than a mile to the east.
On one side of the gloomy space rested an old wardrobe, door slightly ajar to reveal a
few  hanging  garments.  But  the  most  interesting  object  by  far  was  a  great  wooden  box,

somewhat battered by much use or travel, which had been shoved against the north wall.
Chris thought it looked like a coffin, and said so.
"No.  Built  too  strong  for  a  poor  man's  coffin,  not  elegant  enough  for  a  rich  man's."
What was it, though? There were two strong rope handles on each side, and a plain wooden
lid, tightly fitted by some competent woodworker.
Christopher,  ever  curious,  approached  the  box  and  tried  the  lid.  To  his  surprise,  and
Carrie's, it slid back at once.
"Look here, Sis!"
"Why, it's full of dirt." She  was  aware  of  a  vague  disappointment  in  her  observation,
and not sure why. Only about half-full, actually, but that was no less odd. Stranger still was
the fact that the neat joinings of the interior seemed to have been tarred with pitch, as if
to make them waterproof. Of course so tight a seal would also serve to keep the soil from
leaking out. But why would anyone—?
The  earth  was  dry.  When  Carrie  picked  up  a  small  handful  and  sifted  it  through  her
fingers, it gave off a faintly musty, almost spicy smell, with a suggestion of the alien about
it.
Christopher was downstairs again, moving so silently  on  his  bare  feet  that  Carrie  had
not realized he was gone, until she heard him faintly calling her to come down. She slid the
lid back onto the box, and carefully lowered the trapdoor into place behind her.
Her  brother  had  turned  on  the  gaslight  in  the  kitchen  and  discovered  some  tins  of
sardines  abandoned  in  the  pantry.  Presently  they  remembered  the  box  of  kindling  in  the
cellar, and it was possible to get a wood fire started in the kitchen stove.
The  sardines  were  soon  gone.  Brother  and  sister  were  still  hungry,  but  at  least  they
were out of the rain.
That night they slept in a house, behind locked doors, curled up in  a  dusty  rug  on  the
kitchen floor, where some of the stove's warmth reached them. Barely into October, and it
was cold.
*    *    *    *    *
Next day, waking up in a foodless house and observing that the rain had stopped, they
were  soon  out  and  about  on  the  streets  of  London,  trying  to  do  something  to  earn  some
money, and keep out of trouble. But in each endeavor they had only limited success. Carrie
was certain that the neighbors had begun to notice them, and not in any very friendly way.
So had the bobby who walked the beat during the day.
There  was  one  bright  spot.  On  the  sideboard,  as  if  someone  had  left  it  there
deliberately, they found a key which matched the locks on both front door and back.
Vincent still had his eye on them too, or at least on Carrie. And "Don't see your parents

about,"  one  of  the  neighbors  remarked  as  she  came  by.  She  answered  with  a  smile,  and
hurried inside to share with Christopher the handful of biscuits she had just stolen from a
shop.
Shortly  after  sunset,  threatening  trouble  broke  at  last.  The  rain  had  stopped,  and
people were ready to get out and mind each other's business. One of the neighbors  began
it, another joined in, followed by the walrus-mustached  policeman,  who,  when  voices  were
raised, had decided it was his duty to take part.
And joined at a little distance by the nasty Vincent, who before the policeman arrived
boldly put in a word, offering to place Carrie under his protection. He had some comments
on her body that made her face flame with humiliation and anger.
Carrie could not slam the door on Vincent, because he had his foot pushed in to hold it
open.  He  withdrew  the  foot  as  the  bobby  approached,  but  Carrie  did  not  quite  dare  to
close the door in the policeman's face.
"What's your name, girl?" he wanted to know, without preamble.
"Carrie. Carrie Martin. This's my brother Chris."
"Is  the  woman  of  the  house  in?"  demanded  the  boldest  neighbor,  breaking  in  on  the
policeman's dramatic pause.
Carrie admitted the sad truth, that her mother was dead.
Another neighbor chimed in. "Your father about, then?"
The girl could feel herself being  driven  back,  almost  to  the  foot  of  the  stairs.  "He's
very busy. He doesn't like to be disturbed."
Somehow  three  or  four  people  were  already  inside  the  door.  There  was  still  enough
daylight to reveal the shabbiness and scantiness of the  furnishings,  and  of  the  children's
clothes, once quite respectable.
"Looks like the maid has not come in as yet." That was said facetiously.
"Must be the butler's day off too," chimed in another neighbor.
"You say your father's, here, miss?" This was the policeman, slow and  majestic,  in  the
mode of a large and overbearing uncle. "I'd like to have a word with him, if I may."
"He doesn't like to be disturbed." Carrie could hear her own voice threatening to break
into a childish squeal. For a little while, for  a  few  hours,  it  had  looked  like  they  might  be
able to survive. But now…
"Where is he?"
"Upstairs. But—"
"Asleep, then, is he?"

"I—I—yes."
"How old are you?"
"Sixteen."
"Oh yes, you are, I don't think! See here, my girl, unless I have some evidence that you
and the young 'un here are under some supervision, you'll both be charged with wandering,
and not being under proper guardianship."
Carrie, standing at bay at the foot of the stair, gripping  her  brother  by  his  shoulder,
raised  her  voice  in  protest,  but  the  voices  of  the  others  increased  in  volume  too.  They
seemed to be all talking at once, making accusations and demands—
Suddenly their voices cut off altogether. Their eyes that had been fixed on Carrie rose
up to somewhere above her head, and behind her on the stair there was a creak of wood, as
under a quiet but weighty tread.
She turned to see a tall, well-built, well-dressed man coming down with measured steps.
Perfectly calm, as if he descended these stairs every day, a gentleman in his own house. His
brownish  hair,  well-trimmed,  was  touched  with  gray  at  the  temples,  and  an  aquiline  nose
gave his face a forceful look. At the moment he was fussing with his cuffs, as if he had just
put on his coat, and frowning in apparent puzzlement at the assembly below him.
Carrie had never seen him before in her life; nor had Christopher, to judge by the boy's
awestruck expression as he watched from her side.
The  newcomer's  voice  was  strangely  accented,  low  but  forceful,  suited  to  his
appearance,  as  his  gaze  swept  the  little  group  gathered  in  his  front  hall.  "What  is  the
meaning of this intrusion? Officer? Carrie, what do these people want?"
Carrie could find no words at the moment. Not even when the man came to stand beside
her in a fatherly attitude, resting one hand lightly on her back.
"Mr. Martin—?" The bobby's broad face wore a growing look of consternation. Already
he  had  retreated  half  a  step  toward  the  door.  Meanwhile  the  nosy  neighbors,  looking
unhappy, were moving even faster in the same direction.
"Yes? Do you have official business with me, officer?"
Vincent had disappeared.
The policeman recovered slightly, and stood upon official dignity; thought there might
be  some  disturbance.  Duty  to  investigate.  But  soon  he  too  had  given  way  under  the  cool
gaze of the man from upstairs. In the space of a few more heartbeats the door had closed
on the last of them.
The mysterious one stood regarding the door for  a  moment,  hands  clasped  behind  his
back—they were pale hands, Carrie  noted,  strong-looking,  and  the  nails  tended  to  points.
Then he reached over to the hat rack on the  wall  behind  the  door,  and  plucked  from  it  a

gentleman's  top  hat,  a  thing  she  could  not  for  the  life  of  her  remember  seeing  there
before. But of course she had scarcely looked. And then he turned, at ease, to regard her
with a smile too faint to reveal anything of his teeth.
"I take it you are in fact the lady of the house? The only one I am likely to encounter
on the premises?"
The children stared at him.
Gently he went on. "I am not given to eavesdropping, but  this  afternoon  my  sleep  was
restless,  and  the  talk  I  could  hear  below  me  grew  ever  and  ever  more  interesting."  The
foreign accent was stronger now; but in Soho accents of all kinds were nothing out of the
ordinary.
"Yes  sir."  Carrie  stood  with  an  arm  around  her  brother.  "Yes  sir—that  is,  there  is  no
other lady, er woman, girl, living here at present."
"That is good. It would seem superfluous to introduce  myself,  as  you  have  already,  in
effect, introduced me to others. Mr. Martin I have become, and so I might as well remain.
But when others are present, you, Carrie, and  you,  young  sir,  will  address  me  as  'Father.'
For however many days our joint tenancy  of  this  dwelling  may  last.  Understand,  I  do  not
seek  to  adopt  you,  but  a  temporary  arrangement  should  be  to  our  mutual  advantage.  A
happy, close-knit family, yes, that is the face we present to the world. When it is necessary
to present a face. Ah, you will kindly leave the upper regions of the house to me—if anyone
should ask you, it is really my house, paid for in  coin  of  the  realm.  In  the  name  of  Mr.  de
Ville."
"Yes sir," said Carrie, elbowing her brother until he echoed the two words.
"And now, my children." Mr. Martin, or de Ville, set his hat upon his head, and gave it a
light tap with two pale fingers, as if to settle it exactly to his liking. Carrie noticed that as
he did so, he ignored the old mirror on the wall beside the hat rack. And she could see why,
or she imagined she could, because the small mirror did not show the man at all, but only the
top  hat,  doing  a  neat  half-somersault  unsupported  in  the  air,  its  reflected  image
disappearing utterly just as the hat itself came to rest on the head of the mysterious one.
"I am going  out  for  the  evening,"  he  informed  them.  "I  advise  you  to  lock  up  for  the
night as solidly as possible. Do not expect to see me again until  about  this  time  tomorrow.
Pleasant dreams…"
On the verge of opening the door, he checked himself, frowning at them.
"The two of you have an undernourished and ill-clad look, which I find distasteful, and
will only provoke more neighborly curiosity. Here." White fingers performed an economical
toss;  a  small  coin,  glittering  gold,  spun  through  the  air.  Christopher's  quick  hand,  like  a
hungry bird, snatched it in midnight.
*    *    *    *    *
That night brother and sister slept with full bellies, having gone out foraging amid the

early  evening  crowds,  to  a  nearby  branch  of  the  Aerated  Bread  Company.  At  a  used
furniture  stall  Carrie  had  also  bought  herself  a  nice  frock,  almost  new,  and  a  couple  of
pillows;  it  was  awkward  living  in  a  house  where  there  were  no  beds  or  chairs.  And
Christopher had found a secondhand pair of shoes that fit him well enough. They were going
to sleep on the kitchen floor again, but they were getting used to it.
*    *    *    *    *
"Where'd he sleep, is what I'd like to know," said Chris next day, climbing the stairs up
from  the  parlor.  The  man  had  said  he'd  not  be  back  till  sunset,  so  now  in  midafternoon
there was no harm in gratifying their curiosity, never mind that he'd said to keep below.
Both of the bedrooms were as  desolate  as  ever,  and  the  dust  on  their  floors  showed
only their own footprints, one set shod, one five-toed, from yesterday's exploration.
"And  how'd  he  get  into  the  house?"  Carrie  wanted  to  know.  "Didn't  come  past  us
downstairs."
"You don't suppose—?"
"The skylight? Why'd a man do that?"
" 'Cause he don't want to be seen."
And they went up the narrow white stair, through the trapdoor.
The  skylight  was  as  snugly  fastened  as  before.  Out  of  persistent  curiosity  they
approached the mysterious box again.  The  lid,  once  moved,  fell  clattering  with  shock  and
fright.
"Oh my God. He's in there!"
But none of this awakened Mr. Martin.
After  initially  recoiling,  both  children  had  to  have  a  closer  look.  In  urgent  whispers
they soon decided the man who lay so neatly and cleanly on the earth in his nice clothes was
not dead. His open eyes moved faintly. In Carrie's experience, people sometimes got drunk,
but never had even the drunkest of  them  looked  like  this.  Some  people  also  took  strange
drugs, and with that she had less familiarity.
A  ring  at  the  front  door  broke  the  spell  and  pulled  them  down  the  stairs.  A  solid
workman stood on the step, cap in hand. In a thick Cockney accent he said he had come to
inquire about a box, one that might have been delivered here "by mistake." Carrie, in a clean
dress  today,  and  with  her  face  washed,  denied  all  knowledge  and  briskly  sent  the
questioner on his way.
"I  don't  think  he  believed  me,"  Carrie  muttered  to  her  brother,  when  the  door  was
closed again. "He'll be back. Or someone will."
"What'll we do? Don't want anyone bothering Mr. Martin. I like him," Chris decided.

Quickly the girl took thought. "I know!"
*    *    *    *    *
Within the hour the bell rang again. This man was much younger, and obviously of higher
social  status.  Bright  eyes,  dark  curly  hair.  "Excuse  me,  Miss?  Are  you  the  woman  of  the
house?"
"Who wants her?"
"I'm George Harris, of Harris and Sons, moving and shipment." A large, clean hand with
well-trimmed  nails  offered  a  business  card.  Carrie  read  the  address:  Orange  Master's
Yard, Soho.
"Oh. I suppose you're one of the sons."
"That's right, Miss. I'm looking about this neighborhood for a box that seems to  have
got misplaced. There's evidence it was brought to this house, some days ago. One of a large
shipment, fifty in all, there's been a lot  of  hauling  of  'em  to  and  fro  around  London,  one
place and another. Ours not to reason why, as the poet  says.  But  our  firm  feels  a  certain
responsibility."
"What sort of box?"
George Harris had  a  good  description,  down  to  the  rope  handles.  "Seen  anything  like
that, Miss?" Meanwhile his eyes were probing the empty house behind her.
And  Carrie  was  looking  out  past  him,  as  a  cab  came  galloping  to  a  stop  outside.  Two
well-dressed young gentlemen leaped out and climbed the steps. George Harris, who seemed
to know them as respected clients, made introductions. Lord Godalming, no less, but called
"Art"  by  his  companion,  Mr.  Quincey  Morris,  who  was  carrying  a  carpetbag,  and  whose
accent, though not at all the same as Mr. Martin's, also seemed uncommon even for Soho.
The  new  arrivals  made  nervous,  garbled  attempts  at  explaining  their  urgent  search.
There had been, it seemed, twenty-one boxes taken from some place called Carfax, and so
forty-nine of fifty were somehow now accounted for. But this time, Lord Godalming or not,
Carrie held her place firmly in the doorway, allowing no one in.
"If there is a large box on the premises, I must examine it." A commanding tone, as only
one of his lordship's exalted rank could manage.
At  that,  Carrie  gracefully  gave  way.  "Very  well,  sir,  my  lord,  there  is  a  strange  box
here, and where it came from, I'm sure I don't know."
Three  men  came  bustling  into  the  house,  ready  for  action,  Morris  actually,  for  some
reason, beginning to pull a thick wooden stake out  of  his  carpetbag—and  three  men  were
deflated, like burst balloons, when  they  beheld  the  thin-sided,  commonplace  container  on
the parlor floor.
"Our furniture has not arrived yet, as you can see." The lady of the house was socially

apologetic.
Quincey  Morris,  muttering  indelicate  words,  kicked  off  the  scruffy  lid,  and  indeed
there was dirt inside, but only a few handfuls. And the two gentlemen hastily retreated to
their waiting cab.
But George Harris lingered in the doorway, exchanging a few more words with  Carrie.
Until his lordship shouted at him to get a move on, there were other places to be examined.
On with the search!
*    *    *    *    *
At sunset Carrie's and Christopher's cotenant came  walking  down  the  stairs  into  the
parlor as before. There he  paused,  fussing  with  his  cuffs  as  on  the  previous  evening,  But
now  his  attention  was  caught  by  the  rejected  box.  "And  what  is  this?  An  attempt  at
furnishing?"
"You had some callers, Mr. Martin—de Ville—while you were asleep. I thought as maybe
you didn't wish to be disturbed." And Carrie gave details.
"I see." His dark eyes glittered at her. "Arid this—?" 
"The  gentlemen  said  they  were  looking  for  a  large  box  of  earth.  So  I  thought  the
easiest way was to show 'em one. Chris and I put some dirt in and dragged it  up  from  the
cellar.'Course this one ain't nearly as big as yours. Not big enough for a tall man to lie down
in. The gents were upset—this weren't at all the one they wanted to find."
There was a long pause, in which de  Ville's  eyes  probed  the  children  silently.  Then  he
bowed. "It seems I am greatly in your debt, Miss Carrie. Very greatly. And in yours, Master
Christopher."
*    *    *    *    *
Mr. de Ville seemed to sleep little the next day, or not at all, for the box in the garret
held only earth. In the afternoon, Carrie by special invitation went with her new friend and
his strange box to Doolittle's  Wharf,  where  she  watched  the  man  and  his  box  board  the
sailing  ship  Czarina  Catherine. And  she  waited  at  dockside,  wondering,  until  the  Russian
vessel cast off and dropped down seaward on the outgoing tide.
As she returned to the house, feeling once more alone and unprotected, she noted that
the evil Vincent was openly watching her again.
He  grew  bolder  when,  after  several  days,  it  seemed  that  the  man  of  the  house  was
gone.
George Harris came back once, on some pretext, but obviously to see Carrie, and they
talked for some time. She learned that he was seventeen, and admitted she was three years
younger.
Five days, then six, had passed since Czarina Catherine sailed away.

George  Harris  came  back  again,  this  time  wondering  if  he  might  have  left  his  order
book  behind on his previous visit. Carrie made him tea, out of the newly  restocked  pantry.
Mr. de Ville had left them what he called a token of his gratitude for their timely help, and
sometimes Carrie was almost frightened when she counted up the golden coins. There was a
bed in each bedroom now, and chairs and tables below.
*    *    *    *    *
Tonight Chris was in the house alone, curled up and reading by the fire, nursing a cough
made  worse  by  London  air.  Carrie  was  out  alone  in  the  London  fog,  walking  through  the
greasy, smoky chill.
She heard the terrifying voice of Vincent, not far away, calling her name. There  were
footsteps  in  pursuit,  hard  confident  strides,  and  in  her  fresh  anxiety  she  took  a  wrong
turning into a deadend mews.
In another moment she was running in panic, on the verge of screaming,  feeling  in  her
bones that screaming would do no good.
Someone, some presence, was near her in the fog—but no, there was no one and nothing
there.
Only  her  pursuer's  footsteps,  which  came  on  steadily,  slow  and  loud  and
confident—until they abruptly ceased.
Backed into a corner, she strained her ears, listening—nothing. Vincent must be playing
cat and mouse with her. But at last a breath of wind stirred the heavy air, the gray curtain
parted,  and  the  way  out  of  the  mews  seemed  clear.  Utterly  deserted,  only  the  body  of
some derelict, rolled into a corner.
No—someone  was  visible  after  all.  Half  a  block  ahead,  a  tall  figure  stood  looking  in
Carrie's direction, as if he might be waiting for her.
With a surge of relief and astonishment she hurried forward. "Mr. de Ville!"
"My dear child. It is late for you to be abroad."
"I saw you board a ship for the Black Sea!"
His  gaze  searched  the  fog,  sweeping  back  and  forth  over  her  head.  "It  is  important
that certain men believe I am still on that ship. And soon I really must depart from England.
But I shall return to this sceptered isle one day."
Anxiously she looked over her shoulder. "There was a man—"
"Your  former  neighbor,  who  meant  you  harm."  De  Ville's  forehead  creased.  His  eyes
probed  shadows  in  the  mews  behind  her.  "It  is  sad  to  contemplate  such  wickedness."  He
sighed, put out a hand, patted her cheek. "But  no  matter.  He  will  bother  you  no  more.  He
told me—"

"You've seen him, sir?"
"Yes, just now—that he is leaving on a long journey—nay, has already left."
Carrie was puzzled. "Long journey—to where, sir? America?"
"Farther than that, my child. Oh, farther than that."
A man's voice was audible above the endless traffic rumble,  calling  her  name  through
the night from blocks away. The voice of George Harris, calling, concerned, for Carrie.
Bidding  Mr.  de  Ville  a  hasty  good  night,  she  started  to  go  to  the  young  man.  Then,
meaning  to  ask  another  question,  she  turned  back—the  street  was  empty,  save  for  the
rolling fog.

Wolf and Hound
Nigel Bennett and P. N. Elrod
Sabra stood on the cliff overlooking  the  sea,  scenting  the  rising  wind  for  magic.  She
braced against cold  updrafts  buffeting  her  small  body,  her  long  hair  torn  free,  whipping
about like Medusa's snakes. She braced and let it come until she could determine if it was
the simple spice of some minor weather-wizard or the dank reek of deeper sorcery.
As  the  church  bells  below  tolled  midnight  the  air  abruptly  went  still,  waiting.  In  the
fields  behind  her  she  heard  the  dolourous  bleating  of  sheep.  In  the  town  below  a  dog
frantically barked warning. Then the storm  itself  burst  upon  sea  and  land.  She  could  see
the  very  color  of  its  force  on  the  wind,  angry  red  streaks  shot  through  with  a  violet  so
deep as to be black.
Spreading her arms wide, she sang into the night, her clear voice going out to the rocks
below, then dancing across the wild gray waters of a harbour to a mist-hidden horizon. The
returning echo against her  soul  confirmed  her  suspicion.  The  quickening  wash  of  the  gale
had real spellwork behind it: old, dark, and dangerously powerful.
Blood magic it was.
Blood magic… and death.
Out  there  beyond  the  breakwater…  a  drifting  schooner.  That  was  the  source.  Did  it
carry plague such as she'd seen ravaging all the world in those short centuries past? If so,
then there was little she could do to stop  it.  A  rare  stab  of  true  horror  pierced  her,  but
only for an instant. Great would be that calamity, but it was  part  of  the  natural  cycle  of
the earth. This was decidedly un-natural. Which brought it within her sphere of influence.
By  miracle  or  curse,  the  ship  found  its  way  into  the  harbour,  going  aground,  causing
much activity among the locals who ran to its aid. She wondered if any of them marked the
black shape of the huge wolf that leaped to shore from the deck. It charged straight for a
sea  cliff  and  the  darkness  of  the  churchyard  above.  The  beast  did  not  pause,  but
continued  past  the  church,  heading  for  the  shelter  of  a  broken  abbey,  heading  directly
toward Sabra.
The wolf found its way up the last steep rise, gaining level footing not five paces away.
Much larger than any she'd seen before, it was big as  a  calf,  a  match  for  any  of  the

hounds  of  Annwyn.  Raw  hate  gleamed  from  red  eyes.  Swinging  its  heavy  head  in  her
direction, long teeth bared in a growl, it advanced on her. She did not move, except to hold
out her hand  in  a  placating  gesture.  She  spoke  Words  of  Calming  in  the  Old  Tongue.  The
creature  snapped  in  reaction,  ears  flat,  hackles  up  as  though  she'd  clubbed  it  instead.
Beneath the thick fur, muscles bunched, and it leaped at her, its reeking jaws closing upon
her throat, ripping flesh like paper. She fell backwards  under  the  weight  of  its  body  and
kept  falling.  Both  of  them  launched  spinning  from  the  cliff,  dropping  into  empty,  roaring
space…
Sabra awoke fully from the dream.
She lay inert, eyes shut, only mildly aware of the ornate  bed  in  which  she'd  slept  the
day through, and tried to hold fast to the last  shreds  of  the  vision,  seeking  more  details.
Clearest  of  all  was  that  picture  of  herself  standing  on  the  cliff  overlooking  Whitby
Harbour. Sweet Cerridwen, but she'd not passed through Whitby in decades, why now?
Used  to  all  sorts  of  nightmarish  dreams,  her  gift  of  Sight  was  usually  more
forthcoming with meanings to explain the mesh of  images,  but  not  this  time.  Whether  the
wolf was a literal or symbolic danger she could  not  tell.  Whatever  was  astir  knew  how  to
cloak  itself, which meant a formidable magical skill. She could not ignore such a strong,  if
murky, portent and made the necessary arrangements for the long rail journey home.
Taking advantage of certain modes of this century's fashion, Sabra  covered  her  pale
skin in long gloves and a heavy  cloak,  and  draped  a  dense  black  veil  over  a  wide-brimmed
bonnet. Warm for August, but it protected her from the burning sun and offered welcome
isolation.  She  appeared  to  be  a  recently  bereaved  widow  in  deep  mourning.  None  would
question  why  she  took  no  meals  in  the  train's  dining  car.  Those  feedings  she  sought
elsewhere from willing and forgetful companions. No more dreams of blood magic disturbed
her day-sleeps, which was frustrating. She wanted more information.
It took days of travel to reach England from St. Petersburg where she'd been keeping
an  eye  on  Victoria's  granddaughter,  Alexandria.  By  then  the  storm  Sabra  had  envisaged
had come and gone, the mystery of it cold, though gossip was still rife. The macabre tale of
a dead captain sailing his deserted ship into harbour confirmed to her that she'd done the
right thing leaving the Russian court to investigate this. Whatever had been aboard boded
ill for the realm she'd pledged to guard.
She  spent  a  week  in  Whitby,  sensing  nothing  useful,  learning  little  of  import  except
that  the  wolf  had  also  been  real  enough,  though  all  thought  it  to  be  only  a  large  dog.
According to a newspaper report, it had fled the ship following the same path she'd seen in
her dream, vanishing into the night, perhaps to prowl the moors, alone and afraid.
Or so people assumed.
Shape-shifters  were  not  unknown  to  her.  Most  were  harmless,  but  this  one  was
different, else its magic wouldn't have drawn her attention so strongly.
She  sought  and  found  information  about  the  ship's  cargo  and  its  final  destination,
tracking  it  to  Purfleet.  Taking  to  the  rails  again,  she  followed  the  same  route  to  King's

Cross station, and ultimately to the badly aging mansion attached to old Carfax Abbey.
The place was deserted save for a number of boxes in the ruined chapel which proved
to be filled with earth.
So…  that  was  it.  One  of  the  European  Breed  come  to  settle  in  England.  She  had  no
objection to them, so long as they conducted themselves with wisdom and discretion. Thus
far she was unimpressed. This one—if she drew the correct conclusion from  the  captain's
log printed in the papers—had killed the entire crew of the ship on which he'd sailed. Why
had he not simply cast his influence upon them to make them forget his presence? All those
of undead blood had that talent, but this had been vicious and barbaric beyond reason.
Then there was the matter of the magic.
Whoever this newcomer might be, he commanded powers beyond those of his peers. The
Europeans  had  sufficient  supernatural  strengths  within  their  inherent  natures,  but  to
combine those with black sorcery made for a frightening potential. Before she could return
to Russia, Sabra would have to determine their extent—and his intentions.
Still in the convenient isolation of widow's weeds, Sabra took rooms at a nearby hotel.
In  the  days  to  come  she  maintained  a  loose  vigil  on  Carfax,  primarily  after  dark,  as  she
judged it to be the most likely  time  for  him  to  return,  but  that  proved  a  disappointment.
The only activity she marked  was  noting  one  night  that  nearly  half  the  boxes  were  gone,
the  signs  left  in  the  thick  dust  indicating  the  invasion  of  a  carting  firm  going  about  its
prosaic business.
Then  there  was  the  occasional  excitement  when  one  of  the  lunatics  from  the
sanitarium next door escaped. He always came to Carfax, crying pitifully to  gain  entry  to
be with his "Master."
The poor brute was touched by the moon all right, his disturbed mind reacting badly to
the European's strong psychic trace. She visited the fellow once in the late hours, speaking
through  his  barred  window  in  hope  of  learning  something  useful.  Alas,  his  madness  was
something even her powers of influence could not pierce. All she got was his insistence that
"the Master was here," to which she assigned its broader meaning. If the European were on
the immediate grounds, she'd have sensed him.
Growing  impatient  with  the  wait—for  August  had  long  vanished  and  September  was
nearly gone—Sabra tried a scrying ceremony one night while the moon was still at full. The
results,  as  she  stared  hard  into  the  mirrored  surface  of  a  black  bowl  filled  with  water,
were  mixed.  She  saw  the  delicate  shadow  of  a  young  woman,  but  nothing  of  her  face  or
location. The shadow became less and less substantial, then vanished altogether.
Not good, Sabra thought grimly, then added a handful of earth taken from one of the
boxes to the bowl. She stirred it clockwise and waited for the water to grow still again.
This time she saw his shadow. It stretched long and solid in the moonlight, reaching far
over city and field. The shadow was not black, but blood red. No surprise there. She sought
to raise her view, to see the man himself, but he kept drawing away from her.  His  shadow

suddenly  changed  shape,  first  into  that  of  a  wolf,  then  a  bat,  and  finally  dissolving  into
countless  fly-specks  that  swirled  away  to  vanish  in  the  wind.  She  did  not  think  he  was
aware of her; this was only part of his normal protective magic.
And probably strongest at night, she wryly concluded upon waking from her trance.
The  next  time  she  made  an  attempt  was  at  the  brightest  hour  of  noon,  closing  her
shutters and pulling the draperies close.
The visions were clear now, but dark: deaths and burials, images accompanied by vivid
emotions. She  was  at  last  able  to  see  the  young  woman.  Dead  now.  There  had  been  much
unhappiness and suffering for her. Though she'd been hedged round with protections, they
were not sufficient to keep him from sating his appetite for her. Poor lost child. She'd have
had little idea what was happening to her, nor would she have known  how to defend against
it. There was much to be said for keeping alive old superstitions and wives' tales. The great
dawning  of  science  had  helped  many  with  its  light,  but  there  were  yet  things  walking
abroad  who  took  advantage  of  the  shifting  shadows  in  the  chasms  between  science  and
faith.
Dire change had already wrested the girl from her final sleep, too late to restore  the
balance there. However, Sabra had gotten a distinct clue to follow, a very clear vision of a
churchyard with a marble mausoleum, and the impression that it was fairly close.
At dusk she set out searching for a specific building  to  match  the  one  she  carried  in
memory.  London  had  hundreds  of  churches,  but  she  had  a  scent  to  follow  the  right  one.
Death and sorrow leave their own unique spoor.
Not  far  from  Hampstead  Heath,  she  found  the  church  and  its  attendant  cemetery.
There she got confirmation that the gods favored her presence, for she arrived in time to
witness a most peculiar event. Four men, one old, the rest young, were hoisting  themselves
over  the  churchyard  wall.  With  no  small  exertion  they  eventually  succeeded,  albeit  in  a
most  undignified  manner.  They  should  have  scouted  the  area  first  and  made  use  of  a
convenient overhanging tree but  a  few  yards  along  the  wall.  Sabra  had  the  advantage  of
them  with  her  excellent  night  vision.  Despite  her  skirts,  she  nimbly  climbed  the  friendly
branches to drop silently on the other side.
Though stealthy as they threaded through the tombstones to the mausoleum, they did
not have the look of grave robbers, being too well dressed.  Medical  men  seeking  a  corpse
suitable for dissection? No, for one of them produced a key  to  the  structure.  Mourners?
They  were  in  for  a  wretched  surprise.  She  hid  behind  a  shadow-steeped  cypress,  close
enough to observe.
The  older  fellow,  who  had  a  Dutch  accent,  seemed  to  be  in  charge,  unlocking  the
mausoleum that they might enter, then shutting them all inside. She stole forward, listening
through the door cracks as they labourously opened one of the coffins within… only to find
it empty. That did not sit well with the other men, who all seemed connected to the  young
woman who should have lain there. They demanded an  explanation,  and  the  old  man,  whom
they addressed as "Professor," provided one. He was quite detailed.

Ah.  So  that  was  it.  Hunters.  He  was  trying  to  train  his  acolytes  in  the  mysteries  of
destroying Nosferatu. With indifferent success, it seemed, though he managed to convince
his unhappy students that something odd was afoot and that they should hold watch.
They  soon  quit  the  tomb,  Sabra  withdrew  to  the  cypress,  and  all  save  the  professor
settled  in  to  wait.  He  busied  himself  by  working  some  sort  of  putty  around  the  door,
explaining that the crumbled-up Host he'd mixed into the stuff would prevent the Un-Dead
from  entering  through  the  cracks.  This  positively  scandalized  Sabra.  There  were  other,
more respectful methods of sealing a place. Holy Water or a blessing would have done just
as well. Perhaps he was trying to make a dramatic point with his students.
Sabra settled in, senses alert. She'd have had to wait anyway; this added company was
merely an unexpected complication. It would be most interesting to question the professor,
but later, when she could hypnotically control him.
If he survived  the  night.  Even  a  young  Nosferatu  was  a  deadly  opponent  to  ordinary
mortals. Sabra hoped the men had armed themselves. And with the right weapons.
A distant clock struck the quarter-hours. Slowly, most slowly. She found no fault with
the other guardians  in  their  determination;  it  was  a  weary  vigil  and  in  such  a  place  as  to
excite the morbid side of one's imagination. Cemeteries held  no  fear  for  her,  but  she  did
not approve of them, disliking the idea of all those bodies lying corrupt in the good earth.
The ancient Britons had sensibly exposed their dead, letting the elements and  animals
have their way with the flesh until naught remained but clean bones, which were then tidily
interred.
For a time  they'd  adapted  the  northern  custom  of  burning  the  corpse,  setting  off  a
spectacular  blaze  none  of  the  gods  could  miss,  releasing  the  spirit  to  soar  free  from  its
clay prison.
Either way, there would be no doubt to anyone that the deceased, and any illness he or
she  carried,  was  indeed  dead  and  would  remain  firmly,  safely,  and  harmlessly  on  its  own
side of the veil. This relatively new custom of burying bodies in the ground or leaving them
boxed  up  in  mausoleums  was  indecent,  not  to  mention  unhealthy.  Far  better  to  let  the
natural corruption of the flesh take place in the cleansing wash of open sky or by purifying
fire than to hide it away to fester and rot in the airless dark.
Well, if one must have such dreary spots, best that they be on holy ground, which was
good for certain numinous matters. But  there  were  some  types  of  magic  that  ran  beyond
the bounds of the ordinary rituals of faith…
The clock struck two, and moments later she heard the old man's hiss of warning. The
group's  whole  attention  riveted  upon  something  coming  up  the  yew-tree  avenue.  Sabra
ventured out a bit for a glimpse.
A young woman clad in filmy grave garments, the same one from the scrying-vision. She
walked  slowly,  ghost-like,  not  yet  aware  of  the  men.  There  was  no  mistaking  what  she'd
become, but that dark bundle she held close to her lithe body… a child? Sabra was aghast

at this cruel turn of appetite, and set herself to leap forward and to intervene, devil take
the consequences.
But  matters  moved  too  swiftly;  the  instant  of  intervention  passed  when  the  men
startled the girl, who cast the child away. She should have fled, but instead turned the full
power of her charm upon one of  them,  apparently  her  husband.  It  was  as  though  none  of
the others existed for her. She'd have ensnared him on the spot, but the professor stepped
between, using a crucifix to thwart her. Only then did the girl seem to realize  her  danger
and darted for the tomb—to be repulsed by the Host. The change should not have left her
vulnerable to such holy objects; it was the corruption of the European's dark magics  that
had done that to her.
Sabra's heart sank. This was bad. Very bad.
The  professor  removed  a  portion  of  the  putty  so  the  girl  could  slip  inside  the  tomb,
which  she  did,  her  ability  to  do  so  adding  to  their  consternation.  He  replaced  it,  then
announced that they would return on the morrow. They quickly left, taking the child.
What a terrible little drama, Sabra thought, and alas for the grieving husband. He was
the most shattered, but then who would not be? To have a loved one die, then return from
the grave so hideously changed as to turn that love into loathing would break the strongest
heart and will. She trusted that  his  friends  would  see  him  through  the  worst  of  it;  there
was nothing she could do for him but seek the source of his loss: the European.
She left the cypress and tried the door of the tomb. Locked, and Sabra was not in the
habit  of  carrying  skeleton  keys.  On  the  other  side  she  sensed  the  girl's  roiling  feelings:
rage, frustration, confusion, pain, and terror, the mindless terror of an animal.
With as much reverence as  she  could  summon,  Sabra  peeled  away  some  of  the  putty,
then pressed her hands flat against the cold stone of the tomb.
Come forth! she commanded.
Strong  as  she  must  be  in  her  new  state,  the  girl  had  no  defense  against  such  a
Summoning. Within seconds she'd seeped through the thin opening and  stood  trembling  on
the grass. She'd been pretty in life; in the death-that-was-not-death she was radiant.
And from the look in her wide eyes, she was also quite mad.
Once a helpless innocent, now returned to prey upon the most helpless innocents of all.
She had no restraints and no reason left in her addled brain. Little wonder  she'd  reacted
so foolishly to the hunters, seeking sanctuary in a place no longer safe. She was like a child
pulling a blanket overhead to keep out the monsters.
Sabra  tried  to  fasten  her  attention  with  hypnosis,  hoping  to  draw  her  from  the
darkness,  but  to  no  avail.  What  remained  of  the  girl's  mind  was  quicksilver  elusive;  she
voiced  only  vague  ramblings  about  being  lonely  and  hungry.  Her  eyes  focused  once—on
Sabra's  throat—and  she  started  eagerly  forward,  but  Sabra  put  a  stop  to  that  with  a
rebuffing word and gesture, freezing her in place. The girl subsided, moaning miserably.

Most  of  the  converted  made  the  transition  with  little  or  no  shock  to  the  mind.  Of
course, it helped when their lovers took the trouble to acquaint them with what to expect.
Sabra asked the girl for the  European's  name,  but  she  didn't  even  know  that  much.  Less
than the poor lunatic from the asylum.
With no small disgust—for  the  European,  not  his  pathetic  victim—Sabra  released  the
girl to return to her hiding place. She was malleable to some forms of suggestion, so Sabra
took care to instruct her to sleep deeply for the next few days and nights. It would  ease
her sufferings. By then the old professor and his friends would have had time to return and
deal  with  the  wretch.  She  was  entirely  lost  to  insanity  and  the  European's  magic;  death
would at least free her spirit. A tragedy, but there was no other help for it.
As for the heartless bastard who had done this to her…
Sabra  returned  to  her  hotel,  sleeping  lightly  until  midmorning,  when  she  donned  her
widow's  weeds,  paid  the  accounting,  and  set  forth  for  Carfax,  carrying  a  carpetbag  of
such items as she might need for an outdoor adventure. It would be only a slight rough-out
for her; she'd camped in worse places in her varied travels. But, oh, the abbey was so filthy,
the dust a foot deep in some places. Why were some men such pigs? She'd known  wonderful
exceptions over the centuries, but this European was not in their number.
She gathered wood, twigs, and vines and made a broom, the first to cross the threshold
in several decades. She swept out an inner room of the house, banished its resident nest of
rats, and blessed it to make it a place of power. Then she sat cross-legged in the middle of
the circle she'd chalked on the floor. Before her was the scrying bowl, its  water  muddied
by earth taken from the boxes. There she focused the whole of her concentration,  trying
to contact him through that link. The possibility existed  he  would  go  to  ground,  but  from
his vile treatment of the girl and the murder of the ship's crew, Sabra judged he would be
more  curious  than  cautious.  If  he  was  that  arrogant  he  might  think  himself  immune  to
harm—a weakness she could exploit.
Sabra  lost  track  of  time.  She  surfaced  once,  days  later,  drawn  out  one  night  by  a
strange  commotion  in  the  attached  abbey.  The  hunters  were  there,  apparently  having
followed  the  same  trail  of  boxes  as  she,  and  busily  opening  them  and  blessing  their
contents.  A  convocation  of  rats  turned  up,  one  of  the  European's  devisings  meant  to
discourage burglars, but the men countered with some  fierce  terriers  to  chase  them  off,
and continued with their work, placing pieces of the Host in each box. She smiled approval
for their cleverness. It would not please their quarry.
Armed with this new advantage, Sabra later returned to her room with a fresh handful
of  reconsecrated  soil  and  added  it  to  the  scrying  water.  When  she  sent  her  thoughts
forth—now  and  finally!—she  encountered  his  solid  presence,  and  the  jolt  she  sent  him
struck  like  an  electrical  shock.  The  returning  echo  carried  his  reaction:  reflexive  rage…
and vast puzzlement.
Good. It was about time he noticed her.
He  delayed  answering.  In  all  likelihood  he'd  never  encountered  one  such  as  herself.
Another  few  days  passed  before  prudence  surrendered  to  curiosity,  and  she  sensed  his

approach  to  Carfax  not  at  night,  but  at  noon.  Perhaps  he  thought  that  like  his  own,  her
un-natural powers would be at their lowest ebb in the sun, and preferred to keep things on
a physical level where he would have the advantage.
She went down to the abbey to greet him, perching primly on one of the boxes, not so
much to make a point, but because it wasn't layered with dust like the rest of the stinking
sty.
The great door opened, and he paused on the threshold, allowing his eyes to adjust to
the dimness within. It left him beautifully silhouetted. If Sabra had a crossbow in hand and
been so minded, he'd have much regretted the error.
Tall  and  thin,  with  a  cruel  sensual  face,  and  a  fierce  intellect  alight  in  tiger  green
eyes… yes, that poor girl  had  stood  no  chance  against  him  at  all.  Few  would.  There  was  a
poisonous aura around him  that  boded  ill  to  any  who  brushed  against  it,  like  a  carrier  of
plague.
He came in slowly, his harsh, red-flecked gaze fixing on her like a fiery arrow. He took
in the boxes, certainly aware that they'd all been interfered with, made useless to him.
"Did  you  do  this,  woman?"  he  demanded,  his  voice  rumbling  so  deep  with  suppressed
fury  that  it  stirred  a  breeze  around  him.  The  place  was  in  need  of  such;  the  air  was
unbreatheably thick with grave-stench.
"I'm not responsible," she replied, holding to an even tone. "But we must speak—"
"Who are you, woman?"
Well, she did not care for that contemptuous address. As though being a woman was a
weakness.  And  she  would  never  give  him  her  true  name.  Names  held  power;  he  had  quite
enough already. "You may call me Miss Smith. And you?"
His red lips twitched. Amusement or scorn? Probably both. "I am the Count de  Ville.  I
own this place. Why are you here?"
He had a sense of humor to go with his arrogance. With but a small shifting of accent
one could pronounce it as "Devil." 
"Very well, Count de Ville. In the name of Queen Victoria I command and require that
you give an explanation for your activities since you've come to this land."
His stare was priceless. "What?"
I've never been very good at presenting credentials, she thought. "I shall be brief, but
you must listen and think most carefully. The evidence is that you committed murder on the
high seas, the ship on which it occurred is still at Whitby Harbour, along with its logs. The
evidence  is  that  you  did  seduce  and  willfully  murder  a  young  woman,  but  not  before
transforming  her  against  her  will  to  become  one  of  your  own  breed,  the  motive  as  yet
unknown. These are most serious crimes, Count de Ville, and they must be answered for."

Another long stare, then a roaring bark of laughter that  filled  the  room.  "You  do  not
know with whom you are dealing."
Hm.  Romanian  accent. Probably  one  of  those  minor  princes  so  used  to  having  his  own
way that he'd forgotten how things were done in the outside world.
"I may also make the same observation," she responded. "I remind you that you are not
in your homeland, but mine, and are answerable to her laws."
"English law?" He spat.
Older than that. Much older.
De Ville looked carefully around, scenting the heavy air.
"There are no others here, sir," she said. "You will find this to be a most singular court."
"You have me on trial?" He seemed ready to laugh again.
"Indeed, yes. Use your common sense and respect what it tells you about me."
He glared. She felt an icy hand caress her protective wards. His gaze turned inward as
he  concentrated,  eyes  rolling  up  in  his  head,  palms  out  as  he  delved  past  surface
appearance. "You have Knowledge. But it is not such as to help you here."
"Count  de  Ville,  you  are  a  man  of  great  intelligence,  yet  you  are  ignoring  some  very
important danger signs. I strongly suggest you heed them. Would I be here alone with you if
I could not take care of myself? Would I have even been able to call you here if I did not
have considerable skills at my disposal?"
He was silent, thinking. Past time for it, too.
"Now, sir, let's us get to the business at hand. Explain yourself."
"I will not."
There  were  ways  around  that.  She  fixed  him  with  her  own  gaze,  tearing  past  the
protective hedges now that he was close enough. What she found was revolting.
He was old, but not ancient, and another  name  was  in  his  mind…  Vlad,  Son  of  Dracul,
yes,  that  was  it.  She'd  heard  of  him,  quite  the  vicious  devil  against  the  Turks  in  his
day—and his own people. He was decidedly savage to any who challenged his authority. She
swiftly  closed  off  a  random  vision  of  a  forest  of  writhing  bodies  impaled  on  stakes  and
moved  on  to  his  present-day  concerns.  He  had  plans  to  establish  himself  in  England.  The
British Empire, right or wrong, was the seat of real political influence for the world. He'd
once been in the center  of  such  a  maelstrom  in  his  distant  land  between  the  forests.  He
wanted  to resume that sort of absolute control again, but on  a  much  larger  field.  He  had
some very specific plans on how to do it, too. Sweet Goddess, if he ever got to the Queen or
the Prince of Wales…

Frozen  with  surprise,  he  gave  a  start  and  tried  to  throw  her  from  his  mind.  She
withdrew at her own speed, leaving him panting from the effort of trying to hurry her.
"What are you?" he asked, when he'd recovered.
"You already have the answer, but my apprenticeship was very much elsewhere than in
the hell-depths of the Scholomance."
"What know  you of that?" His shock was such that he'd lapsed into  Romanian.  Still  in
tune with his mind, she was able to translate.
"I know  much. I know  that you are gifted with the Talent, but you do not see  beyond
the gratification of your own needs. You do not see forward to the consequences of  your
actions on yourself or others or the general balance of all things. That is blind and blatant
irresponsibility.  You've  grown  careless  and  foolish  or  you  are  simply  mad.  And  your
ambitions are such that I cannot allow you to continue unchecked."
"You have not the strength to stop me."
Damn. He possessed more arrogance than wisdom. She'd hoped to be spared the ordeal
of her dream. "Sir, let it suffice to say that I am used to dealing  with  real  monarchs,  not
some incognito lordling with delusions of his own importance. You are an invader here, I see
that  now,  and,  by  the  authority  of  the  queen  I  serve,  I  command  and  require  that  you
immediately leave and return to your homeland."
She  did  not  remotely  imagine  he  would  go  quietly.  From  her  touch  on  his  mind  she
understood there was only one way to deal with him, only one thing he would respect.  And
she also understood the play of her initial dream, why it had ended in that manner.
He  reared  to  his  full  height,  like  a  cobra  preparing  to  strike.  "Ah,  but  I  see  it  now.
Talent  and  power  you  do  indeed  possess,  but  as  for  delusions  of  importance…  you  are
nothing more than an escapee from that ridiculous madhouse across the way. Unfortunate
for you, young woman. But you are comely, and for that I shall make it pleasant."
The first wave of it stole suddenly over her like a heady perfume. Sweet, but that was
meant  to  mask  the  underlying  bitterness.  It  was  most  potent,  though,  and  deeply
compelling.  Sabra  felt  her  body  willingly  respond  to  his  seduction,  though  her  emotions
recoiled. She could physically fight it, but it would do her no good,  for  he  was  bigger  and
stronger.  She  could  magically  fight  it,  and  win,  but  he  would  have  to  die.  She  had  no
objection  to  killing,  having  done  her  share  in  the  past,  but  her  Sight  told  her  his  was  a
different destiny, entwined with that of the hunters. She knew better than to fight Fate.
He  drew  close,  looming  over  her,  eyes  flaming  with  hunger,  desire,  and  triumph.  She
smiled dreamily, as that poor girl must have smiled, and waited as though enspelled for him
to take her.
He did indeed make it pleasant, murmuring softly in his own tongue, tilting her head to
one side with the light touch of a  fingertip.  His  breath  was  warm  on  her  bare  throat,  his
kiss gentle. Under other circumstances  she  might  have  welcomed  him  as  a  lover,  but  they

were too far apart in spirit for that.
Then he held her close and tight, and bit into her flesh. Though he did not rend it like
the wolf in her dream, the effect was the same. She gasped from the sudden pain, felt her
blood being strongly drawn away, as though he were taking life from her soul, not her body.
Perhaps  he  fed  on  souls,  enjoyed  corrupting  innocence.  That  would  explain  his  lengthy
torture of the girl.
Nothing  like  that  for  me, Sabra  thought.  He  intended  to  drain  her  dry.  He  pressed
hard upon her, drinking deep.
She allowed it, waiting.
He was not the only one adept at blood magic.
But… hers was far older.
All  that  was  of  the  divine—no  matter  the  faith—was  his  bane.  He'd  chosen  his  dark
path and thus made it so. And if the Host repelled him then so would…
His strangled scream, when it came, made it all worth it.
He  reeled  away  from  her,  hands  clawing  at  his  mouth  and  throat.  Staggering,  he
crashed  against  one  of  the  boxes  and  fell.  She  watched  his  sufferings,  showing  no
expression,  but  with  a  great  lifting  in  her  heart.  Sometimes  justice  could  be  most
satisfying.
Vlad, son  of  Dracul,  writhed  in  the  dust,  choking  and  groaning  his  agony.  She'd  seen
such symptoms before, but then the effect  had  been  from  strychnine,  the  convulsions  so
strong that the victim broke his own bones from his thrashings.
"In  my  veins  runs  the  chill  doom  of  Annwyn's  hounds,"  she  explained,  rubbing  her
throat  as  the  flesh  knitted  up.  "They  will  harry  you  forever,  you  bastard  son  of  the
Scholomance."
He shrieked, twisting.
"You feel also the holy fire of Cerridwen."
Another shriek, his back arching, then he abruptly collapsed and went still.
Sabra stood over him, taking in the ravages her blood had executed on what remained
of his soul. He yet lived, but the fight had gone out of him. When he finally opened his eyes
to her, they were suffused with terror.
"Return to your own land, dragon's son," she whispered. "This place is not for you."
Telegram from Mina Harker to Van Helsing: 
"Look  out  for  D.  He  has  just  now,  12.45,  come  from  Carfax  hurriedly  and  hastened
towards the south. He seems to be going the round and may want to see you: Mina."

The Dark Downstairs
Roxanne Longstreet Conrad
Here, now, Nora, dry your eyes. I know  it's a sad day, but we should all get about our
duties now. She's in a better place.
What, you want to hear about Dracula? At a time like this? Go on with you, you must've
heard the story a dozen times by now, what with Mr. and Mrs. Harker  and  all  the  rest  of
'em  in  and  out  of  the  house—oh,  I  know,  they  don't  gossip  to  servants,  but  still,  who
notices us? Stand just outside the parlor, ear to the door—I know  the tricks, missy, don't
think I don't.
Hush, now, keep your eyes on your work. There's Mrs. Bannock, she'll have the hide off
of  us  if  we  don't  finish  these  by  teatime.  What  was  we  talking  about?  Dracula,  indeed.
Well, Nora, I never did see  half  what  they  say  happened  at  Hillingham,  and  believe  me,  I
was  in  the  thick  of  it.  No  dogs,  nor  wolves,  nor  any  of  that  foolishness.  Dracula?  Yes,  I
figure as I saw 'im, but believe you me, he weren't he worst of it. Not by a long chalk.
They'll never tell that part of it, 'cause it doesn't concern the Quality.
Who does it concern? Us, of course. The downstairs. The servants.
'Ere, you need that knife? Give it over.  Now,  where  was  I?  No,  I'm  not  telling  about
Dracula, I'm telling you about Elizabeth Gwydion.
First thing you have to know  about Hillingham is that it's been in the Westenra family
for  centuries,  a  good  old  country  house  in  Whitby,  near  the  sea—the  family  come  down
from  London  every  season  for  the  summer.  By  July  Mrs.  Westenra  and  Miss  Lucy  had
arrived, along with  Miss  Lucy's  friend  Mina  Murray—yes,  Mrs.  Harker,  but  she  was  Mina
Murray then—and they brought Rose with them as ladies' maid. In the house there was Mr.
Gage, the butler, and Mrs. Ravenstock, the housekeeper, and Mrs. Brockham, the cook, and
of course me upstairs, and Penny, and Jeannette the parlor maid and Alice the downstairs
maid and Kate the tweeny, and Mary in the scullery, and Joseph the boot-boy, and George
the footman—
What do you mean, a large staff? Small enough, for  the  size  of  Hillingham,  I  can  tell
you. Up at  five,  bed  at  midnight;  some  things  never  change,  eh?  For  all  Dr.  Van  Helsing's
such a kind man, still things have to be done, don't they?

Where was I? Oh, yes, the staff. Well, that was the staff at the start of July, but it
didn't stay that way, 'cause of Rose, who got herself in trouble with a young man. Well, you
can well imagine, Mr. Gage sent her packing without a reference. Poor Rose, she were crying
something  awful.  Elizabeth  Gwydion  showed  up  the  very  afternoon,  to  Mrs.  Ravenstock's
relief—Welsh,  they  said,  neat  as  a  pin,  a  bit  foreign-looking,  skin  like  the  finest,  palest
cream. Pretty? Oh, if you like. Too pretty, to my mind.
I was polishing the hamster rail when she came sweeping up, head  high,  the  way  great
ladies  do;  she  was  looking  at  those  stairs  as  if  she'd  bought  'em  whole.  I  knew  she  was
going to be trouble—did you know,  she wouldn't even let us call  her  Liz?  No,  it  had  to  be
Elizabeth, like the Queen herself. And Mrs. Ravenstock thought she hung the moon.
She had skills, I suppose. She was good with stains; when Miss Mina cut her finger and
got blood on her best blue gown it was Elizabeth who took it away to clean it, wouldn't give
it over to the laundry maid Gracie at all. 'Twas Gracie who carried the first tale about her,
I suppose.  She  whispered  to  me  as  how  she  saw  Elizabeth  sucking  the  blood  out  of  that
dress, like a half-starved woman licking at spilled soup.
Poor Gracie. Dead two days later in her bed when I went to wake her, her skin blue and
cold, her eyes staring up at the ceiling. No sign what killed her. Mrs. Ravenstock said it was
her heart, but the poor little bint was only fifteen. Poison, I say. But as nobody sent for the
constable, it'll never be proved.
With  Gracie  gone  the  work  got  harder.  Soon  enough  we  found  we  was  washing  the
sheets as well as ironing them, and doing most of Elizabeth's work as well. Mrs. Ravenstock
told us to stop our complaining. She took Elizabeth's part every time, no matter the cause;
the way she looked at that girl fair gave me a turn. And Elizabeth looked  at  her  like  Mrs.
Ravenstock was a cream pastry at afternoon tea.
Dracula? I told you, I'm  getting  to  him.  Now  be  quiet  and  listen,  stop  wiggling  like  a
wet puppy. All right, now, where was I? Oh, yes, Gracie was dead, poor  soul,  and  upstairs,
Miss  Lucy  was  having  her  own  troubles.  Sleepwalking,  the  way  she  used  to  as  a  child.
Nothing to fret over, I said at the time, but of course I was quite wrong about that.
I made an enemy out of Elizabeth Gwydion about then. It was over a little thing, really,
sounds ever so stupid. It was over me being Catholic. Mind you, now, the others tolerated it
right enough. "Oh, Mary Margaret, she's heathen," they'd say cheerfully, though not where
the Mistress could hear. Mr. Gage knew I kept to my faith, and he said nothing about it. I
even  wore  a  crucifix,  under  the  neck  of  my  dress,  of  course.  That  was  what  caused  the
trouble. I was bent over scrubbing the floor and my crucifix must have slipped off, it fell
on the floor and I didn't notice it.
Well,  Miss  High-and-Mighty  Elizabeth  stepped  on  it  as  she  walked  by,  and  screamed
like she'd put her foot on a nail. Hissed some foreign words at me and all but  slapped  me,
she  did;  kicked  over  my  bucket,  water  and  soap  everywhere,  and  flounced  off  with  her
cap-ribbons bouncing. Well, naturally, I complained of it to  Mrs.  Ravenstock,  but  she  told
me I must have overset the bucket myself and to mop up the mess and not  to  carry  tales.
The look in her eyes was like she'd had herself an opium pipe. Well, I wasn't content to be
leaving it at that—after all, I'm not a clumsy cow, and there was no call for Elizabeth to do

such a thing. The row brought Mr. Gage, who called Elizabeth down.
She lied, of course, but Mr. Gage didn't believe it. He gave her a dressing-down such as
few  of  us  had  ever  heard,  and  when  she  looked  at  me  there  was  a  smile  on  her  lips,  but
murder in her eyes, and I knew that wasn't the end of it.
The  next  morning  there  was  broken  glass  scattered  on  the  floor  next  to  my  bed.  I
might've cut my feet bad except that I got up on the wrong side to pick up my Bible, which
had fallen off the nightstand. When I struck the candle I saw the glass glittering like ice,
and my skin crawled, I can tell you. I hadn't heard a thing, not breaking glass, not someone
creeping around in the dark. I could well imagine Elizabeth Gwydion's pale hands scattering
that glass, her bloodless face bending over me as I dreamed.
What  do  you  mean,  what  did  I  do?  Got  a  dustpan  and  cleaned  it  up,  of  course.  And
smiled  at  her  nice  when  she  passed  in  the  hall  as  I  was  sweeping  wet  tea  leaves  on  the
carpet to lay the dust. Smiled for all I was worth, I did. Confusion to the enemy!
The next day there was something in my tea. I barely touched it,  but  still  it  made  me
sick, sick enough that even Mrs. Ravenstock let me take an hour to lie down in the evening
after supper. That was when I dreamed.
I dreamed there was an adder in the house. A black shining adder as glided from room
to room, winding around the feet of the servants. An adder that wound itself around Mrs.
Ravenstock's ankle and oozed up under her skirts.  I  fair  screamed  the  house  down  in  my
dream, but nobody heeded. She went on with her mending, and all of a sudden her eyes flew
open and she jerked hard, as  if  somebody  had  pushed  her,  and  then  she  was  lying  on  the
floor and the adder was crawling away toward the stairs.
Mind you, my gran had dreams. She dreamed of a cave-in at the mine, and it happened
just  the  way  she  said.  I  don't  hold  none  with  imagination,  it's  destructive  to  a  woman's
character, but I didn't imagine this. I dreamed it, and that's a different thing entirely.
Mrs. Ravenstock? Next day she  was  hale  and  well,  except  for  that  opium  distance  in
her eyes. And doting on Elizabeth. But the day after that Mrs. Ravenstock caught her heel
in her dress hem and fell down the service stairs, and broke her neck.
So.  After  Mrs.  Ravenstock's  death—which  was  accident,  sure  enough—you  can  well
imagine  things  changed.  For  one  thing,  we  were  already  short  a  laundry  maid  and  now  a
housekeeper, and next thing you know the bootboy Joseph had given notice, and so had the
scullery maid Mary. Now, you can't hardly run Hillingham on so few servants; Mr. Gage was
fair desperate, I tell you. Meanwhile, things were bad upstairs, too. Miss Mina left to meet
her fiancé Jonathan, and the whispers came round that Mrs. Westenra was in poor health.
Miss Lucy's sleepwalking had gotten so bad it scared us half out of our wits. Yes, even me,
though I don't hold with nonsense.
One morning as I came around the corner  with  my  broom  and  tea  leaves—mind  you  it
was well before six in the  morning—  I  saw  a  ghost  floating  white  in  the  hall.  I  froze,  my
breath locked in my chest, and after a second or  two  I  realized  the  floating  white  ghost
was Miss Lucy.

She was dead asleep on her feet, her gown fluttering in a cold draft  that  poured  out
of her room, her fair hair lifting and twisting around her pale face. As I watched her, her
head fell back, and her lips parted, and she spread her arms wide. She let out this long, low
sigh that frightened me ever so much more than a scream—something immoral in that sigh, I
can tell you. Desperate. She pressed herself against empty air, her whole body arching.
Well,  it  was  indecent!  And  frightful!  I  tore  my  eyes  away  from  her  and  saw  that
Elizabeth Gwydion was standing at the bottom of the stairs. Pale as something drawn with
pen and ink, and her lips were stretched wide in what I couldn't have ever named a smile.
Well, the only thing I could think was dear sweet Mary save us all. So  I  did  what  any
good Catholic girl would have done. I crossed myself.
Miss Lucy's eyes flew open, wide and blank as a winter's sky, and she collapsed to the
carpet in a froth of wind-whipped  gown.  Downstairs,  Elizabeth  Gwydion  shrieked;  when  I
looked to her she was staring at me, and the hate of it fair burned me where I stood. Her
eyes smoked, I tell you, and I thought she might strike me dead in my shoes.
Right then Mrs. Westenra came out of her bedroom, her hair  still  in  night-braids,  and
cried out at the sight of her daughter spilled on the carpet. Poor dear lady, I remembered
what Mr. Gage had said about her health; she looked fair to drop. But she got down on her
knees  and  took  Miss  Lucy's  pale  hands  in  hers,  and  said,  "Mary  Margaret,  fetch  some
brandy. Immediately."
Well,  of  course  the  brandy  was  locked  up—you  don't  leave  brandy  lying  where  any
servant could sneak a glass, do you? So I went for Mr. Gage, straight through the kitchen
where  Mrs.  Brockham,  red-faced,  was  bent  over  the  pots  and  Jeannette,  parlor  maid  or
not, was whisking eggs with just enough force to be surly about it,  straight  to  the  closed
door of the butler's pantry, where I knocked.
He didn't answer. Well, of course I knocked  again, and  said  his  name.  Mrs.  Brockham
left off her stirring to stare at me. I knocked again, fair pounding this time.
"Here now," Mrs. Brockham frowned at me. "What's the trouble, Mary Margaret?"
"I need brandy for Miss Lucy!"
We  went  through  a  bit  more  knocking  and  rattling  before  she  opened  the  door  and
went right in. And screamed, her hands flying to her mouth. I squeezed around her and saw
Mr.  Gage  lying  half  across  his  desk,  his  eyes  bulging  and  gray.  Dead  for  hours,  likely.  I
suppose I might've screamed, too. It brought Jeannette running, who dropped to the floor
in a dead faint, and George, the footman, who as  a  man  was  too  mindful  of  his  dignity  to
faint, though he swayed a bit and looked very pale.
"Better tell the mistress," Mrs. Brockham  said,  voice  gone  all  weak.  "Get  on  with  you,
girl!"
I went, my shoes knocking  on hard wood. Mr. Gage, dead?  Butlers  didn't  die,  at  least
not in service, not in that undignified way like they were no better than the rest of us. Up

the stairs I went, my heart hammering in my chest.
Crouching there next to miss Lucy and the mistress was Elizabeth Gwydion, with a glass
of brandy in her hand that she held to Miss Lucy's lips.
I wasn't thinking, mind you. Not a bit of it. I reached out and I slapped it  out  of  her
hand, sent it crashing against he polished wood of the wall.
Mrs. Westenra shot to her feet and snapped  "Mary  Margaret!  Whatever  has  got  into
you? Stop this instant!"
I gulped down some air and tried to steady my voice, but I didn't take my eyes off of
Elizabeth Gwydion. Behind me I heard the whisper of voices—Penny and Kate  and  Alice  at
the foot of the stairs, watching.
"I  sent  you  for  brandy,"  Mrs.  Westenra  continued  coldly.  "When  you  didn't  return
Elizabeth was good enough to fetch some. Now explain yourself."
"Mr. Gage," I managed to say. "Mr. Gage has passed, ma'am."
"Oh," Mrs. Westenra said faintly. "Oh my. That is most— distressing. How—"
"Don't know, ma'am."
"I see." Mrs. Westenra  took  a  deep  breath.  "I've  already  sent  for  Dr.  Seward  about
Lucy. When he arrives, I'll have him examine the body. I'll address the staff presently."
"Yes ma'am." I dropped a very small curtsy and turned to do what she'd ordered,  but
she stopped me one more time.
"Mary Margaret," she said. "Tell Cook to make it a cold breakfast."
Mind you, she wasn't  a  cruel  woman,  Mrs.  Westenra;  she  was  a  good  employer,  never
harsh, never unfair. But if you ever wanted to know  the  difference  between  upstairs  and
down, there it was in the one short command. Mr. Gage was dead, and all it meant was a cold
breakfast instead of a hot one.
Do? What could I do? We ate our cold meal, waited for Dr. Seward to come and tell us
it was Mr. Gage's heart, most unfortunate, but natural enough. Took him all of a minute to
glance at the body and say so, and then he was off to Miss Lucy.
The  minute  he  was  out  of  sight,  Alice  began  to  cry,  and  Penny  too,  both  good  for
nothing the rest of the day because they  were  sure  the  house  was  doomed.  Floors  didn't
get  scrubbed,  or  the  carpets  swept,  or  the  brasses  polished.  With  Mr.  Gage  and  Mrs.
Ravenstock gone, Mrs. Brockham didn't have the heart to force us to it.
Jeannette  run  off  that  night,  not  even  asking  for  a  reference.  That  left  me,  Penny,
Alice, Kate, Mrs. Brockham, and George.
And Elizabeth Gwydion, of course. Herself.

Poison? Oh, of course it was, Nora, whatever Dr. Seward might have said. Herself had
tried  to  kill  me  already,  and  she'd  done  for  Gracie  and  Mr.  Gage  and  probably  for  Mrs.
Ravenstock as well. If I'd had any sense I would have packed my carpetbag  and  followed
Jeannette. But I never did have sense, everyone's said so.
I stayed, instead. And that night, I dreamed of Whitby Abbey.
In my dream I followed Elizabeth Gwydion there to those tumbled white stones, and in
moonlight  she  was  all  marble  and  shadow.  Mind  you,  the  place  is  harmless  enough  in
daylight—I'd climbed the place from one end to the other, as a girl. But this dream-abbey
was drenched with black, and every shadow hid horror.
Dracula? Oh, aye, I'll give you Dracula, you silly bint, because that's who came to her
there in the dark shattered ribs of the church. He poured himself out of the shadows, tall,
he was, tall  and  cream-pale,  with  heavy  foreign  features—red,  red  lips  the  only  touch  of
color to him.
The evil of him made my skin crawl, even as far away  as  I  was.  He  looked  like  a  man,
but he wasn't, he was more, he was worse, and he stank of rotting blood.
Elizabeth dropped right to her knees in front of him, drowning herself in a thick puddle
of fog.
"Well?" His soft, deep voice carried to me on a dream wind. "Is it done?"
"She  is  prepared  for  you,  master,"  Elizabeth  said,  and  she  looked  up  at  him  with  a
slave's devotion, fair turned my stomach. That accent to her voice, the one she claimed was
Welsh,  it  sounded  thicker  now,  and  I  was  dead  certain  it  came  from  farther  away  than
Cardiff.
"Excellent. I will go to her soon. The others?"
"Servants of no consequence." Elizabeth's face twisted in sudden distaste. "There's a
meddling maid who deserves your personal attention."
"I do not stoop to battling servants," he said. "If you think she does not recognize her
place, then show it to her, Elizabeth my beauty. Teach her the pleasure of obedience."
She groveled to him. She crawled to him, crawled. It made me sick to see anyone, even
Elizabeth, stripped of dignity like  that.  He  put  a  booted  foot  against  her  ribs  and  rolled
her on her back.
The  pleasure  of  obedience,  indeed.  I'd  see  him  in  hell  first,  and  her  too.  At  that
moment he—the thing—turned and met my eyes. Not surprised at seeing me—he'd known  I
was there the whole time.
It  was  like  staring  into  the  sun,  all  that  blinding  hunger.  He  drank  me  down  like  a
bracing tot of hot gin.
"Well."  He  smiled  slowly,  those  red  lips  parting  like  the  edges  of  a  new  wound.  "A

dreamer."
He  rushed  at  me,  darkness  and  the  stench  of  rotten  blood,  and  I  screamed  myself
awake.
*    *    *    *    *
Dr. Van Helsing had been in and out of the house by that time, though I'd had aught to
do with him. He'd come back to do some terrible strange thing to Miss Lucy,  taking  blood
from Mr. Holmwood and putting it in her veins. A Godless thing to do, I still say; no good can
come of a thing like that.  Still,  Dr.  Van  Helsing  had  a  kind  way  about  him,  and  I  saw  him
cross himself once, when they were praying over Miss Lucy. So I knew it was likely we had a
bit in common—and, anyway, he was foreign.
I made myself bold and talked to him uninvited.
Yes, of  course  I  know  it  could  have  gotten  me  shown  the  door!  Blessed  Mary,  well  I
know  it!  But  I  had  to  do  something,  so  I  spoke  to  him  about  the  dreams,  and  Elizabeth
Gwydion, and all the deaths below stairs. Which he hadn't heard, of course—the deaths of
servants weren't worth mention, I suppose. And he  was  gravely  worried  about  it.  Did  you
know he smelled like caraway  seeds even then? And a sharp mint he liked to chew. He was
ever so nice to me, and he told me to watch Elizabeth Gwydion close, and tell him what she
did. He'd be gone that night and the next day, going back to his home, but he'd receive my
report on his return.
Mind you, the household was in chaos. No butler, no housekeeper—poor Mrs. Brockham
wasn't up to the task. And the maids were in hysterics,  terrified  of  losing  their  positions
but even more terrified of leaving them. George, the footman, insisted nothing whatsoever
was wrong, but then he was a dim sort, and as the only man in the house, I suppose he had
to say it. So there was no one left to tell me that I couldn't stay with Miss Lucy. I sat up
outside her room that night, and when Elizabeth Gwydion came to the door I told her right
sharp  to  be  on  her  way.  Later  that  day,  going  down  the  stairs  I'd  traveled  at  least  a
thousand times, something wrenched hard at my foot and I fell. It was a fearful long fall,
but I turned on my side, wrenched  my  shoulder,  bruised  something  terrible—and  I  didn't
break my  neck,  like  poor  Mrs.  Ravenstock.  Must  have  been  a  terrible  disappointment  for
Miss High-and-Mighty Elizabeth.
After  that,  it  was  a  quiet  night.  I  suppose  I  fell  asleep  in  the  chair  outside  of  Miss
Lucy's room. I woke up in pitch darkness, and something cold was touching my throat.
Well, you might imagine, I drew breath to scream, but a hand  clapped  over  my  mouth,
and I pushed, pushed hard, threw myself off of the chair and down to the carpet. This time
I did  scream,  and  loud  enough  to  wake  the  dead.  Wasn't  more  than  a  minute  I  suppose
before light bloomed gold  in  Mrs.  Westenra's  doorway,  and  there  she  was  staring  at  me,
her face gone dead pale, her eyes big as saucers.
Lying half across me was Miss Lucy, her skin ice-cold, her color like ashes. She had two
wounds  in her neck,  fresh  drops  of  blood  staining  the  white  linen  of  her  nightgown.  Poor
thing, she was like a breathing corpse. I got to my feet, and Mrs. Westenra  bent  down  to

help,  but  her  color  was  almost  as  bad  as  Miss  Lucy's.  I  couldn't  drag  the  girl,  it  wasn't
proper, but George was nowhere to be seen, nor any of the other servants.
Except Elizabeth Gwydion, coming, up the steps with a candle. She was smiling.
"I'll help you," she said, and took Miss Lucy's feet. I hated the  idea,  but  what  choice
did I have, then? We  carried  her  into  the  bedroom  and  laid  her  in  the  disordered  bed;  I
tucked her carefully in, added blankets from the wardrobe, and closed the open window.
All the garlic flowers Dr. Van Helsing had left around the room had been swept into a
corner. The necklace he'd asked Miss Lucy to wear was broken on the floor.
I looked up and Elizabeth Gwydion was staring into me, digging her eyes  in  like  claws.
Smiling.
"Too late," she said.
"We'll see about  that,"  I  snapped,  and  saw  that  Penny  had  finally  worked  up  enough
courage to come down, and lurked like some hunted animal behind the doorframe, only her
round pale face showing. "Penny! Get George and tell him to drive like Jehu for Dr. Seward.
Go now!"
She went, her bare feet padding on the carpet. Elizabeth Gwydion never quit smiling.
"Mary Margaret—" Mrs. Westenra, who'd been standing quietly by my side, put a hand
over  mine  as  I  straightened  blankets  atop  Miss  Lucy.  "That  will  be  all.  I'll  sit  with  my
daughter."
Elizabeth  Gwydion  lost  her  smile.  She  didn't  like  that,  didn't  like  it  at  all.  She'd
thought Mrs. Westenra defeated, I saw.
But she bobbed a curtsy and said, "Tea, ma'am?"
"Fine," Mrs. Westenra snapped. Elizabeth went.
"Ma'am—" It was terrible forward of me to say anything, but  I  had  to.  "Ma'am,  best
not to drink anything she brings you. Until Dr. Seward arrives."
She blinked and nodded. After a  moment  she  looked  at  me  again,  and  there  was  new
strength in her eyes.
"You'll defend my daughter?" she asked. "Against anyone?"
"Yes ma'am."
She took her hand out of the pocket of her nightrobe. She was holding a shining silver
paper knife, and she passed it to me and folded my fingers around the warm handle.
"Take it," she said. "Use it if you have to."
I left her and went downstairs to warn Cook that the battle was on.

But Cook was gone. Whether she'd run or been dragged away, we never knew; no trace
of her was  ever  found.  Penny  had  found  George  and  sent  him  on  his  way,  but  as  the  day
dawned,  then dragged on, Dr. Seward didn't come.  There  was  no  telephone  at  Hillingham,
though the Westenras had one in the London house;  I  missed  it  most  sorely,  because  help
was miles away. Still, Dr. Seward would come. Surely.
Towards  five  I  sent  Kate  out  to  walk  into  Whitby  and  find  help—the  constable,  if
nothing else. She'd only been gone a few minutes when she  came  back,  screaming  like  the
house was afire, to tell me that George was lying dead, the carriage smashed, on the rocks
at the turn of the road. After that I couldn't get any of them to go.
So night fell, and we were all alone. Four maids, two ladies, and Elizabeth Gwydion. But
Dr. Van Helsing would be back early in the morning. All we had to do was see daylight again.
So I told the others, and so it was.
But it was a terrible long night. Dead quiet outside, not even a breath of wind. Just the
crash of the sea in the distance, and the sense that the whole house was holding its breath.
Mrs. Westenra dismissed Elizabeth. Oh, you should have seen the woman's  face—cold,
haughty, amazed. But Mrs. Westenra was too soft to make the woman leave the house in the
dark; she settled for sending her to her room and telling Penny to watch the door.
It was  close  on  midnight  when  I  took  Penny  a  cup  of  hot  cocoa  and  found  the  chair
outside  of  Elizabeth  Gwydion's  room  sitting  empty,  though  the  seat  of  it  was  still  warm.
And the door open just a crack.
I pushed it to find poor dear Penny lying on the cold wood floor, struggling. She flung
out a hand to me. Elizabeth Gwydion had hold of her feet, and stooped over her, like an evil
black shadow—
Yes. Him. Dracula. He tore loose of Penny's throat and looked at me, parted bloody lips
in a smile, and his teeth were sharp and white, and Elizabeth Gwydion let go  of  Penny  and
shot  to  her  feet,  grabbed  hold  of  my  arms.  I  cried  out  and  tried  to  fight  but  she  was
horrible strong, and the stale  smell  of  her,  the  rotting  stench  of  him, made  me  faint  and
sick.
I suppose what saved me was the crucifix, which I'd mended and still had hung around
my neck. It swung free and caught the light, sending Dracula reeling back. Remember that
I told you I never saw him make himself dog or wolf or bat?  I  saw  him  turn  to  a  stinking
black mist like flies that whipped away through the open window. At the time I thought he
was  afraid  of  me.  Now  I  think  it  was  just  that  he  was  impatient  to  be  about  his  other
business.
Elizabeth still had hold of me. She was fearful strong, but I had a lifetime of scrubbing
and lifting and hard work behind me, and I threw her off—
—Out the open window. I rushed to it, hoping to  see  her  crushed  on  the  stone  below,
but she was clinging to the brick, clinging with needle-sharp nails. Her pale face grinned up
at me, and I screamed; she  laughed  and  scuttled  away  down  the  wall  like  a  black-shelled

beetle.
I ducked  back  in  and  slammed  the  window  sash  and  bent  to  help  Penny  to  her  feet.
That was when I heard the crash of glass, and the screams.
You know  how it ended, I suppose.  Poor  Mrs.  Westenra's  heart  gave  out.  Miss  Lucy's
own letter says a dog came through her window, though I never saw it; we found her lying
pale and gray on the bed with her mother dead beside her. Penny, Kate, Alice, and I did the
best we cold—covered the broken window,  wrapped  Mrs.  Westenra  in  blankets,  and  took
Miss Lucy downstairs away from the horror.
"Mother," she kept crying, and wanted to go  back.  But  there  wasn't  no  use  in  it,  and
besides she was too weak. I took everyone into the withdrawing room and found the liquor
cabinet standing open. The brandy was empty—George, no doubt,  which  would  explain  the
wrecked carriage—but the sherry was still full. I poured everyone a stiff measure, and we
sat close to Miss Lucy while she wept. A sip or two of sherry was all she would take, though
the rest of us drank up willingly enough; Penny even gulped down what Miss Lucy wouldn't.
"What'll we do, Mary Margaret?" Penny asked, her eyes huge and terrified. She had a
wound on her neck like Miss Lucy's, but she didn't seem the worse for it. Just tired.
"We'll stay here," I said. "Let morning come, and Dr. Van Helsing arrive, before we do
anything more. Here, Miss Lucy. Are you warm enough?"
She  was  shivering,  poor  thing,  though  we'd  wrapped  her  up.  I  felt  warm  enough.
Over-warm, perhaps. Time  passed,  as  time  does  even  in  the  worst  of  circumstances;  Miss
Lucy wept, and we tried to comfort her.
It must have been near an hour later when I looked up and found Alice curled asleep in
a red Moroccan  chair.  Kate  had  nodded  off,  too.  As  I  watched,  Penny  dropped  her  glass
and sank down on the fainting couch, her long dark hair spilling over the carpet.
My legs felt weak. When I tried to rise from where I sat, I found I couldn't. My arms
had gone numb, and I could feel it stealing through me now like a cold wind.
Laudanum, to put us fast asleep.
"Miss  Lucy?"  I  whispered.  She  didn't  seem  to  hear  me.  The  door  of  the  withdrawing
room opened without even a creak, and there in the dark stood Elizabeth Gwydion.
"Come,"  she  said  to  Miss  Lucy.  And  Miss  Lucy,  who  hadn't  but  touched  the  sherry,
wandered  away,  leaving  the  blankets  on  the  floor.  I  couldn't  follow,  couldn't  master  my
own legs enough to try.
Elizabeth came straight to me and looked me right in the eyes, grinning like a skull, and
said,  "My  master's  seeing  to  your  Miss  Lucy.  But  it's  my  privilege  to  see  to  you,  you
meddling cur."
I started to pray then, because I didn't think I could move. The world was going gray,
the edges fraying, and she bent close to me, her lips cold on my neck, sucking like a baby at

the  breast,  and  I  knew  in  the  next  instant  she'd  bite,  and  suck  blood  like  red  milk.  I'd
never feared anything so much, never felt such despair.
Something in my robe's pocket felt hot against me. Hot as the sun. Holy Mary.
Mrs. Westenra's paper  knife!  I  grabbed  it  and  stabbed  for  her,  not  able  to  feel  my
hand, nor the shock when it hit. I only knew I'd made the  target  when  I  saw  her  eyes  go
wide and strange, saw her stumble back  from  me  and  sit  down  clumsily  on  the  floor  with
her legs splayed.
The  hilt  of  the  silver  paper  knife  glittered  on  her  black  dress.  I'd  pinned  it  to  her
heart. She looked amazed.
"You—you English dog—"
"Irish," I snapped.
She was still trying to understand that when she died. Yes, I killed her—but here's the
thing, Nora: as she died, she turned to ashes. Ashes, no different than you'd sweep up out
of  the  grate  in  the  morning.  Ashes  that  stirred  in  the  breeze  of  the  door  swinging  open
again.
Her master stood there, looking  at  the  mess  I'd  made  of  Elizabeth  Gwydion,  and  his
lips drew back from his teeth. His face was ruddy now, his lips smeared with blood,  and  I
thought  of  Miss  Lucy  with  a  terrible  sick  pang.  I  didn't  have  the  knife  anymore,  I  had
nothing to protect me but my small crucifix and my fear.
"You've killed my servant," he said in some surprise.
"I'd kill her again if she'd get up," I said tartly. "Miss Lucy—"
"Is none of your concern." He walked  around me, staring at me with red-flecked eyes.
Like a lion that wasn't quite hungry enough to pounce. "I could kill you all tonight."
I couldn't think of any reason he wouldn't. Penny, Kate, Alice… all  helpless.  Me  only  a
breath away from it. The laudanum was a thick black pool in me, and I was drowning in it.
"Go ahead," I said, as if I didn't even care. "If you'd stoop so low."
He smiled at me then, Dracula did. "For you, I might bend my  principles,  little  one.  Or
make you my own."
"Go to Hell!" I shot back, amazed at my own bravery. I'd never cursed  in  my  life,  not
like that, certainly not to a man. And still he smiled.
"Soon," he promised. "The dead travel fast."
I felt my knees buckle then, and I fell, face down in the ashes of Elizabeth Gwydion. I
rolled over, spitting out the bitterness of her, and saw him looking down at me from such a
far, far distance. His cold fingers caressed my face.

"No,"  he  said.  "I  don't  think  I  will  do  you  the  favor  of  killing  you.  Explain  this
tomorrow, to your betters. Explain your drunkenness and your dead  mistress.  Perhaps  I'll
come to kill you when you're starving on the streets."
His words struck fear in me, absolute fear, because he was right. I fought the dark as
he walked away, but there was nothing I could do but fall. I dreamed, you know. This time
no  adders,  no  abbeys,  no  pale  wasting  ladies.  This  time  I  dreamed  I  was  in  a  great
cathedral, and I lit a candle to the smiling statue of Mary, and I prayed.
I  prayed  until  the  morning,  when  Dr.  Seward  arrived  at  the  house  and  found  Mrs.
Westenra dead and Miss Lucy dying.
No, no, I'm all right. A fleck of coal dust in my eye, most likely. But it was a sad house,
very sad. And no one to blame it on but four drunken servants, which Dr. Seward promptly
did, though of course later he said he knew all along we'd been drugged.
It was Dr. Van Helsing who came to our rescue, finding positions for Kate and Alice. Dr.
Van Helsing himself who gave me and Penny posts here in  his  house.  Do  you  know  what  he
said to me, Nora? He said, "There are monsters  all  around  us,  Mary  Margaret.  Some  that
people in my position will never see, but perhaps you will."
So  here  I  am.  Doing  the  same  ironing,  the  same  scrubbing,  the  same  sweeping.  Some
things never change, as I said. And some do.
Yes, that one's good. Hand me the next. Now, you must put a good sharp point on them,
Nora. Sharp enough to pierce skin like butter. It's got to go right to the monster's heart,
you see? Dr. Van Helsing and the others are going after Dracula,  but  like  I  told  you,  this
has nothing to do with Dracula. It's below stairs business.
Poor Penny's lying in her coffin in the parlor, waiting on the undertaker. And she were
bitten by Dracula that night at Hillingham. If she wakes, we've got to do for  her  like  the
Doctor did for Miss Lucy. Test the knife. Sharp enough to cut bone?
Oh, wipe your tears, girl. And say your prayers. There's plenty below stairs who might
need the same mercy, before this is all said and done.
We care for our own.

Dear Mr. Bernard Shaw
Judith Proctor
1st October 1893 
22 Barkston Gardens 
Earls Court, S.W. 
 
Dear Mr. Bernard Shaw,
 
I write to you because I'm not quite sure who else to write to. You, I am sure, will tell
me honestly and fully what you believe of these circumstances. I know  you well  enough  to
know  that  you  will  not  gloss  over  anything  in  your  reply  and  that  if  you  feel  I  am  being
foolish, you will be blunt enough to tell me.
Be the critic for me once more and tell me if this speaks to you of something possible
or simply an overactive imagination on my part. You're as firmly grounded in the real world
as anyone I know— your play last year on slum landlords had all of London talking—usually
to tear your name to shreds.
I'm wandering off the topic—I'm even being serious—perhaps that tells you how much
this has distressed me!
We're playing King Lear. You know that anyway… You see, I'm still dithering.
To  begin—for  I  shall  never  get  going  if  I  don't—it  started  about  two  weeks  ago.  I
think it was Wednesday, though it might have been Thursday.
Partway through the play, I became aware of someone in one of the boxes. Now that's
nothing unusual. We've been playing to virtually full houses most nights and the  boxes  are
popular. You wouldn't believe what people sometimes get up to in the boxes— the play must
be  quite  a  distraction  to  them.  This  man  was  watching  the  play  though.  He  wasn't  just
watching  it,  he  was  virtually  mesmerised.  You'd  think  he'd  never  been  to  the  theatre
before.  Henry  was  giving  a  bravura  performance  as  Lear  and  I  was  doing  pretty  well

myself.  I'm  really  too  old  to  play  Cordelia  now,  but  when  the  audience  believes  in  it,  I
believe in it too. It's a conspiracy between us and as  long  as  they  keep  paying  to  see  me,
I'm happy to oblige.
The box made him hard to see in the darkness, but I knew he was there—I could feel
him.
Last week, he was back haunting me again. That was definitely a Monday. It's easier to
get  tickets  at  short  notice  on  Monday,  because  we're  rarely  full  then.  Same  seat—he
obviously preferred the boxes. There was something so intense about him—like a  traveller
in  a  desert  who'd  finally  reached  an  oasis.  He  wasn't  just  thirsty—he  was  desperate.
Something was different this time though, he wasn't watching Henry, he was watching me.
Just me.
I've  been  watched  before—you  get  all  sorts  in  theatres.  Some  can  get  a  little
obsessed. This wasn't the normal admirer hanging over the balcony though.  He  kept  back,
and I could barely see him beyond the shadow of the box. I couldn't get a chance to look
properly at him;  I  have  to  concentrate  on  the  part  when  I'm  performing.  It's  so  easy  to
become distracted—sometimes the slightest thing can throw me and I lose my lines.
That's what was so strange—I knew he was watching me even when I couldn't see him.
Have you ever had that sensation? The feeling of eyes looking at the back of your neck?
I'd swear his eyes were red, but it was probably just a trick of the limelight.
I never did get a good look at his face. Even when he stood to applaud  at  the  end,  he
was still in the darkness. All I could really tell was that he seemed  to  be  well-dressed;  he
looked like a man with money.
Actually,  that's  probably  how  he  got  along  to  Henry's  post-show  supper  a  few  days
later. Bram Stoker—Henry's manager— ' has a real nose for possible investors. He does all
Henry's correspondence and I honestly don't know  where Henry would be without him. He
corresponds  with  theatres  for  us,  arranges  tours,  and  leaves  Henry  free  to  do  what  he
does best—acting.
I knew  the  stranger  was  there  the  moment  I  entered  the  room.  He  stood  out  in  the
crowd, there was a space around him and you don't normally get much of that  at  Henry's
parties. I'll try and describe him for you, though memory may make him more dramatic than
he  actually  was.  He  was  tall,  almost  six  foot  in  height.  He'd  a  real  beak  of  a  nose—you
could have cast him as Julius Caesar  any  day—a  black  moustache,  a  pointed  beard,  and  a
hard cruel face. His teeth were pointed—like a dog's canines. I didn't like the look of him
at all.
He became aware of me immediately. Coming  over  to  me,  he  bowed.  "May  I  introduce
myself, Miss Terry? Count Dracula."
He  had  a  European  accent,  though  I  couldn't  place  where  from.  It  certainly  wasn't
French or German. I really didn't fancy talking to him, but one has to make the effort. One
is expected to sparkle at such affairs, so sparkle one does.

I made him feel welcome and asked him where he was from. He wasn't too  pleased  at
that.
"You can tell I am not English?"
"You do have rather a strong accent," though I hastened to add, "but your command of
our language is superb. You have obviously studied for many years."
That seemed to mollify him a little. "I wish to come among you as a gentleman, a man of
learning. I have no desire to be taken for an inferior."
Well, I had his measure now. "That could never be," I assured him. "Your clothing, your
manner, and your speech all declare you to be a nobleman by birth."
Now  he  was  happy—positively  preened  himself.  "The  clothing  is  fashionable?  I  read
your  newspapers,  but  they  are  short  of  information  on  reliable  tailors.  I  do  not  entirely
trust tradesmen who advertise. I asked my  legal  representatives  to  recommend  a  firm  to
me."
I looked him up and down. You can't make a silk purse out of a sow's  ear,  but  they'd
certainly done their best. The cloth draped in the way that only really expensive fabrics do
and the cut was excellent. "You must tell me the name of your firm," I said. "If their legal
advice is as good as their choice in tailors, I might need them some day."
"I sent my measurements in advance; my wardrobe was waiting for me when I arrived."
I  still  didn't  like  him,  but  he  was  beginning  to  impress  me.  He  certainly  planned
carefully enough—he'd never have made an actor. He'd also dodged my question, although I
didn't think about that until later. Maybe he would have made an actor after all.
Loretta waved at me from the other side of the room and I tried to make my excuses
to  go  and  join  her,  but  Dracula  simply  took  no  notice.  He  had  that  kind  of  natural
arrogance that comes from having people leap to do your bidding all your  life.  At  least  he
was polite about it—well, more or less.
"Miss Terry, I must speak to you about the play. Why is it different from what I have
read?"
"Didn't the reviews do us justice?"
"You  misunderstand  me.  The  play  was  not  performed  as  it  was  written.  Why  did  you
change  the  words  of  Shakespeare?"  (You  know,  you'd  have  loved  him.  You're  always
criticising  Henry's  version  of  Shakespeare.  You  ought  to  be  a  theatre  critic  instead  of
shredding musicians.)
"A play is a complex thing…"I began, when Bram came to my rescue. Or Henry's rescue
if  you  look  at  it  another  way.  I  really  believe  that  Henry  has  no  more  devoted  fan  than
Bram Stoker.
"Henry Irving is a creative genius!" Bram declared. "The words written by a playwright

are  just  the  starting  point.  There  is  nothing  sacrosanct  about  them.  They  are  clay  to  be
taken and moulded by an actor to suit his needs."
"I have re-read the play," the count  declared.  "Mr.  Irving  has  changed  the  words.  He
has got them wrong."
Whoops… Beard not the lion in his lair… (Do lions have beards?)
Bram  exploded.  When  a  six-foot-two,  twelve-stone  Irishman  explodes,  you  tend  to
know it.
"Have you no soul!"
The count took an abrupt step back in the face of that fury.
"Don't you know genius when you see it? Henry Irving breathes life into cold words. He
puts passion where there was only paper. There isn't his equal on the  whole  of  the  British
stage."
Dracula's protest was washed away in the onslaught. (I really do think you might have
felt quite sorry for the poor man.)
"If you used that play as written, would it have the impact, the drama of what you saw
tonight?"
"Have you ever seen a better performance? Have you?"
I felt compelled to intervene. "Bram, dearest, he's only been in England a few weeks."
Didn't  help  of  course.  "So  he  thinks  himself  qualified  to  judge  English  theatre  when
he's hardly even watched any?"
Dracula  finally  got  a  word  in  edgeways.  "Your  theatre  is  excellent.  I  have  greatly
enjoyed the performances. But is it right to change what has been written? Would not the
play be even more excellent if performed as written? Would you rewrite the novels of your
great authors?"
Philosophy at that hour of the night? What is the world coming to? The argument was
obviously good  for  ages  yet.  I  took  my  chance,  left  them  to  one  another's  company,  and
slipped  away  to  join  Loretta.  I  spent  the  rest  of  my  evening  in  dedicated  pursuit  of  the
trivial and I'm glad to report that I found it.
The next day, the 22nd, an hour before the show, I found Dracula waiting outside my
dressing room. The stage doorman must have let him in. I wonder how much the count tipped
him?
"My  dear  Miss  Terry,  I  wish  to  apologise  for  last  night.  It  was  not  my  wish  to
embarrass you. May  I  apologise?"  He  held  out  a  ring  in  the  palm  of  his  hand.  The  oddest
thing—I  hadn't  noticed  before—he  had  hair  growing  on  his  palm,  black  and  wiry.  It  was
rather unnerving; I've never seen anything like it before.

Let me tell you though, that ring was several carats worth of apology. (Tell me, why do
men always give jewellery rather than money?) I  accepted  it  with  the  best  grace  I  could
muster and thanked him.
"I find your city fascinating," he  said  slowly.  "There  are  few  people  living  in  the  high
mountains  of  Transylvania  and  they  are  ignorant  and  superstitious.  There  are  no  men  of
learning there, no people who understand art or  literature.  It  is  possible  for  me  to  order
books, to learn other languages, and to study the works of other great men. But with whom
can I discuss these things? Who can make them come alive?
"Shakespeare  is  perhaps  your  greatest  playwright.  I  read  his  words  on  paper  and
thought that I understood them. I saw the play performed upon the stage and realised that
I understood nothing at all. The rhythms and poetry of the words are invisible to  me  until
they are spoken, and then they come alive. They speak of possibilities, of things that an old
man had forgotten and the memory of laughter. It is a lifetime since I laughed, an eternity
since I cried."
I get sickened by continual flattery, but he meant it. I'd swear he meant every word.
What kind of a man did that make him?
"Is it really so empty where you live? Surely there must be towns? Theatres?"
"There  are  travelling  entertainers  who  amuse  the  peasants  with  shadow  puppets  and
old stories, but any attempt at a play is crude indeed. They play their parts with enthusiasm
enough, but they do not become the part as you do. There is no emotion, no truth to it."
I felt then that he was drawn to the theatre because his own life had no emotion in it.
All he could find to fill his need was the synthetic emotion that we supply  to  any  who  will
come and watch. And yet there can be truth in a good play, of a kind  anyway.  I  pondered
that as I went into the dressing room and checked over my sticks of greasepaint. He stood,
hesitant, in the doorway. I was reluctant to dismiss him, but I needed  to  get  ready.  I  sat
down and looked at my reflection—the empty doorway framed my head.
I heard his clothes rustle and spun round. He was still there!
I could not have turned back again to save my life. To turn around would not only have
left him standing behind me, it might also have allowed me to confirm what the mirror had
told me. There are some things that you don't want to be certain of.
My lips took over and started talking even while my mind was frozen in panic. "Count, I
really must get ready for this evening's performance. Why not see me some time when I'm
less busy? How about Sunday afternoon in St. James' park?"
He dipped his head in a gesture that was half nod and half bow. "Would three o'clock
be suitable?"
"At the end of the lake nearest the palace."
"I will be there." He took my hand, and I'm proud to say that I didn't  shake  when  he
kissed it. Theatrical training has its uses now and then.

I was safe, at least until Sunday. A foolish invitation on my part, but I'd had to get rid
of  him  fast  and  that  was  the  fastest  way  I  could  think  of.  Anyway,  I'd  no  intention  of
keeping the appointment.
What was he? A demon? An angel? Or do you think I imagined it about the mirror? I'm
not sure myself now. Maybe I just had an attack of nerves because he was standing behind
me? I don't know. I don't trust my own judgement any more.
I didn't tell anyone about it—I'd have felt such an idiot. They'd probably have decided
my eyes were playing up again. It's not quite so hard writing to you, because I can put the
words  on  paper  and  that's  easier  than  saying  them  out  loud.  It's  easy  to  imagine  I'm
talking to myself, just keeping a journal.
I actually did feel a little guilty about Sunday. Was  it  just  his  appearance  that  made
me so uneasy? None of us get prettier as we get older. Men can't help the  looks  they  are
born with— Dracula had been  nothing  but  courteous  to  me.  I  was  almost  relieved  when  I
got a really bad headache that saved me the  necessity  of  inventing  an  excuse.  Besides,  it
was a terrible day, pouring with rain all afternoon.
Still,  I  should  have  known  putting  him  off  was  just  delaying  the  inevitable.  He  was
waiting outside my dressing room after the show on Monday. I made a mental  note  to  ask
Henry to fire the doorman—I'd given strict instructions that nobody was to be allowed in.
"Miss  Terry,  I  would  not  intrude  upon  you  here  and  now,  but  I  must  speak  with  you
sometime."
I tried to apologise for Sunday, saying that if I'd had his address, I'd have contacted
him to say I was unable to make it. He brushed it aside—wasn't relevant. There were things
he wanted to discuss—things that were important to him.
Why me? There's people enough in London. Why couldn't he talk to somebody else? No
point in asking really—I recognised the symptoms all too well. People love me—not for what
I am, but for what they imagine I am.
In the end, I'd no  choice  but  to  agree  to  another  meeting.  I  probably  wouldn't  have
kept  that  one  either,  except  that  George  the  doorman  swore  blind  that  he'd  never  let
Dracula into the theatre that night. He'd never even seen him. I think the reason I believed
him was that he voluntarily admitted to accepting a large bribe the  first  time.  If  Dracula
was able to get into the back of the theatre without going through the stage door…
I met Dracula outside the actor's church  on  the  Sabbath  and  trusted  in  the  Lord  to
look after his own.
When  I  came  out  from  the  service,  the  day  was  bright  and  sunny.  I  could  hear  a
blackbird singing somewhere, its song affirming everything that's good about life. Dracula
stood waiting for me under the church portico. Daylight seemed to diminish him; he looked
no different and yet—somehow—I feared him less when I saw him by the light of the  day
star.

He bowed and asked me what my pleasure was. I chose to walk. This Old Smokey  was
clear of fog for once and I wanted to enjoy it while I could. I had a need to be aware  of
everything around me, to have people passing and to see couples out strolling. I didn't offer
him my arm and he didn't ask for it; instead, we walked side by side and just talked.
"Your  friend  Stoker  told  me  that  a  hundred  years  ago,  the  ending  of  King  Lear  was
changed to allow Cordelia to live.  She  marries  Edgar  and  lives  happily  ever  after.  He  said
this version was popular, but now the proper ending has been restored.  Why?  What  is  the
purpose of tragedy? Why is her death so important?"
"Tate changed the ending because people are fond of 'poetic justice.'  They  like  good
to triumph over evil. It reassures people, convinces them the world is a safe place."
"But Irving chose to use the original ending? Why? Cordelia is the heroine. She is young;
she is beautiful; she is loyal. Why do you prefer her to die?"
"Because it means that you'll never forget the play. If Lear and his daughter both die
needless deaths, you'll cry for  them  and  you  will  think  far  harder  as  to  the  reasons  why
they died. Cordelia's love and duty carry more weight when she pays the fullest price."
He was silent for a while. I studied his profile as we walked, that beaked nose and the
strong forehead. He reminded me of a bird of prey, something cruel that swoops down and
seizes young birds in its talons. Eventually he spoke: "Is it more important to live  or  to  be
remembered?"
"It's more important to live—that's  why  tragedy  exists.  Tragedy  gives  us  the  illusion
that other people will remember us when we are gone. We have no choice as regards death,
remembrance is closest we can come—we live on in the minds of other people."
I wonder if anyone will remember when I'm gone? Will they wander past  my  memorial
and say "Ellen Terry? Who was she?" We all like to think our memories are immortal, but of
course, they aren't. All things considered, they're probably more likely to  stub  their  toes
on my tombstone and curse.
I  think  Dracula  understood  people's  desire  for  immortality.  He  asked  me,  quite
seriously, if I would rather live for ever or be remembered for ever.
I laughed at that one  (well,  how  can  you  answer  a  question  like  that  seriously?),  and
said I'd look awfully decrepit if I lived for ever!
His answer was to ask if I would want to live forever if I could stay as I am now.
"Well," I said, "if you're going to wave a magic wand, I'd rather be ten years younger."
You realise, you'd probably be terribly disappointed in me if we met—I'll be a grandmother
next year.
"Not you," he declared. "You should always be as you are now."
"You flatter me," I protested.

"You  have  more  than  beauty.  You  have  intelligence,  wit,  and  feeling.  I  have  three
sisters, and they are each worthless. They have  no  ideas  in  their  heads  that  I  do  not  put
there. They do not read, they have no love of knowledge, they don't think. When I see you
on stage, I see a woman different than the one I see here. That alone tells me the  effort
that goes into  your  work.  Then  I  remember  the  emotion  in  the  part  you  play  and  I  know
that must be a part of you, for it is impossible to truly simulate something that you cannot
understand.
"My sisters tell me that I am incapable of love, but they lie. I recognise it when I see it
and therefore I am capable of feeling it."
It struck me that this was a curious doubt for any man to have. Was love important to
him because he had lived alone too long? Was there some dead love in his  past?  Almost  on
cue,  he  said—  "You  played  Othello  the  year  before  last.  Othello  kills  his  love  when  he
believes she has betrayed him, yet with her dying breath Desdemona seeks to protect him.
How do you read that? Can a woman truly love the man who kills her?"
I love Desdemona for her perception, the way she loved Othello for what he was rather
than how he looked. I couldn't help but wonder if Dracula had also raised the question for
that reason. It would be hard indeed for a woman to love him for his face.
"It's a pity you weren't able to see it,  " I  replied.  "But  yes,  her  love  for  Othello  was
always  based  on  her  understanding  of  him.  Even  when  he  is  trying  to  kill  her,  she  knows
deep inside her that he still loves her. That's the tragedy of the play—he kills the person he
most loves. If he hadn't loved her to such excess, he would not have been so enraged by her
seeming betrayal."
"Do you think then that she forgave him?"
I pondered that one, because it's a tricky  question.  Love  and  a  willingness  to  forgive
don't always go hand in hand. "I  think  she  wanted  to  protect  him.  I  think  she  loved  him…
Forgiveness?  That's  harder  to  say.  He  hadn't  trusted  her  and  that's  always  hard  for  a
woman to accept."
"Suppose, for the sake of argument, she could have come back  from  the  dead—would
she have loved him then?"
He really did ask the oddest questions. Death seemed to be always at the forefront of
his mind.
"I suppose she might. If a ghost is capable of love."
That seemed to really hit home.  "It  has  to  be  possible!"  he  snarled.  "There  must  be  a
woman capable of loving beyond the grave."
I touched him gently on the arm. "Who was she?"
"Everyone I have ever loved. Do you realise that it is possible for a man to live forever?
To go on down through the centuries, never changing, never aging? But there is a price, and
that price is to be forever alone. Would you walk that path if you could take it?"

To never see my few grey hairs turning into thousands? To never feel the stiffness and
blindness of old age?  To  be  able  to  see  my  grandchildren  grow  to  adulthood?  How  could
anyone not want these things?
"It would be a gift beyond price, but you're wrong about being alone. No one need ever
be alone."
There was a cat lying down ahead of us, sunning itself on the pavement in the way cats
do. A butterfly carelessly darted within paw range and the cat had it at once. It teased it,
and pounced every time the butterfly thought it had  escaped.  I  shouted  at  the  cat  to  go
away  and  it  ran,  leaving  the  butterfly  to  struggle  into  the  air  once  more.  Such  a  pretty
thing,  all  red  and  purple,  the  sunlight  making  the  wings  look  as  though  they  were  dusted
with gold.
"Do you know what my sisters would have done?" Dracula asked.
I shook my head.
"Pulled its wings off"."
I pulled away in instinctive horror.
"The price," he said, "is to be unloved and always alone."
The butterfly flew higher and as I watched it,  I  heard  the  church  clock  strike  noon.
When  I  turned  back  to  face  Dracula,  he  was  gone.  Make  of  it  what  you  will.—Yours
sincerely,
Ellen Terry 
*    *    *    *    *
Later—
I still  haven't  posted  this.  Maybe  I  never  will.  I'm  still  not  sure  what  happened,  or
whether,  indeed,  anything  happened.  It's  been  a  month  now,  and  I've  seen  nothing  of
Dracula. Where did he go? Why did  he  go?  Could  he  have  been  immortal  as  he  claimed?  I
never liked him, but I'm surprised to realise that I'm concerned about him.
No, not concern—pity.

The Three Boxes
Elaine Bergstrom
London—August 19.
"The  English  is  not  difficult,"  the  Count  said,  settling  into  a  plush  chair  in  his  host's
den, his reflection curiously absent in the polished mahogany top of the desk. His host did
not notice, so intent was he on watching his visitor's face, his body.
"You  might  find  it  odd  that  I  should  sit  like  this.  But  I  find  the  acts  of  sitting,
standing,  even  breathing—or  at  least  pretending  to—so  important  now  that  I  am
surrounded by the life of this great city and must do my best to fit in."
His host did his best to listen the tale. One that would end here in Mayfair, but began
days earlier in a far less civilized corner of the country. He would say nothing in the  hour
that followed, for in truth there was nothing he could say as the Count continued…
 *    *    *    *    *
The Englishman himself is the puzzle. In my country, the poorest work the hardest, for
they  know  it  is  only  through  work  that  they  will  survive.  But  here,  after  the  ship  ran
aground  and  broke  apart  in  the  tide—that  is  good  sailors'  English  for  the  matter,  I
think—with all the wealth the ship carried  scattered  across  the  beach,  none  of  Whitby's
poorest watching the ship break apart would provide  me  with  any  assistance  in  retrieving
my sea-soaked boxes and getting them safely to shore.
So  there  was  I,  with  not  a  soul  to  help  me,  dragging  my  boxes,  heavy  with  soil  and
water, above the tide line. I had only the little money I had taken from the sailors. The bulk
of my wealth was in jewels that I loathed to show to the lazy rabble lest they plot to rob
me while I slept. Not such a fool, I worked alone, waiting for someone  to  come  and  offer
service.
Someone did, but not at all the person I expected. To anyone less perceptive my helper
appeared to be a boy, a youth of about sixteen. But I noted how the body moved, how weak
the work it did, the slight scent of blood. No, not a man but a woman passing as one.
There  were  many  reasons  for  such  a  disguise  when  I  was  alive—escaping  slaves  or
willful women who did not like the husbands chosen for them. But I had come to understand
from my solicitor visitors and from my readings of your land that a woman here would not

need to hide. Not understanding, I did not let her know I had seen through her disguise.
I also did not have time to speak of it.  Night  was  giving  way  to  a  dawn  barely  visible
through the thick clouds. "How soon will the sun rise?" I asked my helper.
Face lifted to the sky, studying. "Noon," she finally said, and shrugged.
I understood, and she seemed so clear on it that I trusted her. With my life. But,  you
must understand, I had little choice.
As she predicted, the sun did not break through the mists for some hours. By the time
it  did,  she  had  already  been  paid  and  taken  leave  of  me,  promising  to  meet  me  at  the
warehouse five nights later. And so I slept in the innermost box, thankful that two pounds
and the promise of more covered the storage cost.
A happy meeting with a fine outcome. I was safe for the moment with  time  to  get  my
bearings before I left for the city I would call home. For the next four nights, as I walked
the cliffs near the  city,  watching  men  and  women,  absorbing  language  and  manners,  even
while dining on a noblewoman of uncommon beauty, my thoughts returned frequently to the
woman who had helped me.
I met her again as we'd arranged. Her clothes were the same as before, but were now
ripped and muddy from the knee down as if she had been hiding in some swamp. Again, I did
not ask for an explanation. It was not my affair.
"These boxes you need shipped, are they all yours?" she asked.
I nodded. "I have property near London. I need to take them there."
An  interesting  woman.  She  did  not  question  the  contents,  instead  asking,  "You  have
money for this?"
"I  have…  means  to  obtain  it,"  I  replied,  still  wary—not  of  her  honesty  but  of  the
possible slip of her woman's tongue.
She began a long explanation of currency exchanges until I stopped her with a wave of
my hand, the gesture having some effect even on someone who did not know  my temper. "I
have the means…  not  in  coin,  but  in  goods.  Do  you  know  an  honest  person  who  would  buy
some… trinkets in gold?"
"Gold?" Her voice rose in curiosity, almost betraying her sex. "There are always  those
who would buy gold. As to honest, I can see what I can discover."
The person would, of course, be honest. I have ways of dealing with those who are not.
We spoke a bit longer then retreated to the first pub we found, where she and I sat in
the larger room, one filled  only  with  men  and  an  occasional  woman  dressed  in  a  way  that
convinced me that some professions are the same in any country.
I told  her  that  I  had  already  eaten,  though  in  truth  I  was  famished.  I  tried  not  to

focus on my savior too closely, watching instead  the  men  at  the  bar.  Most  were  drunk  or
nearly so.  When  one  stumbled  out  the  door,  I  said  I  needed  to  step  out  back  where  the
privies  were  built  on  the  wharf.  My  partner  shrugged  and  continued  to  devour  her  stew,
gripping her spoon with her fist the way the men in the tavern did.
The building backed nearly up to the water, and there was no way to get to the front
but  through  the  pub  or  over  the  roof.  Fortunately,  the  latter  is  not  so  difficult  for  one
such as myself. Mist-like, I moved from back to front, finding my prey just as he was about
to enter one of the foul-smelling hovels your poor call homes.
Too drunk to scream, he instead looked  at  me  with  wide  eyes  as  I  took  form  before
him. Perhaps he even thought me some image of his sodden brain. No matter, he was mine in
an instant. I moved his inert body  into  a  narrow  space  between  his  building  and  the  next
and drained him. Even through his blood, I could feel the heat of the alcohol, so strong that
I wondered if it  would  affect  me.  But  I  was  not  so  foolish  that  I  did  not  slit  his  throat
before I left him.
His blood did give me a headache by the time I said goodbye to my evening's companion.
But that was later, far after we left the public room.
Hunger gone, I could be more genial, enough that she eventually found the courage to
say, "I am not what I seem."
I smiled, closed mouth, afraid that were I to open it I would laugh and she would notice
my teeth and likely guess why. "I know," I said.
"So I thought. Thank you for being silent."
"And why such clothes?"
"I  have  reasons,"  she  replied  then  looked  at  me,  frowning,  weighing  my  discretion.  I
must have passed, for she explained them.
I do not presume to understand her whispered lecture about women working in terrible
conditions, living with  brutes  for  husbands,  denied  land  and  a  say  in  governing.  But  I  did
understand that last, the part that had her in so much trouble. "It is the same everywhere,"
I replied when she had finished. "Women have large families. They work too hard. They die
young. At least here they have food to eat."
"And would have far more if they limited their children to two or three."
That  was  the  number  that  would  likely  be  left  after  plague  and  misfortunes  and  an
occasional famished creature such as myself took their weaker offspring but I kept silent,
believing that such a statement would not be well-received by the woman. She went on, in a
voice so close to silence that even I had to strain to hear her.
"I and my sisters came here to help as we have helped many in London with information
on how to limit children. I have pamphlets that explain the basics to those who can read. To
those who cannot, we hold lectures."

"And what do their men think of this?"
"Many approve. Others don't. But the government needs their soldiers and laborers and
they do not approve. Nor does my husband. He forbade me to continue this work. I do not
have his support in this endeavor."
"And why not?"
"He is a banker. They have reputations."
I killed a fair number of bankers when I ruled, and rarely pleasantly. "All bankers have
reputations," I said, pleased when she understood the joke and laughed.
"So  I  waited  until  he  left  for  business  on  the  continent,  then  came  here  with  my
friends from London. But they were arrested for public lewdness. Now I give the lectures,
always ahead of the authorities looking for me."
"And so the clothes?"
"Exactly. But now I must return to Mayfair… that is, to London, by  whatever  means  I
can before my husband gets home on the 18th. Since my money was with my sisters I have
no means. And I thought…"
She could not continue. Women, no matter how they play at independence, are not good
at bargaining. "You thought one foreigner with a similar need might help?"
"A train ticket. Some money for food and I will help  you  get  all  your  boxes  safely  to
London," she said, leaning close to me as if we were  partners  in  some  crime.  I  needed  the
help. I agreed.
We  were  just  leaving  the  establishment  when  some  unfortunate  woman  found  the
remains of my night's meal. She screamed, drawing a crowd. My partner took a step toward
the group, then moved back close to me. "It is good I have someone to walk  with  tonight,"
she said.
Ah, yes, this is not Romania. With luck it will stay so.
*    *    *    *    *
Such a charming woman, intense Sarah Justin. And she might not know  how to bargain
well but she got a fair enough price for the gold bracelet and ruby ring I gave her, and by
the next evening all my boxes save three were being shipped to London through the efforts
of the Billingtons, father and son.
Fifty  boxes  left  my  hands,  but  I  am  no  fool.  Fifty  might  be  listed  on  Billington's
records, but I kept the remaining three with me.
Those and my partner pulled out of Whitby  a  day  later,  on  an  afternoon  train.  I  was
safely resting in one of my boxes in a baggage car, not asleep but well aware of the train's
motion; the faint, pleasant rocking as it headed west and south.

Would that I had been more aware of my companion. In truth I should have been wary.
I have had a history of choosing the wrong sort of servant. Now that I have even more need
for  such  loyalty,  the  matter  has  gotten  worse.  That  lunatic  Renfield,  screaming  out  his
fantasies in the charnel house you call an asylum, is the worst of any. But it matters little.
Servants can always be replaced.
My thoughts wander and I only have the night to tell this story. You see, while I slept in
the station warehouse, Sarah used the money I gave her for a first class ticket to pay the
fines of her sisters in crime. They had means to leave and so all managed to catch the same
train I was on, getting the lowest sort of tickets and sharing a section of one of the cars,
plotting their next attack like the devil on All Hallows' Eve.
We pulled into Sheffield two hours before sunset. They were  ready,  leaflets  in  hand,
departing  the  train  for  the  meeting  they  had  hurriedly  arranged  with  one  of  those  wire
machines… telegraphs I believe Mr. Harker called them.
I can only conclude that the women thought they had right  on  their  side  and  so  were
careless, because while Sarah in man's clothes had eluded them for days in Whitby,  three
women in skirts could not manage the same for even a few hours.
I was first alerted to the  situation  by  loud-voiced  men  entering  the  baggage  car.  An
employee of the railroad pointed out that the boxes—my boxes!—were not the property of
the women they had arrested, but it made no difference to the local police. I heard one of
them walk close to me, heard the workers argue with him one final time, then the pounding
of an ax… thankfully on the box nearest the door.
Splintering wood. Creaking hinges. A man's voice, demanding, "What  is  the  meaning  of
this?"
By which he meant, of course,  what  was  the  meaning  of  the  earth  inside.  It  was  only
then that I heard quick-minded Sarah reply, "Earth, sir. My traveling companion is… is a… a
wealthy  man.  He  has  brought  plantings  from  his  native  land  and  thinks  that  they  will  do
better in their native soil."
Plantings! How well she put it.
I heard the policeman mumble something back, then the railroad  official  repeated  his
warnings. "And where can I find this man who pays good money to ship dirt, Mrs. Baxter?"
he asked Sarah.
Clever woman! She never used her real name. "I believe he is in a private compartment."
"First  class  is  at  the  front  of  the  train,  sirs,"  the  railroad  official  added,  no  doubt
trying to get them to leave the baggage car before they did more damage.
"Are we free to leave now?" one of the women, not Sarah, asked.
"Your fine was paid, and Mrs. Morgan's, but Mrs. Baxter's to be sent back to Whitby
to see the magistrate with my  blessing.  Glad  to  get  rid  of  the  lot  of  you  troublemakers."
Not  acceptable,  of  course.  I  see  to  my  servants.  The  train  would  leave  Sheffield  at  10

o'clock, which gave me too little time to rescue Sarah. But I had to try. At sunset, I moved
as mist outside the car then went to the front of the train, taking shape in the motor room,
just behind the engineer. I disposed of him quickly, drinking nearly  all  of  his  blood.  I  was
not particularly  hungry  but  such  an  opportunity  should  not  be  wasted.  At  the  end,  to  be
careful, I broke his neck then stayed where I was, waiting for the rest of the… the crew I
think they are called, to come and join him.
The  second  man  reeked  of  sweat  and  soot,  the  third  much  the  same;  these  I  killed
quickly  and in a violent  human  manner.  Then,  just  to  be  certain  the  train  would  not  leave
with a different crew, I ripped through the wires of the engine. At the last, I dragged one
of  the  bodies  away  from  the  front  of  the  train,  toward  the  passenger  compartments
further  back.  We  would  stay  where  we  were,  at  least  until  the  passengers  had  been
questioned. Plenty of time, I thought,  as  I  made  my  way  partly  by  instinct,  partly  by  the
help of strangers to the center of town and the police station. As I had hoped, the bodies
had been  found  and  there  was  only  one  old  man  guarding  Sarah  and  a  male  prisoner  in  a
separate  locked  room.  I  had  already  decided  to  take  the  moderate  approach  to  this
problem—which  is  to  say  the  human  one—if  only  because  a  dead  guard  and  an  escaped
prisoner would bring a great deal of trouble on Sarah Justin, and through her, onto me.
Besides, I wasn't hungry any more. In your land a vampire could grow fat.
The guard didn't even glance up at me as I walked into the room, though I made enough
noise to alert him to my approach. He waited until I stood before his desk then looked  up
from the book he'd been reading. "Office is closed," he said.
"Closed?"
"You can't get legal work done, I mean."
"I think I can," I said and laid a gold ring in front of him.
"What's that?" he asked, making me wonder how he saw to read.
"Gold,"  I  said.  "Nearly  pure.  And  if  you  pick  up  the  piece  you  will  notice  four  tiny
diamonds along one side. Worth more than Mrs. Baxter's fine, I would think."
"We're  not  in  the  business  of  taking  goods  for  fines,  and  she  hasn't  even  seen  a
magistrate yet. It will have to wait until Whitby."
Not certain if I had found an honest man, or only a greedy one, I laid a second, larger
ring  beside  the  first.  "I  don't  care  if  these  pay  the  fine  or  not,"  I  said.  "I  want  her
released."
"I can't do that, sir,"  he  said,  though  he  leaned  forward  to  examine  the  pieces.  As  I
took in breath to try one final, persuasive argument, I caught a scent that likely saved his
life—alcohol, some cheap grain, recently consumed from the strength of  it.  If  I  had  been
more fixed on him than on my reason for being there, I would have noticed it sooner.
"I can't," he repeated, looking up from the rings and directly into my eyes.

"Give me the keys," I said after a moment.
He handed them over, but fought my suggestion that he sleep. A well-aimed blow to the
side of his head placed him in a state close enough to sleep to seem so to the first returning
policeman. Just to be on the safe side, I found the bottle in his pocket and spilled it across
his desk. The rings were in plain sight. When the others returned, they would think he had
been too drunk to hide his bribe.
In the back, I tried the key in the lock of the room where they had put her, but though
it fit, it did not open the door. Apparently, the drunk was not trusted with an actual set of
keys. I wonder if he knew it.
With no choice left me, I called to Sarah—awake now and wary. I told her to step back
then flung myself at the door. It burst inward with such a crash that my first sight of her
was with her face contorted with fear, eyes shut tight, hands covering her ears. "I thought
you blew it up," she said.
"No need. It is  not  so  thick,"  I  replied,  though  my  arms  and  shoulders  ached  with  an
almost human sharpness. "Now we need to catch the train."
"It would have left by now with your… boxes." She wanted to ask about the earth, but
my only answer would be the one she gave the authorities.
"There's been trouble at the station. The train is still there. We must go."
She  barely  glanced  at  the  unconscious  guard  as  we  passed  him.  Apparently  my  ruse
fooled even her.
 *    *    *    *    *
The station was  filled  with  police.  We  waited  in  the  shadows  near  the  depot  for  the
questioning to end. Two men passed close by, speaking of the murders. Sarah became  pale
as one of my brides, but I swore on the Bible and my mother's grave that I knew nothing of
them. My soul is already damned, of course, and my mother, being a deceitful woman in life,
would hardly be bothered by my lie.
We saw her friends. She started to call to them but I told her to be silent. "You must
not be seen with them because they might be thought—" I hesitated, uncertain of the word.
"Accomplices," she supplied and nodded her agreement. So we sat, speaking little until
the police went away and the train was fitted with a new engine. At the moment the wheels
began to turn and the train pulled forward,  blocking  the  view  from  the  station,  I  pushed
her toward an entrance. No coward she, she grabbed the handrail and pulled herself up.  I
followed  with  far  less  difficulty  and  soon  we  were  sitting  in  the  stateroom  I  had
presumably  rented  for  us…  the  first  time  we  were  together  in  it  since  the  journey  had
begun.  We  had,  I  understood  with  some  concern,  less  than  two  hours  until  sunrise  and
would arrive in London in midday rather than after dark. Like it or not, I was at her mercy.
I had no choice but  to  explain  matters  as  truthfully  as  I  dared.  To  my  surprise,  I  found
that I did not wish to cause her anguish or take control of her mind, and not just because I

needed her services.
She  sat  across  from  me  in  the  little  compartment,  staring  at  the  door  every  time
someone went by as if the horror she would face lay outside our little compartment rather
than on the seat across from her. Her hands clutched each other and the folds of her skirt,
no doubt to keep me from seeing how they trembled. I reached for one. I had touched her
before, but never for so long. I let my guard fall slowly, watching her face for some sign of
understanding.
"Your hands are so cold," she finally said.
My usual means to approach the matter. "There is a reason for that,"  I  said,  and  told
her.
She listened to my story, more  incredulous  than  horrified.  A  smile  danced  across  her
lips as if she wanted to laugh. "You are taking my mind off my troubles with this outrageous
tale.  You  could  make  a  fine  living  here  as  a  penny  dreadful  writer,"  she  said  when  I  had
finished.
I could have pressed her hand to my silent heart but that would have been too intimate,
too… well, I would not. With only an hour remaining, I made her swear not to scream. And I
changed.
I  chose  wolf  form.  A  large  and  dangerous  animal,  it  is  true,  but  it  has  been  my
experience that women are far more afraid of bats,
Dear Sarah! When I  lay  across  the  seat  opposite  her  in  the  form  of  noble  beast,  my
muzzle resting  on  my  paws  so  I  would  look  as  tame  as  possible,  her  hands  shook  but  she
reached out and brushed them across my fur, then buried her face in the back of my neck.
"How wonderful!" she cried. "How completely wonderful!"
Such a woman, Sarah Justin! She watched with interest, not fear, as I shifted first to
mist then to my own form. "And  to  think  I  have  traveled  with  you  all  this  time  and  never
once suspected!" she said as much to herself as to me.
Now that she believed my story, I went on to explain that any  exposure  to  sun  would
burn me as painfully as flames would her.
She understood and said she would see my last two boxes safely to Carfax. I told her
she need not do this but she insisted. "I think of the men on the train with their axes and
all you have done for me. Of course I will see you safely to your new home. The train stops
in Purfleet. I will arrange for cart and driver then catch a later train to London.  I'll  have
more than enough time to make it seem that I never left home at all."
Then  she  sat,  hands  in  her  lap  again,  watching  me  with  a  curious  expression.  Was  it
hope? She seemed to like the wolf and I enjoyed the feel of her hands on my pelt. But such
a form is dangerous. I lose some human control and to have her touch me as she would not
dare were I in human form… no, it was better to stay as I was and follow her conventions.
To pass time, I asked, "Tell me what you know of London."

She spoke of theaters and pubs and  the  banking  district  and  the  rest.  I  absorbed  it
all—particularly  the  places  in  your  East  End  where  one  such  as  me  can  feed  without
arousing  suspicion.  Thanks  to  her,  I  feel  almost  at  home  in  this  marvelous  city,  and  the
hunting is excellent.
I left her just before sunrise, aware of  her  gaze  following  me.  She  had  not  given  me
her  address.  I  had  not  asked  for  it.  It  would  be  better  that  way,  for  she  belonged  to
another and I owed her too much.
When I rose again, I would see my new home. I was far too excited for sleep and so I
was awake  when my boxes were unloaded, feeling the sun even through the thick wood  of
my daytime refuge. I heard the rough voices of the loaders, the creak of a cart, the snort
of a nervous horse, then Sarah's sweet voice asking them to please be careful.
"Done this longer than you've been on this earth, Miss. Now let us be," the man said.
I was being lifted, carried. I heard the train's  whistle,  the  horse's  nervous  whinny,  a
crash, and last, Sarah's loud scream.
For a moment, I tensed, waiting for the burning of the sun.
Nothing. It was the other box that fell, cracked, my precious soil mixing with the dung
in the road.
"Should we scoop it up, Miss?"
Just go, I thought, and heard her echo my words.
It was a long drive. The  wood  absorbed  the  heat  and  made  rest  impossible.  When  my
box had been safely deposited in the cool confines of Carfax, I felt her hand brush the top
of the box, a finger run the length of it. "Goodbye," she whispered, and was gone.
 *    *    *    *    *
One night passed. Two. I  found  the  old  stone  walls  to  my  liking.  I  took  the  boxes  of
earth and scattered them through London, placing some in Belgravia and Bloomsbury and all
the other places where foolish people walk the streets at night thinking there is nothing to
fear. The rest, I hid on the Carfax grounds, a wild place with many hiding spots.  And  as  I
labored alone, I tried not to think of Sarah except to hope that her ruse had gone well and
that she was happy.
On the third night, she returned to me, a little parcel of clothing in one hand. We met
outside, the moonlight glittering on her tears.
"Are you hurt?" I asked, ready to kill the one who raised a hand to her.
"Yes. No… no. Really, I'm not."
"But you cry?"

"My husband learned of everything. I don't know  how. He only said, 'Well, at least  no
one knew  your  name.  Next  time  I'm  gone,  I'll  lock  you  in  your  room  and  pay  someone  to
watch you.' I cannot  live  that  way.  I  will  not.  And  then  I  thought  of  you,  so  kind  and  so
helpful and so in need of a pair of daylight eyes."
"And you think I will take you  in  to  help  me?"  I  asked,  carefully,  praying  her  answer
would be yes.
"Yes…  and…  no,  to  let  me  be  with  you,  only  you.  Let  me  stay  here  and  work  for  you.
Make me as you are."
Then she did something I could never forgive.  She  kissed  me,  betraying  her  vows  and
the loyalty and obedience she owed a husband.
I have been wronged by too many women, and they have all met the same  fate.  Would
that Sarah had been stronger. But, out of respect for the help she had given me, one quick
blow to the head and she was unconscious. I fed, and when she died I buried  her  beneath
the crypt where I slept, using the box she had brought here as her coffin.
Tonight, I laid a jewel over the fresh-turned earth. And though I doubt God will listen,
I said a quick prayer that, even though she broke her vows, he spare her soul. Then I went
through  her  bag  and  found  a  letter  addressed  to  you  but  never  sent.  It  is  a  beautiful
journey from Purfleet to Mayfair for one such as me. London. So beautiful. And so alive.
No, it will do you no good if you tip over the chair. There is no manservant to hear you,
not any more…
 *    *    *    *    *
Dracula  stood,  moved  close  to  his  victim,  inhaling  the  scent  of  hairwax  and  sweet
tobacco and, just for a moment, of Sarah's perfume. "No, I do not understand you English,"
he said. "Such a woman, a prize among women, and you treated her as a servant. One bit of
understanding and she would have loved you, passionately and forever. Instead you worried
about little matters, and lost her.
"It is right to dispose of a woman who does not obey, to  put  her  in  the  hands  of  God
mercifully and quickly. But what of the man who pushed her away?  What fate should await
him?
"No mercy. Had you means to speak, you might even agree. No mercy. Fool! Perhaps she
will be allowed to judge you in the next life."
And so the Count moved, silent  as  the  mist  to  his  bound  prey.  The  last  thing  the  man
saw  were  long  pale  fingers  coming  toward  his  face,  shifting  swiftly  into  something  more
powerful, a beast to push his head back. No fangs here, nothing as soft and almost pleasant
as  fangs.  No,  it  was  the  wolf  who  devoured  him,  feasting  long  after  he  had  life  to  care.
Licking the blood from furry paws.
With a quick, mournful, howl, he was gone, padding away from the blood-soaked room,
the  silent  Mayfair  house.  East  he  padded  toward  his  retreat  in  Carfax.  As  he  did,  the

almost-human part of him vowed that the next woman he took would be different—softer
and sweeter, younger, and above all, obedient to her master.
When  he  reached  Carfax,  he  found  Renfield  hiding  just  inside  the  gates.  Seeing
Dracula, he rushed out and gave a low bow, the solemnity marred by his laughter.
Better, his master thought, far better than the other.

Good Help
K. B. Bogen
Not  again!  Dracula  leaped  from  the  sill  and  flew  across  the  lawn  toward  the  nearby
trees.  He  landed  amidst  the  small  stand  of  English  oaks  at  the  same  time  the  slender,
cloaked figure entered the house at the Crescent. Shifting into human form and turned to
watch the window he had just vacated.
That irritating  woman  and  her  meddling!  If  she  had  continued  her  wanderings  just  a
short  while  longer,  I  could  have  finished  what  I  started.  And  if  Renfield  had  not  gotten
himself incarcerated in that  hospital,  there  would  have  been  someone  to  waylay  the  nosy
brunette. What a nuisance.
He really ought to do something about replacing the old lunatic.
At home, he had never required a full-time manservant to take care of everyday tasks.
Anything  that  could  not  be  done  at  night,  the  gypsies  would  do.  For  a  modest  fee,  of
course.
But here in England, it was different. So many  people.  So  many  annoyances.  He  really
needed someone to prevent all the unnecessary interruptions. He simply detested having to
eat and fly. It was bad for the digestion.
He  shrugged  and  stared  at  the  figure  slumped  on  the  window-sill  until  she  stirred,
moaning. After a few seconds,  she  rose  and  stumbled  toward  her  bed.  Soon,  my  dear, he
thought  to  her,  soon  it  will  be  all  over.  He  ran  his  tongue  over  the  points  of  his  teeth,
thinking how nice it would be when the time arrived.
A moment later, another woman appeared beside the first.
His eyes on the two women, he took a step forward—and fell the last ten feet. Hellfire
! After all these years, he should have learned to land on the ground instead  of  the  lower
branches. He glanced around to see if anyone noticed. No? Good.
He wiped the dirt from his trousers and cloak, then spit out the dead leaves that had
found their way into his mouth. After satisfying himself that nothing was  torn  or  broken,
he peered through the gloom at the two figures in the window.
The dark-haired woman, the one called Mina, put her arm around  her  sleeping-walking

friend. The vampire listened intently, straining to pick out Mina's whispered words at that
distance.
"Come, dear Lucy, we must get you back to bed. You'll catch your death  in  this  damp,
chill air!"
Dracula  laughed  to  himself.  Somehow,  I  do  not  think  the  damp,  chilly  air  will  have
anything to do with it.
Mina gently helped her friend to her bed, still murmuring words of encouragement. As
they left the window, Mina threw one furtive glance toward the trees, and Dracula quickly
faded into the darkness.
He sighed. This Mina might prove an interesting diversion in the future. At the moment,
her  untimely  return  had  proven—inconvenient.  Miss  Westenra  would  have  to  wait.  There
were other matters of importance to attend to.
*    *    *    *    * 
His  errand  took  him  to  the  docks,  past  the  row  of  darkened  warehouses.  The  air
smelled too much of salt and fish and waterlogged wood, but the gloom of the docks suited
his  mood  as  he  stalked  down  the  aisles  between  the  crates.  He  was  still  seething  about
Mina's sudden return. Damned inconsiderate woman! He had been so close, and yet…
At last he found what he sought. Ethan Soarsby. His kind had been called many things
over the centuries, but Dracula thought "wharf rat" suited  him  best.  The  little  man  might
be just the distraction he needed. Dracula had been studying him for several days. He had
potential.
Soarsby stood by one of the packing  crates,  pry  bar  in  hand  as  he  plied  his  trade.  A
moth-eaten  wool  jacket  lay  atop  the  crate,  muffling  the  sound  of  splintering  wood.  A
matching wool cap  covered  his  head,  leaving  visible  a  fringe  of  mousy  brown  hair.  On  the
ground beside him lay a pile of sacks.
A  sudden  crash  at  the  end  of  a  row  of  crates  sent  Dracula  into  the  shadows  to
investigate. The last thing he needed was a witness. But the culprit turned out to be a cat
hunting among the boxes, nothing more.
Satisfied  his  actions  would  go  unnoticed,  he  returned  to  the  now-open  crate,  but
Soarsby had gone. Not far, though. Empty sacks still littered the ground and Dracula could
feel the man's presence. The little thief was near. Very near.
What  was  the  best  way  to  catch  a  predator?  The  vampire  knew  that  answer  from
years of experience. Pretend to be prey.
He grinned and stood quietly, letting Soarsby step in behind him, a  lion  playing  with  a
mouse.
The  thief  stepped  silently  into  position.  Silently  to  normal  ears,  at  any  rate.  Dracula
waited for him to make his move.

A hand snaked around his neck  and  a  knife-edge  pressed  against  his  flesh  above  the
collarbone. The thief's skin was clammy and his breath reeked of onions and fish.
He noticed Soarsby had also had garlic for dinner and almost laughed out loud  at  the
thought of that old wives' tale. How many times had he met with some would-be adversary
who  thought  it  was  the  bulb  of  the  plant  that  would  vanquish  a  vampire?  So  few  people
realized it was the flowers he found revolting. He really preferred roses. But, back to the
business at hand…
Centuries  before,  a  knife  at  his  throat  might  have  caused  Vlad  Tsepes  a  moment's
nervousness.  But  many  battles  and  many  lifetimes  had  passed  since  then.  As  it  was,  he
found the situation— entertaining.
Seconds ticked  by  while  he  waited  for  the  thief  to  make  the  first  comment.  Finally,
Soarsby thought of something to say.
"Don't  move  a  muskle,  or  ya  won't  be  able  ta  move  a'tol."  Soarsby  emphasized  his
threat  by  pressing  the  knife  deeper  into  the  flesh  of  Dracula's  neck.  Considering  their
height difference, the action was as much of a stretch as the threat itself.
"Really? How amusing." He deliberately kept his tone light. "I have a better plan."
The Count took the thief's wrist and gently forced it down  as  he  turned  to  face  the
little  man.  Soarsby's  features  contorted  from  the  effort  as  he  tried  to  keep  his  knife
raised. He failed.
Several  emotions  played  across  the  thief's  face.  Surprise.  Anger.  Hatred.  Fear.  The
fear won. His eyes widened as he began to understand the kind of force he was fighting.
Dracula continued amicably,  "I  have  a  proposition  for  you,  my  friend…"  He  swept  his
cloak over Soarsby's shoulders and led him back toward the warehouses.
 
"It will be back by dawn. See that everything is in order."
"Yes… Master." Soarsby rolled the word around on his tongue, as  if  tasting  it  for  the
first time. In fact, he was. That vintage of it, at least.
Dracula  left  through  the  ironbound  door,  wincing  as  its  rusted  hinges  screamed
protest. It had been two days since his last visit to Lucy Westenra, and he looked forward
to it. She was so— giving. He smiled at the thought.
He returned just  before  dawn,  in  much  better  spirits  than  on  previous  mornings.  His
visit with  Lucy  had  gone  well.  Her  friend  Mina  had  not  even  noticed  him.  Having  Lucy  sit
beside the window  had proven to be a very good tactic. As long as  she  never  left  her  bed
chamber, her friend felt she was safe.
He landed just inside the wall surrounding the abbey. He was in such a wonderful mood,
he  felt  like  walking.  A  few  wispy  clouds  trailed  across  the  moon  and  a  light  fog  had

developed, lending Carfax an ethereal quality.
He took a deep breath, enjoying the salt/flower scent of the ancient apothecary roses
that hugged the crumbling walls of the chapel. He was so  engrossed  in  the  smells,  sounds,
and flavors of the night that he completely missed the pile of rubbish some cretin had left
by the corner.
Metal and wood scattered noisily as he stumbled through the pile of discarded building
materials. A broken timber smashed into a pane of glass with a loud crash.
"What the—?" Considering the manner in which the things had been arranged, it almost
looked intentional. But who would have done such a thing?
He limped toward the chapel, cursing in four different languages.  Some  of  the  words
had not been heard in over three centuries.
As he approached the entrance, he paused, steeling himself for the whine of the hinges.
But there was no sound.
He  opened  and  closed  the  door  several  times,  experimenting.  Neither  a  squeak  nor
squeal. Soarsby had located Renfield's underused oil can.
"Nicely done." Dracula entered the chapel quietly for the first time since his arrival at
Carfax. He looked around, amazed.
Soarsby had dusted the spider webs from the corners, fixed the holes in the shutters
and fastened them securely against the coming daylight.  He  had  even  removed  the  coffin
lid and smoothed the soil within.
A fresh earth scent rose from the box, to mingle with the smells of old wood and wool
in the ancient chapel. And there was something else. In the shadow where the lid overhung
the edge of the coffin was a gift: Soarsby had left a bedtime snack in the form of a large
rat in a wire cage. How thoughtful.
"Things are looking up," Dracula mused as he lay down for his  nap.  The  picture  on  the
inside  of  the  coffin  lid  was  a  nice  touch,  too.  He  would  have  to  remember  to  suggest  to
Soarsby that he replace the raw steak with one of those French postcards. Scented.
"Will ya be visitin' tha pretty miss this night, Master?"
"Not tonight. I have other business this evening.
There is a stack of papers to go over and a libretto  I,  um,  borrowed  that  I  hoped  to
read. I shall be upstairs, if you require instructions. Miss Westenra will keep for a  day  or
two." Besides, he was a little weary of trying to avoid Mina's notice.
The papers were, as expected, boring. Real estate contracts, accounting  records,  and
reams  of  legalese  he  had  not  managed  to  escape  for  the  last  two  hundred  years.  It
constantly  amazed  him  how  many  ways  mankind  had  found  to  increase  their  load  of
paperwork. It got worse every century. Maybe he should start a campaign to save the trees

and put an end to the document craze. Or invent something to take the place of paper. He
dwelt on that thought an extra moment. It might be worth looking into.
Meanwhile, all that legal babble had given him a headache. Perhaps the play would prove
more  interesting.  The  title  certainly  looked  promising:  The  Pirates  of  Penzance.  Pirates
were good.
 
An  hour  before  dawn,  a  flustered  Soarsby  hesitantly  entered  the  room  Dracula  had
adopted as his office. He waited for his master to acknowledge him.
Dracula just chuckled and turned another page.
"M-master?"  The  laughter  apparently  confused  the  ex-thief.  As  if  evil,  bloodsucking
monsters were not allowed to have fun once in a while.
Dracula  looked  up  from  his  papers.  "May  I  help  you?"  he  prompted  when  Soarsby
seemed reluctant to proceed.
"There be someone beatin' on the door, askin' fer ya. Tha back door."
Now who  would…  oh. Renfield.  The  Count  reluctantly  left  his  desk  and  that  delicious
libretto, and headed for the entrance to the chapel. Soarsby followed a few steps behind.
Renfield stood in the entry, fidgeting, clad in only his nightshirt. When Dracula started
to widen the opening, Renfield protested.
"No, no! Leave it, Master! Leave it closed. They're after me."
Dracula pushed the door to and opened the small window set into it. He peered down at
the old man pressed against the wood. "They are?"
"Yes, and they'll find me, soon enough. That they will. But tell me, who—who was he, the
man who first answered my knock?"
Dracula paused, considering carefully his response. "He is Mr. Soarsby, my—assistant."
"Assistant? A replacement? Oh, no, Master! I am your faithful servant, still. You need
not find others."
"Renfield…"
His cries became more fervent, even hysterical. "You shall not have another! Not while
I draw breath."
"Renfield…"
"No, no! I shall…"
"Renfield!" If only the old man would let him speak…

Nearby, they heard a loud crash, followed  by  men  cursing  loudly.  The  refuse  Dracula
had  tripped  on  the  previous  morning  had  been  Soarsby's  idea  of  a  warning  device.  It
worked  very  well,  as  the  Count  knew  from  personal  experience.  Now  someone  else  knew,
too.
Renfield listened to  the  sound  for  a  moment,  then  continued,  his  voice  soft,  but  still
tinged with hysteria.
"I am here to do Your bidding, Master. I am Your slave…"
Oh, no! Not that "I deserve everything because I have given everything" speech again.
This could take a while.
Dracula  leaned  against  a  handy  wall,  arms  crossed,  stifling  a  yawn.  He  thought  of
interrupting Renfield's diatribe, but the ranting seemed to keep the old man happy.
"… await your commands…"
He  nodded  off  a  couple  of  times,  then  shook  himself  awake.  Dawn  was  fast
approaching.
"…  in  Your  distribution  of  good  things?"  Renfield  finally  wound  down  and  his  voice
trailed off into a whine.
More crashes and cursing brought Dracula out  of  his  doze.  Renfield  swung  around  to
face  the  cause  of  the  noise  as  a  group  of  men  appeared  around  the  corner.  The  Count
recognized the leader as the doctor from the asylum next door. Doctor Seward.
With  a  loud  cry,  Renfield  rushed  them.  He  fought  like  a  tiger,  flailing  wildly  and
without  thought  for  the  consequences.  The  men  with  Doctor  Seward  had  a  rough  time
bringing the old man down.
Renfield  smacked  one  of  the  attendants  with  a  piece  of  wood.  Another  tripped  and
thudded  to  the  ground  gasping,  with  Renfield's  hands  clutched  around  his  throat.  Blood
trickled down the old man's cheek from a cut on his forehead. It was a circus, but it kept
their attention away from Dracula and the chapel.
The fight seemed to go on forever, but finally they forced Renfield to the ground and
wrapped him in a straight waistcoat. As they  carried  him  away,  he  risked  one  last  look  in
Dracula's direction while his lips twitched into a knowing smile.
The Count watched them retreat toward the asylum. After a while, Soarsby broke the
silence.
"Who were that, Master?"
"A mistake, Mr. Soarsby. One I should, perhaps, rectify in the very near future."
"Rec-ti-fy?" He stumbled over the unfamiliar word.

"Fix."
"Oh, ya mean yer gonna kill 'im."
Dracula  glared  at  Soarsby.  Then  he  relaxed  and  nodded.  "Possibly,  Mr.  Soarsby,
possibly."
The  whole  situation  was  quite  unfortunate.  Renfield  would  have  been  a  perfect
assistant, if he could  have  found  two  coherent  moments  to  rub  together.  And  he  did  not
seem very pleased at being made redundant. If those fools at the asylum could not contain
him, it might become necessary for the count to take care of the problem himself.
He  arose  the  next  evening  thinking  about  the  events  of  that  morning.  He  was  still
wondering  how  to  solve  the  trouble  with  Renfield  as  he  neared  the  Crescent.  He  also
needed to decide what to do about  Mina.  It  seemed  a  waste  of  Soarsby's  talents  to  use
him to prevent the woman from interfering with his visits with Lucy.
Dracula reached the edge of the wood near the house where the Westenras had rooms
and stopped where he could see Lucy's window. He leaned against a large tree to watch for
company.
The rough bark of the ancient oak dug into his back,  as  though  to  remind  him  that  it
deserved more respect at its age. Hah! Dracula himself had been alive almost two hundred
years when the tree was a mere sapling. Still,  it  was  good  to  know  some  things  could  last
more than a few short decades.
Leaves rustled high in the branches, sending forth their earthy summer scent to mingle
with  the  decay  of  their  forbears  already  moldering  on  the  ground.  Shadows  fluttered
around  him,  caressing  his  face  reverently,  like  sycophantic  demons.  He  ignored  them  all.
Life  was  fleeting  illusion;  shadows  he  was  accustomed  to;  demons  he  would  confront  at
another time.
He  took  a  deep  breath  and  leaped  into  the  sky,  changing  shape  as  he  did  so.  As  he
landed  softly  on  the  sill  outside  Lucy's  room,  he  looked  around.  The  window  was  open.
Surprised, he cautiously stepped down from the ledge—and fell again.
Damn! I must be worried about something. That is the second time in less than a week I
have done that. The windowsill was a little too tall for a bat.  He  transformed  quickly  and
entered the room.
Lucy lay on her bed, the covers strewn wildly across its surface. She eyed him hungrily,
her eyes burning. And she was alone.
"Please, come to me!" She beckoned to him as she reclined against the  pillows,  trailing
one  delicately  manicured  finger  between  her  breasts.  Her  gown  slid  open,  drawing
Dracula's  attention  to  her  naked  body  beneath  the  silky  material.  The  soft  scent  of
lavender rose from her warm flesh.
This is different. He approached her slowly, a little suspicious.

She bit her lip in anticipation while an odd, almost predatory expression played across
her face. "I am ready, my love." She leaned forward, head tilted, mouth open slightly.
Wrong move. Some latent, lingering shred  of  teenage  rebellion  asserted  itself  and  he
hastily revised his plans. He did not like being rushed. Especially by the victim.
He sat on the edge of her bed. Leaning forward, he caressed her cheek and whispered,
"Not  this  time,  I  think."  Always  leave  them  wanting  more. "Tell  me,  where  is  your  friend
Mina?"
"She received a message that her fiancé Jonathan Harker is in Buda-Pesth. He  is  in  a
monastery or some such, and very ill. She left to join him there." Her hands clutched at the
edge  of  Dracula's  cloak.  He  pulled  away  while  he  considered  the  implications  of  Lucy's
news. Lucy pouted.
So—Jonathan  Harker  survived  his  final  night  in  Castle  Dracula.  Bad  news.  He  might
serve  as  witness  to  the  Count's  true  nature.  He  certainly  must  have  some  idea  what  the
vampire planned for his new homeland.
And Mina had left to be with him. That was good. She would be out of the picture for
some while.
On  the  other  hand,  they  were  certain  to  return  to  England  as  soon  as  Harker
recovered from his illness. The  two  lovers  would  have  to  be  taken  care  of  when  the  time
came.
To top it off, the girls were  probably  upset  that  their  dinner  ran  away.  If  they  ever
managed to track Harker down, they would certainly find the Count as well. And he would
be  in  almost  as  much  trouble  as  his  solicitor  for  failing  to  keep  the  young  man  properly
contained.
Too preoccupied to dine, he left Lucy sleeping restlessly and headed back to Carfax.
When  he  landed  outside  the  entry  to  the  chapel,  he  found  it  cracked  open  and  the
sound of a struggle inside alerted him that Soarsby was not alone.
"… not yours! I am to be the one…" It was Renfield's voice.
Something thudded against the old oak, knocking  it shut. There  were  several  crashes.
Splintering wood. A muffled cry of rage or pain.
Dracula  burst  through  the  door  and  found  Renfield  fighting  with  Soarsby.  Soarsby
seemed to have some idea of what he was doing and several times the thief  got  the  upper
hand. But Renfield fought like a demon. The older man was winning.
Dracula  waded  into  the  fracas  and  pulled  the  men  apart.  Twice.  Finally,  he  shouted,
"Stop this right now!"
They stopped.

He  gave  them  both  a  shake  before  releasing  them.  "You  should  be  ashamed  of
yourselves."  He  felt  as  though  lie  were  lecturing  a  pair  of  children.  They  stared  at  their
toes, afraid to look Dracula in the eye.
"Who started this?"
"He did!" They replied in unison, each pointing to  the  other.  Maybe  the  comparison  to
children  was  not  far  wrong.  It  reminded  him  of  all  the  times  he  and  his  brother  Mircea
fought for their father's attention. Dracula took a step backward,  glaring at the two men.
"You two have got to learn to get along. Now, shake hands and make up."
Soarsby started to say something negative as Renfield shouted.
"Never!" The old lunatic pulled a knife from his waistband and dashed toward Soarsby,
slashing wildly.
"Renfield!" Definitely a strong resemblance to the relationship between himself and his
brother. Including the mayhem and bloodshed.
He tried to get between the men, but Renfield was too fast. In a second, the old man
had plunged his blade into Soarsby's chest.
"Heh heh! I am the one, the one who will be  Yours  forever!  It  is—"  Soarsby's  "alarm"
went off again.
Renfield darted through the door, slamming it shut as he charged his pursuers. Dracula
heard the sound of a vicious battle through the  thick  wood.  Continuing  to  give  ear  to  the
fighting in the courtyard, he knelt beside the body of his erstwhile assistant. Soarsby lived.
Barely.
He considered his alternatives. How disappointing!  The  thief  had  proven  to  be  a  very
valuable aide, but Dracula had no intention of spending eternity with him.
What to do? He stared thoughtfully at the door, listening to the battle raging  on  the
other side. "My dear Renfield, you certainly know how to make things difficult. I shall have
to attend  to  you  presently."  He  looked  down  at  Soarsby's  gasping  form.  "But  for  now,  I
think it is time for my morning repast."
He sank his fangs into Soarsby's neck, savoring the last few drops of life in the man's
body. Leaning back, he eyed the pool of blood forming beneath the hilt of the knife.
Too bad Renfield had to go and waste Soarsby like that. He licked the last few drops
of sweetly metallic liquid from his lips. Good help is so hard to find.

Everything to Order
Jody Lynn Nye
The bell rang precisely at the appointed hour of eleven. As the porter swung wide  the
door, Miss Violet Carr peered out at the three  well-dressed  women  standing  on  the  steps
half-clad in darkness. At first she was cross with the porter for not lighting enough lamps,
but  she  realized  that  the  visitors  were  hanging  back  in  the  folds  of  the  thick  fog  that
wrapped around  the  London  night.  Miss  Carr  curtsied  and  dipped  her  beautifully  coiffed
head with the deferential half-bow she reserved for members of the titled class. They  all
wore heavy coats of velvet lined with the most expensive sables,  with  more  furs  wrapping
them  to  the  ears.  Their  hats  were  also  black  fur,  from  which  depended  thick  black  silk
veils. The outfits must have been sweltering on an August night. "Welcome to the House of
Feldon,  ladies,"  Miss  Carr  said,  with  deference  and  cordiality.  Silently,  the  shrouded
figures slipped one by one over the threshold. Once inside, they lifted their veils. Miss Carr
scanned the faces and hesitated slightly, conscious of the possibility of making a dreadful
faux  pas  and  starting  the  evening  out  on  the  wrong  foot.  "I…  I  beg  your  pardon  for
asking—which of you is Countess Dracula?"
"We all are," the eldest said. She gave Miss Carr a smile as curiously undefinable as her
accent. She didn't seem to be  very  much  older  than  the  youngest,  who  seemed  as  though
she could boast the same number of years as Miss Carr herself, twenty-four.
Violet Carr was young for a vendeuse,  but  was  grateful  for  the  opportunity  that  the
owner of the House  of  Feldon  had  bestowed  upon  her,  to  oversee  showings  of  the  house
line to clients, to take orders, and to supervise fittings of  the  chosen  garments.  It  was  a
position of trust, and she already had two—two!—titled clients who asked particularly for
her  when  they  came  to  the  House  of  Feldon.  She  hoped  to  increase  her  status  this  very
evening, if it meant she had to stay up until dawn.
"We must thank you for your indulgence in allowing us to come to you so very late," the
eldest countess said. "We keep late hours. It is not an English custom. All of your shops are
closed  before  sunset.  How  are  we  to  make  our  purchases?  Other  houses  of  fashion  of
whom we made this little request were unable to accommodate us. It is most inconvenient."
"We  endeavor  to  please,"  Miss  Carr  said,  pleased  for  Mrs.  Feldon-Jacobs's  sake.  It
surely  would  be  worthwhile  having  remained.  These  ladies  were  possessed  of  fabulous
wealth.  The  necklace  about  the  neck  of  the  youngest  countess  was  composed  of  real
diamonds, each stone the size of Miss Carr's thumb  tip.  Such  jewels  had  to  be  worth  the

value  of  a  steamship.  Those  other  couturiers  would  regret  having  refused,  and  Mrs.
Feldon-Jacobs would have reason to be smug.
Her eagerness  must  have  showed  upon  her  face,  because  the  eldest  countess  smiled.
She had a most interesting face. It  spoke  to  Miss  Carr  of  high  breeding  and  quality.  The
cheekbones were particularly beautiful, not  too  protruberant,  yet  with  a  piquant  shadow
beneath.  Her  nose  was  high-bridged,  narrow  as  a  hawk's  beak,  and  she  had  large,  deep
brown eyes that seemed to be a blend of black and red, and black-brown hair swept up into
sleek folds  around  her  head.  She  wore  black  velvet  sewn  with  jet  beads  and  fringe  that
swayed gently as she moved. The second lady was very much like her, the lineaments of her
dark-complected face spare as a sculpture, with large dark eyes. Her dress, also of velvet,
was blood red,  trimmed  in  jet  and  garnets.  The  third  lady,  clad  in  heavy  blue  velvet,  was
equally striking, lovely in a more English manner, with masses of blonde hair, fair skin, and
large, luminously blue eyes. At least their beauty would be more pleasant if these ladies had
the  bloom  of  health  upon  them.  They  were  all  so  very  pale.  Perhaps  in  Rumania  ladies  of
quality were not permitted or encouraged to take the air very often. It was on the  tip  of
Miss Carr's tongue  to  ask,  but  good  manners  took  over.  It  was  not  a  question  she  would
ever  ask  of  an  Englishwoman.  She  must  not  allow  her  training  to  desert  her  even  though
these were only foreigners.
Pages, yawning openly due to the late  hour,  assisted  the  countesses  in  removing  their
coats and hats, and vanished with the garments to the cloakroom. Miss Carr took the lead,
escorting her visitors into the  salon.  She  heard  a  murmur  of  approval  from  behind  her  as
she stepped  aside  to  allow  them  to  enter  the  chamber  ahead  of  her.  The  room,  the  most
superior  of  the  five  that  Mrs.  Feldon-Jacobs  maintained,  had  walls  covered  in
Regency-striped oyster silk with  dark  wood  trim  and  doors.  A  vase  of  lilies  stood  on  one
occasional table, and a vase of ostrich feathers adorned the other. She was pleased to see
that the porter had raised a good fire in the marble-lined grate, and begged the visitors to
make themselves at home. The second-eldest countess took the most comfortable  chair,  a
luxuriously  padded,  chestnut-coloured  upholstered  leather  armchair  with  mahogany  legs
that sat at  one  side  of  the  fireplace,  and  was  chased  from  thence  by  a  glance  from  her
senior. Strangely, the eldest did not sit down in it herself, but left it for their fair-haired
junior, who sank into it with the grace of a queen.
"How  may  our  establishment  assist  you?"  Miss  Carr  asked,  standing  before  them  a
trifle nervously. In light of the byplay she had just witnessed, she did not quite know  which
one to address.
"We do not wish anything that has been worn before by anyone else," the eldest  said,
settling herself at one end of the bottle-green velvet couch at the other side of the hearth.
"We are here for haute couture, nothing less. This house has produced handsome  wares  in
the past. That is what we wish."
"Made-to-measure, then," Miss Carr said, inwardly jubilant. Bespoke gowns were worth
to the establishment ten to twenty times the value of off-the-rack garments. She tried not
to look excited as she opened her tiny notebook and raised her gold pencil. "Do you perhaps
have a concept of what particular needs in your wardrobe you wish to fill?"

The youngest, enthroned in the great leather  chair,  waved  her  hand  dismissively.  "We
have not had new wardrobes in ages, not ages! The whole  ensemble,  if  you  please.  Evening
dresses, walking dresses, night dresses! We wish to see it all."
Less  explosively,  the  others  agreed.  "Yes,  show  us  your  current  line,  if  it  is  not  too
much trouble."
"Not  at  all,"  Miss  Carr  said.  "We  are  pleased  to  do  anything  that  will  suit  your
convenience."
The eldest countess smiled her enigmatic  smile.  "I  am  most  delighted  to  hear  you  say
that."
Miss  Carr  bowed  herself  out  to  go  to  the  robing  room  where  the  mannequins  were
waiting to hear what garments they should don.
The  girls  sitting  on  couches  and  benches  in  their  altogethers  in  the  cloth-draped
chamber looked up at her as she entered. They had been  drinking  tea  and  coffee  to  stay
awake.  A  few  of  them  had  taken  naps,  but  many  of  them  were  worn  and  a  little  pallid,
looking  older  than  their  ages,  which  were  from  sixteen  to  twenty  years.  They  had  all
expressed themselves willing to work late for the bonus wages Mrs. Feldon-Jacobs offered
for this night. It was hardly a respectable time for young ladies to be out,  but  the  owner
constantly impressed upon her staff that the customer was always right, and three  ladies
who wished to be fitted for entire ensembles was not an opportunity to be missed.
"The whole line," she said. Excitement brought roses back into the girls' cheeks as they
hurried to help one another dress. "The first walkthrough should begin in ten minutes," Miss
Carr announced, pitching her voice slightly to carry over the hubbub. "Make your change in
time  for  the  second  walkthrough  and  wait  for  my  signal.  Repeat  your  promenade  in  the
same order until I inform you to stay  or  go  back  to  your  first  costume."  The  girls  didn't
look up at her, busy as they were with corsets and petticoats, but she knew they heard her.
She  returned  to  the  salon,  clasped  her  hands  together  nervously  and  beamed  at  her
guests.
"We shall be ready to present our line to you shortly. In the meantime, may I offer you
refreshment?"
"Thank you," said the second-oldest, raising her hooded eyes to Miss Carr.  The  glance
was piercing and disquieting. Miss Carr suppressed a shudder. "But not just now."
"Of course," Miss Carr said, feeling her heart flutter. "I…
Countesses,  how  shall  I  address  you  to  distinguish  among  you?  Are  you  perhaps
sisters?" she asked, though she couldn't see how the third woman might have been related
to the first two. "Or are your husbands brothers? Cousins?"
"We are all the wives of the great Count Dracula," said the second woman, with  great
pride.

"Our ways are not  your  ways,  I  know,"  the  eldest  countess  said.  She  smiled,  showing
her teeth. All three had red, lush lips framing perfectly white teeth.
"I  hope  you  will  not  think  that  I  am  questioning  your  ways!"  Miss  Carr  exclaimed,
shocked.
"No. Of course you are not," the eldest Countess Dracula said, with a smile.
"Indeed, it is a fascinating concept of those of us in England," Miss Carr went on, "that
a  man  should  have  three  wives,  rather  like  a  Turkish  sultan."  The  ladies,  to  her  great
surprise at women of such elegance, all spat on the white silk carpet.
"The Turks," said the eldest, disdainfully. "The Turks are barbarians."
"I apologize," she said hastily. "I did not mean to offend."
"It is not you," said the second-eldest countess. "It is the Turks who  offend  by  their
existence."
Miss  Carr  was  relieved  having  just  experienced  an  inner  vision  of  the  countesses
sweeping out of the salon and into  the  night,  outraged;  and  herself,  standing  on  the  very
same stoop the next morning, unemployed, having wasted resources of the House of Feldon,
then  driven  away  the  customers.  She  supposed  that  her  grandmother  might  have  made  a
similar  gesture  regarding  the  French,  so  perhaps  the  ladies'  reaction  was  not  so
outrageously exotic as it at first seemed. What an odd thing it must be to be a co-wife, she
thought,  like  those  people  who  lived  in  the  American  states.  What  were  they  called,
Mormons? Miss Carr had thought that the religion was new, but it might have originated in
the  Balkans,  for  all  the  proponent  was  a  man  called  Joseph  Smith.  Perhaps  there  was  a
Rumanian equivalent of the name.
Mannequins swirled into the room like a bouquet of flowers. Each turned this way and
that before promenading slowly around the room clockwise, then counterclockwise.  In  all,
each  spent  nearly  ten  minutes  displaying  the  dress  she  was  wearing.  The  girls  may  have
come from the poorer classes, but  each  one  was  attractive,  perfectly  groomed,  and  bore
herself with the carriage of a queen, full tribute to Mrs. Feldon-Jacobs's rigorous training.
"You must tell me, Countesses, if there is any dress that appeals to you that you would
wish to try  on  yourselves.  We  would  be  more  than  happy  to  assist  you  during  the  second
showing."
The visitors chatted excitedly among themselves in their own tongue, leaving Miss Carr
to watch the mannequins. One young woman was particularly good. Miss Carr recalled that
her name was Claire Stimson, and that she was new to the House of Feldon. The dress she
wore was Miss Carr's favorite of the season's  line.  The  cream-silk  evening  dress  daringly
displayed a good deal of long, slender neck and the upper curve of the bosom before falling
into becoming  puffs  of  satin  around  the  bust  and  shoulders,  fitting  tightly  at  the  waist,
and bustled with Alençon lace at the rear of the smooth skirts. Though the décolletage was
much lower than a modest lady might find comfortable to wear, Miss Stimson still managed
to assert  dignity.  Miss  Carr  watched  her  with  approval.  The  three  countesses  sat  up  and

showed great interest in Miss Stimson's ensemble, eyeing the model hungrily.
"Ah!" one of them exclaimed, in English. "Yes, this is precisely what we have come for."
They seemed particularly taken by the demeanor of the  mannequin  herself.  Miss  Carr
thought that she would recommend the girl  for  promotion  when  the  new  line  was  brought
out  in  the  spring.  The  lovely  gown  concealed  beneath  it,  Miss  Carr  happened  to  know,  an
entirely new kind of corset that Mrs. Feldon-Jacobs had designed for not  only  bestowing
the  wasp-waist  so  vital  to  the  year's  fashions,  but  subtly  lifting  the  bosom.  The
undergarment  was  not  yet  complete,  and  had  to  be  pinned  together.  It  was  surely  very
uncomfortable, yet Miss Stimson carried herself with aplomb.
"Ye-es," said the eldest, slowly, avidly, staring as Miss Stimson turned and pirouetted.
"Exactly, exactly so." The mannequin looked to her employer. Miss Carr nodded,  indicating
she was to remain in the room. How could Miss Carr possibly send her away, with all  three
Countesses Dracula staring at the  model  gown  with  such  interest  that  their  mouths  were
slightly open. Miss Carr was faintly troubled by their very red lips. Such vivid paint was not
the fashion for respectable women in England, but foreign customs were different.
And  yet  women  talked  the  same  the  world  over.  The  middle  sister-wife  had  been
keeping careful track of the various fashions that had been displayed.
"I want the evening dress in crimson.  I  believe  it  was  the  sixth  dress,"  she  said.  Miss
Carr went down her list to verify that it was so. "I shall  also  have  the  walking  costume  in
midnight  blue  with  white  fur,  the  ninth  selection.  I  shall  look  very  elegant  in  it,  should  I
not? The morning costume, number two in black and cream striped silk, is very handsome. I
think  highly  of  the  fourth  gown,  the  tea  dress,  although  the  dusty  pink  will  not  suit  me.
Does it come in other shades?"
"Of course, Countess. I have squares of the colors available for you to examine," Miss
Carr said, adding up the value of each costume in  her  notepad  and  coming  up  with  a  most
attractive sum, and the other two had not chosen yet!
Disconcertingly, the countesses appeared to divine her thoughts.
"You must not think we are extravagant, my dear Miss Carr," said the eldest, raising an
eyebrow dark as a raven's feather on her pale forehead. "It is only our due from our lord
and master. For the trouble he has caused us, he owes us much, to the very last coin in his
treasury! Plucking us up from  our  native  soil,  and  making  us  endure  this  arduous  and  dull
journey into a foreign land… you must forgive me," she said, charmingly apologetic. "I mean
no disrespect to your homeland, and you have been the most welcoming of hostesses."
"Not  at  all,"  Miss  Carr  murmured,  embarrassed  to  overhear  such  private  arguments
between husband and wives. "It is difficult to travel such distances, although the summer is
the best time in which to do it. How was your journey to England?"
"Abominable," said the middle one. "On the terrible little boat upon which we embarked
from  our  beloved  Rumania  we  sailed  through  a  horrendous  storm.  All  of  our  trunks  were
washed overboard. We barely came ashore with the vitals for existence still in our grasp."

"Your lives?" Miss Carr asked, gasping with excitement. There was an indefinable pause
before the eldest broke the silence that had fallen.
"So to speak. And Magda retained our  jewel  box,"  she  said,  with  an  approving  nod  to
the second-eldest wife. "She is always one to  hold  on  to  opportunity.  Luckily  our  bankers
had already received our letter of credit. If our lord had only followed our advice we might
have saved the vessel—but he never does listen."
"We smelled the storm, but he enjoys such things," said Countess  Magda.  "Never  mind
that we have lost our whole wardrobes and everything we held dear."
He wrecked the ship on purpose? Miss Carr wanted to ask, but didn't dare.
"But, he will pay," said the  eldest  avidly,  licking  her  red,  red  lips.  "He  will  pay  dearly.
This is only the beginning of the price."
"Oh,"  Miss  Carr  said,  uncomfortably,  wishing  to  change  the  subject  away  from  such
personal issues. "Well. Did you land at Southampton?"
"No," said the youngest, sulkily. "Whitby."
"My goodness,"  said  Miss  Carr,  with  great  excitement,  "then  you  must  have  heard  of
the shipwreck there! It was in all the newspapers. A ship called the Demeter ran  aground,
steered by a dead man's hand."
Miss  Carr  thought  the  event  sounded  like  a  romantic  and  strange  play  that  sent  a
frisson up her back when she'd heard. It was not gossip, but news, so it was a fair subject
to broach, by Mrs. Feldon-Jacobs's rules. But it failed to intrigue her guests.
"How very… interesting," said  the  eldest  countess,  after  another  pause.  "No.  We  had
not heard of such a shipwreck."
The last mannequin curtsied lightly as she did her final turn, and slipped from the room.
"Well,  Countesses,"  Miss  Carr  said,  nervously.  This  was  the  moment  when  they  would
either make an order or find an excuse to leave. "Have we shown you anything  that  would
suit you?"
"Oh, yes," the eldest countess said, with a lift of her dark brows. "We have seen many
things that we wish to have. As you may guess, price is no object."
"Then, if you permit," Miss Carr said, "allow us  to  take  measurements  at  this  time,  so
that when you give your order, we may start at once tomorrow upon your choices."
The senior countess looked at the other two. "Yes, this would be acceptable to us."
With the assistance of three of the seamstresses, Miss Carr helped the countesses out
of  their  gowns.  Their  velvet  dresses,  oddly  heavy  for  the  climate  and  the  season,  had  a
musty air about them, as though they had been  hanging  in  a  closet  or  folded  into  a  chest
for  a  very  long  time.  Their  undergarments  were  also  curious,  being  extremely

old-fashioned,  albeit  of  the  best  fabrics  and  lace.  One  of  the  seamstresses  prepared  to
wrap a tape measure around the bosom of the  Countess  Magda,  when  she  jumped  back  in
surprise.
"Oh!" she cried. Miss Carr hurried over to see what was the matter.
Spinning down along its own thread from a web just under the lady's décolletage was a
large  black  spider,  very  much  alive.  Miss  Carr  looked  at  the  countess  in  puzzlement.  The
creature was so large she could not possibly have missed knowing  it was there. Perhaps she
had no fear of  them.  Perhaps  she  liked  them.  Perhaps  having  a  spider  about  one's  person
was a foreign custom, like the English tradition of letting a money spider walk  across one's
palm.
"Oh," the countess  said,  glancing  down  at  the  object  of  their  curiosity.  She  seized  a
feather  from  the  display  in  the  vase  on  the  side  table,  and  whisked  it  to  the  floor.  The
spider promptly ran underneath a chair. Miss Carr made a mental  note  to  send  one  of  the
page boys in to hunt it down and kill it as soon as the visitors were gone. When the ladies'
measurements were complete, the seamstresses offered them dressing gowns and assisted
them to sit down.
"And  now  we  will  show  the  line  again,"  Miss  Carr  said.  "You  may  stop  any  of  the
mannequins if you wish to try on her costume. Please let me know  which you wish to order,
or to add to the list for later consideration."
In  the  end  the  Countesses  Dracula  amassed  an  enormous  order.  Hardly  a  mannequin
came and went without one of the three insisting that she must have the costume, with all
the appropriate accessories and underthings.
"And when may we expect to have the first fitting?" the eldest countess asked, as the
eighth model put in her appearance. Miss Carr glanced up from her notebook.
"I  believe  that  Mrs.  Feldon-Jacobs  will  say  that  it  can  be  a  week  hence,  er,  also  at
night if you require."
"We do. You can do all this in a week?"
"Indeed, yes, madam," Miss Carr said with pride. "We have the best staffed  and  most
efficient workrooms in London. I trust you will be satisfied not only with our workmanship,
but with our promptness."
"That is most satisfactory. Ah! Here she is again."
Miss Stimson had returned for her second appearance in the perfect, pearl-white satin
dress.
"Enchanting,"  said  the  youngest  countess,  her  blue  eyes  wide.  "We  must  have  one  of
those."
"Two," said Countess Magda.

"Would you care to try it on?" Miss Carr offered politely, jotting the style number into
each of the two younger ladies' measurement charts.
"Perhaps not now," said the eldest wife. "There is so much else to see."
"But,  she  must  stay,"  the  youngest  wife  insisted.  Miss  Stimson  received  her  silent
instructions from Miss Carr, and took up a languid-seeming stance against the wall near the
vase of feathers,  with  one  arm  resting  lightly  on  the  table  top.  It  was  actually  a  restful
posture, designed to ease the back when one of the mannequins must remain standing for a
long time. Another girl swirled into the room in a walking costume of leaf  green  with  sage
trim.  The  countesses  chattered  to  one  another  with  delight,  though  their  eyes  kept
returning to Miss Stimson.
Miss Carr was quite dizzy with  delight  by  the  time  she  finished  writing  up  the  order.
Mrs.  Feldon-Jacobs  would  have  to  put  the  workrooms  on  full  alert,  but  it  would  be
worthwhile. This order would be the talk of the industry. The last model was displayed and
retired. The eldest countess clapped her hands.
"Brava,"  she  said.  "This  is  all  very  good.  And  now,  we  are  feeling  rather  famished.
Perhaps you may furnish us with that little refreshment?"
Their red mouths looked almost predatory, their white  teeth  sharp  as  an  animal's.  At
once  Miss  Carr  was  horrified  at  herself  for  even  thinking  of  such  a  comparison.  "Of
course!"  she  said.  "Forgive  me  for  not  offering  again."  She  nodded  to  one  of  the
seamstresses, who left the room and sent in the page boy. Miss Carr gave the order for tea,
sandwiches, and cakes. She risked a discreet  look  at  her  watch.  The  hour  was  long  after
midnight. She hoped the day's bread would still answer. Knowing that they would have night
visitors who might require sustenance, they had wrapped a fresh loaf as well as they could.
The final group of mannequins began to withdraw. Miss Stimson, seeing release at hand,
crossed the room to join her companions.
"Oh, no, don't go," the youngest countess said, catching Miss Stimson by the arm. "You
must join us for our meal."
She drew the girl beside her and held her quite close. Miss Stimson looked unhappy, but
she was afraid to refuse. She knew what  it  meant  to  them  all  if  she  should  displease  the
customers.
She smiled tremulously, looking to Miss Carr for rescue. Miss Carr was uncertain what
to do, and wished the owner was there. She knew no respectable Englishwoman would touch
another  person  so  familiarly,  but  these  were  foreigners.  She  fancied  that  she  saw  their
mouths open as if they would eat the girl right there.
What  to  do?  The  gown  was  lovely,  and  the  girl  did  look  lovely  in  it.  Perhaps  the
countesses  just  wanted  to  have  it  there  under  their  eyes  while  they  discussed  the  final
details of their order. Since the financial arrangements had not yet been  concluded,  Miss
Carr  was  as  paralyzed  as  Miss  Stimson.  She  watched  in  horrified  fascination  as  the
youngest  countess  reeled  in  the  girl  like  a  fish  until  they  were  virtually  eye-to-eye.

Suddenly, the blond woman let out a horrified cry and  threw  the  girl  away  from  her.  The
girl  landed  in  a  heap  of  white  silk  on  the  floor.  The  countess  pointed  a  trembling,
accusatory finger at the mannequin's neck.
"What is that?" she cried.
Miss Carr went to help Miss Stimson up  and  investigate  the  problem.  About  the  girl's
neck  was  a  tiny  chain.  Miss  Carr  hadn't  thought  a  thing  about  it  except  that  it
accessorized the neckline of her gown and drew attention tastefully to the bare shoulders.
Hanging from the fine chain was a minute gold cross, a small personal item that belonged to
Miss Stimson herself. The mannequins were permitted to wear such jewelry as long as they
were  handsome  and  in  good  taste.  The  tiny  cross  was  real  gold,  classic  in  shape  and
irreproachably  modest.  Miss  Carr  hadn't  thought  that  the  countesses  might  not  be
Christians and would find the symbol offensive. They didn't look Jewish. Perhaps there was
another faith they followed in the Balkans that went along with polygamy.
"I am so sorry," Miss Carr said, lamely, searching for words to repair the damage.
"I  can  see  that  we  are  not  welcome  here,"  the  blonde  said,  rising  to  her  feet  with
flashing eyes.
"Don't  be  silly,"  Countess  Magda  exclaimed,  tugging  on  her  sister-wife's  sleeve.  "
Clothes, sister! This will be our only opportunity. He never  shows  remorse.  You  know  that.
We must take advantage of this indulgence as we can."
"Ladies,  please,"  Miss  Carr  appealed  to  them,  seeing  hundreds  of  pounds  fly  out  the
window on night-borne wings. "If the bauble offends you, I shall remove it."
"Please do," said the eldest countess, swiftly. "That will suffice." There was a muffled
outburst from her co-wife, but it was quickly quelled by a fierce glance.
"I am so sorry, Miss Carr," Miss Stimson whispered, her fair cheeks crimson. "I thought
it would be all right. Please don't sack me."
"It is not your fault," Miss Carr said, unfastening the tiny clasp and gathering the chain
in  her  palm.  "I  will  put  this  in  the  dressing  room  on  the  table.  In  future  let  us  choose  a
different jewel for you to wear."
The girl's gratitude shone in her eyes. "Thank you, madam." She gave an uneasy glance
over Miss Carr's shoulder at the visitors. "I… I do wish you would not  leave  me  alone  with
them."
"Nonsense," Miss Carr said briskly. "They will do you no harm. They merely wish to look
more closely at the dress. Allow them to examine it as they wish."
"Yes, madam," the girl whispered.
"Refreshments,  Countesses!"  Miss  Carr  announced,  as  the  page  boy  entered,  pushing
the laden tea cart. She was grateful for the distraction. It also gave the mannequin time to
recover  herself  and  resume  her  station  near  the  wall.  The  visitors  waited  as  the  page

poured tea and offered sandwiches all around.
"That  is  very  nice,"  the  eldest  countess  said,  accepting  a  cup  with  a  slice  of  lemon
floating on the amber tea in one of Mrs.  Feldon-Jacobs's  heirloom  cups.  "Very  nice.  All  is
most satisfactory."
"Now, if you will excuse  me  for  a  moment,  I  will  go  and  prepare  the  papers  for  your
approval," Miss Carr said.
"Yes,  yes,"  said  the  Countess  Magda.  "Everyone  go  away.  We  wish  to  talk  among
ourselves. Not you, my dear," she said, taking the girl's hand as Miss Stimson attempted to
follow. "We wish you to stay with us."
The  last  thing  Miss  Carr  saw  as  she  closed  the  door  on  the  salon  was  the  girl's
frightened eyes.
*    *    *    *    * 
The invoice took little time to  prepare.  Miss  Carr  had  but  to  transfer  to  it  the  name
and price of the gowns ordered, note the name of the buyers and their impressive-sounding
address.  Carfax  Abbey,  Sussex.  The  owner  would  be  pleased  with  everything  from  this
night's work.
She returned to the salon in time to see the mannequin staggering back to lean against
the  wall,  pale  as  a  ghost,  with  a  few  drops  of  blood  on  her  neck.  She  was  wrapped  in  a
dressing gown, and the silk ball gown was on hooks  against  the  wall.  No  doubt  one  of  the
countesses had wanted to try it on, but the blood was a puzzle. Perhaps Miss Stimson had
been injured by the pins holding the incomplete stays together, which had to come off over
the head. Miss Carr checked the gown for spots. The girl seemed to have had the presence
of  mind  not  to  bleed  on  the  dress.  Miss  Stimson  stood  looking  at  her  employer  with  the
dazed expression of a sheep.
"Are you all right?" Miss Carr asked.
"Yes, madam," the girl said, rather stupidly. She blinked at the lamp, her pupils shrunk
to pinpoint size. Miss Carr saw how pallid she was, red rings around her  eyes  very  much  in
relief to the parchment color  of  her  skin,  and  put  it  off  to  the  lateness  of  the  hour.  No
wonder she had scratched her neck. "It's a trifle bright in here, madam."
"Perhaps,"  Miss  Carr  said.  "You  have  done  well,  Miss  Stimson.  I  will  tell  Mrs.
Feldon-Jacobs  so.  You  may  retire  and  take  tomorrow  off.  But  I  expect  to  see  you  here
bright and early Thursday morning."
"Yes, madam." The girl tripped clumsily out  of  the  room.  Miss  Carr  was  tired  too,  but
she didn't dare  to  give  in  to  the  sensation.  Thankfully,  the  visitors  read  over  the  invoice
with  little  interest.  The  eldest  countess  signed  her  name  at  the  bottom  beside  the  sum
total, a colossal number that made Miss Carr want to dance, if only she wasn't so tired.
"Our bankers are Coutts & Co. The count has a substantial letter of credit with them.
This should take a substantial bite out of it." As if  it  was  part  of  an  old  joke,  the  senior

countess showed her teeth, and the other two laughed. "We thank you very much for your
hospitality, Miss Carr, but we must now be going."
Miss  Carr  dropped  her  half-bow,  half-curtsy  gratefully.  It  was  after  one  in  the
morning. She'd be lucky if her bespoke cab would still be outside.
"Very well, Countesses. May I say, on behalf of the House of Feldon, that it has been a
great pleasure to serve you? Is there anything else at all with which I may assist you?"
"No, thank you," said the youngest, rising from her grand chair and licking her lips. Miss
Carr noticed again how  very,  very  red  they  were.  Was  that  a  drop  of  rouge  on  her  chin?
"We have got everything that we came for."

Long-Term Investment
Chelsea Quinn Yarbro
The  coffins  bothered  him,  no  doubt  about  it.  Ever  since  the  foreign  gentleman  had
hired him to supervise his warehouse, the coffins had bothered him—that, and working late,
although  he  was  not  completely  alone  at  any  hour,  for  even  at  night  the  London  docks
bustled; ships tugged restlessly at their moorings out in the Thames and  those  secured  to
the  vast  wooden  piers  strained  at  the  lines  holding  them.  Lamps  gave  off  a  fuzzy  glow,
tingeing the docks with gold and lighting the busy efforts of all who labored here. Activity
was everywhere: longshoremen worked steadily, loading or removing cargo from the waiting
holds; sailors from a hundred foreign ports polished brightwork, swabbed decks, inspected
rigging, bucked cargo, hauled lines, all as if it were midday. Many of the office windows in
the warehouses were lit, testimony to the industry of the owners of the vessels as well as
the men they hired. The brackish smell of bilgewater and the odor of tar  hung  on  the  air,
stronger than the clean scent off the distant sea, although there was a tang of salt in the
fog.
Edward Hitchin sat in the dusty  office  above  the  warehouse  floor  and  tried  to  keep
himself  busy.  The  foreign  gentleman—  calling  himself  Carfax—was  paying  him  well:  ten
shillings for a day's work, and twelve when he had to remain past nine  at  night,  handsome
wages  for  a  young  man  from  Stepney  who  was  little  more  than  a  watchman.  He  was
determined to keep the job as long as possible, for he liked the jingle of coins in his pocket
and the respectful nod from the patrolling constables.
A ship was due in from Varna, and Mister Carfax had told  Edward  to  expect  another
load of coffins. "Not that we haven't a fair supply on hand already," he had added before
leaving Edward alone. "Still, it is good business, is  it  not,  to  have  an  ample  supply.  Coffins
are  a  long-term  investment,  are  they  not?"  He  had  chuckled,  which  Edward  found
disquieting, but there were so many things about Mister  Carfax  that  gave  him  pause  that
this chuckle seemed a minor intrusion.
"Too  true,"  Edward  said  to  himself  as  he  looked  out  the  window  and  down  onto  the
warehouse  floor  where  several  dozen  elaborately  carved  coffins  were  stacked.  He  had
been  thinking  about  Carfax's  remark  all  evening—that  coffins  were  a  long-term
investment; he had decided that in its way, the observation was  witty.  Coffins  always  got
used, eventually. Another load of them and the warehouse would be  more  than  half-filled,
and that load would arrive in a matter of hours.

Edward was considering lighting up his pipe when a sharp rap on the entry door claimed
his attention. Surely the ship  had  not  yet  off-loaded  the  cargo  for  Mister  Carfax.  When
the knock  was repeated, he bolted from the  office,  running  noisily  down  the  stairs  as  he
called out, "In half a tick!" Opening the door, he found himself facing a man he  had  never
seen before, but knew at once, though the man wore  a  suit  instead  of  a  uniform,  that  he
was a member of the police. Edward blanched but held the door steadily. ''Good evening."
"Good evening. Am I addressing Mister Carfax?"
"No,"  Edward  answered,  wondering  what  the  police  wanted  with  the  tall,  foreign
gentleman. "'He's away just now. I'm his… assistant.  Edward  Hitchin."  He  could  not  make
himself  ask  what  the  police  were  doing  here,  so  he  waited  while  the  policeman  stepped
inside.
"Do you have a little time to spare, Mister Hitchin? I am Inspector Ames  of  Scotland
Yard."
This polite inquiry, along with being called "Mister" caught Edward off-balance.  "Sure
enough," he said after he thought about it.
"You've been here all evening?" The policeman  took  a  notebook  from  his  inner  breast
pocket, and a pencil from his outer breast pocket, and prepared to write.
"Is this official, you taking down my answers and all?" Edward asked, trying to conceal
his anxiety.
"Should it not be?" Inspector Ames asked so mildly that Edward had to resist the urge
to spring from the room. "Now, have you been here all evening?"
"Since eleven in the morning. I came in late because I have to be here late to receive a
new shipment of… stock." He indicated the dimly lit warehouse.
"The  sign  over  the  door  says  D.  Carfax,  importer  and  purveyor  of  fine  coffins  and
caskets" said the policeman. "Is this the stock on hand?"
"Yes,"  said  Edward.  "The  bills  of  lading  are  in  the  office.  What  you  see  here  comes
from  Varna,  most  of  it.  Very  elaborate  carving  they  do  in  that  part  of  the  world—very
elaborate." He pointed to the nearest stack of coffins. "These are the  simple  ones.  There
are  fancier  toward  the  back.  We  even  have  some  with  bells  to  be  secured  above  in  case
someone should be buried alive, and need to be dug up again." He had been told to mention
this desirable feature even though he thought it ghoulish.
"Do you open them, or—" the inspector began.
"Oh, no," said Edward hastily. "It's not… seemly."
"Um.  Very  prudent,"  said  the  policeman  indifferently,  and  handed  a  card  to  Edward.
"Will you be good enough to tell  Mister  Carfax  that  Inspector  Uriah  Ames  is  desirous  of
speaking with him at his earliest convenience?"

Edward took the card, holding it gingerly. "May I tell him what this is about?" he asked,
curiosity and dread warring within him.
Inspector Ames coughed diplomatically. "A  body  was  found  washed  up  on  the  Isle  of
Dogs. It has no identification, no clothing. It is likely the deceased was the victim  of  foul
play. The dead woman has not been claimed or anyone of her description reported missing."
He watched Edward closely. "We are asking all businesses along the docks, for  it  is  likely
that she was thrown into the water somewhere in this area, and we are hoping that someone
noticed something." He paused, his pencil poised over his well-thumbed notebook. "Have you
noticed any suspicious activities in this area in the last week or so?"
Edward shook his head. "I have been in the office, or on the floor, making an inventory
for Mister Carfax. I take  my  tea  inside."  He  shrugged  apologetically.  "I  wish  I  could  tell
you something more."
"Provide  me  with  your  direction,  and  I  suppose  that  will  do  for  now,"  said  Inspector
Ames.
"Edward Hitchin, Beeks House, White Horse Road, Stepney," he said promptly, knowing
that the address was far from impressive.
"Lived there long, have you?" Inspector Ames asked as he wrote.
"M'Mum and I have been there for ten years and more." He did his best  not  to  sound
defensive.
"Your Mum still there, is she?" Inspector Ames asked.
"Yes;  she's  not  in  good  health."  It  was  a  convenient  mendacity,  for  the  melancholy
which held her in its grip seemed as crippling as any misfortune or disease.
"Sorry to hear that," said Inspector Ames with the habitual  sympathy  of  one  used  to
bad news. "Stays in, does she?"
"Most  of  the  time.  I  tend  to  her  needs,"  Edward  informed  Inspector  Ames,  at  once
proud and wary.
"And you work here for long hours," said Inspector Ames.
"I am well-paid for my time," Edward insisted. "Mister Carfax is a generous employer."
"Worked for him long, have you?" Inspector Ames seemed disinterested in the answer,
but Edward knew enough about the police not to be deceived by this ploy.
"Not long, no. Mister Carfax is a foreigner but recently arrived in London. He keeps a
house somewhere in the country, but he has a place in London, probably in the toffy part of
town—  Mayfair,  or  Berkeley  Square  or  some  such.  He's  rich  enough,  and  he  has  the
manner." He felt that volunteering this information would show his willingness to cooperate
with the police inquiries. "He comes here three or four times a week to tend to business and
to instruct me in my duties." "Then you expect to see him shortly," said Inspector Ames.

"Tomorrow, about four or five," said Edward promptly.
"Then you will give  him  my  card  and  pass  along  my  message,  and  I  shall  expect  a  call
from Mister Carfax before the end of the week." This affable request, Edward knew, was
an order. He nodded.
"I'll attend to it, first thing he arrives," Edward said, and tried to contain his fidgets.
"That's good of you," said Inspector Ames as he put his pencil and notebook away, and
with an uneasy glance at the stacked coffins and caskets said, "I'll let myself out."
*    *    *    *    * 
By the time Carfax arrived the next afternoon, Edward had become distressed  about
what the Inspector had told him; dead women, murdered women, brought back memories of
the  Ripper,  and  with  it,  other,  more  personal  recollections,  as  well  as  the  uncomfortable
awareness that the Ripper had never been brought to justice. So Edward was nervous when
he  passed  on  Inspector  Ames's  card  and  request.  "The  police  are  nothing  to  fash  with,
Mister Carfax," he added when he finished explaining the situation. "When there are dead
bodies involved, the police are… are persistent."
"Ah, yes. English police. We hear many things about them in my native land," said Mister
Carfax, examining the inspector's card. "What does he want of  me,  this  Inspector  Ames?
You say there is a body—what has that to do with me?"
"There's an investigation into the woman's death. The police are gathering information
about  the  circumstances,"  said  Edward,  wondering  how  Mister  Carfax  would  doubt  that:
foreigners were unaccountable.
"What has that to do with me?" Mister Carfax repeated with supreme indifference. "1
know nothing of this woman. Why should the police need to know that?"
"They want you to go along to the station  and  tell  them  what  you  can.  You  may  know
nothing,  but  they  will  want  to  hear  of  it  from  you."  Edward  tried  not  to  sound  too
apprehensive, but he suspected he failed.
"But  I  have  nothing  to  tell  them.  Dead  women  do  not  interest  me."  His  accent  grew
stronger,  as  if  his  emotions  had  loosened  his  control  over  the  English  tongue.  "It  is  most
unseemly, to have to answer to the police, a man of my position."
Although Edward was not sure what that position might be, he said, "They just need to
have you tell them you were not on the docks when the woman was killed—that's all."
Carfax looked indignant as he pulled himself up to his full, and considerable, height. "It
is for the police to wait upon me. Send this Ames word that I will receive him the day after
tomorrow in the early  evening."  He  looked  toward  the  newest  arrivals.  "How  many  in  this
load?"
"Twenty-three  of  the  fancy,  eleven  of  the  plain,"  said  Edward,  grateful  to  have  this
opportunity  to  show  his  efficiency.  "The  ones  with  brass  fittings  are  in  the  row  at  the

center."
"Just so," Carfax approved. "Did you open any of them?"
Edward shook his head. "You said I should not."
"So I did," Carfax mused,  then  went  on  more  briskly,  "You  have  done  well,  Hitchin.  I
will pay you a bonus for your work." He strode toward the stairs. "Oh. I suppose you should
know I will take nine of them, for delivery. Tomorrow a drayer will come to fetch them."
"You have a customer, then?" Edward said, relieved to hear it.
Carfax smiled. "In a  manner  of  speaking."  He  paused.  "I  will  tell  you  which  are  to  be
taken, so you will not load the wrong ones."
"Very good, sir," said Edward, secretly glad to know some of the stock would be leaving
the warehouse.
As he climbed up the stairs, Carfax said, "This is going very well. By winter I should be
established."
"There's  always  a  market  for  coffins,"  said  Edward,  deliberately  echoing  Carfax's
sentiments as he followed him up the stairs.
 *    *    *    *    *
"When  did  Carfax  say  he  would  arrive?"  Inspector  Ames  asked,  glancing  at  his
pocketwatch  for the third time. It was twenty minutes  past  the  hour  Carfax  had  said  he
would  be  at  his  warehouse  for  their  meeting.  The  afternoon  was  closing  toward  evening
already; fall was beginning.
"He said four, but he was coming in from the country, and he may have been delayed on
the  road."  Edward  felt  acute  embarrassment  at  this  predicament.  "You  may  have  to  be
patient.  He  was  determined  to  meet  with  you,  or  so  he  said  when  he  left  day  before
yesterday."
"Well, I will wait a while longer," Inspector Ames said with a ponderous sigh. "He's the
last one I have to interview from this area."
"Any  progress?"  Edward  did  not  want  to  know,  but  he  was  determined  to  keep  the
inspector entertained during his wait for Mister Carfax.
"Not much," Inspector Ames admitted. "The woman is still unidentified, which hampers
our work. We are doing our best."
Edward thought that  did  not  sound  promising,  but  he  said,  "No  doubt  you'll  find  the
murderer, eh, Inspector?"
"Are you mocking me?" Inspector Ames asked suspiciously.
Shocked,  Edward  shook  his  head.  "No,  sir.  Nothing  of  the  sort.  I  only  meant  what  I

said, that you will catch the criminal."
Inspector Ames looked slightly mollified, but he glowered  at  Edward.  "You…  you  poor
people have no respect for the police."
"I am not one such.  My  father  worked  for  the  police,  in  the  stationhouse.  It  got  him
killed," said Edward stiffly.
"Oh,  yes?"  said  Inspector  Ames,  regarding  Edward  with  slightly  more  interest.  "How
did it happen?"
Edward guessed that  the  inspector  wanted  to  know  so  he  could  check  out  the  story
more than he had any genuine interest. "It was during the Ripper days. A man was brought
into the stationhouse for  Stepney,  where  my  father  clerked.  He  was  under  suspicion  for
savaging a… street woman, and some thought he might  be  the  Ripper—the  man  in  custody,
not my father. The thing was, the fellow had a  knife  on  him  that  no  one  knew  about,  and
when he was being written up, he grabbed my father and used him  for  a  shield  to  escape.
Cut his throat on the stationhouse steps." He swallowed hard. "My  father  said  that  police
are the best hope we have to make life safe. No, Inspector, I would not mock you, for his
sake if no other."
"Just so," said Inspector Ames, making it serve as an apology.
"I won't say as police don't make me nervous," Edward went on, thinking he was saying
too much, but unable to stop himself. "You said right when you said poor people—" He broke
off. "Well, thanks to Carfax, I am not poor any longer."
Inspector Ames nodded and was about to speak when Carfax himself came striding in
out of the foggy, fading day. "Mister Carfax," he said with energy. "I had about given you
up."
"I  apologize  for  my  tardiness,"  said  Carfax.  "I  have  been  at  the  zoological  gardens.
Most unusual. I must go again when I am at leisure to appreciate its occupants. I am afraid
I forgot the time." He glanced at Edward. "I trust Hitchin has been looking after you in a
satisfactory manner?"
"He has, sir," said Inspector Ames, not quite deferential, but less accusing than he had
been with Edward. "I am sorry I must intrude, but there has been a—"
"—killing  of  a  young  woman,"  Carfax  finished  for  him.  "Yes.  So  Hitchin  told  me."  He
indicated the steps to the office. "Perhaps you would be more comfortable if I offered you
a chair?" Without waiting for an answer he went up the stairs.
"I am coming, sir," said Inspector Ames, tagging after Carfax.
Edward watched them go, feeling at loose ends. He had only the coffins for company,
and he began to wander the aisles between the stacks of coffins. They no longer bothered
him as they had done at first, although he was a long way from comfortable with them. He
consulted  his  pocketwatch  several  times  before  he  saw  Inspector  Ames  emerge  on  the
landing.

"Very good, Mister Carfax. I am grateful for your time." He bowed slightly and started
down the stairs.
"If I think of anything that has bearing on your investigation, I will be sure to inform
you," came Carfax's voice after the policeman.
"Much obliged,"  said  Inspector  Ames  as  he  made  his  way  down  the  stairs,  pausing  as
Edward approached him to see him off the premises. He looked at  Edward,  his  expression
revealing nothing. "Odd sort of chap, your Mister Carfax."
"Well, he's foreign, isn't he," said Edward as he opened the door.
"That he is," Inspector Ames agreed as he left the building.
 *    *    *    *    *
The  next  body  was  found  six  days  later:  an  amah  coming  from  India  with  a  military
family was supposed to accompany the luggage from the docks to  the  family's  house.  She
never arrived, although the luggage did. Now the waterfront began to hum with rumors, and
the police sent  more  constables  to  patrol  the  narrow,  noisome  streets  where  warehouses
sat chock-a-block with ancient inns and houses of dubious reputation.
Edward  admitted  Inspector  Ames  a  day  after  the  ghastly  discovery  was  made.  He
noticed the dark circles around the policeman's eyes, and the downward  turn of his mouth.
"A terrible thing, Inspector."
"That it is," Inspector Ames agreed. "You know why I've come."
Nodding, Edward said, "You think it is the same killer, then."
"Yes. We have good reason to." He said nothing more specific as he glanced around the
warehouse. "Carfax has moved out more coffins."
"That  he  has,"  said  Edward,  taking  indirect  satisfaction  in  this  turn  of  events.  He
permitted himself to boast a bit. "He has sent more than a dozen out of the city.  He  tells
me that more are to go before the week is out."
"He must be pleased," said Inspector Ames, and exhausted his capacity for small talk.
"Hitchin, what have you seen? What have you heard?"
"Nothing that you haven't heard, or seen, sir," said Edward as a cold fist closed on his
guts. "Why should I? I am indoors all the day long, and into the night."
"Do  not  tell  me  you  do  not  while  away  the  hours  alone  in  that  office  upstairs?"  The
inspector's incredulity was insulting enough to sting.
"I will not tell you, if you are not prepared to believe me.
But  it  is  what  I  do."  He  could  feel  the  heat  in  his  face,  and  hear  it  in  his  voice.  He
struggled to cool his temper. "Why do you doubt me?"

"Well, you know, I checked up on your father, and on you. Your report of his death was
reasonably accurate, but I must tell you that the scrapes you have been in since his death
are very troublesome to me, very troublesome." He studied Edward a short while in silence.
"You have been caught stealing, have you not?"
"Food. Only food.  For  my  Mum,"  muttered  Edward.  "The  pension  doesn't  go  very  far,
and sometimes she's gone hungry."
"Very commendable, I'm sure." Inspector Ames's sarcasm was as bad  as  his  disbelief.
"You spent a month in gaol, my lad."
"That  I  did.  Two  years  since."  He  could  not  conceal  his  bitterness.  "My  Mum  nearly
starved to death. No one cared for her."
"An  unfortunate  circumstance,"  said  Inspector  Ames  smoothly.  "You  must  be  very
grateful to Mister Carfax. Not many would employ the likes of you, not once you've been in
gaol."
"Probably  not,"  Edward  said,  keenly  aware  that  the  inspector  was  right.  "But  Mister
Carfax, being foreign, is not so worried about these things as you are. He hired me—and I
did  tell  him  about  what  I  had  done."  He  did  his  best  to  look  unconcerned,  though  the
memory of that interview still rankled. "Mister Carfax is willing to give a man a chance."
"No doubt," said Inspector Ames. "And you are loyal to him for this."
"Certainly," said Edward staunchly.
"Good," said the inspector. "It would be unfortunate to see the man served a perfidious
turn by one who should have only gratitude."
"I  understand  you,  Inspector  Ames,"  Edward  told  him.  "I  will  not  abuse  Mister
Carfax's faith in me."
Inspector Ames frowned at him. "I shall hope you do not. For I shall make it my task to
be watching you."
*    *    *    *    * 
By the time the fourth body was discovered, only five days after the third, fear was all
but  palpable  in  the  air.  Activity  on  the  docks  became  hasty,  furtive.  More  constables
patrolled, and fewer businesses kept their  offices  open  past  seven  in  the  evening  except
when  it  was  absolutely  necessary.  Everyone  looked  upon  strangers  as  dangerous,  and
occasional fights broke out as a result of quickened tempers and unlucky mistakes.
After sustaining a third  visit  from  the  police  in  as  many  days,  Edward  found  himself
wandering  restlessly  around  the  main  floor  of  the  warehouse,  looking  at  the  stacked
coffins  and  trying  to  steady  his  chaotic  thoughts.  He  knew  Inspector  Uriah  Ames  was
suspicious of him; his experience of the police told him that once they had settled on a man,
they  were  tenacious  in  their  purpose,  no  matter  how  much  in  error  they  might  be;  the
implications worried him. Why did Inspector Ames think he was guilty of some criminal act?

How  could  any  policeman  believe  that  he  was  a  murderer?  He  paused  beside  the  largest
stack of caskets, noticing that one or two of them were slightly out of alignment.  Sighing
with  a  sense  of  ill-use,  but  secretly  glad  to  have  something  to  take  his  mind  off  his
problems, Edward did his best to shove the coffins back into position.
The uppermost coffin teetered, rocked, and fell, crashing onto the rough planking with
an ominous crack as the lid split open at the lock, spilling out a load of  dark-red  earth  on
the warehouse floor.
Edward stood in silence, staring at the  fallen  casket  and  its  unaccountable  contents.
He  could  not  bring  himself  to  move.  What  was  earth  doing  inside  a  coffin?  he  asked
himself, and found no answer. Very slowly he let his breath out, unaware until that instant
that he had been holding it. He noticed that this coffin was one of the ones that had been
tagged to be picked up by the drayage firm the next day, and that made him more puzzled
than ever. Who wanted the earth, and what would he do with it? He had  no  answer,  so  he
approached  the  matter  from  a  different  angle:  why  should  any  undertaker  buy  a  coffin
filled with earth? To whom was Carfax selling these coffins, and why?
The sound of a carriage in the street brought him back to himself. He swore obscenely
and comprehensively under his breath as he resisted the panic that threatened to overcome
him. He was aware that he had to clean up the  dirt  and  make  some  attempt  to  repair  the
coffin before Mister Carfax could see what a mess had been made. This galvanized him into
action:  in  a  flurry  of  activity,  he  removed  his  jacket  and  turned  up  his  sleeves  in
preparation for all he had to do, searched for the wide broom he used every night  before
he left to make  a  pile  of  the  dirt,  and  he  improvised  a  dustpan  to  collect  it  and  stuff  it
back in the carved wooden box. The lock was a trickier problem, and it so engrossed him as
he glued the various bits back together that he did not  notice  when  the  door  opened  and
Carfax  himself  slipped  into  the  warehouse,  taking  refuge  in  the  shadows  where  Edward
could not see him.
When he was satisfied that he had repaired the worst of the damage, Edward hurried
off to the washroom to clean his hands and neaten himself up. He combed his hair with his
fingers  and  patted  cold  water  on  his  face  to  diminish  the  flush  of  exercise,  then
straightened his collar and tie before going to fetch  his  jacket.  He  stopped  still  when  he
saw  Carfax  standing  in  the  doorway.  "Good  afternoon,  sir,"  he  said  nervously.  "I  did  not
hear you arrive."
"I  daresay,"  said  Carfax,  strolling  into  the  center  of  the  warehouse,  his  voluminous
European-style cloak swinging around him. "Is all well?"
"The  police  still  haven't  caught  the  murderer,  but  your  business  is  thriving,"  said
Edward  uneasily.  He  hoped  that  Carfax  would  not  notice  that  the  caskets  were  not
stacked as they had been.
"Five bodies, is it?" Carfax asked.
"Four, actually," said Edward.
"Oh, yes. Four." He paused beside the first stack of coffins. "How sad." Then he turned

abruptly. "If you will fetch the accounting books down from the office? I want to assure
myself that our records are accurate. There have been enough orders for these coffins for
a review of our stock."
Glad to be doing something useful, Edward bolted for the stairs; he did not see Carfax
open the nearest coffin,  take  rumpled,  stained  clothing  from  under  his  cloak,  and  thrust
the clothing inside; he closed the lid carefully, making almost no sound. Smiling slightly,  he
waited for Edward to come down with the account book.
"Here  it  is,"  said  Edward,  holding  out  the  ledger.  "You'll  see  I've  ticked  off  all  the
coffins  and  caskets  you  have  already  shipped,  and  entered  the  date  they  were  shipped
here—" he pointed out the place in the columned paper.
"Ah, yes," said Carfax. "A good arrangement." He pointed to the inventory numbers of
the  next  lot  that  would  be  shipped.  "These  are  the  ones  that  will  be  transported
tomorrow?"
"Yes, sir," said Edward, unable to keep from glancing at the earth-filled casket.
"Very  good,"  said  Carfax,  and  turned  his  attention  to  other  matters,  which  quieted
Edward's dismay.
"I'll  see  the  coffins  get  off  all  right  and  tight,"  Edward  promised  Mister  Carfax
shortly before that worthy left him that evening.  "It  will  be  good  to  have  them  gone,"  he
said with genuine emotion.
 *    *    *    *    *
"He denies everything. He claims to  know  nothing  about  the  clothing  or  the  earth.  If
you had not told us where to search, he might have got away with it," said Inspector Ames
as his men struggled to return some order to the chaos they had created. "We expect that
of such criminals. This one was no different, claiming someone had planted what we found,
to fix the blame on him. I am sorry that we had to do this." He nodded as an indication of
why he was apologizing: coffins and caskets were strewn about, most of them opened, as if
a terrible desecration had taken place in an unlikely graveyard. The constables were doing
their  best  to  restack  the  coffins  and  caskets  now  that  Hitchin  had  been  taken  into
custody.
Carfax heard this out with every sign of distress. "But what did you find?" '
"Enough to give the hangman employment," said Inspector Ames heavily. "In his drawer
in the office there were some things he had hidden—of course, he denies any knowledge of
them. They will be enough for the Queen's Counsel to make an unbreakable case."
"Are you so certain he is the man?" Carfax shook his head.
"Well," said Inspector Ames knowingly, "it's often the cooperative ones who prove the
most dangerous in the end.  No  doubt  he  holds  the  police  to  blame  for  his  father's  death
and his mother's decline." He held out his hand to Carfax. "And speaking of cooperation, I
thank you for all you have given us, sir. Without your help, this case might not have ended so

quickly."
Carfax accepted the inspector's hand. "I must admit I did not think it would come  to
this when I first admitted you to my warehouse." He sighed. "I can hardly stand to look at
the place now."
"Give it time, sir; give it time," Inspector Ames recommended with a touch of sympathy.
"No  doubt  that  is  excellent  advice."  Carfax  nodded  as  he  looked  about  in  mild
distraction.  "At  least  my  business  will  keep  me  away  from  here  for  a  while,  so  I  may
accustom myself to  what  has  happened  here."  He  stared  up  at  the  office  above  them.  "I
shall have to find someone else to manage this place for me, someone who can assume more
of my duties in my absence."
"I can recommend an agency, sir," said Inspector  Ames.  "I  feel  a  bit  to  blame  for  all
the disruption you have endured."
"You  have  only  done  as  you  must.  It  is  the  murderer  who  has  brought  all  this."  He
gestured to the disarray of coffins and caskets.
"Right you are, sir," Inspector Ames agreed. "But we're the ones as did the search, and
we're  the  ones  to  put  it  right  again."  He  did  not  add  that  this  was  a  courtesy  rarely
extended  to  men  in  the  visitor's  position:  had  the  search  been  unsuccessful,  or  had  the
owner of D. Carfax been less imposing, the police would have left  the  disorder  for  him  to
deal with.
"For which I am most appreciative," said Mister Carfax. "I could not look upon dealing
with this without being appalled. I fear I should have had to hire others to do it."
"Understandable, sir," said Inspector Ames.
An uncomfortable silence fell between them.
"Inspector," said Carfax suddenly, "do you need me for anything more? If you do not, I
will give you a key and ask you to lock up when you and your men are done."
"Of course, sir," said Inspector Ames, thinking that these foreigners were odd  coves,
going queasy over the damnedest things. "I'll return your key as soon as you ask for it."
"Thank you, Inspector."  He  turned  his  back  on  all  the  activity,  then  reached  into  his
waistcoat pocket and drew out his key on a long chain. "I will go into the country for a few
days, I think. To recruit myself. This has left me quite shaken."
"More's the pity, sir," said Inspector Ames, taking the key-and-chain from the visitor.
"Just  you  rest  up  a  bit.  Don't  let  this  unpleasantness  spoil  your  taste  for  England."  He
wanted  to  ease  Carfax's  mind,  so  he  added,  "Hire  an  experienced  manager  and  let  him
handle the business for a while. Take your time."
"Time," Carfax echoed. "You give excellent advice, Inspector. I have other  matters  to
attend to just now. I  would  be  imprudent  to  neglect  them."  He  pressed  his  lips  together,

musing.  "Your  point  is  well-taken.  With  a  competent  manager,  this  place  should  prosper,
whether I am here to run it or not."
Inspector Ames smiled. "Sounds the very thing." Very probably, he thought, there  was
nothing more pressing than the desire to get away from this place, but he could not blame
Carfax for that, after such a grisly discovery. He would have patted the foreigner on the
arm, but that would have been much too familiar a gesture. "What did Hitchin say you call
this place—a long-term investment?"
Carfax  paused  in  the  act  of  leaving.  "That's  right,  Inspector,"  he  said  with  an
expression that was not a smile, "so I did."

"Places for Act Two!"
Bradley H. Sinor
"Blimy, mate! You're out of your bloody mind!"
Liam Gideon stared down the length of his sword at the pale face that moments before
had been a blustering, menacing figure.
"Crazy or sane, it doesn't matter," he said. "Because I am the one who has a sword  at
your throat. So I wouldn't be advising that you move too quickly or count on any help from
either of your friends."
The  pale-faced  man's  eyes  darted  to  the  far  side  of  the  alley  where  another  man,
dressed as shabbily as he, lay. This one was still breathing, but with two teeth dangling over
the edge of his lip it was obvious he was coming to no one's aid. A second fellow lay on the
ground,  conscious,  but  not  moving.  A  heavy  black  boot  was  planted  across  his  chest.  The
boot belonged to a tall dark man, dressed in elegantly cut clothes, who the three had been
attempting to rob.
"Now, sir," Liam said to the stranger. "I  think  it  only  right  and  proper  that  you  make
the decision about what to do with our friend, here. Should I run him through, perhaps cut
him just a bit, say, remove certain portions of his anatomy; or should we just hold him and
the others for the arrival of the police?"
"My  first  inclination  would  be  to  give  them  a  long,  very  slow,  very  painful  death.  A
public  impalement  might  be  a  beneficial  lesson  to  others."  The  man's  dark  eyes  glittered
with a strange redness to them. He spoke with the slightest hint of  an  accent,  each  word
clearly, crisply, and evenly pronounced.
It occurred to Liam that perhaps English was not his native language.
"It would be an interesting sight, but consume far more time than I am willing  to  give
to  it."  With  those  words  the  man  lifted  his  boot  from  the  thief's  chest  and  half  turned
away from him. Liam had the impression of someone who had done with a matter, though he
did notice that the stranger never fully took his eyes off the three thieves.
Liam drew his sword away from the first man's neck.  The  other  one  scrambled  to  his
feet, watching Liam and the stranger with the look of a trapped animal. A  moment  or  two
passed as both men stood frozen, rain washing across their terror-striped faces. Then they

grabbed their unconscious companion, dragging him down the alley.
"I imagine they will have quite a tale to tell once they hit the pub," said Liam.
"It is always wise to spread news of your prowess among an enemy. The story will grow
with  each  retelling,"  said  the  stranger.  "You  never  know  how  it  might  help  you  in  the
future."
"Hopefully, neither of us will have to deal with them again," said Liam.
"True, but with that sort of ilk it never hurts to have a reputation."
The stranger turned toward Liam. This was the first time he had had a chance to get a
good look at him. His dark, somewhat disheveled hair, combed across the tops of  his  ears,
gave him an almost feral look. There was something intense and controlling in his manner.
"Now, if I may inquire, who is it who stood to battle at my side?"
"Gideon. Liam Gideon, late of Dublin, Edinburgh, and parts beyond."
"Liam Gideon. I thank you for your assistance. It came at a most propitious time."
Liam had been minding his own business, hurrying to get back to the Strand Theatre on
the west side of London. Passing an alley, hearing the sounds of a fight, he turned and saw
three men attack a lone figure. He had hardly thought about it before he was plunging into
the middle of the melee.
"You were holding your own pretty well against these fellows. I suspect that you didn't
need that much assistance from me."
"None  the  less,  you  chose  to  ally  yourself  with  me  in  battle.  That  is  something  that
among my people means much. So do not doubt that you have the gratitude of Vlad Tsepes,
Count Dracula."
"Thank you, Count. It wasn't that much of a decision for me. It  was  simply  something
that seemed needed doing. Something that I didn't think about, just did, my duty, and I am
but a slave to duty," he said with a smile.
"A slave to duty?" Dracula looked at Liam oddly.
"Your pardon, Count. I was quoting a line from a  play  that  I  am  in.  It  seemed  fitting,
somehow," said Liam.
"A play? You are an actor, then?"
"At times," he said.
"And what is this play?"
"The Pirates of Penzance by Gilbert & Sullivan."

"Gilbert & Sullivan? I am new to London, recently arrived from my native Transylvania,
so I'm afraid that I am unfamiliar with either of these gentlemen. I must admit that they
sound more like a law firm than playwrights."
"A law firm? That's novel," laughed Liam. "They  are  the  creators  of  the  most  popular
operettas in the last dozen years."
"Indeed?  I  may  have  to  seek  them  out,"  he  said.  "That  may,  perhaps,  explain  your
sword.  Seeing  a  young  man  carrying  one  is  a  common  thing  in  my  homeland.  But  here  in
England, except for military ceremonies, I have seen none."
Liam held up the sword for his friend's inspection. Its surface was  shiny  as  a  teapot,
the grip emblazoned with a dozen brightly colored stones amid Celtic knotwork.
"At first glance, it does appear to be a formidable weapon," said Dracula.
Liam could see that the Count had discerned the blade's true nature.
Liam  cupped  his  left  hand  and  sharply  slid  the  edge  of  the  blade  along  it.  Then  he
turned his palm where Dracula could see it. Both  men  were  smiling  and  not  surprised  that
the flesh was uncut. "I'm afraid I couldn't have done much real damage to those three. It's
a prop intended for the character of the Pirate King."
"The thing is, our enemies didn't know  that.  Their  own  imaginations  were  very  potent
weapons against them."
"Thank you, Count. Our company manager asked me to pick up a replacement for one of
our principals, who broke his this morning. Since it  was  only  a  slight  detour  from  where  I
was going, I was glad to do it." Liam pulled out his watch and flipped the cover open.
"Damn! I was due at the theater a full ten minutes ago. I'm sure that Mr. Bunberry will
be snarling like a banshee!"
"Fear not, friend Liam. I am in your debt.  You  have  stood  to  combat  at  my  side.  So  I
shall  not  abandon  you.  I  will  accompany  you  and  explain  about  the  delay  to  this  Mr.
Bunberry," he told Liam.
"Thank you, Count, but that isn't necessary."
"I feel it is," observed Dracula. "Besides, along the way you can tell me more about this
Gilbert & Sullivan."
*    *    *    *    * 
By the time Liam and his companion reached the theater, what had begun as a light rain
had  turned  into  a  torrential  downpour.  As  they  rushed  up  to  the  stage  entrance,  Liam
noticed that the new advertising poster had been put in place.
GILBERT & SULLIVAN'S

THE PIRATES OF PENZANCE
A SPECIAL LIMITED RETURN ENGAGEMENT
 *    *    *    *    *
A  theater  in  the  midst  of  rehearsal  a  few  days  from  opening  night  could  resemble
chaos  personified.  That  evening  the  Strand  was  no  exception.  Yet  to  Liam's  experienced
eye  there  was  an  almost  musical  order  to  the  whole  scene,  though  he  imagined  Count
Dracula found it quite confusing.
An  entirely  new  operetta,  Utopia  (Limited),  the  first  by  Gilbert  &  Sullivan  in  some
years, was scheduled to open in October.
Yet at the last minute the decision had been made to reprise Pirates, using the group of
actors  who  had  been  touring  with  it  for  well  over  a  year  and  only  recently  returned  to
London.
"It  is  a  matter  of  publicity,  Liam,"  observed  Alexander  Bunberry,  the  company
manager. "We will still open with Utopia in October, but a brief reprise of Pirates can only
help to generate interest."
"Liam! Liam Gideon!  Where  the  hell  have  you  been!  I  expected  you  back  by  half  past
four!"
The  voice  belonged  to  a  tall  skinny  man,  with  muttonchop  sideburns  that  seemed  to
cover half or more of his face. He  came  charging  toward  Liam  from  behind  a  huge  Greek
column that was part of the Pirates set. He seemed to be on the edge of pure fright. Hands
were  constantly  in  motion,  pointing  this  way  and  that  or  flipping  through  the  pages  of  a
libretto that had seen better days.
"I'm sorry I was delayed, Mr. Bunberry. It couldn't be helped," said Liam.
"Couldn't be helped! You know that Everett is screaming that he can't rehearse unless
he has his new sword," said Bunberry.
"I well know all his complaints, sir," said Liam.
"Then  why  were  you  dawdling  about!  I'm  still  expecting  him  to  fall  in  the  pit
deliberately, just to spite me!"
"I doubt that."
"Sir, Mr. Gideon was not as you say it, dawdling about," said Dracula.
"And who would you be?"
"I am… Count  Dracula."  Dracula's  eyes  fastened  on  Bunberry's.  Neither  man  blinked.
"Had  it  not  been  for  the  timely  intervention  of  Mr.  Gideon  when  three  thieves  were
attacking  me, I would have found myself in a grave situation. He did the only thing  that  a

man of honor and duty could do."
Bunberry stood there for a moment, his eyes glassed over, a thin sheen of sweat on his
forehead.
"Well, if it was something like that I can understand the delay," he said. "Just get that
sword to Everett. The old hen will be fretting his life away, sure that his performance will
be ruined and his  career  over,  until  he  gets  it.  Then  run  down  to  the  costume  shop.  They
need to measure you for your new Frederic costume."
At that, Bunberry whirled  on  his  heels  and  headed  off  in  the  direction  of  the  pirate
ship set that filled much of stage left. Just before he got there, a large fat man that Liam
didn't recognize, dressed in a tailored waistcoat with a top hat and cane in hand, stopped
him. The two men began to speak in whispers.
"I expected him to be quite a bit more vehement about the whole thing," muttered Liam.
"Perhaps it was something I said," mused Dracula.
 *    *    *    *    *
"Look, you blinking Irishman. If you don't stand still, Effie is going skewer that pretty
little bum of yours with a very long needle!"
With  those  words  ringing  in  his  ears,  Liam  made  a  conscious  effort  not  to  move.  If
Effie Ferguson made a threat, she meant it. Looking somewhere between thirty and  sixty,
she was the absolute mistress of the Strand Theatre costume shop. She had the reputation
of being able to make a  gunny  sack,  four  buttons,  a  flower,  a  skein  of  thread,  and  some
glass  beads  into  the  fanciest  ball  gown.  Facing  the  mirror,  Liam  could  see  the  woman's
hands moving swiftly, marking with a long piece of chalk on his pants leg. Then she produced
a rather formidable-looking shaving razor and slid it along the cloth from  the  back  of  his
knee  to  his  ankle.  He  could  feel  the  cloth  parting,  but  never  once  felt  the  touch  of  the
metal.
"You just tell me what I need to do, Effie, and I will do it."
"Now, that's a good lad," she told him. "We want you looking only your best, now, to go
on for Their Highnesses."
"Highnesses? What are you talking about?"
Effie chuckled but did not look up. "Now tell me, Mr. Liam Gideon, are you trying to say
that you don't know about our 'guests' for opening night?"
Liana  drew  a  breath  and  forced  a  smile.  He  had  played  this  little  game  with  Effie
before. "No, Effie, I don't. So would you please share that information with me?"
"Well,"  she  said.  "I  suppose  if  they  had  wanted  you  to  know  someone  would  have
mentioned it to you."

"Perhaps. Or perhaps everyone thought that  everyone  else  had  told  me.  So  why  don't
you tell me?"
"Maybe I should. After all, it isn't often that poor little common actors get the chance
to perform for the high and mighty likes of 'themselves,' now do they?"
"Yes?"
"It seems that opening night we will have some people in the audience that will bring all
of the 'right' sort of society as well as the commoners in."
"Who  in  hell  are  you  talking  about,  woman?  Is  St.  Patrick  himself  coming  to  see  the
show?"
A sharp pain drove its way into Liam's calf. He could barely keep from moving, knowing
that Effie would do much worse if he did.
"No,  you  Irish  gobashit,  it  isn't  St.  Patrick,  nor  is  it  Grace  O'Malley  or  even  Finn
MacCool! Trust an uncivilized Irishman to think of those insignificants in a case like  this,"
she said.
"Insignificants!  Strike  me,  woman,  there  are  moments  I  wonder  about  your  sense  of
who  is  or  isn't  important,"  Liam  said.  "So,  now,  who  would  it  be,  if  it  isn't  those
noteworthies?"
"Simple;  it  is  himself,  Albert  Edward,  Prince  of  Wales  and  heir  to  the  throne  of
England, who will be gracing  these  premises  on  opening  night.  Seems  that  he  and  his  wife
think that seeing a performance of Pirates would make a grand way to spend her birthday,"
Effie said.
"I suppose they're renting out the entire theater? Just an intimate little gathering of
1,500 of their closest friends," said Liam.
"No, they aren't renting out the entire theater, you Irish idiot. You don't think Bertie
has that many friends?"
Another pain shot through Liam's calf to punctuate Effie's words. There was a muted
chuckle from the costume mistress.
"Woman, you enjoyed that!"
"Me? Of course I did. Now, stand still!"
 *    *    *    *    *
"I wanted to stop in and wish you good luck, Liam," said Dracula.
"I appreciate the sentiment, Count. But I really wish you hadn't said it."
"What?"

Liam smiled. Explaining theatrical traditions to non-theater people was something that
every actor had to do now and then. He led Dracula into the Strand Green Room. The Green
Room, which was painted a mottled  brown,  was  a  large  lounge  in  the  back  of  the  theater
where actors and  stagehands  could  take  a  few  minutes  and  relax.  Why  it  was  called  the
Green Room Liam didn't know. As a matter of fact he had never been in one that was green;
it was just another theatrical tradition.
"It's an old theatrical custom. If you wish  a  performer  good  luck  before  they  go  on,
you don't  say  those  words;  they'll  bring  him  bad  luck.  Instead,  actors  say  'break  a  leg.'
Every actor knows what you really mean."
Dracula  raised  an  eyebrow  at  this.  "I  suppose  each  profession  has  its  own  customs.
Very well, let me bid you to 'break a leg.' Figuratively, of course, not in reality."
"Thank you," said Liam.
"Are you nervous?" asked the Count.
"A bit. A very  wise  actor  once  told  me  that  if  I  weren't  at  least  a  little  bit  nervous
before each performance, then that was the time to worry."
"Your friend had the right attitude."
Just then the door to the Green Room flew open, as if a storm was behind it. Bunberry
came barreling in, followed by Effie and several stagehands.
"Liam, there you are. I've been looking all over the theater for you!" said Bunberry.
"Is  there  a  problem?  Everett  has  his  sword  and  knows  the  new  choreography
backwards and forwards."
"I  don't  know  what  he  does  or  doesn't  know,  and  it  doesn't  matter.  Everett  is
incapacitated and won't be going on tonight," said Bunberry.
"Incapacitated? Is that a fancy way of saying he's drunk again?" said one of the other
actors.
Effie  answered  them  with  a  humph,  and  a  look  of  disgust.  There  were  tales  that
Everett had, over his twenty-five-year career, given some of his best performances drunk.
"He's passed out and no one can rouse  him.  He's  breathing,  so  I  assume  he  is  alive.  I
spoke  to  the  gobashit  earlier,  not  an  hour  ago,"  said  Effie.  "He  seemed  fine  then.  I
certainly didn't smell any alcohol on him then."
"Could he be sick?" suggested Liam.
"There's a doctor in the audience. I had him come back and look Everett over. He says
nothing appears to be wrong with him; he is just asleep and no one can wake him up."
"The thing is, we are going to need a Pirate King and neither of the usual understudies

is available," said Bunberry.
"Are you saying what I think you're saying?"
"We can use Gene Yearson as Frederic, but not for the Pirate King. I want you to take
the role," he said.
The words hung in the air. Liam felt the bottom fall out from his stomach. He  glanced
toward the big clock that hung near the door. It said 7 o'clock.
"And curtain is at half eight," he muttered. "The thing is, I don't know  half  the  songs
or the dialogue. I'll try, but I'm afraid that I will end up making a fool out of myself  and
disgracing us in front of the Prince of Wales."
"That's  a  chance  that  we  are  just  going  to  have  to  take.  Effie,  can  you  alter  his
costumes and fit him out as the Pirate King in time to go on?"
"A moment, Mr. Bunberry," said the Count. "Liam will  do  what  he  has  to  do;  that  is  all
any  man  can  do.  Understand  that  I  do  not  doubt  Liam's  abilities,  but  I  may  have  an
alternate possibility that you should consider."
"Count, right now I can see no other answers, besides Liam, short of sending a man on
with script in hand," said  Bunberry.  "But,  I'm  willing  to  entertain  any  ideas.  Just  make  it
quick."
"Very well, then I suggest you leave Liam in the role for which he is  prepared  and  put
me in the role of the Pirate King."
There  was  utter  silence  in  the  Green  Room.  Every  one  of  the  actors  had  heard
Dracula's words; none was more surprised than Liam.
"You, Count?" asked Liam.
"Yes."
"You're  an  actor?"  said  Bunberry,  a  tone  of  disbelief  in  his  voice.  "In  university,  I
suppose."
"There and in other places. I was in fact considered very good," said Dracula.
"You never mentioned that you were an actor," said Liam.
"It  was  a  long  time  ago.  Besides,  Liam,  you  never  asked."  His  eyes  locked  with
Bunberry's, as they had the previous night. The company manager didn't appear to breathe
for several minutes.
"You know the libretto? The songs, the dialogue?" said Liam.
"Every word."
"Only two days ago you hadn't even heard of Gilbert & Sullivan, let alone the Pirates of

Penzance, said Liam.
"Meeting you and seeing this company made me curious. Shall we say I borrowed a copy
of  the  libretto  someone  had  left  on  a  chair,  read  it  over,  and  was  amused  by  it.  I  even
slipped in last night and watched the rehearsal."
"That would help with you knowing the blocking. But you say you read the libretto just
once?" asked Liam.
"That's right. Anything I read I remember, every word of it."
"Your voice, sir?"
Liam,  Burberry,  and  the  others  looked  toward  the  door.  A  man,  dressed  in  evening
clothes, with a neatly waxed mustache stood there.
"Mr. Gilbert!" said Effie.
"Your voice, sir? What do you sing?" demanded William
Schwenck  Gilbert.  The  fifty-seven-year-old  lyricist  spoke  with  the  manner  of  a
sergeant-major demanding something from one of his troops.
"Baritone."
"And you say you know my words?"
"Indeed," Dracula began to sing, "Oh, better to live and die, under the brave black flag
I fly. Than play a sanctimonious part, with a pirate head and a pirate heart."
Gilbert stood silent, his face unmoving and emotionless.
"Effie!" said Gilbert. "Can you alter Everett's costume quick enough to fit the Count? I
can have them hold the curtain an extra ten minutes, but not a second longer."
"I'll have him looking like those clothes were made for him."
"Do it."
 *    *    *    *    *
"Still nervous, Liam?" asked Dracula.
The two men stood in the wings, looking out at the back of the great gold curtain that
covered  the  front  of  the  stage.  Effie  was  standing  just  behind  them,  tying  off  several
threads in the Count's costume.
"A bit. But I should be asking you if you're nervous. After all, you came to see the play,
now you're a part of it."
"I am a bit nervous," said Dracula.

"Then break a leg, Count."
"Thank you, Liam."
 *    *    *    *    *
No one heard a shot. With the orchestra well into the act's final number it would have
been impossible to hear anything short of a cannon going off. Liam would have never known
that anything happened if he had not been looking straight toward the Royal Box.
Something struck the plaster wall edging just above the Prince and Princess of Wales,
sending a shower of powder down across the duo. Their Royal Highnesses looked around, as
puzzled as  everyone  else.  A  moment  later  they  began  laughing  as  the  elaborate  dance  on
stage ended and the curtain rolled down.
As Dracula exited behind the waterfall curtain, Liam grabbed him and explained what
he had seen.
"It was not your imagination, Liam, nor was it the manifestation of this ancient theater
exhibiting its aches and pains. I saw it as well. I suspect a rifle shot," he said.
"A rifle? In the theater? Why, and who would be using it?"
"I'm not sure," said Dracula. "I suspect that it came from somewhere above us."
Liam's  eyes  traced  the  edge  of  the  curtain  up  into  the  darkness  high  above  the
backstage  area. It was a landscape of catwalks, curtains, and ropes, all helping  to  add  to
the illusion that was projected  on  stage.  There  were  a  few  figures  moving  around  on  the
catwalk, high up in the air, where they could raise and lower the curtains. But it was higher
that Liam looked, nearly a hundred feet, near the top of the building itself. He saw nothing,
but apparently Dracula did.
"Follow me," said the Count.
Liam was only a  moment  behind  him.  Attached  to  the  back  wall  of  the  theater  was  a
ladder that ran all the way to the roof.  Dracula  was  thirty  feet  onto  it  when  Liam  began
climbing, moving upwards into the darkness.
More than a dozen heavy black curtains, along with an equal number of smaller, lighter
ones, hung from railings that were in turn suspended from beams embedded in the walls of
the theater itself. Below and all around them Liam could hear the sounds of the stage crew
busily changing  the  set  to  get  it  ready  for  act  two.  Once  they  reached  the  highest  level
there was little light. The catwalks were nothing but long boards, a foot or so wide at best,
that  had  been  placed  along  the  girders  to  provide  a  path  for  workmen.  A  single  misstep
could send someone hurtling down.
That fact  did  not  bother  Dracula.  He  moved  quickly,  with  a  confidence  that  seemed
inhuman. Liam tried to keep pace, but it was not easy. When Liam finally caught up with the
Count they had made their way back across the  stage  area  and  stood  next  to  the  top  of
the huge waterfall curtain.

"Observe," said Dracula. His long slim fingers pointed downwards. From this perch they
had a clear view of the Royal Box. "I would say this is where the assassin shot from."
"Thank God he missed," said Liam. "But where is he now?" "I think close by." The Count
motioned for Liam to be silent, his eyes blazing red. Dracula was a hunter seeking his prey.
Liam  heard  the  soft  sound  of  a  board  creaking.  He  turned  and  found  himself
confronting  a  figure,  dressed  in  the  same  pirate  costume  that  the  actors  wore.  In  the
semidarkness it seemed a fearful apparition that was trying to slip by the two men. "Oh no,
you don't," Liam said.
He moved to intercept the assassin but  missed  his  footing  and  stumbled,  ramming  his
head  hard  against  a  metal  strut  that  supported  the  curtain.  It  was  only  the  purest  luck
that he was able to keep from falling from the girder. Around him the world whirled for a
moment, transforming the stage light below into a rainbow of colors.
That was when he noticed  the  fog.  It  came  from  nowhere,  it  was  just  there,  flowing
around the upper part of the theater. Liam tried to focus on Dracula, dressed as the Pirate
King, who stood now facing the assassin in the crewman's costume.
The words that Dracula had sung  earlier  in  the  Green  Room  ran  through  Liam's  mind,
echoing in the Count's strong baritone. "Oh, better to live and  die,  under  the  brave  black
flag I fly. Than play a sanctimonious part, with a pirate head and a pirate heart."
Then  Dracula  was  gone,  replaced  by  a  huge  silver  wolf,  the  fog  blending  into  the
beast's coat. The animal's growl was an otherworldly sound that seemed to Liam something
out of a nightmare. The assassin screamed and tried to back away.
Liam's eyesight began to clear and he could see Dracula again. The fog was gone and so
was the wolf. The Count was grappling with the assassin. In a single motion he managed  to
hurl him  against  the  curtain.  The  impact  made  a  dull  thud  that  sent  the  figure  collapsing
into an unconscious heap.
Liam got to his feet and  made  his  way  over  to  their  prisoner.  There  was  enough  light
coming through the top of the curtain that he could see the figure's face.
"Effie?!"
 *    *    *    *    *
With the help of a couple of stagehands, Effie had been taken down from the theater
aerie. She now lay stretched out, unconscious, on a pallet of curtains and sacks, a thin trail
of drying blood running from a cut on her scalp.
A crowd of actors and stagehands surrounded them. Gilbert,  Bunberry,  and  the  large
fat man that Liam had seen earlier had appeared out of nowhere.
"It looks as if we have what we were hoping for," said the fat man.
"Is there a doctor in the house?" said Gilbert. That it was one of the oldest theatrical

clichés ever didn't seem to matter when William Gilbert said it.
"I  think  having  a  doctor  look  over  both  Effie  and  Liam  would  be  a  good  idea,"  said
Dracula.
"Arguably,"  said  the  fat  man.  "Send  one  of  the  stage  hands  to  box  A17.  There  is  a
doctor named Watson with the A. J. Raffles party."
"Are we going to be able to finish this show?" asked Gilbert.
"Oh, yes," said the fat man, "if Mr. Gideon  and  the  Count  are  able  to  carry  on,  and  I
think  there  should  be  no  doubt  of  that.  By  the  way,  Count,  I  thoroughly  enjoyed  your
performance. You have a wonderful voice and a real talent for comedy."
"Look here, Holmes." said Bunberry.
"Holmes?"  said  Liam.  He  knew  that  name,  as  any  regular  reader  of  The  Strand
magazine did. "Are you?"
"That was  my  late  brother.  But  it  doesn't  matter  who  I  am,  young  man,  because  you
never heard that name mentioned in this theater, and I was never here," said the fat man.
"Consider that an order from Her Majesty's Government."
"Yes, sir," said Liam. He had other questions he wanted to  ask,  but  discretion  seemed
the better part of valor right now.
"Perhaps  you  could  explain  things  to  me,  sir,"  said  Dracula.  "Would  I  be  correct  in
assuming that this whole matter of the reprise  of  Pirates  was  part  of  an  elaborate  plan?
Who is Effie?"
The fat man, who wasn't there, removed a cigar case from his inside jacket, opened it,
and offered one to Dracula. The Count declined.
"As  to  your  first  question,  you  may  be  right  or  you  may  wrong,  that  is  all  I  can  say.
Effie,  my  dear  Count,  besides  being  the  costume  mistress  for  this  theater,  is  an  expert
with a one-shot air rifle. I know  of  only  one  better,  a  former  Indian  army  colonel.  Those
skills  earned  her  a  position  as  an  assassin  for  hire,  working  this  evening  for  a  Scottish
anarchist group," he said.
"And you want her to tell you all about her employers," suggested Dracula.
"It would be very nice to hear news of her current and past employers. She can choose
to  cooperate  with  us,  or  face  a  hangman's  noose.  Her  Majesty's  Government  had  long
suspected her, but we never had any proof. Tonight, we have the proof we needed. Thanks
to  the  cooperation  of  Mr.  Gilbert  and  Mr.  Sullivan,  Their  Highnesses,  and  a  pair  of  very
good actors who portrayed them this evening. Had she not missed, and even  the  best  miss
occasionally, it would have been a most inconvenient matter to explain things to the public.
Now, I have matters that require my attention. May I wish you, Count, and the rest of the
cast the best of lu—"

"The proper phrase is 'break a leg', I believe," said Dracula.
"Ah, yes, quite right. Very well then, break a leg."
Others  came  crowding  around  Effie,  Gilbert,  and  the  fat  man,  so  Liam  and  Dracula
withdrew to the far corner of the stage.
"Count, I have to ask you something," said Liam.
"What is that?"
"Up there, when were fighting Effie, did I see what I thought I saw?"
"And what was that?"
"I would swear that I saw one of Finn MacCool's wolves. But then it was gone."
"Are you sure of what you saw? Any more sure than Everett is that he did not  have  a
visitor earlier this evening? One that told him to take a long nap?"
"Perhaps not. But why, Count? Why did you do it?"
"Partially curiosity. When you are as old as I am you embrace the unknown. By the time
we encountered Effie, I had no choice. I was a 'slave to duty,' " he said with a remarkably
toothy grin.
Before Liam could speak the assistant stage manager came up behind the men.
"Places for act two, gentlemen," he announced.

Beast
Amy L. Gruss and Catt Kingsgrave-Ernstein
"I told you," Jerry gloated from behind  Al's  shoulder.  "I  told  you  Poltwhistle'd  come
asking  for  those  books.  I  told  you  you  shouldn't  just  go  making  free  with  valuable  and
delicate antiques, but did you listen? Oh no! What's old Jerry Cartley got to say that the
great and powerful Al—"
"Look!" The taller youth whirled on his heel and glared, stopping  his  coworker  dead  in
his boots. It was a good one, that glare; it had often served him well when the school bullies
looked  for  a  thin,  asthmatic  boy  to  torment.  Al  did  not  scrimp  on  it  now.  "I  heard  what
Poltwhistle  said,  same  as  you  did.  Keep  them  safe,  he  said."  Al  shoved  his  hands  into  his
pockets and looked over his  shoulder  at  the  sunset.  "They  wasn't  safe  up  there  with  the
mice in the attic." He sniffed and strode off down the street again.
"Roof  leaked  up  there,"  he  muttered,  more  as  comfort  to  himself  than  by  way  of
explanation. Jerry was useless in Al's estimation, more interested in the pastry  shop  next
door than in the volumes of treasure at Poltwhistle's Papers and Antique Oddities. Tonight
of all nights, when speed and secrecy was what Al needed, the dolt found the single streak
of determination that beat in his flabby heart.
"Wettest summer since I came down  from  Scotland,"  Al  grumbled,  once  more  finding
his  stride  on  the  sooty  cobbles.  A  fast  stride,  in  hopes  of  outdistancing  Cartley's
endurance, if not his  curiosity.  "Rained  all  August,  practically.  I  did  Poltwhistle  a  favour,
getting those books to a dry place, and he knows it! I kept them safe! Now there's a buyer
that wants them, I'll just bring the trunk back to the shop, is all."
Jerry  laughed,  a  phlegmy,  unpleasant  sound.  "What's  funny  then?"  Al  demanded
through  clenched  teeth.  "You.  All  noble;  which  is  why  you  kited  off  with  the  Sefer
Yetzer-moth, and the Sumerian wotsit, and that grim-thingummy, and left the Voltaire and
Dumas up there for mouse food."
"Give  me  strength!"  Al  pleaded  of  the  smudged  sky,  just  visible  between  the  last  of
London's  outlying  warehouses.  "Any  idiot  can  come  by  a  Voltaire,  and  there  are  so  many
first-edition Dumas in London you could wipe your arse with them!" He turned and backed
Jerry  into  the  blood-slimed  steps  of  a  fishmonger's  alleyway.  "But  the  Yetzeroth—in
English? Unheard of! The Egyptian Book of the Dead—and the handwritten grimoire of the
last  witch  hanged  in  England?  That  box  held  a  dozen  treasures,  and  I…"  He  let  the

sentence  trail  off,  aware,  suddenly,  of  the  street  behind  him.  Not  crowded,  but  hardly
bereft of curious onlookers.
Cartley's  eyes  bulged  in  alarm.  The  smell  of  his  sweat,  strong  in  the  evening's  chill,
overcame the alley's fishy ambience. Al coughed, moderated his tone, and put on a smile. "I
put  them  in  a  safe  place.  I'll  have  them  at  the  shop  first  thing  in  the  morning,  just  like
Poltwhistle said." He patted Jerry's woolen coat, flicked a bit of dust,  and  backed  away.
"Now  if  you  don't  mind,  I'll  walk  the  rest  of  the  way  on  my  own.  Get  on  home  to  your
supper now, eh?"
Jerry's eyes narrowed. "You just don't want me to see  if  you  got  anything  else  from
the shop hidden away that hasn't been missed yet," he accused. "It's stealing, Al. They may
call it whatever they like in Scotland, but in London it's stealing, and it's wrong. You go to
Hell for stealing."
Al smiled grimly. Just like a Londoner to take a jab at his nationality when he couldn't
win an argument any other way. "You go to Hell  for  buggery  too,  Jerry,  but  that  doesn't
stop you and that newsboy, does it?" He relished Jerry's ragged gasp as  he  realized  that
Al knew his most dreaded secret. "It's getting late; what say you run home now, else I walk
along with you," he called. The fat fool backed away, mouth still agape with horror.
"Sorry, Limey," Al muttered as Cartley turned and ran into the gathering fog creeping
with the evening from the river Thames. "Can't have you tagging on after me. Not tonight."
The  thin  youth  shoved  his  hands  into  his  pockets  and  turned  back  toward  his  treasure
trove's  hiding  place.  What  a  perfect  hiding  place  it  was,  too.  He  scowled  in  annoyance.
Hardly anyone from London ever went out by way of Carfax House and the locals were all
scared to. He'd heard the tales told in Purfleet inns when his studies had kept him late into
the night; a clutch of witches, burned in their sleep by Elizabeth the Great's witchfinders,
haunting and wailing and searching for their lost souls—or failing that, the soul of anybody
who came near.
He only told the story once, to a flirtatious  pub  wench  who  knew  no  more  of  the  old
place than he, and whose eyes grew round at the fear of it.  Total  fiction—he'd  only  been
thinking of a tumble then, but within the month Al had heard the whole, embellished tale on
three  separate  occasions.  He  seized  the  opportunity  to  add  further  grisly  detail  to  the
history in order to secure absolutely that solitude which his study of the lost arts required.
With the caged lunatics baying in the sanitarium next door and Al's own little additions to
the place—hollow pipes to moan when the wind blew, branches in the chapel's ruined belfry
that clattered like bones, the occasional well-placed lantern, mirror, and pane of glass—the
ghost story had spread like wildfire. It was perfect.
Perfect until a month ago when a horde of carters tramped through his haven, setting
huge boxes on the ground without regard for any of his carefully drawn glyphs. Bad enough
that all his experiments had been smudged into oblivion, but the idiots had put the biggest
one—a trunk seven feet long, five wide, and four deep—just at the entrance  to  his  hiding
place, making it impossible for him to get to his precious books.
Then  the  real  haunting  had  started,  more  profound  and  horrifying  than  anything  he
could  orchestrate;  grisly  murders  in  the  city,  sightings  of  fierce  rats  and  dogs  with

demonic,  red  eyes,  the  dead  ship  appearing  in  Whitby  harbour  after  a  freakish  storm.
Inspecting  the  damage  after  the  carters  had  left  that  first  night,  Al  had  noticed  that
every one of the boxes that littered Carfax were marked with the doomed vessel's  name:
Demeter. He hadn't dared go back there.
Still  wouldn't  go,  given  his  preference,  but  he  daren't  lose  yet  another  job  or  his
father would, as he had promised, call him back home. Al would rather face down the devil
himself than wind up trapped back in that Scottish bog of a village.
"You!" A voice shrilled from above his head, scaring the wits out of him. "You boy!"
Al swallowed his heart. The Lunatic—again. Every time he worked up the nerve to come
near  the  house  that  mad  bastard  was  at  the  window,  baying  like  a  watchdog.  But  Al
couldn't afford caution this time, couldn't hide from the threat of guards or the shadowy,
half-glimpsed figure that lurked in the ruin. Al hunched deeper into his collar and tried to
ignore the wild-eyed man's yelling.
"I know why you come here! It won't work!  The Master has promised it to me and you
shan't have it! You with your pitiful scratchings in the dust—you don't know  how to serve
him!" Somewhere nearby, a dog began to bark.
"Look, you daft bastard," he hissed,  glaring  up  at  the  madman,  "I  don't  give  a  haggis
about your master—it's my master's going to have the Peelers down on me if I don't get my
books back!  So do us a favour and shut your gob!" Al peered at the crumbling wall, hoping
his dismissal was  obvious  enough.  From  the  sanitarium's  well-tended  garden,  he  could  see
Carfax House,  the  chapel  with  its  cracked  steeple  bulking  darkly  athwart  the  night  sky.
From the outside, it looked impenetrable, however… Yes, he thought. There's still the crack
in the wall, overgrown with vine and weeds. With a sigh of relief, he started forward.
"Oh little boy," the Lunatic called, sweet-voiced.  "Would  you  like  a  treat?"  He  thrust
one hand through the bars of his window, fingers pinching at something that wriggled.
"Sod off," Al seethed as the barking grew more frantic. "Shut it,  or  that  dog'll  wake
the whole of Essex!" He glared as the madman started to giggle.
"Think  that's  a  dog?"  Another  giggle,  and  the  man  howled  suddenly,  full-voiced  and
lusty. "It's a wolf! The Master's servant, just like me! Like me! And not like you!" The arm
thrust through again, bony finger pointing, shaking with rage or palsy. "You wheezing ninny!
You've not enough lives in you to serve him! You're pathetic, you hear? Don't you walk  away
from me! You forgot your treat! Come back! Don't leave me alone!"
He burst into tears, and was still wailing when Al  scrambled  over  the  wall  and  out  of
earshot.
"Quite a piece of work, that one. Bloody barking Limey. Harumph." Inside the chapel, Al
leaned on the huge box and sulked. The answer to his worry was just there, blocked in by a
crate he just couldn't budge. "Ought to cull out Cartley's tongue." He grumbled, " 'Tongue
of fat, buggerin' bastard' ought to be an ingredient in some spell or other. First time in his
life  he'd  be  useful!"  He  snickered  briefly,  wiped  grime  and  sweat  from  his  face,  then

sighed. "Ballocks."
Suddenly,  Al  remembered  his  Aristotle.  He  searched  the  chapel  in  a  sudden  fit  of
motivation. "Leverage!" A  fallen  roof-timber  poked  out  from  under  a  tattered  curtain  of
cobwebs. Al seized it. "Perfect!" Wedging the board between the wall and trunk, he heaved.
The  huge  box  creaked,  shifted.  Al  held  his  breath,  put  a  boot  against  the  wall,  and
shoved harder. Just when he thought his lungs would burst, the crate slid back with a lurch
and a shriek of nails on stone. Al scrambled to try the door. "Ahh, not quite— bloody hell!"
Losing the last of his patience, he clambered over the box and slithered into his hiding
place,  too  annoyed  to  care  when  he  tore  his  only  coat.  He  found  the  lamp  by  touch  and
examined the door's  lintel.  As  he'd  feared,  the  chalk  was  an  unintelligible  smudge  where
the  trunk  slid  down  the  wall.  "Dammit,  they  ruined  everything!  I  knew  I  should  have
scratched that glyph into the stone. Blast and damn!"
He turned back to  the  worktable  with  a  fierce  scowl  and  began  digging  through  the
piled volumes thereon. "Now which book did I find that in?"
*    *    *    *    *
Drakul  fed  vigorously  that  night  on  grubby  street  Arabs  and  opium-dazed  Chinese
from  the  far  reaches  of  the  English  Queen's  empire,  like  spice  and  savour  to  his  jaded
palate.  Even  the  tame  English  were  a  welcome  relish  after  five  hundred  years  of  bland
Rumanian peasants. Delicate, these English were, and decadent as the soft, green land that
spawned them. He thought of Lucy, pink  and  sweet  as  the  roses  in  Hillingham's  sprawling
gardens, and barked a laugh. A sweetmeat too cloying for  every  day,  that  one—better  to
sip a bit at a time than spoil her worth with greed. Especially with the luxury of variety to
be had at no more expense than a brief journey to London.
Besides,  he  played  a  delicate  game  at  Hillingham  estate—one  he  had  no  intention  of
quitting untimely. Drakul had chosen his first bride, and the chase was exhilarating for all
the  little  obstacles  that  her  caretakers  threw  in  his  way.  His  animal  servant  had  not
shirked  at  their  garlic  or  guards  or  crosses  on  the  window,  and  at  Drakul's  bidding  had
opened the way for him into the lush expanse of his  bride's  private  chamber.  He  laughed,
the memory of Bersicker's feral joy sparking fire in the back of his brain. This night would
not soon be forgotten in the Westenra family, such as remained of it.
The wolf had known  his  business;  to  open  the  way  and  to  terrify.  Not  like  that  idiot
Renfield, who ranted and babbled and was very nearly more aggravation than he was worth.
As he thought of the man, Drakul felt the contact between them flicker to life, though he
had  intended  no  such  communication.  A  mo-ment  later,  the  man  began  shouting  his  usual
promises of loyalty and adoration, flailing his arms through the bars and in general making a
canker of himself. With a mental reminder not to drink the blood of opiated Chinese again,
the Lord of the Un-Dead wheeled around to approach his sacred earth from the east, with
the distant threat of dawn to his tail, and the shrieking lunatic out of earshot.
He came to earth among the weather-tumbled stones of the chapel's burial yard, long
desanctified  by  blood  and  fire.  Like  the  chapel  in  his  own  castle  in  the  Carpathian

Mountains, no prayers had been sung here for hundreds of years, and the only sacred work
being done within the crumbling walls was that of the beetle and the fly.
"The perfect place for me," he said aloud, rolling the English words  around  his  tongue
as  he  had  done  with  the  life-blood  of  the  Chinese  girl  with  the  flat,  glassy  eyes  and
sweet-burning  pipe.  "From  this  place  of  murder  and  sacrilege,  I,  Vlad  Drakul  ride  out  to
meet  my  destiny  as  master  of  this  green  and  pleasant  land."  He  laughed.  "Let  any  come
against me who dare!"
The  wind  answered  with  a  rush,  made  the  trees  in  the  sanitarium's  manicured  park
creak and thrash, and left behind a breath of something at once new and  familiar.  A  boy,
on the verge of manhood:  his  scent  had  haunted  the  chapel  where  the  vampire's  precious
Wallachian earth lay hidden. The nuances were clearer now: the boy was frightened, he did
not  eat  well,  and  was  not  at  all  strong.  The  scent  of  his  fear  was  tangible—sharp,  but
sweetened  with  an  undercurrent  of  hunger,  almost  greed.  He  was  also  very,  very  close.
Intrigued, Drakul listened, heard the rasp of fingers on paper echoing in a bare stone room,
heard  a  slight  wheeze  in  the  boy's  breathing,  the  hiss  of  a  burning  lamp.  The  Crypt,  he
thought with a smile as he entered the chapel.
One of his boxes had been moved, and behind it, a door revealed. From under this door
came both a delicate life-scent and a thin streak of light. Drakul looked in. A  lamp's  glow
warmed a  tiny  room,  outlining  a  gangly  youth.  He  sat  with  his  back  to  the  door,  hunched
awkwardly in a chair too small for him. A table and crate—the only other furniture the cell
afforded—were buried under precarious stacks  of  books,  papers,  bags,  leaves…  doctor's
things, but the youth was no doctor. Drakul smiled, sharpened his sight to pick out details
that uncertain light might have hidden from any other hunter.
The  youth  had  ruddy  hair,  coarse  and  apparently  resistant  to  attempts  at  England's
respectable grooming. No beard. He wore the threadbare garments of a clerk—junior clerk
more likely—or he could have been a shop boy in his Sunday best. But he wore the boots of
a peasant instead of the shoes that  London's  gentry  and  all  who  aped  them  wore.  Drakul
liked  boots.  You  knew  what  to  expect  from  them,  and  the  people  who  wore  them.  The
vampire absently shifted his earth box out  of  the  way  and  stepped  around  the  door.  The
interloper  did  not  so  much  as  twitch.  Drakul  smiled.  Imagine  not  knowing  when  one's
destruction stood at one's shoulder! He cleared his throat.
The boy didn't move. His breath did not even quicken. The smell of his mortal fear still
pervaded  the  cell,  but  without  the  spike  of  panic  that  Drakul  expected.  He  took  a  step
nearer and coughed again. Still no stir, still no alarm. Drakul scowled. He was the  Hammer
of the Turks, terror of his country, the lord of the night, and this intruder ignored him in
favour of… what?
He took another step, brought his shoes down on the stone with a clack. Still the youth
did  not  notice,  but  now  Drakul  could  see  why;  he  was  reading.  The  Count  thought  about
killing him there, in the old  way  he  might  have  done  to  a  Turk  on  the  battlefield;  a  quick
twist of the head, and a jerk backward  so he might be the dying man's last sight. Then he
caught a glimpse of the book and it gave him pause; a familiar pattern, arcane and ancient
lay under the boy's fingers. Scholomancy! Here in this place, this land and time of  reason.

In the hands of a shop boy. Unacceptable!
"What are you reading?" Drakul growled into the youth's ear. At last the boy started,
ancient book dropping  to  the  flagstones  with  a  flutter  and  thud.  A  ragged  gasp  escaped
him as he tried to whirl in his seat, entangling his legs and upending the whole, himself, coat,
chair,  odds  and  ends  from  the  table,  and  half  a  dozen  more  books  into  an  undignified
sprawl. Drakul did not laugh at the sight, though he wanted to.
The boy opened his mouth to speak, made a noise like a rat, then  swallowed  and  tried
again. His voice was tenor and loud with panic. "What's it to you?"
Impudence! Drakul bent to pick  up  the  book,  which  purred  with  force  in  his  un-dead
fingers. "It?" He gave the youth a broad smile, for effect.  " 'It'  is  of  no  consequence  to
me. You, however, have invaded my home, taken refuge in my holy sanctuary, and you annoy
me." The smell of the youth's alarm mingled with the lingering opiate in Drakul's blood and
rushed to his head like a tide. Pleasant, but inopportune.
The youth pressed his lips together, all colour  draining  from  them.  His  nostrils  flared
with quick, shallow breaths as he gathered himself into a less precarious seat on the floor.
Drakul waited only so long for a response. "Make no mistake, boy, you are no match for
me. I demand answers and will have them. What are you reading?"
"Words."  He  smiled,  actually  smiled,  and  an  unwelcome  scent  wafted  past  Drakul's
nostrils. Satisfaction? Inconceivable!
"Clever. So clever, but you must not believe that will win your life from me." He stood,
turned the book over in his hands. "I have seen times when clever men like you were burned,
hanged, broken, and," a smile to remembrance here,  "impaled  simply  for  possessing  such  a
volume." He looked down. "Knowledge of the Devil, the men of God called it, as they did the
Devil's work against science."
"I  don't  believe  in  God."  The  boy  jutted  his  chin  in  defiant  dignity.  Drakul  raised  an
eyebrow at the claim, and he elaborated, "I believe in what  I  see.  I've  never  seen  God  or
the Devil." He swallowed, the apple of his throat bobbing. "They don't exist."
"You  have  seen  the  Devil  now!"  Drakul  reached  out  his  shadow  to  the  cheap  lamp,
smothered the flame effortlessly. In the sudden and shocking  darkness,  his  eyes  were  as
blind as those of his prey, but the youth's gasp and scramble betrayed his movements. The
vampire laughed, reached with a clawed hand toward the radiant terror, "I expect that you
will call out to God before we part!"
Suddenly the boy scrambled forward, threw his arms  around  the  Count's  person,  and
slapped  something  against  his  sternum.  "By  Gevurah  I  invoke  you!"  Those  words  were
half-familiar, but the power quickened the air, this Drakul knew.
"By Chockmah and Netzach I invoke you!" The incantation rose to a breathless shrill as
Drakul  seized the boy's narrow throat. "By Kefer and Malkuth I  summon  you!  Come  Uriel,
Archangel of the Dead to my aid!"

Ghost light, chill and blue, swirled around the vampire, searing,  freezing  his  long-dead
skin. A million  tiny  motes  coalesced  into  a  ball  of  fire,  then  shocked  like  lightning,  like  a
battering ram into Drakul's breast. The force flung him into the crumbling wall as his prey
scrambled out of reach, then bolted for freedom.
*    *    *    *    *
Half a mile down the road, Al risked a backward  glance. "He's—he's not coming after
me. It worked. It worked!" He slowed, but his thoughts did not.  "Ye  gods,  it  worked.  It's
for real!"
Al's disbelief found its way into sporadic mirth. He vaulted a stile and took off across
a pasture, hardly minding his wheezing lungs. "Fancy,  I  did  that.  Me!  I  could  have—out  of
the way, bleedin' sheep!—but I didn't—bastard!—and now—" He shouted gloating laughter
to the sky. Across the river, London's great clock tower chimed four.
He reached a village and slowed to a trot, sensing safety in the surrounding cottages,
though he still rambled aloud in wonder at his discovery. "The power in those books! I could
rule the world! The books—oh ballocks!" Cold reality jolted him out of his smugness:  in  his
panicked flight from Carfax's ancient crypt, he'd left the books behind—all but the one he
clutched.
The breath caught suddenly in Al's chest. Pain squeezed it tight. He stumbled to a halt,
sobbing for air as he tried to examine the lone book he'd managed to win. It was too dark,
and the moon had long since set. Al turned the rough leather over in his hands, peered close,
held it up to his face, and squinted some more. All in vain. He swore heartily. Then, through
the tangled hedgerow, a gleam of light caught his eye. A church! Dozens of  candles  in  the
window, and a bench out of the wind in which to read. St. Catherine's, the carving over the
door  read.  Al  took  only  that  much  notice  of  it  as  he  strode  up  to  the  church's  window,
looked at the book, and swore.
"Holy sodding ballocks of Christ! It's the buggering German one!" Suddenly he felt like
crying. Al trudged back to the church's front steps and sank down to brood. "You have to
go back, you know," he told himself, sniffing. "Nothing for it. You have to get those books.
Poltwhistle  will  serve  you  up  to  the  Peelers  if  you  don't."  His  foot  began  to  cramp.  Al
absently  yanked  his  boot  off,  getting  sheep  dip  on  his  hands  in  the  process.  Dammit!  He
wiped the filth on the church's steps, then massaged his foot, mind racing.
"He's dead. You killed him, you know. You saw him." He paused, for he hadn't  actually
seen.  "But  you  felt  it  happen."  Al  stood  up,  hopping  on  one  foot  to  pull  his  boot  back  on.
"There now. Going back. For the books. Off you go—" The back of his neck prickled; a pair
of glowing garnet eyes blazed out of the darkness at the end of the lane.
"Shite!" Al lurched toward the door, boot half  on,  and  pulled  at  the  latch  with  all  his
might. "Ballocks!" Tripping across the threshold, he hit the stone floor and rolled. His boot
flew free. He snatched his foot to safety, watched in horror as the creature appeared out
of the darkness. Skin white, bloodless, and waxen but for a single slash of red across the
forehead, lips pulled back in a rictus of fury. Pointed, long teeth like a feral wolf in those
red lips. His hands were talons. Al felt his  heart  skip  as  the  eyes,  crimson  and  filled  with

hate, bored into his for a moment. Then the spell of horror broke and Al realized that the
monster was coming toward him. Fast.
"NO!"  he  screamed,  scrambling  back.  "Get  away!"  The  creature  reeled  from  the
church's threshold with  a  furious  snarl.  After  several  breathless  moments,  Al  worked  up
the nerve to shut the door.
No sooner did the latch click than the monster spoke from the other side in a voice as
cold as the grave and rumbling with anger. "Open the door. Now."
Al backed away, hysteria tightening his laugh to a giggle. I sound like  the  Lunatic!  He
swallowed hard. "Not bloody likely, sunbeam!"
Something hit the door, made the ancient timbers creak and shiver like matchwood. Al
jumped,  backed  farther.  A  reek  of  scorched  hair  filled  his  nose  as  the  steely  voice
commanded him again. "Let me inside!" The tone, icy, murderous, shook Al's bravado to the
core.
"Oh no!" Al whispered, shaking his head. "I will  not  open  that  door!  You  can  just  stay
outside and rot! By Gevurah I inv—"
"DESIST!"
With a sudden horror, Al found  that  the  Qabbalic  names  of  power  fled  his  mind  like
water. He couldn't remember them. Any of them!
A paving stone hurtled through the window, scattering the candles across the floor. Al
scrambled  to  stamp  out  the  flames,  his  breath  coming  in  sobs  as  he  realized  the  trap  in
which he'd snared himself. Much good all that study  does  you  now, he  thought,  sinking  to
the floor beside the church's font.
He  screamed  as  another  stone  smashed  in  through  the  window,  splintering  the  rear
pew. Couldn't grab Agnes Nutter's  grimoire,  could  you?  Couldn't  grab  the  Yetzeroth.  Oh
no! You had to go and get a bloody useless book in bloody useless German!
"Come out and your death will be quick!" The monster bellowed. "I'll spit you on a sharp
stake. I'm merciful." That won a giggle from Al. "Laugh, do you? My servants will hunt you
down  and  destroy  you!  You  cannot  imagine  my  reach!"  His  rant  grew  desperate,  more  a
child's tantrum than a devil's promise. "Animals, elements obey my will! I have mastered the
arts  in  which  you  merely  dabble!  Your  lifetime  is  the  blink  of  an  eye  to  me,  your
insignificance so slight it is—insignificant! Damn you— open the door!"
Al whirled to shout at the door and the horror it held at bay. "SOD OFF!" He sobbed,
"Shut up, shut up, shut u—" His breath and his litany of despair caught short as he realized
that there was only one thing to do.
*    *    *    *    * 
The  door  opened.  Framed  in  the  threshold  slumped  his  lanky  tormentor,  head  down,
defeated.  Drakul  blinked,  then  laughed,  scenting  victory  in  the  boy's  terror.  "Come

forward, slave. Come and meet the death I promised you." He crept from the shelter of his
holy  sanctuary  like  a  dog  on  its  belly.  Drakul  licked  his  lips,  tasting  already  the  rush  of
triumph.  This  one  he  would  kill  utterly.  No  un-death  for  this  boot-wearing,  too-clever
peasant.
Drakul  seized his prey as he came within reach, shook him to see  the  fear  in  his  eyes.
"Now who is the clever one?"
In  answer  the  youth  spit,  spraying  a  mouthful  of  burning  holiness  into  the  vampire's
face. It blinded him, sending him reeling to his knees.
"That would be me," came the boy's voice, choking a little with laughter or holy water
as he backed away.
Drakul clawed the air, snarling, howling as the lingering fire deepened his agony. "Your
name!" He thundered the battlefield cry of old. "Give me your name, little beast, that I may
remember you properly!"
Retreating footsteps were the only reply.
 *    *    *    *    *
Al was well  and  truly  wrecked  by  the  time  he  got  back  to  Fleet  Street.  Grinning,  he
wound  his  way  through  the  crowds  of  London's  working  class,  the  hard-won  book  in  one
hand, his lone boot in the other. Al didn't notice the tall man in the traveling cloak waiting
on the bookstore's front step until he'd nearly run into him.
The man turned to scowl, bushy eyebrows lowering as he took in Al's dishevelled state.
He  looked  down  himself,  suddenly  self-conscious.  Begrimed  and  smelling  of  sheep,  bare
feet muddy, trousers filthy to the knees. God knew what his hair and face looked like. Al's
temper flared and he flushed to the ears.
"What're you staring at, you old shite?" He demanded. The old man's eyebrows shot up,
but  he  looked  more  amused  than  insulted.  Al  ground  his  teeth  and  brandished  his  boot.
"Laugh at me, you southern pansy, and I'll feed ye this!"
"CROWLEY!"  Al  jumped  like  a  scalded  cat  at  his  employer's  thundering  voice.
Poltwhistle loomed in the doorway, fists on his hips, towering in apoplectic fury. "How dare
you speak so to my client!" Al yelped as the old man grabbed his ear and hauled him into the
shop. "What have you to say for yourself?"
Al straightened up, and met the old bastard's eye with a grim  smile.  "Here.  I  brought
you your book."
He didn't even try to duck as his employer dealt him a staggering cuff to the ear. The
German book went flying, fetched up against the customer's shoe.
"Dr.  Van  Helsing,"  Poltwhistle  said  as  Al  picked  himself  up,  "My  apologies.  This  little
thief stole the volumes you ordered but never fear. A brief stay in gaol will remind him of
their location."

"Do not to trouble yourself, good sir." The old  man  stooped,  reverently  retrieving  the
volume.  "This  is  the  book  I  require  most  urgently.  Note  the  title—Wampyre."  Poltwhistle
began to object, but the doctor ignored him. "This book will stand between mankind and a
beast most unspeakable. Good!"
He stood, snapped the little book shut, but stopped as his eye fell over Al,  wiping  the
corner of his mouth. The doctor extended a hand to him.
"You should not fire such a steadfast boy—curiosity is no crime."
"Beastly  Aleister  Crowley?  Steadfast?"  Poltwhistle  asked,  incredulous  as  the  two
shook hands.
The doctor grinned,  stepping  out  into  the  bright  golden  dawn.  "So.  And  even  a  beast
can learn, if properly taught."

A Most Electrifying Evening
Julie Barrett
London—fortunately  for  me—is  a  city  of  many  diversions.  From  the  high-society
theatre crowd to the lowlife in Limehouse, I have had plenty of opportunity to experience
it all. One might say I have taken a taste  of  all  this  city  has  to  offer.  I  daresay  that  my
presence in this great city may have had some small bearing on the recent fashion trend of
high-necked blouses.
And now, having experienced all  that  is  London  to  the  point  of  un-deadly  boredom,  I
find myself spending more time in my Piccadilly rooms, reading.
Amazingly, I find myself fascinated with some of the recent scientific advances of the
day. Of course, the changes in weaponry over the centuries have not escaped my  eye.  The
lance eventually gave way to the cannon as the sword to the gun, and as a watchful lord of
my property I took note of the trend (slow though it was to reach my secluded  property)
and trained my servants accordingly. After all, it does not suit my purposes to have a poorly
defended castle.
The  latest  trends  in  inventions  met  my  eye  with  mixed  emotions.  Perhaps  the  most
intriguing of them is the electrification of the cities. London has been electrified in places.
Indeed, my sitting room has been outfitted with an electric lightbulb. I find the light harsh,
and  much  prefer  the  softer  glow  of  candlelight  or  gas.  Yet  it  is  not  the  lightbulb,  but
another application of electricity which has taken my interest.
A  young  scientist  in  America  by  the  name  of  Nikola  Tesla  is  said  to  have  patented
several  electric  motors  in  the  last  year.  News  of  his  astonishing  experiments  with
electricity  would  no  doubt  have  reached  my  backwater  lands  within  the  year,  for  his
experiments  hold  great  promise.  His  tinkerings  with  motors  are  most  fascinating  to  me.
Based upon my reading, I surmise that it would be quite possible to create a sanctum within
my  castle  with  doors  operated  by  these  electric  motors.  This  would  make  it  possible  to
move solid stone doors with great ease. I also surmise that it would  be  feasible  to  create
electric locks. Such devices might make it quite impossible for prisoners to escape.
I must say that it was with a certain amount of glee that I  read  the  news  that  Tesla
himself  would  be  lecturing  in  London.  While  this  lecture  was  by  invitation  only  to  the
greatest of scientific minds, gaining admittance would be an exercise in trifles. After all, it
would  be  very  easy  to  convince  a  member  or  two  of  the  scientific  society  that  I  am  an

eminent  scholar  in  my  own  land.  The  task  was  embarrassingly  easy,  for  the  milquetoast
young man in charge of the invitations became "convinced" with minimal energy on my part
and only a slight headache on his part. He will think  twice  about  taking  a  second  glass  of
sherry again.
A lecture hall at St. Bartholomew's had been chosen for the occasion. I slipped into  a
seat  at  the  rear  of  the  hall,  leaving  the  front  spaces  for  those  with  less-keen  senses.
Precisely at 7:30 a hush fell upon the hall. A tall, well-dressed man whom I took to be Tesla
himself  approached  the  podium.  After  arranging  the  pencils  on  the  lectern  in  a  precise
pattern, he began to assay the decanter of water. I'm sure very few beyond the front row
heard  him  mutter  the  phrase  "64.7  fluid  ounces"  before  pouring  himself  a  glass  with  a
white-gloved hand. I, of course, heard the expression  clearly.  He  took  a  sip  of  the  liquid,
cleared his throat, and proceeded to talk.
"My  fellow  scientists,  thank  you  for  allowing  me  to  speak  with  you  this  evening."
Tesla's  voice  boomed  through  the  hall.  Even  the  elderly  amongst  them  could  hear  him
clearly.  While  he  had  lived  in  America  for  the  past  nine  years,  his  Hungarian  accent  and
method of speech had not altogether faded.
"I come to lecture to you tonight on new advances in the field of electricity. Even as I
speak the first alternating current electric plant in the United States of America is being
constructed at Niagara Falls, in New York. The falls will provide enough energy to light the
entire city of Buffalo, with electricity to spare. Electricity will be  cheap  and  plentiful.  It
will  replace  steam  in  the  factories  and  gaslight  on  the  streets.  Soon  our  homes  will  be
heated by electric energy."
The scientist then asked for the gaslights to be turned low so he might  show  a  series
of  lantern  slides  depicting  the  great  plant.  When  the  gas  was  turned  up,  an  outlandish
apparatus  stood  in  the  middle  of  the  room.  Chairs  squeaked  and  voices  hummed  as  the
assembled gathering of scientists positioned themselves for a better view.
"Gentlemen,  I  give  you  the  induction  coil."  A  large,  ring-shaped  piece  of  metal  stood
atop what appeared to be a tube around which wire had been  tightly  wound.  Several  feet
away  stood a lightning rod. He gestured to two of the more elderly of the crowd who had
moved their chairs forward to further examine the  device.  "Please  move  your  seats  back,
sirs. Otherwise I am unable to guarantee your safety."
I cannot comprehend most of what I saw that at that point, but when  he  worked  the
apparatus an enormous bolt of lightning sprang from its crown to the lighting rod. I felt a
tingle run through my body. Mr. Tesla explained the sensation as stray electricity in the air.
Whatever it was, I must say I was quite amazed.
"So  much  for  the  parlor  tricks,"  he  exclaimed  as  two  men  threw  a  cloth  over  the
apparatus. "I will also speak tonight about the new methods to which electricity may be put
to use. In America, I have  just  patented  a  means  by  which  telegraph  signals  may  be  sent
through  the  ether.  The  signals  can  be  conducted  by  the  electricity  in  the  upper
atmosphere." The scientist paused to allow a  murmur  to  pass  through  the  room.  "Not  only
will man be able to pass telegraph signals through the ether, but one  day  he  may  transmit
his voice, and perhaps even pictures."

Tesla spent the next hour expounding upon one astonishing theory after another. I do
not consider  myself  to  be  of  small  intellect,  but  I  had  a  difficult  time  grasping  much  of
what he had to say. Indeed, it seemed as though some of the eminent minds in attendance
could not fully comprehend parts of the lecture.
I shook my head in disbelief as I  filed  out  with  the  group  of  scientists.  Transmitting
signals through the air was without a doubt the  most  fanciful  idea  I  had  ever  heard,  and
believe  me,  I've  been  around  long  enough  to  hear  much.  Still,  something  about  this  man
intrigued me, so I allowed myself to follow him and a small party of scientists to Simpson's.
During the part of our trek when I was in human form I detected another following behind.
Any mortal nostrils could have performed this feat, for the scent of cologne that reached
my  nostrils  when  the  wind  shifted  was  quite  overpowering.  Another  discreet  admirer,
perhaps, yet I sensed a different  type  of  excitement  than  what  was  felt  by  the  party  I
trailed.
Dining in such an establishment is one of the few pleasures that elude me in my present
state.  Still,  I  persuaded  the  captain  to  seat  me  along  the  wall  near  a  large  potted  tree.
Normally  it  would  not  have  been  considered  a  good  table  at  this  fashionable  restaurant,
but it suited my purposes well. Not only could I hear Tesla clearly, but the plant afforded a
ready receptacle for the glass of wine and bowl of soup that I ordered. As I attempted to
secret  a  small  amount  of  soup  away,  a  stranger  approached  my  table.  It  was  his  cologne
that had assaulted my senses moments earlier.
"I see you're fascinated by  the  great  scientist."  He  was  an  American,  judging  by  his
accent  and  clothing.  "May  I  sit  down?"  As  much  as  I  would  prefer  to  listen  to  the
conversation at the nearby table, I allowed him to join me in hopes that I would be able to
rid myself of him quickly, one way or another.
"My name is Jack Danielson, and I represent the Buffalo Power Company." He slid into
the seat opposite me, blocking my view of the great scientist. "You look  like  an  intelligent
man."
I nodded.
"I am prepared to offer you an investment opportunity in the greatest electric power
plant in the world."
Another familiar scent came to my nostrils. Rat. It went strangely well with his overly
pungent  cologne.  This  man  had  targeted  me,  and  I  planned  to  make  him  sorry  for  his
intrusion. "I was under the impression that this project was funded by the government and
Westinghouse Electric."
The man swallowed almost imperceptibly. I  could  hear  it.  "Sir,  we  are  a  subsidiary  of
Westinghouse. Allow me to show you some materials." As he began to open up a small leather
portfolio, a woman stopped before the table.
"Mr. Danielson," she exclaimed. Her demeanor was quite calm, if not regal, but I could
sense her heart beating quickly out of anxiety. "Has my money been invested?"

"Of course. May I speak with you about dividends for a moment?" He excused himself
to take the woman to the rear of the  room,  near  the  kitchen  door.  I  focused  my  ears  on
their  conversation,  and  was  able  to  hear  a  few  snippets  amongst  the  bustle  of  the  wait
staff.
"—of course, this investment cannot pay off until the plant is operational—"
"—my son the duke will be requiring his dividend—"
"—soon—"
"—reclaim my necklace."
I let the conversation go and studied the  woman's  profile.  Of  course.  I  had  seen  her
picture  in  the  newspapers.  She  was  a  dowager  duchess  whose  family  had  fallen  on  hard
times after the death of her husband. Her son had just come into the title, and rumor was
she was trying to marry him off, no doubt in expectation of offspring to carry on the title,
preferably to some American heiress. Poor woman. Her son had rooms below mine, and  the
walls are thin for one of my powers. It seems he does not prefer the ladies at all.
A  picture  formed  itself  quickly  in  my  mind.  This  Danielson  was  the  worst  sort  of
predator. Van Helsing and his coterie  portray  me  as  a  vicious  stealer  of  blood,  but  I  can
assure you that those who join my circle do so because deep within their hearts it is their
desire. Danielson, however, was a destroyer  of  souls.  I'm  sure  he  mistook  my  old  country
dress and ways as a sign of gullibility and planned to take advantage of it.
The  leech  and  his  victim  rejoined  me.  Her  agitation  was  noticeable  to  even  most
mortals. Normally I wouldn't feel much in the way of  pity  for  this  woman.  The  titled  rich
manage and mismanage their funds over the course of generations. Most of these  families
find a way to keep up appearances until the next windfall arrives. Yet she was the victim of
this  predator  who  had  : single-handedly  ruined  my  quiet,  educational  evening.  I  bade  the
duchess to rejoin her party while I took Mr. Danielson off to a quiet corner of the smoking
room  and  convinced  him  that  he  had  made  a  grave  mistake  and  would  be  refunding  the
money to the investors.
It took a little more persuasion to pry the location of  the  necklace  from  him.  Once  I
did,  I  couldn't  get  him  to  be  quiet.  He  proudly  told  me  how  he  had  taken  the  necklace,
promising  its  return  to  the  duchess  as  part  of  a  dividend  payment.  Instead,  he  would  be
using  it  to  pay  off  a  rather  substantial  gambling  debt.  His  creditor  had  said  something
about using the proceeds from its sale to construct an air gun which could be disguised as a
walking  stick.  Ingenious,  but  I  let  his  rambling  stop  at  that  point.  I  instructed  the
underhanded Mr. Danielson to return to my table and finish my glass of wine. Slowly. That
should hold him while I performed my errand.
I took the form of a bat and made my way to his East End lodgings. The necklace was
where  he  said,  under  a  floorboard.  It  contained  a  single  brilliant  ruby.  The  setting  was
simple, allowing the gem to shine  in  all  its  brilliance.  Such  a  jewel  would  sparkle  upon  any
woman's  bosom,  and  it  crossed  my  mind  to  simply  retreat  to  my  rooms  and  keep  it  for
myself. It would look stunning on Lucy. But I had already started other events in action, so

I hung the jewel around my neck and reverted to the form of a bat, keeping to the shadows
so the light would not flash upon the ruby.
Upon  my  return  I  found  Mr.  Danielson  seated  at  my  table,  dutifully  obeying  the
suggestions I had left with him. I handed him the necklace and bade him to return it to the
duchess.  Return  it  he  did,  but  I  was  unprepared  for  the  noblewoman's  quite  earthy
reaction. She began to beat the man about the head and shoulders with  her  handbag  with
such  fury  that  two  waiters  were  required  to  separate  the  pair.  Presently  a  policeman
arrived and the duchess proffered her charges.
The great scientist Tesla, seemingly engrossed in calculating the volume of  his  coffee
pot,  looked  up  at  the  commotion  and  approached  the  duchess  after  the  leech  had  been
taken into custody. Although the incident was not directly of his doing, he offered his most
sincere apologies for any distress caused to her person. As he spoke, his eye was drawn to
the ruby necklace dangling from her hand.
"Madam, would you allow me to examine your ruby?"
She understandably demurred.
"You may hold onto the necklace. Please, hold only the gem up to the light." He gestured
in the direction of a gas lamp. He studied the stone for a long moment, inspecting the way
in which the light refracted through its facets. He thanked the mystified duchess for her
kindness then returned to his table, his thoughts still clearly with the ruby. Next he took a
long,  slow  sip  of  coffee  then  proceeded  to  arrange  the  spoons  at  his  place  in  precise
alignment with the salt cellar. The waiter delivered a brandy  snifter,  the  volume  of  which
Tesla absentmindedly calculated. He took a sip, then recalculated the remaining amount of
liquid.  After  a  moment  a  smile  began  to  play  upon  his  lips,  and  his  eyes  shone  with  the
brilliance of scientific thought.
"Gentlemen,"  he  addressed  the  somewhat  startled  assemblage  at  his  table,  "what  do
you suppose would happen if you were to shine a very intense light through a ruby which has
been cut so as to precisely focus that light?"
"A very focused red beam of light?" ventured one fellow.
"That could be quite useful during your  magic  lantern  slide  presentations,"  concluded
another.
"The  world  is  not  ready,"  Tesla  sighed  as  the  waiter  refreshed  his  snifter,  then
addressed the man. "Did you know that you have precisely forty-two ounces of brandy left
in  your  decanter?  I'll  double  your  gratuity  if  you  can  divide  that  equally  between  the
glasses at this table." There was a hearty laugh all around as I retreated to my own  place
to settle up my bill. My heart sank as I noticed the waiter  had  refilled  my  wine  glass  and
brought a fresh, steaming bowl of soup.
Ah, well. I would simply leave a generous tip and explain that a recent sea journey had
left my stomach unsettled. I had learned that there are as many excuses as there are long,
lonely nights in London.

An Essay on Containment
Gene DeWeese
 
(From the Secret Journal of Radoslav Coulson)
London
August 7, 1893.
I  greatly  fear  there  will  soon  be  trouble  for  us  all.  The  so-called  Count  has  made
landfall, I know not where.
For days I have sensed his approach, so powerful is his aura. But it is not his power that
is the source of our peril, it is his damnable ego, his utter lack of discipline.
We  have  known  of  his  existence  for  more  than  a  century,  so  perhaps  the  current
dilemma  is  as  much  of  our  own  making  as  it  is  of  his.  We  should  have  acted  decisively
decades ago  and  not  continued  to  place  naive  confidence  in  his  obvious  intellect  and  the
instinct for survival that we all share. It is apparent that our quiet counsel, even our more
pointed warnings, have gone unheeded. Had he paid the slightest attention to our words, he
would at least have contacted one of us to help prepare the way for his journey, not one of
them, with whom he must always be on guard, ready with justifications for behaviors that
to them are bizarre but to us are only what our nature demands.
But perhaps I am being unduly alarmist. Perhaps those very contacts will  cause  him  to
apprehend  the  danger  more  clearly,  to  begin  at  last  to  act  with  the  discretion  that  is
essential in dealing with the ever-increasing perils  of  the  modern  world.  Such,  at  least,  is
my hope.
Nonetheless,  we  shall  begin  our  preparations  immediately.  I  only  hope  that  our  skills
have not atrophied in the decades since we were last called upon to make extensive use of
them.
August 9, 1893.
Once it was determined by consensus which of our unwitting accomplices to employ in
this  matter,  it  required  only  a  single  night  to  verify  that  our  choice  was  viable.  The
extensive conditioning he was given nearly half a century ago in his youth  still  holds  sway.
He has become precisely the person we intended, precisely  the  person  we  knew  we  would

someday need. Now preparations for our little drama can begin in earnest.
August 12, 1893.
As I had hoped and expected, the initial phase went remarkably well.
Indeed, it is at times like this that I can understand what drives the Count to engage in
his  reckless  behavior.  There  is  undeniably  an  incomparable  satisfaction  to  be  taken  in
exercising  one's  mental  powers,  causing  memories  to  shift  and  alter  by  mere  whispered
suggestions in the night. As I observe the intricate patterns of change we weave within the
minds of our oblivious subjects, I can imagine that the feeling we experience is not  unlike
that  which  their  master  musicians  achieve  when  giving  a  virtuoso  performance  for  an
appreciative audience.
My only  regret  is  that  for  our  virtuoso  performances  there  can  be  no  audience  save
ourselves unless it becomes necessary for the subjects to act out the scenario dictated by
those deceitful memories. Contrariwise, my dearest hope is that, for the sake of us all, such
actions  are  never  required  and  that  the  memories  themselves,  untended,  will  gradually
retrogress, unnoticed, until the minds that housed them are left only with dull reality.
We shall see.
August 17, 1893.
Carfax!
The fool has actually moved into Carfax, bringing with him not one but fifty boxes of
his precious native soil, a  needless  luxury  at  best!  If  he  persists  in  such  recklessness,  he
might as well shout his nature from the rooftops!
I should  not  have  delayed  even  these  few  days.  I  should  not  have  allowed  myself  to
entertain for even a moment those same false hopes that had already kept us from acting
for  nearly  a  century.  I  should  have  paid  stricter  heed  not  only  to  the  power  and  the
undisciplined  nature  of  his  aura  but  also  to  his  shameful  record  of  almost  mindless
self-indulgence. I should have seen that, like anyone, he  is  shaped  by  his  past  experience,
and  that  his  past  experience  consists  of  centuries  of  indulging  his  every  whim  without
concern  for  the  effects.  For  centuries  he  "lived"  alone  in  a  backward  and  isolated  area
where superstitions of all kinds were so deeply ingrained in the mortal populace that no one
would  even think of defying even the most ludicrously  unlikely  creatures  who  claimed,  let
alone  openly  demonstrated,  supernatural  powers.  Drink  a  little  of  their  blood  while  they
slumber unaware, steal one of their daughters and bend her to your will, causing her to rise
in the night in answer to your silent summons, and they cower in their  hovels,  scrupulously
avoiding any show of defiance or even of discontent for fear that anything short of servile
obedience would only worsen their situation.
The civilized  world  which  he  has  invaded—our  world—is  far  less  deferential,  as  he  is
already discovering. If he alone were involved, we would not devote a moment of time to his
plight. If he wished to draw attention to himself and  himself  alone,  I  would  wish  him  well
and quietly await his demise, which would surely soon be upon him. But his antics, his foolish

attempts  to  "live"  as  he  had  "lived"  in  that  welter  of  mindless  superstition  that  is
Transylvania, will call attention to us all. Here in the civilized world our strength—and our
safety!—lies not in our modestly superhuman powers but in our anonymity, in the fact that
our kind is  rarely  believed  to  be  more  than  the  fevered  imaginings  of  superstitious  fools
and that when one of us is found to exist, he is easily destroyed if only you follow certain
arcane and nonsensical rituals. If ever we lose that advantage, our already meager numbers
will quickly dwindle to nothing.
Tonight it begins.
Sept. 1, 1893.
It is with considerable relief that I  record  the  fact  that  our  elaborate  preparations
have  not  been  in  vain.  Dr.  Seward,  one  of  many  who  benefited  from  our  recent
ministrations, questioned none of his recently acquired memories when he was  called  in  to
examine  the  unfortunate  young  woman  the  Count  has  become  enamored  of.  Nor  did  he
hesitate  to  immediately  contact  our  chosen  accomplice,  ostensibly  his  "old  friend  and
master"  from  school  days  and,  fortuitously,  an  expert  in  the  very  maladies  of  the  blood
from which the young woman is suffering.
Dr.  Van  Helsing  arrives  tomorrow,  and  I  am  confident  that,  with  our  clandestine
assistance, he will meet with spectacular success in ridding the land of this  creature  that
menaces us all.

Berserker
Nancy Kilpatrick
Here, it is so unlike your homeland. The land where your blood and that of your father
and his father before him rusts the soil. Where you can rest untormented, and be at peace.
But this place! Even the brilliance of daylight cannot disguise an obscenity: the parody
of life. Around you swells a perpetually flowing, ever-renewing river of  unawareness  from
which  you  intend  to  slake  your  thirst  at  will.  But  rampant  mindlessness  offends  you.  Do
they not deserve your scorn?
Such pathetic trees! Scrawny as the Cockney children racing by. Feeble roots cling to
the  island's  soil.  So  bare,  as  if  stripped  of  life's  nourishment.  These  denizens  of  the
modern have  cleared  and  clipped  the  bushes  as  though  natural,  wild  beauty  is  repugnant.
What  a  society!  What  a  mockery!  Cutting  vegetation  into  the  shape  of  animals!  These
mortals have too much time on their hands! Time is their enemy, even as it has become your
friend.
So this is what you have read of, what the British call "civilization." A "park." You came
to  this  place  for  several  reasons,  not  the  least  of  which  is  that  you  seek  refuge,  a
temporary respite,  a  few  moments  where  you  may  recapture  for  refreshment's  sake  the
comfort of nature's calming familiarity. But it is a sham! An illusion. You have been tricked.
This is not the verdant growth of your homeland. The tight green carpet beneath your feet
screams  in  distress.  These  short  hairs  resemble  the  preposterous  mutton-chops  stuck  to
the cheeks of the mortal males surrounding you. They look ridiculous, foolish, and yet these
beings have the nerve to call your countrymen barbarians! Madmen! Once you have supped
on  their  blood,  and  they  have  tasted  your  wrath,  truly  they  will  come  to  know  what  the
word "barbarian" means.
"Good day!"
"Good day," you reply to the just-so gentleman in the summer frock coat, accompanied
by a timid, plain woman and two frightened children.
He  and  his  family  stop,  wanting  to  continue  this  pointless  exchange  with  a  stranger.
"The weather has turned for the better," he remarks.
"England possesses a most fortuitous clime," you comment.

"Yes," the wife responds nervously, glancing furtively at her husband as though seeking
approval for her vocalization.
She  is  plainer,  that  is  certain,  yet  she  resembles  Lucy—fair  hair  and  eyes,  arched
brows, high cheekbones, long, slim throat…
The  man  leans  upon  his  ivory-tipped  cane,  content  with  his  lot  in  life,  the  world  his
oyster, it seems. "I take it you are from Europe." His face smiles, yet you are keenly aware
of the distrust beneath this facade.  He  has  encountered  a  foreigner.  One  alien.  He  must
assess you rapidly, fit you neatly to a slot in order to "know" you.
"Indeed," you say, "you are correct. I am Transylvanian."
The woman, eyes dulled by incomprehension, stifles  a  gasp.  The  girl  child  a  yawn.  The
boy his urge to run with the pack of children from  the  lower  class,  their  shirttails  flying,
short breeches dirty. Children his mother looks on with disapproval.
The man repeats, "Transylvania…" scanning a  mental  map.  You  see  that  he  has  pegged
you. "Eastern European," he now says confidently. "Northeastern Balkans,  correct  me  if  I
am wrong."
"You are not wrong," you inform him, although the satisfied nod is annoying. He feels he
now has you classified and can rest. He wears  the  mask  of  intelligence  laced  with  safety
and certainty. A veil of correctness that hides control. Control born of fear.
Perhaps  you  should  inform  him  that  this  meaningless  exchange  will  not  assure  that
blood remains in his veins. That if you had a mind to bleed him dry like an  enormous  leech,
you would do so, could do so. His destiny rests in your hands.
"James Holbrook," he says, extending a hand. "Barrister-at-law."
You shake his hand, the current custom here, adopted from North America apparently,
and revel in the warmth of this mortal's flesh and the throbbing  cauldron  ablaze  beneath
that  epidermis.  These  sensations  cause  you  to  tremble  slightly  with  anticipation.  "Count
Dracula," you inform him.
His thin eyebrows lift. He is impressed with your station, as he should be, and yet more
relieved. Here he is, in the presence  of  what  he  deems  to  be  his  own  class,  no,  a  class  to
which he aspires. "My wife Elizabeth," he says informally, adding, "my son John junior, and
my  daughter  Caroline,"  and  he  pats  the  little  girl  on  the  top  of  her  head  of  yellow  curls.
Caroline  stares  up  at  you  with  large  eyes  that  provide  no  challenge,  since  she  is  already
under the natural spell of childhood.
"It  is  a  pleasure,"  the  wife  says,  beginning  a  curtsy,  which  she  curtails  because  of
indecision. She is not quite certain what to do with foreign royalty.
In the distance, a familiar howl, one you  recognize.  The  sound  sends  a  shiver  through
the woman. She is as one entrapped behind a glass prison,  a  prison  whose  panes  you  could
easily crash through and shatter—

"I take it you are a visitor to our England," the  man  says  crisply.  "Am  I  correct?"  He
asks questions as if they are statements, as though  he  is  in  a  courtroom,  before  a  judge,
arguing a case rather than engaging in a dialogue.
"I am."
"We are very proud of our city of London.  And  the  gardens  here.  I  hope  you've  been
enjoying your stay in our fair land, taking in the sites, the marvels of the modern, civilized
world." His hand sweeps with a gesture of ownership, as though he not  only  possesses  but
has created all of which he speaks.
You  have  been  on  this  unfamiliar  soil  but  a  short  while  and  yet  you  far  prefer  the
ruggedness  that  is  your  heritage  to  the  cultivated  "marvels"  he  so  obviously  idolizes.  In
Transylvania,  the  harsh  beauty  reminds  you  that  survival  is  always  a  struggle.  The
environment  itself  forces  a  warrior  to  be  alert  to  danger,  rather  than  lulling  him  into  a
torpor  which  leads  to  demise.  This  man  is  surrounded  by  a  hundred  dangers  yet  has
convinced himself he is invincible. Your attitude, the one  you  were  born  with,  the  one  you
died with, the one you continue to rely on in this existence is in tune with nature— for are
not  the  animals,  even  the  insects,  on  guard  always,  alert  to  predators?  That  is  nature's
way. What is wrong with these Englishmen that you can walk  among them, speak with them,
touch them, and their every sense is dead to danger?
They laugh and talk and ignore you,  other  than  the  odd  glance  or  remark  focused  on
your foreignness, which always fosters comments to prove they are  superior.  They  delude
themselves  with  silly  thoughts  that  suggest  supremacy.  It  is  their  weakness,  and  will  be
their downfall.
"Have you been to Piccadilly?" the wife ventures.
You stare into her faded eyes, a bold gesture, and watch as conflicting emotions dance
within her— she is trapped by your gaze. Attraction and repulsion vie for position. Paralysis
is the outcome.
The man instinctively feels this threat and takes her  elbow,  which  causes  her  to  look
away. Her cheeks redden with embarrassment.
"Well then," the man says. "We shall be off. The children want to ride the carousel, you
know. And we would hate to impinge."
You feel a twinge of respect for him now. At least he has the sense to recognize peril in
one regard.
He tips his hat, and you return the gesture, glancing at him, bowing slightly to his wife,
who  seems  afraid  to  look  at  you  again,  and  that  causes  you  to  smile.  The  distracted
children are like barely ripe plums, not ready yet for the brandy maker. But the woman…
The  family  turns  by  rote  at  the  cue  of  the  man  and  begins  to  wander  toward  the
carousel.  You  watch  them  stop  at  the  cotton  candy  vendor.  The  children  receive  a  cone
each of pink sugar fluff. The wife surreptitiously glances back in your direction.

"Yes, my lovely," you whisper. "I could easily shatter  the  walls  of  your  prison  and  you
would belong to me as you so long to."
A  delicious  look  of  lust  and  dread  flickers  through  her  eyes,  and  she  turns  away
abruptly.
You laugh, drawing stares from the crowd.
So  many  warm-bloods!  Their  numbers  spiral  to  infinity,  like  drops  of  water  in  the
ocean, stars in the sky. They bask in the  sunshine,  light  which  has,  over  half  a  millennium,
become increasingly abhorrent to you. It would not surprise you if soon you can  no  longer
tolerate these fiery rays and prefer to sequester yourself entirely in the indirect light of
the  moon.  You  are  so  unlike  these  mortals,  who  believe  the  light  beneficent.  Who  have
recently created sunlight in small globes of glass and this, like their other inventions, leads
them to believe they are conquering nature. All in an attempt to master death. But it is you
who are the  Master  of  Death.  And  you  have  done  this  by  adhering  to  your  true  essence,
something these peasants cannot imagine.
That they should envision themselves greater  than  nature,  that  they  believe  they  can
control eventualities with their industries, both amazes and amuses you, the latter in a grim
way. You survey the skyline of London, blotted with inky smoke from their factories, fumes
that choke the air, and you wonder: are they insane?
They cannot breathe. They die of illnesses brought about by their own wicked  habits,
and yet they place such childish faith in science—even now,  they  believe  they  can  replace
the blood in the veins that you have drained, blood that calls to you as the lark calls to her
mate. Oh, these straight-backed fools! The strict and serious men arrayed in silly top hats,
the  prim  parasol-carrying  women  who  believe  themselves  better  than  one  another,  their
rosy-cheeked children skipping across the lawns as if they will never age. As if their blood
will never cease flowing through their veins… and into yours.
You cannot even pity them. Are they not less  worthy  of  compassion  than  these  caged
animals  you  approach?  The  mortals  ignore  their  carnal  instincts  while  you  indulge  yours.
They  are  to  you  as  the  beasts  are  to  them—inferior.  It  is  your  right  by  virtue  of  your
superiority to take them. They will become your eternal storehouse at  which  you  will  sate
your hungers.
They call this park  the  London  Zoological  Gardens.  To  either  side  are  structures  the
living have built to amuse themselves. Such romantic, pastel buildings, with domed roofs and
arched  wrought  iron  gates.  There!  Close  up.  The  electrical  carousel,  the  painted  ponies
dipping  and  lifting  to  the  music,  in  imitation  of  the  horses  you  once  rode  into  battle.  It
amazes you that barely more than a decade ago, in your part of the world, a clever inventor
generated  electrical  power  for  the  first  time  and  it  is  that  which  drives  this  frivolous
machinery. This is yet one more indication of the inevitable downfall of this century.
At least there are the remnants of nature.  The  flora,  though  cultivated,  inspires  you.
Color  splashes  the  lawns,  the  flowers  still  as  the  dead,  their  brilliance  enhanced  to  your
eyes by the growing darkness as the sky following you becomes overcast.

Ahead,  an  abomination!  You  are  assaulted  by  sounds  and  smells.  Caged  wildlife!  A
horrifying concept. You see  one  animal  familiar  to  you.  You  reach  back  into  your  memory
where this furry humped spitter emerges from a time  long  ago  when  your  father  offered
you  and  your  handsome  brother  to  your  mortal  enemies,  the  Turkish  Ottomans.  He
betrayed you to save himself, abandoning you  in  a  foreign  land  with  strange  customs  and
intense cruelties. You learned a lesson well at a vulnerable age,  one  you  have  carried  with
you all of your long existence—none are trustworthy!
A pachyderm from India is chained to a spike. This enormous beast  you  have  read  of,
have seen sketches of, yet have never before experienced. Dusty grey flesh, pig-like eyes,
ears that could be wings, a snout functioning independent of the rest of its body.
And the scent! Sharper than that of  the  camel.  This  beast  emits  a  strong  mix  of  the
hay it consumes and the natural result of that consumption. It bays,  but  not  like  a  horse,
more  like  a  horn.  This  giant  of  a  creature  even  now  recognizes  you  in  the  crowd,  turns
towards you, rearing back on legs like tree trunks, then kneels before you…
You pass by quickly. There are other, stranger sights here, and you have a mission.
Birds of  all  sizes  and  colors  flutter  in  the  aviary.  And  the  lion,  ruler  supreme  of  the
jungles  of  the  world,  roars  in  your  direction,  shaking  its  mane,  bowing,  prepared  to
relinquish his reign to one supreme.
These wild beasts that once roamed free on the earth are now caged in spaces far too
small for such majestic life. If you were capable of pity, you would pity them. Where Homo
sapiens invade, the extinction of a species follows.
This is the natural extension of Darwin's theory. He is an Englishman, one of their own,
and  yet  you  know  they  have  not  paid  heed  to  his  work.  But  you  have.  The  origin  of  the
species  is  linked  with  natural  selection.  These  feral  creatures  are  doomed.  Only  the
strongest survive, and you know in your heart that you prevail absolute over humanity, even
as they rule the beasts.
The animals are fearful. They sense you. Sense the danger. Their muscles lock in terror,
their eyes bulge. The felines pace with tension and the airborne take frantic flight. These
reactions alone make them superior to the stunned men surrounding them.
Your acute hearing identifies a sound you heard but moments ago, so familiar. It is the
reason you have ventured so far into the land of  the  living  on  this  sun-drenched  day.  The
low panting emanates from the far end of a row of hideous metal cages. He is confined, the
area cramped for one of his proud nature. You have command over all animals, including this
kindred spirit—he will do your bidding.
The  wolf  pauses,  sensing  your  approach.  He  turns  to  face  you.  His  nostrils  flare.  He
recognizes a species akin to his own, but not of his pack. Indeed, he has no pack, no mate.
Like you, he is far from home soil. He is alone.
"All the way from America, they brought him, they did." The keeper, a fat  man  with  a
suit  official  but  too  small,  looks  at  you,  hoping  to  impress  you  with  his  knowledge.

"Fearsome beast, ain't he? Tore a man's heart right from his chest in a minute, he did."
"Is that so?" you say calmly.
"Oh, absolutely! That's the wolf for you. They've rid the continent of them a hundred
years ago for that very reason. That's why they had to bring this one over the ocean."
The wolf glares at the keeper and growls low in his throat. Clearly he understands the
meaning of the human's words. His feral odor becomes sharp to your nostrils, betraying his
fury.
The gray wolf of the timberlands stares at you, savvy to your understanding. The glint
in his eye tells you that his wild nature has not been tainted by years in captivity.
"Name's Berserker," the keeper interrupts your thoughts. "On account of his being so
deranged and all."
"A fitting name," you say, "for clearly he is not predictable."
The wolfs ears prick in your direction, for he knows you speak  of  him  and  to  him.  He
knows you know him deeply. The madness in his eyes is the spark of passion that aligns with
your own.
Suddenly,  the  keeper  reaches  for  a  wooden  pole.  He  jams  it  between  the  bars.
Berserker growls low, and snaps at the wood, his large teeth gouging the birch.
"See  what  I  mean?"  the  keeper  says,  jabbing  at  Berserker  again  with  the  pole.  The
wood  slams hard into the animal's furry side, causing  him  to  yelp.  Fear  and  fury  claw  the
airwaves as his savage scent turns sharp with this provocation.
Patience, I tell him. Your revenge will be sweet.
"In  Transylvania,"  you  say,  distracting  the  keeper,  "such  beasts  freely  roam  the
forests still."
"That right? Well, this one shoulda been shot long ago. He's a menace, he is."
You  survived  Europe's  encroaching  civilization.  Planned  destruction  forced  these
wondrous  animals  further  back  into  the  wilderness  until  their  numbers  became  few.  You
know intimately of their habits, though, for you have spent centuries among them. They are
not the werewolves of mythology, nor the killers of legend, but gentle, timid mammals, akin
to the dog—indeed, you have kept them as pets on occasion. It is rare they kill anything as
large as a man, and then only out of desperation. They nurture their young, travel together
for protection, the strongest male with the strongest female, working in tandem to defend
the pack and its territory.
The  moronic  keeper  grabs  up  a  slab  of  raw  meat  in  his  fist  and  slaps  it  through  the
bars. Berserker sniffs at the stale flesh, then licks it twice for the blood. He stops, raises
his head, and stares at you, the insanity in him the result of incarceration. Soon, you assure
him, you will have fresher flesh, and dine with a lost hunger borne of exertion.

Berserker nods. He bows his graceful head slightly, ears pressed back against his skull.
His tail droops between his legs. Now, he haunches down on all fours, watching you, waiting.
"See the way it is?" the keeper says.  "Let  'im  know  you  ain't  scared.  Show  'im  who's
the master, ain't that right gov'ner?"
"As you say," you tell the stupid man, whose flabby throat you would tear out yourself
were there not the crowds still littering the grounds.
Berserker is a noble brute. He is so much like you, frustrated by his fate. He longs to
find purpose again. He longs for the hunt. He longs for revenge on the weak  and the stupid,
and to bring down the brazen. Given a fair altercation between the two, this keeper would
not survive. All three of you know that to be true.
Berserker stares into your eyes,  his  yellow  orbs  speckled  with  hope  and  despair.  You
watch the pupils dilate then contract, and again. He bares his teeth, but just once, then you
hear the whimper of submission as he bends his head even lower, muzzle resting on the floor
of the cage, eyes still fixed on yours.
You laugh in delight, thrilled to find one unbroken here, amidst the tamed.
The keeper jerks his head around to stare at you, askance.
"A storm approaches," you say. "One that  will  devastate  this  city  of  London,  and  this
country, leaving dead and near dead in its wake."
The  keeper's  small  eyes  turn  fearful.  He  follows  your  gaze  to  the  blackened  sky.
Lightning cuts through the darkness, diving toward the ground near his feet, startling him.
Thunder rocks the earth you stand on.
The mortals scurry for cover. The keeper turns to run, crying after him, "Best to find
safety!" and then he is gone.
Every animal in this evil zoological  garden  responds  to  the  elements.  The  pungency  of
their scents clog the air as  the  storm  rampages  towards  you.  You  hear  them  screech  and
roar  in  terror  and  hope.  The  finches  in  the  aviary  fly  hysterically,  like  bats.  The  larger
animals pace and stomp, trembling. Berserker twitches, on his feet now; you have captured
his soul. He and the storm become aligned in agitation. You see the ruthlessness in him and
it cheers you.
These  animals  have  more  sense  than  the  men  fleeing  for  cover.  They  know  where
danger lies, and where it does  not.  The  mortals  have  much  to  learn  from  what  they  deem
inferior  life-forms.  But  they  are  prideful,  willful.  And  alienated.  These  traits  spell  their
doom.
"We will stake our claim to their thin blood!"  you  cry,  and  Berserker  throws  back  his
head and howls in tandem.
Your  laughter  equals  the  explosion  of  thunder.  Oh,  how  the  dark  rage  buries  the
blinding sunlight! Berserker paces,  races  back  and  forth  in  his  prison,  excited,  eager  for

freedom.  His  wild  eyes  are  alive,  brilliant  with  awareness  of  your  authority.  The  earth
trembles as if in awe, sensing he will do your bidding.
In  the  century  in  which  you  were  born,  the  French  deemed  what  lay  above  as  the
macrocosm,  the  greater  world  or  universe,  reflected  here  on  this  tiny  earth  as  the
microcosm.  You  are  in  touch  with  this  reality  that  equates  the  inner  with  the  outer,  the
small  and  insignificant  with  the  grand  and  incomprehensible.  It  is  the  source  of  your
strength and to draw from it is your right.
You  contemplate  the  earth  itself,  so  abundant  with  the  flicker  of  warm-blooded
creatures. Their metallic scent seeps through their wet pores, wafting along humid air in a
tantalizing manner— the scent of steaming blood! In the blackness that has descended, you
see them here and there, glittering stars with the added dimension of being aromatic.
You  have  always  acknowledged  nature.  Respected  her.  You  know  you  are  her  equal.
Nature is, perhaps, all you respect, for you  believe  only  in  the  natural  order.  You  are  the
culmination of Darwin's evolution. The one who has evolved  over  time  to  become  the  most
advanced  life-form  on  the  planet.  You  are  master  of  this  terran  universe.  The  English
naturalist would have been thrilled to meet you.
These mortals would declare that such  notions  disease  the  mind,  although  you  do  not
permit  dis-ease  to  infiltrate  your  crystal  awareness.  Berserker  is  a  worthy  assistant
because beyond all else, he is like you: adaptable and cunning, dominant traits imbedded in
your genes as Herr Mendel discovered when he played with peas. Dominant traits which are
the foundation of potency and preeminence!
The  storm  crashes  around  you,  drawn  to  you,  for  you  are  the  source  of  division.
Berserker leaps at the bars that confine him, as if crying "Death or Freedom!"
Over  400  years  of  existence  have  developed  your  organic  talents.  You  will  adapt  to
England.  But  England  will  never  adapt  to  you.  You  will  infect  these  bleeders  as  the
Frenchman Pasteur predicted. You will spread through the population like a germ, a plague
darker  than  black,  leaving  them  helpless,  unable  to  resist.  Imprisoning  them  in  their  own
weakness.
Your  laughter  expands,  drowning  out  the  thunder,  and  Berserker  begins  to  howl  in
earnest, bashing his body against the bars, drawing blood. The smell of  it  intoxicates  you.
The mortals for miles around tremble  at  the  unfamiliar  sound  and  scent  of  wildness  that
strikes a primal cord.
The wolfs victory cry delights your ears, riding sharp and crisp through the wind.  You
are  a  pair,  in  unison,  like  lovers,  or  father  and  son,  master  and  slave.  Two  warriors,
unstoppable.
You  raise  a  hand  to  the  sky  and  lightning  follows  where  you  point,  splitting  a  birch
down the middle. You are a warlord now, as you were vivode throughout your existence. One
deemed so fierce—mad even—that your countrymen fear you still. They learned to respect
and fear you in the past, when you drove the

Ottomans  buck  from  your  boundaries,  back  over  the  Carpathian  Mountains,  back  to
the land where they belonged. They respected and feared you for preserving the  law,  for
enforcing Christian values. Did you not punish the dishonest, those who would steal and lie
and cheat for personal gain? And  even  as  much  as  those  you  ruled  respected  and  feared
you, they loved you. Then, and now. Your reputation survived, even as has your body in this
supple, corporeal form you  continue.  You  are  a  hero  to  your  countrymen.  The  British  who
have  colonized  so  much  of  the  world  are  simply  modern  Ottomans.  You  defeated  the
turbaned ones, you will erode from within this society that wears the high hat symbolizing
the pinnacle of civilization.
You are Ruler of Transylvania, King of Terrors, Lord of the Undead. You are invincible.
That  truth  causes  your  lips  to  split  apart  and  a  long  hiss  to  escape  your  throat,  swirling
through  the  air  like  a  current  that  will  crush  everything  in  its  wake,  mingling  with
Berserker's mad howls. The wind whips the soul of every soon-to-be corpse in this park. It
slices through to the subconscious Freud postulates. But humanity's creative inventors and
astute thinkers cannot save them!
You  have  read  that  Kierkegaard  preached  an  acceptance  of  fate,  which  includes
suffering. That philosophy is repugnant to you. It is Nietzsche who speaks your creed. You
and you alone are of paramount importance. The prattle of Marx and Engels will dissolve in
the  vapors  of  time—there  is  little  strength  in  a  collective  without  a  strong  leader.
Machiavelli, your contemporary, knew this. He spoke from your era, where politics sired all.
Berserker's instincts are aligned with your own. He understands all too well  the  rules
of power and control as crucial for survival. He cannot cower at your just fury because he
shares this  reaction.  You  cannot  bear  to  see  him  entrapped  this  way.  It  is  not  sentiment
which  inspires  you  but  a  sense  of  reestablishing  order.  These  mortals  will  pay  for  their
insolence! Let them gloat for now. Their telegraphs and telephones and phonographs. Their
printing presses and cameras. Their refinement of pistols and rifles  and  gunpowder.  None
of it will help them! All will incinerate in the blaze of a power greater than their own. All of
their knowledge will crumble to dust.
Your  knowledge  has  been  gleaned  over  many  lifetimes,  knowledge  that  covers  the
spectrum of life, that totals the grains of sand on all of the beaches of the world! Mortal
philosophy is correct in one thing—they will taste divine suffering through  their  servitude
to you, their master. Your violent kiss will bequeath this destiny to them. They will languish
in the knowledge that they will be like you but never be your equal.
With  the  strength  of  ten  men,  you  direct  the  forces  of  nature.  Your  hand  sprouts
talons that claw the lock on the cage. Instantly, sparks shoot  through  you.  In  the  deluge,
the metal sizzles and melts. You grasp it in your hand, snap the lock, and pull open the door
of the prison.
Berserker does not hesitate. In one leap, he is on the ground, before his master. "Go!"
you  tell  him,  mentally  directing  his  instincts  toward  Whitby  and  Hillingham.  Toward  the
glass that separates you from Lucy, as if such tangible reality can stand in your way!
Berserker  swivels  his  head  to  stare  in  the  direction  of  the  keeper.  "When  you  have
served me and my work is done," you remind him, "then and only then will you will reap your

reward!"
He hesitates but a moment. Then, swiftly, he sprints over the drowning grass and into
the trees. Free. Alive. As lucid as can be.

Curtain Call
Gary A. Braunbeck
(From the unpublished papers of Charles Fort)
 
I  have  been,  for  most  of  my  life,  a  collector  of  notes  on  subjects  of  great
diversity—such  as  deviations  from  concentricity  in  the  lunar  crater  Copernicus,  to  the
great creature Melanicus and the super-bat upon whose wings it broods over the affairs of
Man, as well as stationary meteor-radiants, the reported growth of hair on  the  bald  head
of  a  mummy,  the  appearance  of  purple  Englishmen,  instances  of  amphibians  and  blood
raining  down  from  the  heavens,  apparitions,  phantoms,  the  damned,  the  excluded,  wild
talents, new lands, and "Did the girl swallow the octopus?"
But my liveliest interest is not so much in things as in the relations of things. I find now,
in the twilight of my life, as I pour over the endless data that I have assembled throughout
my  days,  that  I  think  more  and  more  about  the  alleged  pseudo-relations  we  call
"coincidences." What if these events, rather than being happenstance, are the final  result
of great, secret, dark machinations  of  the  Universe  interacting  with  the  subconscious  to
produce  an  event  or  events  which  guide  humanity  down  certain  roads  its  members  were
destined to take?
I am writing now of a brief period I spent in London when I was thirty-six, in the early
months of 1912 (nearly ten years before I decided to move there), and of a most singularly
peculiar bookshop, its even more peculiar proprietor, and a  bit  of  London  Theatre  history
which none before me has ever recorded.
I was staying at a very comfortable rooming  house  in  Bedford  Place,  just  around  the
corner from the British Museum in Great Russell Street (since my visit to London was solely
to  search  through  the  museum's  vast  archives  of  manuscripts,  the  location  of  my  rooms
could  not  have  been  more  advantageous  for  my  purposes).  On  this  particular  day—kept
from  my  research  at  the  museum  by  a  cryptic  note  delivered  to  my  room  early  that
morning—I  was  exploring  the  narrower,  less-often  traveled  streets  of  the  vicinity,  in
search of an address which seemed more and more to me a flight of  fancy  in  the  mind  of
whomever had composed the note, when the heavens opened  wide  and  within  moments  the
rain was pounding down violently. I was in Little Russell Street, just behind the church that
fronts on Bloomsbury Way, and there  was  no  way  for  me  to  find  immediate  shelter  from

the storm. The address written on the note was obviously someone's idea of a  joke,  for  I
had been up and down this street no less than three times.
So why had I not noticed the little bookshop before?
It seemed  that  as  soon  as  the  sun  was  obscured  by  the  rain  clouds,  the  tiny  edifice
simply appeared out of the rain, set between a baker's and a haberdashery where  before
there had been only, I am certain, a cramped alleyway.
I shall state here that, despite the path of research my life has been  dedicated  to,  I
am not a man who is given to either hallucination or flights of fancy. I  neither  believe  nor
disbelieve anything. I have shut myself away from the rocks and wisdom of ages, as well as
the so-called great teachers of all time; I close the front door to Christ and Einstein and at
the  back  door  hold  out  a  welcoming  hand  to  rains  of  frogs  and  lands  hidden  above  the
clouds and the paths of lost spirits. "Come this way, let's see if you can explain yourselves,"
I say unto these phenomena, always  taking  care  to  look  upon  them  with  a  cold  clinician's
eye. I cannot accept that the products of minds are subject-matter for belief  systems.  I
neither saw nor did not see a bookshop hidden away on this street. It  simply  was, at  that
moment, where the moment before it was not.
I crossed the street and entered the place, nearly soaked through.
The  first  thing  that  assaulted  my  senses  was  the  so-very-right  smell  of  the  place.
Perhaps you have to be a true lover of books to understand what I mean by that,  but  the
comforting, intoxicating, friendly scent of bindings! and old paper was nectar to my soul.
I  called  out,  asking  if  anyone  were  there.  When  no  response  was  forthcoming,  I
removed my coat, draped it on the rack near the door, and—after patting down my hair and
shaking off the remnants of rain from my shoes and sleeves—proceeded to browse through
the offerings.
The  walls  were  lined  from  floor  to  ceiling  with  sagging  shelves  full  of  books,  and  I
could see at a glance that, though the stock contained everything from academic texts to
the usual classics, its primary focus was on matters philosophical and occult; everywhere I
turned there  were  books  such  as  Agrippa's  De  Occulta  Philosophia, the  ancient  notes  of
Anaxagoras  of  Clazomenae  detailing  his  conclusions  that  the  Earth  was  spherical,  The
Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna, the Hindu Rig Veda, the poems of Ovid, the plays of Aeschylus,
Lucan's  De  Bello  Civilia…  my  heart  beat  with  tremendous  anticipation.  What  treasures
would I find here?
It was only as I was admiring an ancient copy of the Popol Vuh which sat under a glass
case in the center of a great table that I became aware that I was no longer alone. How I
knew  this  I  could  not  then  say,  though  what  was  soon  to  follow  would  make  the  reason
clear.
I turned and saw the proprietor.
Though  he  appeared  to  be  only  a  few  inches  taller  than  I,  there  was,  nonetheless,  a
sense of power and great, massive presence about him. His fierce, dark eyes stared out at

me  from  underneath  thick  eyebrows  that  met  over  his  knife  of  a  nose.  His  heavy  white
moustache drooped down past the corners of his  mouth,  drawing  my  attention  at  once  to
his red and seemingly swollen lips, which  were  flagrant  and  somehow  femininely  seductive
against  the  glimmer  of  his  face.  Though  he  was  obviously  an  older  gentleman,  he  carried
himself with the grace and power of a man fifteen years my junior.
"Mr. Fort,"  he  said,  in  a  heavily  accented,  full,  rich  basso  voice  the  New  York  Opera
would  have  swooned  to  have  sing  upon  its  stage,  "I  am  so  very  pleased  you  were  able  to
accept the invitation." He offered his hand. "It is a great honor to meet a gentleman  such
as yourself, who shares my interest is matters of data that Science has excluded."
I shook his hand. His grip was steel. I winced from the great pressure and  the  pain  it
sent shooting up my arm.
"I  beg  your  pardon,"  he  said,  releasing  my  hand.  "I  sometimes  forget  that,  in  my
enthusiasm, my handshake can be a bit…"
"Formidable?" I said, massaging my fingers.
His smile was slow in appearing but total in its chilling effectiveness. "What a kind way
to put it." He turned and started toward a  door  near  the  back  of  the  shop.  "If  you'll  be
kind enough to follow me, sir."
I did,  though  somewhat  reluctantly.  After  all,  what  did  I  know  of  this  fellow  or  his
intent?  True,  in  my  studies  I  had  come  across  many  strange  tales  told  by  sometimes
stranger individuals, but (at this point in my life, at least) I rarely had to meet any of these
people face to face. Still, I must admit, my curiosity was stronger than  either  my  anxiety
or trepidation.
I need speak in a bit more detail of the cryptic note which was delivered to my room as
I was readying myself for the day's research at the museum. It arrived in a heavy envelope
which  contained—aside  from  the  letter  itself—several  newspaper  clippings,  which  I  will
summarize momentarily. It read as follows: "My  Dear  Mr.  Fort:  I  know  that  you  will  read
the enclosed with great interest, but also with your Intellectual's eye. Come to the address
written  below  before  the  noon  hour  and  I  will  give  you  irrefutable  proof  that  these
incidents are, indeed, based on fact and not myth. I urge you to keep this appointment."
Below the body of the writing were these words: Denn die Todten reiten schnell ("For
the dead travel fast," a line from Burger's "Lenore").
The letter was signed only: A.S.
Having read with great delight Mr. Jules Verne's famous novel, I found myself smiling
at the thought that I  might  encounter  the  fictitious  Arne  Saknussemm  at  the  end  of  my
own "journey."
The clippings came from newspapers such as Lloyd's Sunday News, the Brooklyn Eagle,
Ottawa  Free  Press,  and  the  Yorkshire  Evening  Argus.  All  of  them  detailed  stories  of
various  bodies  which  were  discovered  to  have  died  from  massive  blood  loss—  often  the

bodies  were  drained  totally  of  their  blood  supply.  All  of  the  deaths  had  another  fact  in
common: each victim, though at first thought to have been the target of a robbery-related
assault,  was  found  to  have  "tiny  puncture  marks"  near  or  on  a  major  artery.  Sometimes
there were more than one pair of these marks (a body found in Chicago had at least thirty
such  puncture  marks  on  her  legs)  but,  in  each  case,  saliva  was  found  within  these
punctures, leading, naturally, to the conclusion that each of  these  victims  had  been  killed
by "mentally disturbed" individuals who suffered "the delusion of vampirism."
My  hope  is  by  now  you  will  understand  why  my  curiosity  overpowered  any  anxiety  I
might have been experiencing.
The proprietor opened the door and led me down a long stone stairway which  emptied
out into  a  surprisingly  cavernous  basement.  Lighting  a  kerosene  lantern,  he  proceeded  to
lead me down a slope in the floor to an area which I  can  only  describe  as  being  a  sort-of
hidden theatre; there were  a  few  rows  of  seats  (which  smelled  of  old  fire)  and  a  raised
stage, more than a few of whose boards still bore the black marks of a fire.
As  I  sat  where  the  proprietor  directed  me,  I  noticed  the  insignia  of  the  Lyceum
Theatre on the back of the seat in front of me, and realized at once that these seats—as
well  as  portions  of  the  stage  before  me—had  been  scavenged  from  the  great  fire  which
destroyed the Lyceum in 1830. (That they might have  been  scavenged  from  the  wreckage
of the 1803 fire did not, at the time, seem a possibility to me.)
The proprietor wandered away  into  the  darkness,  the  light  from  the  lantern  growing
smaller  and  more  dim  as  he  made  his  way  through  a  curtain  off  to  the  side.  I  heard  him
moving  around  backstage,  then  a  few  squeaking  sounds,  a  cough,  and  then  the  curtain
fronting  the  stage  rose  slowly  to  reveal  a  series  of  chairs  and  small  podiums,  each  on
different levels, arranged in a manner befitting a "dramatic reading"—what is often called
"Reader's Theatre" in America.
There  was,  however,  only  one  person  on  the  stage  as  the  lights  came  up,  and  he  was
neither standing nor seated behind one of the podiums.
He was in a wheelchair, downstage  center,  illuminated  by  a  spotlight  from  above.  His
face was half in shadow, even after he raised his head to look out at his "audience."
Newspaper clippings of blood-drained victims.
The Lyceum Theatre.
A.S.
I knew even before he spoke in his watered-down but still musical Irish brogue that I
was in the presence of none other than Abraham—better known as "Bram"—Stoker.
"Mr. Fort," he said, barely above a whisper. "Thank you for coming. Have you paper and
pen?"
"I do," I called from the darkness of the  theatre,  then  produced  said  items  from  my
jacket pocket. (Fortunately the light from the stage bled forward enough that I could see

to make notes.)
"Excellent," said Mr. Stoker, then wiped at his mouth with a dark-stained handkerchief
he clutched in one shaking, palsied hand.
I knew—as did many  of  his  admirers—that  Stoker  had  been  in  seclusion  for  the  last
few  years.  Ill  health  was  rumored—a  rumor  which  I  saw  now  to  be  sadly  true  (though
whether or not he was suffering from the final stages of untreated syphilis I had not the
medical  knowledge  to  ascertain).  I  can  tell  you  that  the  rumored  feeblemindedness  was
true, for several times  during  his  narrative  did  Mr.  Stoker  begin  muttering  gibberish  for
minutes on end, until he would fall into something like a brief trance from which  he  would
emerge lucid and articulate.
"I am a great admirer of your writings," he said from his place on the stage. "You must
assemble your articles into a book for publication one day."
"That is my intent," I replied, suddenly aware of  the  single  bead  of  perspiration  that
was snaking down my spine.
"May I suggest, then," said Stoker, "that you call your work The Book of the Damned?"
"Why?"
He laughed. It was not a pleasant sound. "Because all so-called 'unnatural phenomena'
comes  from  damned  places,  sir.  Speak  of  damned  places  and  you  speak  of  places  where
powerful emotional forces have been penned up. Have you ever been  within  the  walls  of  a
prison,  Mr.  Fort?  Where  the  massed  feelings  of  hatred,  deprivation,  claustrophobia,  and
brutalization  have  seeped  into  the  very  stones?  One  can  feel  it.  The  emotions  resonate.
They  seethe,  trapped,  waiting  for  release,  waiting  to  be  given  form, Mr.  Fort.  What  you
might call an 'unconscious confluence' were you to label it in one of your articles.
"You now sit in the remnants of one such 'damned  place,'  sir:  the  charred  remains  of
the  Lyceum  Theatre.  These  stage  boards,  the  curtain  above  me,  the  very  seats  which
surround you and the one in  which  you  now  sit,  were  discovered  by  myself  in  a  basement
storage area  of  the  Lyceum  during  my  time  there  as  manager—along,  of  course,  with  Sir
Henry Irving, my own personal vampire."
He spoke living's name with a level of disgust that was absolutely chilling to hear. Even
though  Stoker  attempted  to  hide  his  true  feelings  about  Irving  in  his  biography  of  the
famous actor, it was now well known that, during the twenty-seven years Stoker worked as
stage manager at the Lyceum, Irving treated  him  little  better  than  a  slave,  paying  him  so
very little that, upon Irving's death, Stoker was forced to borrow money from friends and
relatives in order to survive; when he was no longer able to borrow money, he was forced to
write such drivel as his latest (and, I suspicioned, what would be his last) novel, The Lair of
the White Worm.
I could not help but share the sorrow of this broken man on the stage before me; there
had been a potential for true literary greatness there, once, but no more… and the late Sir
Henry  Irving  was  as  much  to  blame  for  that  as  were  Stoker's  so-called  "personal

indulgences."
"Remember  as  you  listen,  Mr.  Fort:  emotions  resonate.  They  seethe,  trapped,  waiting
for release, waiting to be given form."
I  wrote  down  his  words,  though  they  seemed  more  the  ramblings  of  a  mind
surrendering to the body's sicknesses.
Stoker coughed into his handkerchief once again. Even from my place in the "audience,"
I could see that he was coughing up blood. His handkerchief was useless to him now. I took
my own, unused handkerchief from my pocket and rose to approach the stage and give it to
him, but was stopped by the appearance of a great, dark wolf by Stoker's side.
It wandered on from stage left and seated itself next to  his  wheelchair.  Even  sitting
on  its  haunches,  it  was  nearly  as  tall  as  he.  I  had  never  seen  such  a  magnificent  and
terrifying creature in all my life. It looked upon me with pitiless eyes that,  in  the  light  of
the stage, glowed a deep, frightening crimson.
I returned the handkerchief to my pocket and took my seat once again.
"You'll come to no harm, Mr. Fort," said Stoker, reaching out to rub the fur at the nape
of the great wolfs neck. The beast growled contentedly. I thought of a line from Stoker's
most famous novel, about the Children of the Night, and what sweet music they made.
What  follows  is  my  transcription  of  Stoker's  narrative.  I  have  taken  the  liberty  of
removing the sometimes-prolonged pauses he took between words, as well as excising those
instances where his crumbling mind led him down rambling paths of incomprehensibility.
I ask  only  that  you  remember  this  was  a  man  who  could  have  achieved  true  literary
greatness, but who is now only remembered as the author of "that dreadful vampire book."
Even now, I still sorrow at the thought of What Might Have Been, had Fate been kinder
to him.
The Narrative of Abraham (Bram) Stoker, as told to Charles Fort.
Little Russell Street, London, 1912.
I was born in Dublin in 1847, one of seven children. Though I was a very sickly child, I
was nonetheless my mother's favorite. During those years I spent in my sickbed, my mother
tended to me with great and loving care. Having fostered a lifelong fascination with stories
of  the  macabre,  she  entertained  me  with  countless  Irish  ghost  stories—the  worst  kind
there is, I should add. As  a  child  I  was  lulled  to  sleep  each  night  with  tales  of  banshees,
demons, ghouls, and horrific accounts of the cholera outbreak of 1832.
My  mother  was  a  remarkable  woman—strong-minded,  ambitious,  proud,  a  writer—she
hoped that I, too, might one day become a person of  letters—a  visitor  to  workhouses  for
wayward  and  indigent  girls,  and  above  all,  she  was  a  proponent  of  women's  rights—much
like her close friend, the mother of Oscar Wilde. I sincerely believe that,  were  it  not  for
her kind ministrations on my behalf, I might have surrendered to the illnesses that plagued

my early years. But she gave me strength and a sense  of  self-worth,  and  for  that  alone  I
shall always cherish her memory.
When  I  became  of  college  age  and  was  accepted  at  Trinity  on  an  athletic
scholarship—you would not know it to look at this pathetic body now, but there was a time
when I was a champion. I was a record breaker, in my day… and, I must  admit,  I  gained  a
reputation among the members of my class for a somewhat exaggerated masculinity—some
would even call it polemical. But I assure you that I was never less than chivalric toward the
ladies with whom I kept company. I often wonder now if my way with the ladies back then
is not the reason I am being punished in my final days with  a  wife  so  distant  and  frigid  I
might as well be wed to a corpse.
In 1871 I graduated with honours in science—Pure Mathematics, which  enabled  me  to
accept a civil service position at Dublin Castle. That same year I began to review theatrical
positions in Dublin, and in 1876 I was  privileged  to  review  Sir  Henry  Irving's  magnificent
performance in Hamlet. Shortly thereafter, we became great friends—or so I thought.
The  great  actor  is  a  strange  beast,  indeed,  Mr.  Fort,  for  his  ego  is  such  that  it
requires—nay, demands—constant feeding. Sir Henry was much like a child in that way. He
took more of my friendship than he ever did return, but I was  simply  too  awestruck  *  by
the man's genius to take notice of this.
I became  his  stage  manager  when  he  took  over  management  of  the  Lyceum  Theatre.
That same year, I began to publish my writings—The Duties of Clerks of Petty Sessions in
Ireland. It  was  released  to  unanimous  indifference  from  critics  and  the  public  alike.  Sir
Henry urged me to explore more "universal" themes in my work, much as  Shakespeare  and
Milton  and  Marlowe  did  in  theirs.  The  man  was  simply  hoping  that  his  lapdog  assistant
would, perhaps, compose a play in which he might once again take center stage and be  the
focus of attention… but I digress. I served Sir Henry well and  loyally  over  the  years.  His
opinion of my writing remained, as always, dismissive… until I wrote Dracula. On this, he at
last expressed an opinion. "It is absolute, pandering rubbish," he said. Still, in "reward" for
my many years of service and friendship to him, he agreed to allow me to stage a dramatic
reading of the novel before its release from the publisher. The novel was, as I'm sure  you
know, quite dense, and so several long, sleepless editing sessions were required in order to
make the work an acceptable length for theatrical presentation. During this  period  in  the
latter part of 1896, I insisted on being able to rehearse with a cast so as to determine the
success of my editing process. Sir Henry would not allow his personal company of actors to
be  "inconvenienced"—his  word—with  a  "work  in  progress,"  and  so  left  it  up  to  me  to
assemble a cast of unknowns  with whom to rehearse the piece.  It  took  me  several  weeks,
but at last I had my cast—with the exception of an acceptable actor to portray Abraham
Van Helsing. But I shall come to that.
You  need  to  understand  that,  during  this  period  of  intense  concentration,  the
character of Count Dracula became even more alive to me than he was during the years of
research it took to create him and write the novel.  He  was  so  alive  to  me,  in  fact,  that  I
often  found  myself  talking  with  him  as  I  would  stagger  home  nights  after  hours  of
emotionally  draining  rehearsal.  "My  dear  Count,"  I  would  say,  "have  I  lost  all  perspective
where you are concerned?" I did this to relieve my anxiety: if the novel were not reduced

to an acceptable three-hour theatrical entertainment,
Sir Henry made it quite clear to me that he would not permit me to present the work to
the public… not in his precious theatre. And so  the  Count  became  my  constant  companion,
sir, my father-confessor, my only true friend.
I began to realize that the only way for the work to be made right was to necessarily
make the cast believe in  the  Count  as  fiercely  as  did  I.  I  spoke  to  them  one  night  of  my
imaginary conversations with the Count, and though they were at first amused,  they  came
to understand that my dedication to the project was unflappable. I have to say, they were
far more accommodating to me than Sir Henry's personal players would  ever  be  with  him;
being unknowns,  there were no egos to soothe or feed. Until the last rehearsal, it was the
purest, most enjoyable theatrical experience of my life.
Soon, all of the cast were holding conversations with the Count.  I  recall  encountering
the actress who portrayed Mina Murray one night during a break in the rehearsal: I found
her  offstage  left,  sitting  with  her  book,  eyes  closed,  whispering,  "Why  does  someone  as
remarkable as you, dear Count, have to be so very, very wicked?" It moved me, sir, to hear
that—and not only from her, but from all of the cast members. Oh, the stories I could tell
you of their conversations with the Count. They came to believe in his existence as much as
I.
Remember: emotions resonate. They seethe, trapped, waiting for release, waiting to be
given form.
The deadline for my final draft of the performance text was rapidly approaching, and
still  I  had  not  found  an  actor  who  I  felt  would  adequately  convey  the  essence  of  Van
Helsing. It may seem a somewhat selfish  point,  but  the  other  actors  had  so  refined  their
vocal interpretations of my characters, had given them such life, that to bring in an actor
who would be less than their equal would have been an insult to them.
Then one evening,  after  having  ended  rehearsal  early,  I  found  myself  in  this  area  of
Little  Russell  Street,  and  came  upon  this  very  bookshop.  As  I  wandered  among  its  many
volumes,  the  proprietor  took  me  aside  and  asked,  "Are  you  Mr.  Bram  Stoker,  author  of
After Sunset?" "I am," I replied, seeing with some delight that he held a well-read copy of
that very short story collection in his hands. "I am a great admirer of your stories," he said,
offering the book to me, "and I would be honored if you would inscribe my copy."
I took the book from him with thanks, and proceeded to uncap the pen he offered, but
somehow I managed to cut the tip of my thumb in the process. I bled a little upon the first
page— not enough to ruin it, but enough that it  could  not  be  easily  or  neatly  wiped  away.
"Please do not worry yourself," said the proprietor to me as I signed my name to the title.
"It can be taken care of."
After  I  returned  the  volume  to  him,  he  took  it  behind  the  counter  and  knelt  down
behind  a  shelf  of  books.  A  few  moments  later  he  emerged  and  showed  me—much  to  my
surprise—that  the  blood  had  been  successfully  removed  from  the  title  paper.  I
noticed—but  did  not  think  much  of—his  licking  his  lips  several  times  after  rising  from
behind the counter. "I must say, Mr. Stoker, that I am greatly anticipating the  release  of

your new novel." "You may be one of the few persons in England who is," I replied,  and  we
shared a jovial laugh at my remark.
Something about him seemed terribly familiar to me, and as I listened to his voice with
its  weary,  sand-like  quality,  I  came  to  realize  that  I  was  looking  at  my  Van  Helsing.  I
proceeded  to  tell  the  proprietor  of  my  problem,  and  asked  him  if  he  would  be  willing  to
read the part of Van Helsing for my presentation to Sir Henry at the end of the week. He
was deeply flattered, and of course accepted my offer.
When  the  time  came  for  the  rehearsal,  I  found  him  outside  the  theatre,  nervously
pacing by the performers' entrance. "My dear fellow, we are all waiting,"  I  said.  When  he
said nothing in reply, I opened the door wider and said, "Please, come in and join us." He did
so, and the rehearsal began.
It was the most magnificent reading of the novel I have ever  witnessed.  He  captured
not only Van Helsing's weariness,  but  his  near-mad  drive  to  destroy  Dracula,  as  well.  His
performance was a prism of compassion, fury, wariness, dedication, sadness, and strength.
When it came time for his "This so sad  hour"  speech,  he  had  all  of  us  transfixed.  He  was
Van Helsing.
Then, at the conclusion of the scene, he began to laugh.
It was the sound of an ancient crypt door being wrenched open.
The spell was immediately broken. "My dear fellow," I said to him. "May I inquire what
you find so humorous about this very tragic scene?"
"That you see it as tragic at all is what amuses me," he replied, only this time his voice
was  not  that  of  either  Van  Helsing  or  the  sandy-voiced  proprietor  I  had  met  at  the
bookshop the previous day: it was the voice of Count Dracula—not only as I had heard it in
my imaginary conversations with him, but as the others in the cast had heard  it,  as  well.  I
looked upon all their faces and knew that this was the voice of the Count as we had come
to believe it would sound.
Speak  of  damned  places,  Mr.  Fort,  and  you  speak,  on  some  level,  of  belief.  Emotions
resonate. Electrons dance. Equations collapse and  are  replaced  by  newer,  equally  possible
equations.  Call  it  the  collective  unconscious  or  the  hive  mind  of  the  masses,  but  the
emotional charge had built and surged down the cumulative lines of  our  psyche  and  found
not only focus but form.
He  changed  before  our  shocked  eyes;  from  man  to  bat  to  wolf  to  rodent  to  owl  to
insect, then back again, then a hybrid of all creatures, plus man—a sight so unspeakable I
have never been able to  bring  myself  to  put  its  description  onto  paper  for  fear  of  being
labeled mad.
Count Dracula rose up before us in all his dark, majestic, terrifying glory. "My  thanks
to  all  of  you  for  our  little  talks  at  night,"  he  said,  smiling  a  lizard-grin  and  exposing  his
awful teeth. "I have searched for centuries for a proper form in which I could enter your
world, and you have so thoughtfully provided one for me."

We began to run for the doors, but he became shadow and beast and speed itself: none
of the cast made it any farther than the stage-left dressing room entrance before he fell
upon them and opened their  veins  with  his  teeth.  His  strength  was  superhuman,  his  speed
that of the wrath of God Himself—if indeed such a Being exists at all.
I huddled behind a stack of risers, listening to the terrified and soon-silenced screams
of my cast as the Count fed on each and every one of them. After what seemed an eternity,
he found my hiding place and lifted me up as easily as one would a newborn child.
Holding me by the throat, he glared at me with his glowing red eyes and said, "I wish to
thank you personally, Mr. Stoker, for giving me life. But you have also made it necessary for
the others who populated your novel to enter this world behind me, and so I must take my
leave of you for now. Since I  now  know  the  ending  of  your  story,  I  feel  it  is  my  duty  to
change  it  on  this  side…  but  you  needn't  worry  about  further  revising  your  manuscript.  I
think it will be satisfactory to have the world believe that  I  am  a  fictitious  creation  who
was summarily dispensed with at the conclusion of your little melodrama."
And with that, he released me, and disappeared into the night.
Shortly thereafter, the members of my cast rose to  their  feet,  undead  all,  and  made
their way down into the basement of the theatre and, from there, into  the  sewers  of  the
city. They are still there to this day.
And I sorrow for what I unleashed upon them and the world. Dear God, how I sorrow.
*    *    *    *    * 
I sat in the darkness of the theatre in  stunned  silence  for  several  minutes  after  Mr.
Stoker  finished  telling  his  incredible  tale.  The  man  was  obviously  mad…  but  there  still
lingered in my mind a whispering doubt. And there was, after all, that unearthly wolf on the
stage with him.
"How can I help your unbelief?" came a voice.
I had been staring at Mr. Stoker. His lips had not moved. I looked, then, at the wolf by
his side.
It spoke again: "Your unbelief, Mr. Fort. How can I help it?"
The wolf moved forward, hunkered down as if to pounce, and at once became an army
of rats that swarmed across the stage and into the orchestra pit and emerged in the aisle
as the proprietor who had led me down here. "Does this help?" he asked of me.
I rose to my feet and began to frantically make my way over the seats toward what I
believed  to  be  the  staircase  I  had  descended  earlier.  My  heart  was  pounding  against  my
chest with such force I feared it would smash through my ribs and tissue.
The  proprietor  became  several  bats  who  quickly  swooped  down  and  around  me,
assaulting me with their wings. I fell to the floor and the bats collided in a flash of darkest
shadow  and  became  the  proprietor  again,  only  now  he  was  much  younger  in  appearance,

taller, stronger.
Eternal.
"Look upon me and fear, Mr. Fort. For I am as real as you dread I am."
He reached down and grabbed onto my jacket with one hand, lifting me off the  floor
with  unnerving  ease  so  that  my  feet  dangled  above  the  aisle  like  some  marionette  left
hanging on a peg.
I could not take my eyes from his blood-red gaze.
"My biographer, my creator, wishes for his  cast  to  be  given  their  proper  curtain  call,
the one denied them so  many  years  ago."  He  slammed  me  down  into  the  nearest  seat  and
held me there with one mighty hand on my shoulder.
"Nothing less than your most enthusiastic applause will ensure your safe exit from this
place," snarled Count Dracula in my ear.
An  iron  grate  in  the  floor  near  the  foot  of  the  stage  shifted  with  a  nerve-wracking
shriek and was cast aside by a hand that was more bone than flesh.
And the parade of the dead began.
How  to  describe  what  I  saw?  How  to  convey  the  pathetic,  terrifying,  sad,  depraved
sight which my eyes beheld?
Their flesh—what remained of  it—had  the  color  and  texture  of  spoiled  meat.  Worms
and other such creatures of filth oozed in and out of the holes in their  faces  where  once
their eyes had resided. The stench of death was sickly sweet in the air. Some shambled,  a
few crawled, and one—a woman—had to be carried by another cast member because much
of  her  lower  torso  was  gone,  leaving  only  dangling,  tattered  loops  of  decayed  intestine
which hung beneath her like a jellyfish's stingers.
I wept at the sight of them, but I applauded them; oh, how I applauded!
And I was not alone in my efforts.
Surrounding me, each of them as decayed and pathetic as the sad creatures who were
assembling on the stage before us, were all the characters from Stoker's novel, all of them
flesh and blood, all of them—thanks to the Count's actions—now equally un-dead: here was
Mina Murray and  Jonathan  Harker;  there  was  Dr.  Seward  and  Lucy,  Lord  Godalming  and
Quincey,  and  every  last  character  from  the  novel  who  had  participated  in  Dracula's
destruction, only now they were the destroyed ones… even the great Abraham Van Helsing.
All un-dead and applauding those whose  portrayals  and  belief  had  brought  them  into  this
world and given them life—albeit briefly.
I became  aware  of  several  women  clothed  in  white  encircling  me  as  I  continued  to
applaud and the cast to take their individual bows.

The  brides  of  Dracula  surrounded  me,  caressed  me,  touched  me  with  their  lips  and
hands. My temperature rose in depraved want for them, and I applauded all the harder for
it.
"My cast," intoned Stoker from the stage, gesturing to each member of his troupe. "My
fine cast, my dear friends."
Dracula  wiped  something  from  one  of  his  eyes.  Looking  at  me,  he  smiled  his  awful,
bloody grin and said, "I am moved, are you not the same?"
"I am," I said, quite dizzy.
The applause from the audience grew deafening. Dracula parted his arms and became a
giant man-bat thing with slick flesh. He flew above stage and proceeded to land gracefully
in the center of the players.
"Let  my  brides  pleasure  you,  Mr.  Fort,"  he  bellowed  above  the  noise  in  a  voice  part
human and part beast, "and worry not, for they will not feed on you. You are our messenger
now. Leave here, and tell the world, if you have the courage, that I am real, and that as long
as men read my story, I shall never die. With the coming years and centuries, my story will
be read by thousands, millions more, and each time the book is opened, each time a page is
turned, I grow stronger and more eternal! Tell this to the world, sir, if you dare! For in the
centuries to come my followers will grow, they will read of me, go forth, and multiply, and
there  will  come  a  night  when  the  entire  earth  will  awaken  and  pull  in  the  sweet  damned
breath of the un-dead, and then I will be  as  I  should  have  been  from  the  very  beginning:
The true Prince of Night, the king of my kind! Go, then, and tell them, if you dare."
One of his brides fell on her knees before me whilst another began to tear at my shirt.
The  applause  swelled  as  Dracula  himself  took  a  bow,  and  then  I  fell  down  into  a
dizzying pit of desire and darkness.
 *    *    *    *    *
When I regained consciousness, I found myself outside the Lyceum Theatre, some good
distance from where I was staying.
I cannot  say  for  certain  how  I  came  to  arrive  safely  back  at  my  rooms  at  Bedford
Place, only that I did find my way back there and was at once taken by the arm and led to
an office where I was given a stiff drink of whiskey while a constable was called to  take
my statement.
"Robbery and Assault" was the official explanation for my condition.  I  saw  no  reason
to argue their conclusion.
The next day, no fewer than three  bodies  were  discovered  around  London,  the  blood
drained from their veins.
The  next  day,  I  discovered  reports  of  several  other  deaths  in  Canada,  the  United
States, and Germany.

I  returned  home  soon  after,  and  for  the  rest  of  my  life  continued  to  gather  such
stories of bloodless bodies.
I am  now  an  old  man  and  my  time  is  short.  It  has  taken  me  a  lifetime  to  muster  the
courage  to  set  this  tale  to  paper.  Whether  or  not  you  choose  to  believe  this  is  a  matter
between  you  and  your  conscience.  I  can  no  longer  say  I  neither  believe  nor  disbelieve
anything. Belief or unbelief, the dark forces of the Universe will have their way, regardless.
At my window  last night I beheld the countenance of Mr. Bram Stoker, himself among
the  un-dead  now;  beside  him  was  his  creation,  the  Count,  and  in  his  eyes  was  a  promise:
Soon.
I fear I may not be alive come morning.
Not that I would have lived that much longer, anyway.
So I take my leave of you. Do with this narrative what you will. The night is nearly upon
us.
An article in yesterday's New Yorker listed Dracula as  one  of  the  best-selling  books
of all time. To this date, it is estimated that somewhere around five million copies in twenty
different languages have been sold.
So many readers. So many pages turned.
And he grows stronger with each word read.
There will come a night, he said.
I fear it may be sooner than we think.
I shall lay down my head for the last time now.
God go with you in all the damned places that you walk.
Soon, such places shall be all there are.
 
—Charles Fort, the Bronx, May 3, 1942

Renfield or, Dining at the Bughouse
Bill Zaget
The Master comes, not on an ass, but riding the waves, sailing a schooner from  Varna.
Not dragging a cross, but hauling his native soil. The dark Transylvanian earth.  This  is  the
Master, in whose veins flows the blood of the ferocious and the lion-hearted, of Thor and
Wodin, of Icelandic tribes with their Berserkers, the blood of  the  Szekelys,  more  potent
than that of the ancient witches of Scythia, who mated with desert demons; the blood  of
Attila and the warlike fury of the Hun, who scorched the earth like  living  flame;  He,  who
drove  back  the  Magyar,  the  Lombard,  the  Bulgar,  and  the  Turk;  He  the  noble  Voivode,
Count Dracula, the Son of the Dragon, in The Land Beyond the Forest.
F-f-f-f-flap of wing… Breath of fire… Smouldering… The demon blood… Sea and foam…
Sailing 'cross the Channel…  Fifty  boxes  of  earth…  Sweet  teeth…  Berserker…  Fallen  out…
Believe… Not one…
Whip the child Whip the child Whip the child!
 
Where… ?
*    *    *    *    * 
A  room…  and  a  meal.  Breakfast?  Lunch?  Dinner?  The  Last  Supper?  A  feast  on  St.
George's Eve, yes. And to do  it  justice:  a  bowl  of  mamaliga, then  some  impletata, washed
down  with Golden Mediasch, with its queer but cunning sting on the tongue.  Or  a  flask  of
plummy slivowitz, fit  for  the  Carpathian  palate,  yes.  But  not,  not  the  Doctor's  bland  and
lumpen excuse for nourishment. Where is the maitre d'?! Where is the maitre … ?
 *    *    *    *    *
Master?
Master?
 *    *    *    *    *
It's  not,  you  know,  is  not  whipped  icing  and  shavings—the  whip  and  the  blade

perhaps—but not all sorts of f-f-f-fruity toppings that appeals. I mean, I  used  to  believe
that chocolate was mankind's greatest invention. Right up there with fire and telephone. I
no longer believe. It is a child's belief, and I am not one. Not one!
The simple joys have been replaced. Joy is not so simple, now that my sweet tooth has
fallen out; and in its gummy place, I swear, a sharper one is growing. As is the  craving  for
more exotic delights.
Ergo,  I  wait  with  longing,  and  in  the  meantime,  dance  and  rave—extraordinaire—for
the  good  Doctor  Seward;  but  will  not,  will  not  touch  his  culinary  offerings,  for  I  have
begun to find and forage for myself—as it must be.
They are everywhere, yet are often unseen. They can blot out the sky, yet can seem to
disappear. They burrow beneath or hug the surface of the Earth or take wing, and away… !
From  the  Latin,  insectum, meaning  "cut  into"  they  are  small,  as  I  have  been  and  wish  at
times to be. They crawl, as I have done and have been made to do. And so many have wings
and take flight, as I could not and cannot. Still, the consumption of lower orders, and this,
I suppose,  is  dead  centre;  the  eating  of  things,  that  some  may  prefer  to  mash  with  the
nasty heel of a boot—what a waste! These creatures may be empty of thought, but are full
of vital substance. The building blocks of Life. In some countries, it is believed we become
in  part  what  we  ingest—imbued  with  the  life  of  the  fallen,  and  are  stronger  for  it.
P-P-power.
It's  all  a  food  chain,  round  and  round.  The  bigger  eats  the  smaller.  And  what  goes
around may come around, but the hunger blots out the thought. Thinking is a terrible thing.
As terrible as feeling… anything. No, I must eat life, step by evolutionary step, in order to
break the bonds and forge new links,  that  I  may  become  truly  big  or  truly  anything,  and
blot out the sky or seem to disappear…
They  come  to  me.  The  Doctor  cannot  stop  them.  They  have  no  bones,  to  make  one
choke—imagine  that!  You  see,  they  carry  theirs  on  their  backs;  an  "ex-o-skeleton"  it's
called. It holds them  together,  this  protective  shell,  not  to  mention  giving  them  a  certain
crunchy  je  ne  sais  quoi. And  they  can  move  about  in  this  jointed  suit  of  armor,  but  they
cannot grow. So it's shed at intervals in the process called  "ecdysis."  They  molt  and  grow
and molt and grow some more.
And  so  the  Grand  Experiment  continues.  First,  with  flies.  They  sniff  my  shit  in  the
chamber pot and are drawn like, well… flies.
Phylum—Arthrapoda, Class—Insecta, Order—Diptera…
The Tale of the Fly
First. It was the smell that first attracted it. The fly. And the stillness. The scent of a
human female, of a male, and another, who was lying flat—no longer human, but very nearly
so.
Decay is-z-z-z-z-z… dizzying, like rotting meat. Ahh…

The fly, the proverbial on-the-wall-type fly, took in the intimate scene with its feelers,
sense hairs, and compound eyes, like huge bulging buds atop its head. Patches of  light  and
shadow; a young boy, grub-human and curious, entered the room. The fly, also curious, flit
and  rode  in  on  his  head,  smelled  his  shining  hair,  and  licked  the  oils  with  its's-s-sucking
mouth. The boy stopped and stared at the body, which lay on the bed.
"T-Timmy," the female clicked and hummed. Her oils had  a  similar  taste.  The  taste  of
Mother.
The other male, not flat, but standing grim, the one the Mother called "Doc-tor," hissed
at the boy, "Stay out of the room!"
The shaking air wafted waste. Flesh, losing freshness, the turning of oils,  excited  the
fly-e-e-e-e-e. It lit upon the Almost-Man, who was not really asleep, but near death. He too
tasted like the boy, in a subtle sort of way, this Father-Flesh.
"But Mummy, I, I…"
The Mother-Flesh shook her head and sighed. The Great Doctor-Human pointed, "Out!"
The fly landed on his medicinal nail, then the wall, and finally the bedsheet, which quivered
for a moment—a pale foot stuck out and gasped for air—and then was still. The fly settled
on  a  stubby  toe,  set  its  proboscis  down  and  lapped  the  stillness  and  the  sweat,  the
darkness that was nestled there.
"Timmy!"
And the boy ran out. Oh, there'd  be  other  times  to  savor  his  youthful  juice.  For  now
the No-Longer-Father-Flesh was a treat the fly could not  resist.  But  living  smells  invaded
the feast. The mosaic blur that was the Mother missed the fly, but barely, as it leapt  and
flew,  attaching  itself  to  the  overhead  light.  It  could  sense  the  looks  it  was  getting.  The
Doctor-look,  stern  and  arrogant.  The  Mother-look,  with  heaving  breath,  trickling  the
ancient odor of superstition.
"I am but a fly," he buzzed. And then was still. "I" was new. The death-sweat  and  the
pain were new and surely belonged to the Dead. And yet he felt the Father no longer down
below,  but  within  his  insect  gizzard.  It  clung  to  his  hairs  and  rimmed  his  eyes.  Even  his
eyesight had somehow changed, although he wasn't exactly sure how.
Perhaps  the  Mother  was  to  blame,  with  her  woeful  Mother-stare  and  the  fear  that
souls can be stolen at the moment of death—all directed at this common fly  and  somehow
made real. Or so the fly thought, with almost human craft.
Not even as a maggot had he felt such squirming novelty. The Father lay heavily on his
wings, but he was able to make it out an open window. Soon  his  wondrous  cargo  no  longer
weighed him down. He felt so light and of light itself. Never had he flown so high. Could he
fly to a place called Heaven? That was new too, this "Hea-ven," where he sensed could  be
found  an  Infinite  Love  and  Infinite  Wisdom  and  Infinite  Sweetness,  like  the  mixing  of
sugar and excrement, but sweeter still by far.

 
Open…  gates…  Heavy  Father…  Out!  The  gizzard…  the  flesh…  Sucking…  Dark…  The
Daddy-toe…  Rotting  meat…  The  chamber  pot…  Ecdysis…  Decay…  Ecdysis…  Power…  Dead
centre… Chains…
Cut into Cut into Cut into Out!
 *    *    *    *    *
The Nasty Heel of a Boot.
 *    *    *    *    *
I  never  even  got  to  touch  his  toe.  Little  things  can  have  power  too.  The  imploding
heart…  and  he  was  gone.  I  was  five  and  couldn't  understand,  and  yet  I  knew  that
something  had  come  crashing  and  would  never  fly  again.  My  mother  soon  remarried;  the
tears  had  dried,  I  guess.  And  This  Husband  couldn't  be,  would  never  be…  but  now  made
real the striking of flesh and bone, rather than the birthing of flesh and blood.
 *    *    *    *    *
Blood…
 *    *    *    *    *
Fly Number 139. When I first began my Grand Experiment, I kept tally,  of  a  sort,  by
notching the back of the door with a dinner knife after lights out. I now jot numbers down
in a  little  book  the  Doctor  has  asked  me  to  use.  He  insisted  on  a  written  entry,  and  not
knowing what else to do, I laughed. He tried to confiscate my notching-tool and paid dearly
for it. Oh,  it  was  hardly  a  mortal  wound.  You're  more  likely  to  die  from  the  food  than  a
swipe from what was meant to cut into that crap. But he managed to bleed copiously—there
on  the  floor.  The  taste  was,  exquisite!  He  was  appalled  at  the  sight  of  me  lapping  on  all
fours  the  puddle  of  his  deep  red.  To  this  day,  I  am  limited  in  my  cutlery  to  only  using  a
spoon. Now, a spoon takes more effort, but makes a more artistic gouge.
But I have agreed to also make entries in his "little book." He thinks it gives a sense of
order to my world. Certainly to his, but not to mine. Numbers, like order, are not real. Thus
have I rendered them meaningless. Number 81 sits beside the number 4, 21 beneath 39, and
on  and  on.  Oh,  he  will  ponder  and  search  for  meaning,  and  when  he  finally  deciphers  a
pattern, he thinks I may yet be cured. But the only pattern, and what is real are my notches
on the door over there. They don't signify any number, but an instance  of  pleasure  in  the
consumption  of  life.  I  have  configured  a  wondrous  thing,  a  veritable  work  of  Art…  and
Magic.  With  each  mark  The  Master  is  drawn  that  much  closer.  And  when  the  pattern  is
complete, He will be here for me. There is as much method in my madness as in the doctor's.
But  Herr  Doktor  Seward,  I  look  seaward  for  my  salvation,  ha!  and  I  will  never  be  your
creature.
The cure is not in little books, but sailing here to Carfax. From out of His castle near
the Borgo Pass, He comes where  He  is  needed  most.  Soldier  and  alchemist,  with  a  mighty

brain, learning beyond compare, and a heart that knows no  fear.  I  keep  crude  count,  and
oddly,  but  that  Count  Dracula  may  one  night  appear  with  that  great  lofty  dome  of  His
forehead,  the  aquiline  nose,  long  sharp  nails,  extraordinary  pallor,  and  vengeful  red  eyes
that blaz-z-z-z-ze!
 *    *    *    *    *
Order—Hymenoptera… yellow, black, and fuzzy… Apis… Apis…
The Tale of the Bee
The  usual  riot  of  color—the  redyellowbluegreen  of  it  all—and  the  smell,  the  woozy,
intoxicating scents that teased and drew and beckoned; and they were all still about, but
strange. Dulled and blunted almost beyond recognition. And the sun—high in the bright blue
air, or had been. Don't know where to go; but go. And the bee, knocked  almost senseless to
reach the world it had known, hit a barrier it couldn't really see. And it hurt. The hardness
and the heat. Glass; the bee had known  this thing before, but then there was always some
eventual escape from its cool deception. Now the bee was surrounded by that memory, but
with  metal  on  top  and  punched  with  holes.  Bits  of  blue  air  sneaked  in—  a  healing
breeze—and roused the bee from its stupor. Sort of. For now it  seemed  to  be  flying,  and
yet  its  wings  were  still.  Focus  was  not  a  simple  thing,  but  the  bee  soon  realized  a  young
human was carrying the jar in which it had been trapped. The boy pressed his own proboscis
against the glass. A monstrous face.
 *    *    *    *    *
Boys will be boys.
 *    *    *    *    *
Through the holes in the lid he poked blades of grass and bits of clover. Lovely clover.
Its tantalizing odor revived  the  bee  even  more—enough  to  see  an  older  male  approaching
the boy. The man's body seemed to weave, although this could have been a distortion of the
glass. And with a flashing thud, the jar flew out of the young boy's hand, landing in a soft
clump of grass.
A  few  minutes  passed  before  the  bee  could  get  its  bearings.  If  the  bee  could've
understood the human tongue, it would've heard the man, with slurring speech:
"Who're you laughing at, eh?" Slap! "Sneaking a peek at your Mum and me?! I'm on  to
you. You're no good." Slap! (Boys will be…) "Your Mum will give you away, and it'll serve you
right. You're nothing and will always be. Fly-catching son-of-a-bitch!"
The  Young  One  shakily  challenged  the  Dominant  Male.  "I-It's  a  bee,  and  it's
bee-eautiful."
Now, the bee could not follow this, and yet, and yet… Smack! And then the heady smell
of blood. Beloved rose-deep-red trickling down the Monster-Boy's face.
"What do you know about beauty? Infant!"

And  with  the  nasty  toe  of  the  boot,  the  Step-Father  kicked  the  jar  aloft.  The
glass-eyed  planet  panicked  and  flew  by  in  flashes  of  light.  The  bee  and  all—shattered
'gainst a rock. On fire; and the bee was speared by a shard of glass.
Somehow… somehow,  he  found  some  humming  spark  and  shook  himself  free.  Bumbling
and erratic, he weaved towards them through the  air.  He  could  no  longer  sense  the  sun's
direction, and his aim was mostly gone. He didn't even know  if he still had a  stinger  to  do
the job up proper. Blood-rose and clover bits would be the last to tempt his tender labium,
but even that memory was thrown in shadow by the urge to inflict on another his pain and
dying.
Boys will be boys, and bees will be; and with his last ounce he dove towards the moving
smudges of light that were the Kick-Father and the Bleeding Son. Perhaps the bee would be
able to pierce the Giant, the Killer of Beautiful Things and restore the world to its honeyed
state. Nectar flows, and so does time…
 *    *    *    *    *
Slap!… The tender labium… Sucking sweet… Nothing…
Nothing… Bee-eautiful… Boys will be… Poking…
Blades of grass… Shards of glass… Distortion… Trickling laughter red… The heat… The
hardness…
Smack!
The Killer
Senseless.
Surrounded by memory and the healing breezzzze… 
The usual riot.
*    *    *    *    *
I started up. I  stirred  things  up.  I  deserved  what  I  got.  And  I  was  bad.  I  was  eight
years old! Whose truth is true?
He confused my mother with his charm—and harm; kept us in check, then left with all
our goods. Worldly. The bigger eats the smaller in a chain that circles the Earth.
So  with  much  fretful  caring,  my  mother,  poor  and  broken  down,  did  send  me  away,
after all. Whose truth…  ?  She  could  no  longer  provide.  She  could  no  longer  find  it  within
herself. She could no longer find herself.  But,  in  time,  I  soon  found  myself  in  a  home  for
waifs and wayward youths!
 *    *    *    *    *
Home…

 *    *    *    *    *
If  only  I  could  sleep  through  until  He  comes.  The  Doctor  can  give  me  chloral,  the
modern Morpheus, C2HC13OH2O. No! My Un-dead Master comes; I mustn't be… un-ready.
I will welcome and invite Him in. Beings of His ilk cannot come unless bidden at first to
enter. And then nothing can stop Him from slipping through the crack beneath the door or
through  the  bars  on  the  window  on  moonlight  rays.  Elemental  dust  that  settles  into
something long and dark with fiery eyes. Bright avenging beacon; He is my only hope.
He is of the night, yet He does not cast  a  shadow,  as  do-gooding  humans  do.  Shadow
will be dispelled. I want no shadows! Nor can He reflect himself in a looking glass. One sees
only oneself.
Mirror and shadow; why are they such mysteries? Why do they hound us so? The blow
from  a  fist  or  a  flick  of  a  switch  renders  them  quite  useless.  A  scientific  explanation
renders  them  merely  tedious.  A  vampire  abolishes.  He  cuts  through  invention  and  natural
occurrence,  straddles  the  dimensions,  and  toys  with  perception  with  a  flick  of  a  thorny
nail. This is a good thing! He takes away control from "X" and gives to  "Y"  with  a  piercing
kiss.
In the dark pitch of perfect blackness shadows do not exist, nor does reflection.
Why am I so weak? I need sustenance—with something more than just six legs. Hmmm…
 *    *    *    *    *
Eight-legged, with claws and an attitude, Class—Arachnida… Spinner of silken tales…
The Spider
*    *    *    *    * 
Cool  shadow  and  the  damp  pleased  the  spider.  And  corners—  perfect  home  for  its
woven artistry, and more. There; the crumbling husks of a fly, and even a bee, once so, but
then paralyzed with poison, and now sucked dry and bound up in steely strands of silk.
A  quiet  chattering  drew  attention.  The  spider  knew  that  sound.  The  chattering  of
adolescent  teeth.  The  young  visitor  yet  again.  His  entrance  was  always  sudden,  loud  and
violent. A dark silhouette with a rumbling voice would push the boy into the underworld of
the spider.
"And pray for forgiveness!"
The  slam  of  a  door.  The  momentary  rising  of  dust.  A  short  bout  of  whimpering.  And
then  the  chatter.  And  shivering.  Bare  white  flesh—not  much  good  for  hiding.  And  in  the
course  of  time  that  it  took  the  spider  to  drop  along  the  thread  of  its  dragline  and
cautiously  approach  the  naked  form,  back  off,  and  climb  up  to  a  ceiling  beam,  another
silhouette had entered the basement storage room. He dropped a tin plate with a clunk and
nudged it towards the youth with his foot.

"Food for Fido." Or Spot or Rex. The boy seemed to  be  called  by  a  number  of  names.
"No, you're a flea on a dog named Fido." Mocking laughter, then he was gone.
Now the spider had known the occasional flea. Not bad, but not very filling. Just what
sort of flea was this pale chattering  giant?  Perhaps  another  dropping-down  was  in  order.
But  the  slow  creaking  of  the  door  and  the  flickering  flame  of  a  candle  held  the  spider
back. And a quiet voice:
"Timmy?"
The faithful flea-boy drew a breath. "Brother Tom?"
"Poor lad; what will we ever do with you?"
"I  didn't  mean  to  hurt  anyone.  It  was  only  a  scratch.  Morgan  called  me  names,  and
Brother Jim, he…"
"He took his side; I know. It pays to be popular, I suppose. You must be freezing." He
briskly rubbed the boy's cold chest from behind.
Then silence. The spider stared at the flickering of the tallow shaft. Light had brought
a play of shadows into its domain. This was all proving quite the spectacle.
The bearer of light and warmth enfolded the naked youth  in  his  baggy  robe.  The  boy
tried to pull away, but claws—the spider envied such claws—pressed against the slim neck.
The boy, he tried to pull away! A tongue darted into Timmy's startled eyes, licked the salty
tears away. The spider was impressed. Then
Brother Tom made the young boy's head seem to disappear in  the  woolen  folds  of  his
robe. No more chattering, but choking and gasping. Forceful arms and legs holding tight the
struggle  in.  An  elated  shout…  a  muffled  cry—quite  the  spectacle—ending  in  threatening
tones:
"You  mustn't  tell.  Ever.  You  were  asking.  I  gave  from  the  heart.  The  sin  is  yours.  It
could go very badly for you. I'd pray if I were you."
The spider dropped. The two already seemed half-paralyzed.  Fear,  and  satiation.  Tom
held Tim in wrapping arms. It was as if they slept  as  the  not-so-itsy-bitsy  spewed  out  his
thread from his spinneret.  It  was  as  if  they  dreamt  him  large.  And  so  the  silken  threads
became  ropes  of  steel;  cephalothorax  and  abdomen  and  legs  with  combs  and  claws  now
hugely spread. Inspired by their dreams,  the  spider  sewed  them  shut.  Wound  airtight  the
eyes and nose and mouth. Too bad the  boy  had  to  be  twined,  but  the  spider  couldn't  tell
where one ended and the other began. By midnight Brother Jim would find their mummified
remains.  And  a  dark  and  hungry  god  to  feed,  in  the  bowels  of  the  home  for  waifs  and
wayward, wayward… !
 *    *    *    *    *
Sewn shut… the naked shadows… prey for forgiveness…

the darting tongue… suck dry… the crumbling… flea
Flee
Flee
Flee!
 *    *    *    *    *
The perfect home.
It was a consummation neither devout not to be wished. Things got more complex after
that, and not a little absurd. He once told me to bite his tongue. I did it once. He liked  it.
But not too hard. It was sorely tempting to pierce straight through. But misbehavior would
lead to being dunked in a bath of icy water and left naked in the basement,  shivering  for
hours.  Some  boys  were  tied  up  and  hidden  behind  a  screen  for  being  too  marked  up  for
show.  Bed  wetters,  stripped  half-naked  down  below,  had  to  face  a  wall  and  bang  their
heads and feet against the brick 'til they were swollen and dripping blood.
 *    *    *    *    *
Blood.
*    *    *    *    * 
It  was  not  the  slapping  hands  and  fists  that  was  the  worst,  but  creeping…  creeping
hands that slid like slugs on a trail of slime. And places touched that should not have been.
The Brothers swarmed like a  plague  of  locusts.  Gregarious,  they  spoiled  with  pennies  and
sweets, before despoiling their youthful charges. Us.
Things were done that should not have been! I cannot describe the pain of, of… entry.
Perhaps if there had been love… But the bigger eats the smaller, and power is  the  game.  I
had to bury my underclothes, soiled and soaked with blood, in the  playground  after  lights
out.
And when, with time, I no longer felt the physical pain of, of… I knew that I was truly
lost.
I want back the blood I shed! The years that were taken away from me. If it takes a
thousand years, I swear… !
When The Master, Count Dracula comes, He will  bring  life  everlasting.  And  then,  how
they all will quake! Wild justice will tame all those lily hearts, hiding stamen that stab, that
have stabbed. No more. God is no shield. But a mask. Oh, let their souls try to upward go; I
care  not.  It's  blood  I  crave  and  the  flesh  and  the  deep  dark  earth.  My  Vampire-Lord
doesn't deal with souls; He spits them out. Like seed. They sprout, rooted to this world, not
the next. They will not join Sweet Jesus, though they will try and reach. But the heat of the
sun turns cold and hollow. Winter cuts them down to size. And We will laugh.

 *    *    *    *    *
Ha.
 *    *    *    *    *
The Doctor plagues me about souls. Perhaps he should've been a  man  of  the  cloth.  He
wants me to  feel  guilt  for  devouring  all  those  little  buggers.  But  I  have  not  eaten  insect
souls. Show me, Dr. Seward, where? I want none. I have no use.  It's  Life  I  want.  And  will
have. Perhaps flies are poor things, after all. And bees and spiders; well, blow them all! I'll
move up the evolutionary scale. Scale the heights.  From  birds  and  rats  and  rats  and  more
rats  still,  to  cats  and  the  higher  orders  yet  to  come.  Horse  and  ape,  and  especially  that
jewel in the crown of Creation—Man. The ones that run the operations, pull the strings and
make the rules and make us pay, while breaking those selfsame  rules!  Homo  sapiens—God,
how it rolls off the tongue! And if there be angels, why, I'll pluck their wings and eat them
too. Lip-smacking good!
But each bite is a link in a chain, and I must  start  somewhere.  Yes…  The  little  bird  in
the bush in a garden; this is  Renfield's  tale:  the  story  of  a  boy  impossibly  old  beyond  his
years, who was hurt and needs to heal. A ward of the state, messed with and betrayed. He
left the home at seventeen, but not for long. In and out and in again for years.  Jobs  that
didn't last. He was given to inexplicable crying jags and sleepless nights and more than the
occasional drink.
During  one  of  his  years  in  the  Real  World,  the  orphanage  had  made  a  deal  with  the
government  and  was  reclassified  as  house  for  the  mentally  disturbed.  Thereby  did  their
subsidy rise ninety pennies per youth per day. The boys were all  still  there,  but  now  were
"not  all  there."  A  small,  wayward  joke.  They  almost  had  me  convinced.  I  am  not  mad.
Somehow.
So Timmy came back to the fold. Hardly prodigal—just back. He was  now  old  enough,
you  see;  he  was  left  alone.  Not  really  an  inmate—just  "in."  He  tended  their  garden  and
swept their halls. Became the handy-man. He closed his eyes and ears…
'Til  one  day,  years  later,  a  new  boy  entered  the  picture—not  unlike  Timmy,  when  he
first  came  through  those  large  oak  doors.  He  befriended  that  new  boy.  Be-frien-ded…
Look, he needed something—guidance; I don't know. I told myself I was just protecting him
from  the  others.  Be  his  dark  beacon  and  save  him  from  the  blinding  light  of,  of
Brotherhood. I'm not worthy. If I could've been a father to this child and thereby gained
my own… But that purity just wasn't in me. Oh, I did not creep; I only wished to reassure.
The healing touch. But I touched places I should not have been! He pulled back and so did I,
but  the  moments  between—it  was  a  lifetime—mine  and  his.  Where  did  one  end  and  the
other begin? Oh God… !
 *    *    *    *    *
God…
*    *    *    *    * 

I have  called  this  my  home  for  most  of  my  life.  I  have  been  murdered  by  inches.  My
poor crushed brain knows things, but can't seem to, to… Nowhere to go; but go!
I  too  am  lugging  my  native  soil,  sleeping  deep  while  the  sun  has  shone.  Dreaming…
Nosferatu…  come.  The  vision  has  somehow  turned.  I  don't  want  to  be  powerful.  Just  at
peace.
Vlad,  Vlad,  Impaler  Vlad.  Can  I  dump  the  earth  and  sink  the  ship  before  he  reaches
port? I must not deceive myself; he has always been here. He is my father and my mother,
the Brothers, and the pain. The Doctor of my youth and my Doctor's little book. All the bits
of  life  consumed,  the  laughter  and  the  tears.  He's  the  whole  bloody  ball  of  wax,  rolling
from my day of birth to… St. George's Eve, when, it is said, all the buried treasures are at
last revealed, even while all evil things hold sway.
At midnight, the  Dragon  and  the  Saint  are  one.  Lance  and  claw,  shield  and  wing,  and
scales… of justice wildly pitch. Where does one end… ? We cross ourselves and lose our way
in the smoking breath and rising dust of hooves. We are teetering by the hissing gorge, and
the  rough  and  tumble  fall  from  Grace  may  actually  be  a  soaring  up.  But  I  seem  to  be
suspended on a thread, neither here nor ever there. I'm squirming in a pupal state, pressing
'gainst the membrane, poking feelers out. Yes, cocoons can rip apart, as  chains  can  break
away. And doors, yes doors, can surely open!
 *    *    *    *    *
I am a veritable work of Art. I am Magic. 
That is, one day, I hope I can
 believe…

About the Authors
Julie Barrett is the  author  of  Quantum  Leap  A-Z  and  several  short  stories.  She  also
writes ad copy and designs web sites. Julie lives in Piano, Texas, with her husband and son.
They all enjoy watching the cats chase a very focused beam of red light.
 
Nigel Bennett won the prestigious Gemini Award for his role  as  the  vampire  patriarch
LaCroix on the series Forever Knight. British-born Bennett directs as well as writes and has
appeared  in  many  stage,  television,  and  film  productions,  including  The  Rocky  Horror
Picture  Show,  Hamlet,  Psi  Factor,  Legends  of  the  Fall,  Murder  at  1600,  and  Lexx.  His
website is www.blackhatstation.com.
 
Elaine Bergstrom is the author of several novels, including Blood to Blood; The Dracula
Story Continues, Mina, and The Door through  Washington  Square. She  lives  in  Milwaukee,
Wisconsin.
 
K.B. Bogen has a head for technology, a knack  for humor, and a taste for the macabre.
A  native  Texan,  she  holds  a  Bachelor  of  Science  degree  in  Computer  Science  and
Engineering from UT Arlington. Her favorite form of communication is humor; she prefers
to make people laugh rather than cry, though she is not above causing the occasional shiver
in  her  audience.  Part-time  party  decorator,  and  full-time  wife  and  mother,  she  plays
domestic when she has to and reads forensic anthropology textbooks for fun.
 
Gary A. Braunbeck is the author of the acclaimed collection Things Left Behind, as well
as the forthcoming collection Escaping Purgatory (in collaboration with Alan M. Clark) and
the CD-Rom Sorties, Cathexes, and Human Remains. His first solo novel, The  Indifference
of  Heaven, was  recently  released  by  Obsidian  Books,  as  was  his  Dark  Matter  novel,  In
Hollow  Houses. He lives in Columbus, Ohio, and has, to date, sold nearly 200 short  stories.
His fiction, to quote Publisher's Weekly, "stirs the mind as it chills the marrow."
 
Roxanne  Longstreet  Conrad  is  the  author  of  seven  novels:  Stormriders,  The  Undead,
Red  Angel,  Cold  Kiss,  Slow  Burn  (as  Roxanne  Longstreet),  Copper  Moon,  and  Bridge  of
Shadows (as Roxanne Conrad). Her short story "Faith Like Wine" appeared in the anthology
 Time of the Vampires. Her next novel,  Exile, will  be  published  in  2001.  She  lives  with  her
husband, award-winning artist Cat Conrad, in Arlington, Texas.

 
While  a  tech  writer,  Gene  DeWeese  produced  everything  from  cleaning  instructions
for U.S. Air Force  computer  ball  bearings  to  NASA  space  navigation  texts.  Since  Robert
Coulson recruited him to help out on a Man from U.N.C.L.E. novel thirty-odd years ago, he's
also produced thirty-odd books, including The  Wanting  Factor,  Something  Answered, and
Adventures  of  a  Two-Minute  Werewolf.  Another  book,  on  doll-making,  explains  how  to
make  dried-apple  shrunken  heads.  He  lives  in  Milwaukee  with  his  wife  Beverly  and  two
one-eyed cats, Toughie and Suzilla, and two "normal" ones, Octavia and Roscoe.
 
P.  N.  "Pat"  Elrod  has  written  over  sixteen  novels,  including  the  ongoing  Vampire  Files
series  for  Ace;  the  I,  Strahd  novels  for  TSR  and  Quincey  Morris,  Vampire  Dracula
adventure books for Baen. She has coedited two anthologies with Martin H. Greenberg and
is  working  on  more  toothy  titles  in  the  mystery  and  fantasy  genres,  including  a  third
Richard Dun novel with Nigel Bennett.
 
Amy Gruss, graduate of SMU (English/Creative Writing), is a prize-winning poet and a
professional scriptwriter, who has been known to teach everything from Renaissance dance
to  water  aerobics  and  Olympic-grade  belching.  Working  with  Tempest  Productions  as  a
writer, narrator, and production  assistant  for  short  documentary  films,  she  fills  the  last
three months of every year with song, as the musical director of the Omni Carolers. "Beast"
is her first professional fiction publication.
 
Tanya  Huff  lives  and  writes  in  rural  Ontario  with  her  partner,  four  cats,  and  an
unintentional  chihuahua.  After  sixteen  fantasies,  she's  written  her  first  space  opera,
Valor's  Choice  (DAW  April  2000),  and  is  currently  working  on  a  sequel  to  Summon  The
Keeper called The Second Summoning. In her spare time  she  gardens  and  complains  about
the weather.
 
Award-winning  author Nancy Kilpatrick has published fourteen novels,  over  125  short
stories,  and  has  edited  seven  anthologies.  Her  latest  works  include  the  collections  The
Vampire Stories of Nancy Kilpatrick (Mosaic Press, August 2000) and Cold Contact (Dark
Tales  Publishing,  June  2001);  the  anthology  Graven  Images  coedited  with  Thomas  Roche
(Ace  Books,  October  2000);  Blood-lover,  the  fourth  novel  in  her  popular  vampire  series
"Power of the Blood" (Baskerville Books, October 2000). Currendy she is working on several
pieces of short fiction, a new novel, and is about to begin editing another anthology.
 
Catt Kingsgrave-Ernstein lives in Denton, Texas, where, in the company of her husband,
four cats, and a surly hedgehog, she has  been  writing  and  publishing  fantasy,  horror,  and

science  fiction  stories  in  small  presses  across  the  United  States  and  Canada  since  1989.
Spliced into the cracks between performing in her Celtic band, Ravens, forays in community
and  street  theater,  and  seven  years  of  running  a  professional  fantasy  art  studio,  her
writing career waited to fully blossom until 1996, and the release of Time of the Vampires.
"Beast" is her first collaborative work in publication.
 
Jody Lynn Nye lists her main career activity as "spoiling cats." She lives northwest  of
Chicago with two of the above and her husband, author and packager Bill Fawcett. She has
published twenty-five  books,  including  five  contemporary  fantasies;  four  SF  novels;  four
novels  in  collaboration  with  Anne  McCaffrey,  including  The  Ship  Who  Won;  a  humorous
anthology about mothers, Don't Forget Your Spacesuit, Dear!; and over sixty short stories.
Her  latest  books  are  License  Invoked  (Baen  Books),  co-written  with  Robert  Asprin;  and
Advanced Mythology (Meisha Merlin Publishing), fourth in the Mythology 101 series.
 
Judith Proctor says, "My interest in writing grew out of an old British science  fiction
show—Blake's  7.  My  interest  in  theatre  grew  from  my  appreciation  of  the  lead
actor—Gareth Thomas. (My knowledge of Shakespeare has  now  progressed  to  the  extent
where  my  thirteen-year-old  son  can  impress  his  English  teacher  by  explaining  bits  of  A
Midsummer Night's Dream that she didn't know  about.) Writing this story gave me a good
excuse  to  read  the  Ellen  Terry/George  Bernard  Shaw  correspondence,  which  I'd  been
meaning to do for years. I also love folk music and play the concertina." She is also happily
married with two children and lives in Dorset, England.
 
Fred  Saberhagen  is  best  known  for  his  Berserker®  series,  about  self-replicating
robots that seek to end all organic life. The latest novel in the series is Shiva in Steel. He
has also written in such diverse worlds as high fantasy, chronicled in his Swords series, and
Gothic horror, in his  novels  about  Dracula.  His  short  fiction  has  been  published  in  classic
science fiction magazines,  such  as  If,  Galaxy, and  Amazing, as  well  as  Omni,  Analog,  The
Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction, and Isaac Asimov's Science Fiction Magazine. He
lives with his wife in Albuquerque, New Mexico.
Not long ago Brad Sinor  ran  into  someone  who  he  hadn't  seen  for  several  years.  The
friend asked if Brad was still writing. Brad's wife, Sue, said, "There's still a pulse. So he's
still writing." His short fiction has appeared in the  Merovingen  Nights  series,  Time  of  the
Vampires, On Crusade: More Tales of the Knights Templar,
Lord of the Fantastic, Horrors: 365 Scary Stories, Merlin, and Such a Pretty Face.
 
Chelsea  Quinn  Yarbro  is  the  author  of  more  than  sixty  books,  among  which  are  the
Saint Germain cycle of vampire novels.

 
Born in Detroit, raised in Montreal, and educated there and in London, Bill Zaget is also
an actor (as Zag Dorison), playwright, director, and performance poet. "Renfield or, Dining
at the Bughouse" is adapted from his one-man show of the same title, and is his first foray
into short fiction. He presently resides in Toronto.

