Jonathan Barret 4 - Dance of Death by P N Elrod
CHAPTER 1
London, December 1777
"You're certain that he's all right?" asked my cousin Oliver, shifting closer i
n an anxious effort to see better. "He looks like a dead fish."
Which was a perfectly accurate observation; however, I had no need to be re
minded about the effect of my special influence on another person. I really
 had no need for Oliver's interruption, either, but he'd asked to watch and
 at the time there seemed no reason to deny his request. Now I was having s
econd thoughts.
"Please," I said in a rather tight voice. "I must concentrate."
"Oh." His hushed tone was contrite, and he instantly subsided into silence an
d went very still, enabling me to put forth my full attention on the man sitt
ing before us. Focusing my gaze hard upon his slack face, I softly spoke into
 his all too vulnerable mind.
You must listen very carefully to what I say....
In this moment I truly felt myself balanced on the edge of a knife. With Ol
iver along to witness things, I was steadier than if I'd been alone, and ye
t I was very much aware of the lamentable consequences should I make a mist
ake with this fellow. A single word on my part or a brief surge of uncontro
lled rage let loose, and the man would most likely be plunged into a madnes
s from which he might never recover. I'd done that once before unintentiona
lly find would be a liar not to admit this present circumstance offered me 
a great temptation to repeat the action. God knows, I'd more than sufficien
t cause to justify such a malfeasance.
His name was Thomas Ridley, and last night he and his cousin Arthur Tyne ha
d done their damnedest to try to murder me. For this and other crimes they'
d committed or participated in, I had been informed it would be too much to
 expert a just retribution by means of the law; therefore I'd taken upon my
self the responsibility to guarantee that they would commit no further misc
hiefs. Arthur had already been dealt with and would soon be sent away home 
when he was fit enough to travel. I'd drained quite a lot of blood from him
 last night surely for the purpose of survival, not revenge, and he'd been 
but half awake and easy to influence.
Ridley was another matter.
We'd confined him to one of the more remote cellar storage rooms far beneat
h Fonteyn House, well away from any ears with no business hearing his bello
wed curses. When I'd awakened that evening, had finished with the befuddled
 Arthur, and was ready to deal with Ridley, he'd worked himself into a trul
y foul temper, if one might judge anything by the coarsely direct quality o
f his language. Much of his invective involved both general and specific pr

ofanities against myself and my many relatives for his treatment at our col
lective hands.
Coming down to the cellar together, Oliver and I had dismissed the five foot
men detailed to stand watch, and announced our presence to Ridley through th
e stout oak timbers of the door to his makeshift prison. He responded with a
 statement to the effect that it would be his greatest pleasure to kill us b
oth with his bare hands. He saw no humor in Oliver's comment that he'd just 
given us an excellent reason for keeping him incarcerated until he was starv
ed into a better disposition. Ridley's reaction was another tirade against u
s, accompanied by a solid crashing and thumping to indicate that he'd found 
something in his cell with which to make an assault on the door.
"I think we should have the footmen back," Oliver advised, casting a nervous
 eye at me. "We won't be able to handle him alone, he's far too angry for re
ason.''
"He'll not be difficult for me once I'm inside."
"That's a proper lion's den in there and I must remind you that your name's 
Jonathan, not Daniel."
"And I must remind you that I have a bit more than just my faith to protect m
e in this instance."
"From the sound of things, you'll need it."
Ridley roared and smashed whatever weapon he'd found upon the door, causing
 it to rattle alarmingly. I hoped that his improvised club was not made of 
wood. For reasons unknown to me, wood presents a rare difficulty to my pers
on when brought to bear with violence, and to it was I as susceptible to bo
dily harm as any ordinary man; I'd have to take care not to allow Ridley th
e least opening against me.
Easier said than done, Johnny Boy, I thought, steeling myself to enter. More 
out of trepidation of what was to come and to put it off just a bit longer th
an out of concern for Oliver, I paused to make an inquiry of him.
"You know what to expect, don't you?"
Ridley's commotion must have distracted him. "I expect he'll pulverize you,
 then come after me."
"He won't be able to. I was asking if you remembered what I was going to do 
to get inside.''
"Oh, that," he said with wan enthusiasm. "Yes, you've mentioned it, but I'm no
t so sure that I've quite taken it in."
"I've never had cause before to demonstrate it for you. You're not going to s
woon or do anything silly, are you?''
''For God's sake, how bad can it be?''
"It's not bad, just something of a surprise if one is unprepared for it."
"I should be able to manage well enough. Once one's witnessed a few amputati
ons there's little enough the world can do to shake one's calm. Nothing like

 seeing a man getting his leg sawed off for putting you in a proper mood to 
count your blessings and to ignore most troubles life has to fling at you." 
As if to give lie to his statement, Oliver jumped somewhat at Ridley's next 
fit of hammering.
"Steady on, Coz." I found myself near to smiling at his discomfiture and won
dered if he was playing the ass on purpose just to lighten things.
He scowled, jerking his head in the direction of the, clamor. "Well, get on 
with it before he has the whole house down. Do what you must-just promise yo
u'll try to come out in one piece."
"I promise." And with those words, I picked up one of the lighted candles l
eft behind by the footmen and vanished.
Oliver emitted a sort of suppressed yelp, but held his ground as far as I c
ould determine without benefit of sight. My hearing was somewhat impaired w
hile in this bodiless state, but I could clearly sense his presence just in
 front of me-or what had been my front but a moment before. Now I floated, 
held in place by thought alone, and by that means did I propel myself to on
e side, find the crack between the cellar bricks and the wooden door, and s
weep down and through to become solid once more in the little room beyond.
I say little, for Ridley seemed to fill the whole of its space. I was a tall 
man, but Ridley was just that much taller, possessing a large and fit body he
avy with muscles and all of them full charged with his anger. The remains of 
some bandaging circled his head; he'd suffered injury last night and taken a 
shallow but colorful wound. It had probably opened again because of his exert
ions; the blood had soaked through, and I instantly picked up the scent of it
. His right arm had been in a sling the last time I'd seen him. The sling
was gone now and his arm hung slack at his side. He still had much energy 
in him, for he slammed at the door again using his good arm and called us 
cowards and damned us thrice over. His back was to me when I caused myself
 to reappear.
The candle I held yet burned, and its sudden radiance drew his instant atten
tion upon me. He whirled, one hand raised holding what had once been a table
 leg and the other shading his eyes from the brightness of the flame. We'd l
eft him in the dark for the whole of the day lest he work some damage by hav
ing fire, and so my tiny light must have been utterly blinding to him. Despi
te this, he was very game for a fight, and without warning threw his improvi
sed club right at me with a guttural snarl. I wasted no time vanishing again
, an action that plunged his room into full darkness once more since I still
 clutched the candle.
He must have been so lost to his emotions that it had made little or no imp
ression on him that I'd appeared from nowhere and departed in the same mann
er. I'd held some hope that the surprise alone might slow him enough for me
 to soothe him to quiescence, but was forced to abandon it as he charged ov

er to the spot where I'd been standing and tried to grab hold of me. I felt
 his arms passing this way and that through my invisible and incorporeal bo
dy. He, I knew, would feel nothing but an unnatural coldness.
Now he blundered about trying to find me, cursing like a dozen sailors.
"Jonathan?'' Oliver called out in a worried voice.
I could not answer him in this form, nor could I count on him to be especi
ally patient. We were as close as brothers, and his concern for me would s
oon cause him to fetch the footmen and come to my rescue. Even with the od
ds at seven to one Ridley would probably break some heads before being sub
dued.
I didn't care for that prospect one whit. When Ridley had crossed again to t
he door in his blind search, I allowed myself to assume a degree of visibili
ty, but not solidity. He saw the candlelight immediately as before, but this
 time it was pale and watery, the brass holder in the hand of a ghost, not a
 man. This was so startling that he finally paused long enough to take in a 
good view of me. I was fairly transparent yet; doubtless he could see right 
through me to the damp brick wall at my back, an alarming effect that more t
han served. In the space of a moment Ridley went from a man who looked just 
short of bursting a blood vessel from his fury, to a man frozen with a profo
und astonishment beginning to edge into fear.
It was as close as I'd likely be able to come to a favorable condition for 
what needed to be accomplished. Quick as thought, I assumed full solidity, 
fastened my gaze unbreakably on to his, and told him to be still. Perhaps f
ed by my own heightened emotions, my order to him must have had more force 
to it than was necessary for he seemed to turn to cold marble right then an
d there. An abrupt twinge of dismay shot through me, and for an instant I t
hought I might have killed him, but this eased almost as quickly as it had 
come when my sharp ears detected the steady thunder of his heartbeat. I sag
ged from the relief.
"Jonathan?"
"I'm fine," I said loudly so Oliver could hear through the slab of oak betwe
en us. "It's safe now. You may unlock the door."
I heard the clink and rattle of brass, and the barrier between us swung hesit
antly open. Oliver, his lanky frame blocking the lighted candles behind him, 
stood braced for trouble with a charged dueler in his hand.
"Where on earth did you get that?'' I asked, staring.
"F-from my coat pocket, where d'ye think?''
"You won't need it; Ridley's asleep on his feet, as you can see."
Oliver narrowly examined my charge, then reluctantly put the pistol away."H
e's under your influence, then?''
"For the moment."
His gaze alternated between my face and Ridley's. "First you're there and th

en you're not, and now this. You should have a conjuring show. It's just too
 uncanny."
"I quite agree,'' I said dryly.
"Something wrong?"
"I'm tired and I want to have done with this."
And more than that I wanted to feed again. Though outwardly I'd fully reco
vered from the attack Ridley and Arthur had made upon me the previous even
ing, I was still mending within. My vanishings just now had depleted my st
rength more than I cared to think about; my very bones felt hollow.
Perhaps Oliver realized something of this. He stood well aside allowing me t
o lead Ridley to sit at the table the footmen had recently used for their su
pper. I sat opposite him, checked on the number of lighted candles, and deci
ded there was enough illumination for me to work by. The single one I'd used
 in the cell would have been insufficient for the sort of detailed project I
 was about to attempt.
Finally settled-as well as unable to put it off any longer-I began the danger
ous process of rearranging another man's thoughts.
Oliver, after his initial question, was content to leave me undisturbed as I
 cautiously worked. Whenever I had to pause and think on what to say next, I
'd steal a glance at my cousin and find him watching with rapt attention. Si
nce first learning of them he'd been highly curious about my unnatural abili
ties; I hoped this demonstration would content him, since I wanted it to be 
the last one for the time being. I had no liking for forcing my influence up
on another and took such a liberty with people only when dictated by dire ne
cessity. At the worst it was a terrible and sometimes hazardous intrusion up
on another and at the least any lengthy encounter like this one always gave 
me a god-awful headache.
But for all our sakes and his, Ridley very much needed to forget certain pas
t events, as well as remember to abide by a new pattern of behavior in the f
uture. Though presently under my control, he was as hearty in mind as in bod
y, and I found it a difficult and exhausting task. I not only had to constan
tly maintain my hold against his strength of will, but labored hard to keep 
my own perilous emotions in check lest I cause him a permanent injury of min
d.
You 're not to pick any more duels, Ridley, do you understand that? It's pa
st time that you assume more peaceful pursuits than harassing honest citize
ns. No more violence for you, my lad.
Light enough words, but it was the force I put behind them that counted. He 
blinked and winced a few times, a warning to me to ease off. I did, but damn
ation, I'd come so close to dying again ...
You know well enough how to cause trouble, so you must certainly know how t
o avoid it, and that's exactly what you'll be doing from now on. If  I hear

 about you being in any more rows . . . well, you  just behave yourself or 
I'll know the reason why.
When I'd run out of things to tell Ridley, which were mostly instructions I'd
 already given to Arthur but requiring much less of an exertion, I leaned bac
k in my own chair to pinch the bridge of my nose and release a small groan of
 sincere relief that it was finally finished.
"Now you're the one who looks like a dead fish," said my good cousin.
"Then serve me up with some sauce, I'm ready to be carried out on a platter aft
er all this.''
Oliver pressed the back of his hand to my forehead. "No fever, but it's clam
my down here, so I can't be sure."
"I'm not feverish, only a bit worn down. A little rest and some additional re
freshment and I'll be my own self again."
"Which is something more than amazing from what you've told me about yo
ur adventure."
"Less adventure than ordeal," I grumbled, rubbing my arm. Arthur had nearl
y severed it with his sword last night, and though muscle and sinew were k
nitted up again with
hardly a scar to show for the injury, it still wanted to ache. Another visit to
 the Fonteyn stables might help ease things.
"And I want to hear the full story of it, if you would be so kind. Elizabeth's
 only been able to repeat the high points you'd given her."
But I'd told my sister all that there was to tell and said as much now to Olive
r.
"That's not the same as hearing from the source. Besides, I'm full of questio
ns that she was unable to answer.''
"Such as?"
"I'll ask 'em as they occur to me, so expect to be interrupted. For the mome
nt, all I want to know is what do we do with Mr. Ridley here?"
Our guest was still blank-eyed and slack-jawed. Perhaps the experience was t
iring to him as well. One could but hope. "Take him upstairs and put him wit
h his cousin, then pack the two of 'em off as soon as Arthur's ready to trav
el."
"Tomorrow, whether he' s ready or not.''
That suited me very well. Wearily I stood and instructed Ridley to do the sa
me and follow us out of the cellar and upstairs. He did so, as docile as a s
heep. Oliver, leading the way with the one candle we'd not extinguished and 
left behind, cast a worried look back at our charge.
"We'll not have any more trouble with him? You're sure?"
"Quite sure." At least for the present. Ridley and Arthur would behave the
mselves for a time, but past experience told me that even the most firm su
ggestions would eventually erode away and be forgotten. I'd have to make a

 point of visiting them from time to time to strengthen what had been cons
tructed in their minds tonight. My hope was they would eventually embrace 
my compelled guidance as their own desire, and no longer have need of my i
nfluence to keep out of trouble.
"Seems unnatural, that," Oliver muttered.
"I can readily agree."
"It also doesn't seem ... well, enough, somehow."
"In what way?"
"After all that he's done and tried to do, just to tell him to run along and s
in no more hardly seems fitting. He should be hanged."
"Did Edmond not explain to you how unlikely an occurrence that would be?'
'
"In rare detail if nothing else about this business. He also said the scandal 
would be bad for the family, though I'm getting to the point where I think a s
candal would do the lot of 'em a world of good.''
"I could almost agree with you, except for how it would involve and affect u
s. I am content to put it all behind me and get on to more rewarding pursuit
s."
"Damn, but you almost sound like him."
"I suppose I must. After all, think how much we have in common." I meant it 
as a light jest, but it didn't come out right. Oliver looked back again, eye
brows high with shock. "I'm sorry, Coz. That was very rude of me."
"Think nothing of it. You've had a hard time of things."
Wasn't that the grand understatement? And not just for last night but for 
the last year or so of my life. Oliver's sympathy coupled with his kind di
smissal of my poor manners crushed me down as much as the weight of recent
 events seemed to be doing. My death, my return to life, my search for the
 woman who had made such a miracle possible, all pressed close, crowding o
ut any other thoughts in my brain for the next few moments. So thoroughly 
did they occupy me that I was genuinely surprised to come to myself in the
 central hall of Fonteyn House with no recollection of how I'd gotten there.
"Now what?'' asked Oliver, setting his candle on a table.
As an answer, I looked hard at Ridley until I was certain I had his full att
ention. "You are a guest of Fonteyn House and will conduct yourself in a gen
tle and honorable manner. The servants will see to your needs, and don't for
get to give
them a decent vale when you leave tomorrow morning."
Ridley responded with a slight nod of acknowledgment, and I cocked an eye
brow at Oliver. He regarded each of us with no small amount of wonder.
"He can stay the night in Arthur's room," I said.
Taking the suggestion, Oliver called for a servant. One of the household's 
larger footmen appeared, stopping short in his tracks to give Ridley first 

a surprised, then highly wary look. He'd apparently heard tales from the me
n who had been on duty in the cellar. Of course, Ridley's appearance might 
have had something to do with it, what with all the bandaging, blood, and d
amage his clothes had taken from last night's fight and this day's incarcer
ation. Add to that his abnormal calmness of manner and you had the makings 
of what promised to be some very speculative and animated below stairs gossip.
"Show Mr. Ridley here to his cousin's room," Oliver instructed the man as th
ough nothing at all was or had ever been amiss. "He'll take his supper there
, and see that he's cleaned up and has all he needs to stay the night. And b
e sure to have someone fetch along a very large brandy for me to the blue dr
awing room."
The fellow looked ready to offer a few dozen questions, but was too well tr
ained to make the attempt. Oliver's mother, the previous mistress of Fontey
n House, had not been one to encourage any kind of familiarity between serv
ants and their betters, and her influence still lingered. The footman bowed
 and cautiously invited Ridley to follow him upstairs. Our prisoner, now ou
r guest, went along as nice as you please without a backward glance at us. 
Oliver breathed out a pent-up sigh and let his shoulders sag a trifle. He e
xchanged a quick look with me; I gave him a short nod meant to reassure him
 that all was well and would remain so.
We watched until they reached the upper hall and turned into one of the roo
ms off the stairs where Arthur Tyne had been placed. More heavily concussed
 than Ridley and missing a goodly quantity of blood, he was slower to recov
er from his injuries. Bedrest and broth flavored with laudanum had been pre
scribed and administered, and he'd slept the day away under the watchful ey
e of one of the maids. The girl, her duties no longer required, soon emerge
d in the company of the footman and both quickly crossed our line of view t
o take the back way down to the kitchens. They were doubtless in a great hu
rry to carry the latest startling developments to the rest of the servants.
''Wonder what they'll make of all this?'' I mused.
''Who knows, but we may be certain it will in no wise even remotely approac
h the truth."
''Mmm, then shall I thank God for such a mighty favor."
We moved along toward the blue drawing room, Oliver's favorite lair, to aw
ait the arrival of his brandy. By now I was in very sore need of a restora
tive as well. That hollow feeling in my bones had progressed to my muscles
, and the pain in my head from all the influence I'd exercised against Rid
ley seemed worse than before. I wanted a deep draught of blood in me and f
airly soon; the dull pounding that had taken up residence behind my eyes w
as threatening to become a permanent lodger.
"Please excuse me for a few minutes," I said as we approached the room. "I'd
 like to get some air to clear my brain."

"Go out to the stables for a drink, you mean," he corrected. "Of course, you
've more than earned it. Would you object if I watched?''
"Good God, why on earth would you want to?''
"I am impelled by scientific curiosity," he stated, full of dignity.
"The same curiosity that allows you to sit through amputations?"
"Something the same as that, yes."
I shrugged, not up to trying to talk him out of it, and, as before when he wa
nted to see how I was to influence Ridley,
there was no reason to deny his request. "Come along, then, let's get it over 
with."
"Such eagerness," he remarked. "You weren't like this that time with Miss
 Jemma at the Red Swan."
"That was for pleasure, this is for nourishment. There's a difference."
"So you've said, but don't you look forward to a nice bit of supper as much a
s any other man?''
"I do, but how would you feel having someone closely watching while you ea
t?''
"If you really mind that much?'
"I don't, I'm just reluctant lest the process disgust you. But then if you can
 witness an amputation without so much as batting an eye ..."
Oliver went somewhat pink along his cheeks and ears. I'd caught him out, bu
t decided against pressing him for embarrassing details. We found a maid to
 fetch our cloaks and wrapped ourselves against the outside chill, then ven
tured forth into the night.
The air was cold and clean as only a newly born winter can make it. My lung
s normally worked just when I had need of breath to speak; now I made a rea
l bellows of them, flushing out the stale humors lingering from the cellars
. Oliver must have felt the same rejuvenating effect, for like schoolboys w
e contested to see who could make the greatest dragon plume as we crunched 
our way over the frozen earth to the stables.
Last night's sleet had transformed the world into a silver-trimmed garden t
hat turned the most mundane things magical. My sensitive eyes found delight
 wherever I looked, a happiness that was somewhat dampened when I realized 
Oliver was unable to share in it. After my second attempt to point out an a
rresting view was accompanied by his complaint that he couldn't see a damne
d thing except that which was in the circle of his lantern light, I gave up
 and kept my appreciation for nature's joys to myself.
My cousin's presence was not unwelcome to me, though, particularly concern
ing this errand. In the London house that my sister Elizabeth and I shared
 with him, the servants had all been carefully influenced by me into ignor
ing some of my more singular customs, especially any after-dark excursions
 to visit the stable. The retainers at Fonteyn House were not so well prep

ared, making me glad of Oliver's company as an insurance against discovery
. He was master here now, following the sudden death of his mother, and sh
ould anyone interrupt my feeding, he'd be the best man to deal with the pr
oblem.
He then demonstrated his own keen understanding about my need for privacy
, for when we encountered some of the stable lads, he invented a minor ho
usehold duty to take them elsewhere.
"Will you be long at this?'' he murmured, watching them go-
I shook my head. "Having second thoughts?"
"No. Not trying to discourage me are you?''
"Hardly, since you're doing a fine enough job of it on your own."
"Am not," he stoutly protested, eyes all wide with mock outrage.
Laughing a little, I led the way in, picking out an occupied stall. Within s
tood one of the estate's huge plow horses. Placid to the point of being half
 asleep, the beast would hardly notice what would be done to him, and his va
st body would provide far more sustenance than I could possibly take in.
Oliver fussed a bit to make sure he was in a position to have a clear line of
 observation and that his lantern was well placed for the best light. I spoke
 to the horse in my own way until I was utterly certain of its tranquillity. 
The inner anticipation I felt building within had swiftly prepared me to sup.
 My corner teeth, sharp enough to pierce the toughest of hides, had budded to
 a proper length for the work they were to do. I knelt, closing my eyes, the 
better to hear the heavy beat of the animal's great heart, the better to shut
 away my awareness of Oliver's presence. His own heart was thumping madly awa
y, but the sound quickly became a distant triviality as my immediate bodily n
eed was at last free to assert its supremacy over all outside distractions.
Now did I cut hard and fast with my teeth into the thick skin of the animal's
 leg to tap the vein that lay beneath. I was dimly aware of Oliver's strangle
d gasp somewhere to one side, and then I heard nothing else for a brief and b
lessed time as I sucked in all I needed and more of the fiery red vitality th
at had become my sole nourishment for life.
The night before I'd drunk deeply from another of the animals here, but then
 I'd been weary beyond thought, hurting, and in need of haste. There'd been 
no time to savor, no enjoyment to be had beyond the basic sating of appetite
. Now could I hold the rich taste in my mouth and revel in it and give wordl
ess thanks for its roaring heat as it rapidly suffused throughout my chilled
 flesh. The injuries, the worries, the cold failings of a harsh world thawed
 from my soul and melted into nothing.
Would that all the problems of life could be dealt with so easily.
I drank for as long as necessity dictated and beyond. No imbibing only enou
gh to sustain myself for an evening or two, tonight I felt like playing the
 glutton. Perhaps I could take in enough blood to hold me for a whole week-

an interesting, but questionable accomplishment. To achieve it might mean t
hat my present enjoyment would be less frequent in occurrence. There had ev
er been a touch of the Hedonist in my nature, and, knowing that quality wou
ld not suffer, but quantity would, it seemed most reasonable to bring thing
s to a stop.
But not until many, many delicious minutes passed by.
Reluctantly drawing away, despite the fact that I was full near to bursting,
 I pressed the vein above the point where I'd gone in and waited until the s
eeping blood slowed and finally clotted. My handkerchief took care of the fe
w stains on my face and fingers. Practice had made me very tidy in habit.
The pain in my head was quite abated, and the strength had returned to all m
y limbs. Satisfaction, in every sense of the word, was mine.
Then I looked over at Oliver.
The golden glow of the lantern light lent no illusion of well-being to his fa
ce, which had gone very pasty, nor did his cloak seem to be of any use keepin
g him warm. He shivered from head to toe, exhibiting a misery so palpable tha
t I felt its onrush like a buffet of wind.
Contrite that I'd caused him such distress, I raised one hand, but did not qu
ite touch him for fear he might flinch away. I'd expected him to be affected 
in some adverse manner, for it is one thing to hear how a thing is done and q
uite another to watch, but I'd not expected his reaction to be this adverse.
"It's all right," he said quickly, his staring eyes not leaving mine. "Give me
 a moment."
''I'm sorry,'' I whispered.
"Sorry for what?'' he demanded after taking in a few deep draughts of air. "
You do what you must to live. If that involves drinking a bit of blood now a
nd then, what of it?"
What, indeed? I thought. What am I? I had no name for my condition except 
for one fastened on me by a terrified Hessian soldier. Blutsduger. Never l
iked the word. It made me think of spiders and how they sucked the life fr
om their living prey. Ugh. No wonder poor Oliver was having a hard time of
 it.
He went on. "Pay no mind to me, I'm just cursed with vivid imagination."
''What's that to do with anything?''
He gave a ghastly imitation of a smile. "Most of the tins it's well in check, 
but tonight what with one thing and another ..."
"What are you on about?"
"The bane of my life as a doctor, but only if I let it get away from me. Have t
o keep a tight hold on it when I'm dealing with a patient, else I'd be no good 
at all.''
"Oliver-!"
He waved a hand to quell my mild exasperation. "While you did your work just 

now, the physician in me was doing his. I was fine at first, observing, notin
g everything there was to note. Then I began to wonder what it might be like 
to be in your boots, downing all that blood like it was so much ale night aft
er night, like it or not. Once my mind fixed on that, on all that blood drink
ing, and on the smell and taste of it... well, I couldn't seem to shake it of
f, so this foolish reaction is my own damned fault."
"I should not have allowed this."
"God's death, man, you think this is bad? Then you should have been there to
 see me at that first amputation. Five of the students fainted, and I was on
e of the dozen others who lost his last meal. Sometimes I can still hear the
 poor wretch's screams and the rasp of the bone saw. By comparison, this was
 nothing. Well-a-day, but I'd say I'm doing rather splendidly this time arou
nd.''
"Oliver, you're -"
"A complete ass? And babbling his head off? Oh, yes, I'm sure of it, but eve
n an ass needs to learn things now and then to get on in the world. Sometime
s the lesson is easy and pleasant, and sometimes not, but it doesn't matter,
 knowledge is the goal."
"And you've gained knowledge from this?''
"Indeed I have, and from now on I'll not take it so lightly when you try to
 present a warning about any given aspect of your condition. That disappear
ance you did in the cellar fair gave me a turn, y'know. Thought my poor hea
rt would stop then and there."
"Why didn't you say anything?"
"I thought if I did you'd get the wind up and not let me watch. I'm quite as
hamed of myself. To be like this after all the bleedings I've done ..." He t
railed off, shaking his head. "But enough on me, tell me what happened to yo
ur teeth. One minute they're normal and the next... and I want to know how y
our eyes feel right now."
"My eyes?"
"They're redder than a sunset-does it hurt? Does it affect your sight?''
"No, not at all, and I can see perfectly well."
"Why do they get like that?''
"Damned if I know. I once asked Nora about it, for hers did the same when she
 fed, but she said she didn't know, either." Or she chose not to tell me abou
t it as she'd done with a thousand other details.
His mouth twitched at the mention of Nora's name. "And damned funny that sh
e never told you what to expect after ... well, we've talked that one over 
often enough. Let me see your teeth."
I obliged and opened my mouth. He muttered that the light wasn't good for a
 proper examination, and I suggested that we remove ourselves back to the w
armth of the house where there were plenty of candles. I also reminded him 

that a large brandy still awaited him there. Either enticement was enough t
o inspire him to action; together both inspired him to haste.
Once back in the house, and ensconced before the blazing hearth in the blue
 drawing room, I found myself to be better disposed to undergo a doctor's e
xamination. Though Oliver had known about my changed condition and the stor
y behind it for some little time, this had been the first opportunity he'd 
had to really look into things. I harbored a small hope that his training i
n medicine might yield up some explanation for my unusual physical state.
Since Nora Jones, the woman I had loved-still loved-the woman who had gifte
d me with this strange condition, had seen fit not to provide me with anyth
ing in the way of preparation on how to deal with it, I'd had to learn abou
t my
advantages and limitations by many trials and much error. Certainly I'd use
d what knowledge I recalled about her own habits as a guide, but after more
 than a year of it, I was still full of many important questions and singul
arly lacking in answers. The urgency to see her again and to obtain those a
nswers had drawn me from my lifelong home on Long Island and back to Englan
d again in an effort to find her.
Unhappily, she was not to be found. Oliver had done his best, moving throug
h his wide circle of friends and acquaintances in London, writing to others
 on the Continent trying to locate her, or at least a hint of her presence.
 The only clue I'd had of her passing had come from a madman named Tony War
burton, and it had been less informative than frustrating and the cause of 
a profound unease on my soul. He'd said she'd been ill. So impervious was I
 to sickness and injury I could not imagine what she might be suffering fro
m. I also tried very hard not to imagine that she might have succumbed to i
t. My success at this endeavor was indifferent at best. If not for the supp
ort of Oliver and my sister, Elizabeth, I might have turned madman myself. 
They distracted me from my melancholy fits and helped me to maintain hope, 
but it was hard going for all of us.
When he'd initially learned about my change, the shock had put Oliver's inna
te curiosity off for a time, and after that family events and troubles had s
upplanted all other matters. Only last night we'd interred his mother in the
 Fonteyn mausoleum, a miserable occupation for everyone concerned, but parti
cularly so for my poor cousin since he'd hated the old harridan.
Because of this hate, he'd had a difficult time dealing with her death. The w
orld expected one kind of response from him and his heart poured forth quite 
another. He'd retreated into a shell filled with nebulous self-censure for se
veral days, until I'd had enough and took a firm hand, giving him a good talk
ing to about it.
I'd managed to coax him away from his guilt in this very room. The servants
 had done a remarkable job of cleaning up the mess. Only a bit of scraped w

ood on the floor, a few dents in the frame of a painting knocked from the w
all, and a missing vase broken during our "conversation" gave the least evi
dence that anything had happened. My injuries from the encounter were all h
ealed, and so, I hoped, were his, particularly the old ones his mother had 
inflicted, the ones that had threatened to swell and fester upon Oliver's soul.
His reawakened curiosity seemed to be a good sign of his spiritual health,
 and had been one of the points I'd considered before giving my consent to
 let him watch me feeding, Whatever adverse reaction he might draw from it
 could hardly be worse than anything he'd had to deal with while growing u
p in the dark halls of Fonteyn House.
"Now just you open wide," he told me, looming in close with a candle.
I opened wide, baring my teeth, then squawked when he brought the flame u
ncomfortably near. "You'll singe my eyebrows off!''
"No, I won't," he insisted. "Oh, very well, hold still and I'll try somethin
g else." He pulled a small mirror from a pocket and employed it in such a wa
y as to reflect the candlelight where he wanted. Unfortunately for the purpo
ses of his science, both his hands were occupied and he could not conduct a 
proper examination. ''Damn, but if I could only get a good look in proper da
ylight,'' he complained.
''Impossible,'' I said, hoping he wouldn't insist on trying. The sun and I were
 no longer friends, but if Oliver's zealous-ness overtook his sense, he might f
orget that vital detail and take action.
"Don't talk." He put the candleholder on a small table and asked me to lean in
 its direction. I did so. Holding the mirror steady in one hand, he used the f
ingers of the other to grasp one of my corner teeth and tug. I felt it slide d
own. Surprised, he released it and gaped as it slowly retracted into place.
"Like a deuced cat's claw, only straighter," he said, full of wonder and repeat
ing the action. "Does that hurt?''
"No."
"What does it feel like?''
"Damned strange," I lisped.
"You should see how it looks," remarked a new voice that gave us a start. "
The servants will think the both of you have gone mad."
My good sister Elizabeth stood in the open doorway regarding us with a cal
m eye and a curl of high amusement twisting one side of her mouth.
"Hallo, sweet Cousin," Oliver said, a grin breaking forth upon his mobile fe
atures. Elizabeth's presence always had a hugely cheering effect on him. "Yo
u couldn't come at a better time. I need you to hold this mirror so I can gi
ve your brother's teeth a good looking over."
"Whatever are you doing?" she asked, not moving from her place by the door
, God bless her.
"Scientific inquiry, my dear girl. I want to thoroughly examine the working

s of Jonathan's condition, and since the good God did not provide me with t
hree hands, I should like to borrow one of yours for a moment."
"Scientific inquiry? How fascinating." With a wicked smile, she determined
ly moved in on poor helpless me.
"Now just one moment..."
But I had no chance to further object. In a twinkling she was next to Olive
r, holding the mirror and watching with avid interest as he poked and tappe
d and tugged my teeth with happy abandon. I endured it for as long as I cou
ld, then made a garbled protest loud enough to inform them that the examina
tion was, for the time being, over.
"Before heaven, I think you've dislocated my jaw," I complained, rubbing th
e offended area.
"1 just wanted to see if the lower teeth were also capable of extension," he e
xplained.
"Next time ask. I could have told you that they don't."
"Sorry, I'm sure, but there's so much that you don't know about yourself tha
t I've gotten used to your negative answer every time I do ask about anythin
g. It seemed simpler just to go ahead and experiment."
"There's no harm done,'' Elizabeth told him. "But I think we've tried Jonath
an's patience sufficiently for this night. Besides, he's needed elsewhere no
w. That is, if you have concluded your business with those two Mohocks."
"Messieurs Ridley and Tyne have been dealt with, dear sister. I doubt they sh
all ever resume their destructive activities with their old crowd again.''
"Thank God for that. Now straighten your neckcloth, dust off your knees, a
nd let's get along. Nanny Howard's been waiting for more than an hour on y
ou."
"Nanny Howard?" said Oliver, then his expression abruptly altered. "Oh, I'd
 quite forgotten about that. Really, Jonathan, you should have reminded me.
 Or did you forget as well?''
"No, that is to say ..."
"Don't tell me you've been putting it off."
"Not precisely, but there's just been so much to think about that I•E'
'' You have been putting it off.''
"I have not, I've just... well..."
Elizabeth stepped in. "Don't badger him, Oliver. Can't you see he's terrified?'
'
"Terrified? Him? After all he's gone through?''
"Do please make allowances, Cousin. He's never been through this before."
Oliver frowned and shrugged. "I see what you mean. Come to think of it and g
iven the choice, I'd probably be hiding in the cellar about now, or be halfw
ay to France. It's a hard road you've picked for yourself and no mistake."
"Surely not that hard," I said.

"Consider how much of the way of it you'll be walking with Cousin Edmond, 
then tell me that again."
He'd made a good point there, but I'd deal with Edmond later.
"Edmond can keep," said Elizabeth. "Our concern is with young Richard. Come 
along, little brother, put your best foot forward. It's not every day a man 
gets to meet his son for the first time."
CHAPTER
-2-
This was not strictly true. I had met the child last night though he'd not bee
n awake for the occasion. It was probably for the best, since the knowledge of
 his existence had been a frightful surprise for me. Coming as it did some fon
t years after his birth, I was hardly prepared to deal with it in an intellige
nt manner. For the most part, I'd simply stared in wonder at the little boy as
leep on his cot-the little boy bearing my features-that his mother had been so
 careful to keep insulated from the rest of the family lest they discover his 
true paternity.
Even now, with Elizabeth and Oliver there to take me in hand, I hardly felt
 ready to deal with the mere prospect of meeting my natural son, much less 
a face-to-face encounter. It was enough to make the bravest man's resolve t
remble and collapse upon itself. Who was I if not a child myself, surely un
able to assume the responsibility involved.
But Elizabeth adjusted my neckcloth, I saw to the dusting of my knees, then
 out we marched with Oliver to the upstairs rooms that served as the house 
nursery. My feet threatened to transmute into leaden weights along the way;
if left to myself, this few minutes' walk might have turned into an hour's j
ourney. Their company forced me to keep to a normal pace. Before them I had 
to pretend to an enthusiasm I did not possess as I had no desire to draw add
itional attention to myself.
Why so reluctant, Johnny Boy? It's not as though you haven't met him alread
y.
True, but until then I'd no knowledge of the child's existence and therefore
 no time to think about things. Besides, he'd been safely asleep. Now that t
he initial surprise and shock had worn off somewhat I was just beginning to 
comprehend the enormity of what I was about to face.
I could give the child a looking over, then leave him to Edmond and have don
e with it, but my heart, quailing as it was at an unknown future, firmly tol
d me that that was not the honorable course to follow. I'd already given Edm
ond to understand that I was interested in the boy's welfare, something that
 had surprised him at the time. After thinking about it, my reaction was som
ething of a surprise to me as well, but the words had been said, and I'd hav
e to stand by them. For it was my duty ... obligation ... burden...

Good God, but Elizabeth and Oliver were positively alight with anticipatio
n for what was to come. I was hard pressed to keep my own shameful cowardi
ce well-hidden - an achievement made particularly difficult because of a c
raven voice within urging me to bolt and run from the house while I could.
Then I seemed to hear my father's voice as sometimes happened when I most
 needed his counsel.
Always move forward, laddie. We're all in God's hands and that's as safe eno
ugh place as any in this world.
It helped steady me, helped to drown out my disgraceful whining.
Would that he could be here, though. Of course, then I'd have to break the ne
ws to him....
Later, I promised myself.
Most of the family members who had stayed overnight after Aunt Fonteyn's f
uneral had gone home today, taking their own offspring back to more famili
ar surroundings, it might have been easier to leave the children at home t
o begin with, but those parents with long-reaching plans found weddings an
d funerals to be ideal times to allow the coming generation a chance to me
et. Thus were advantageous matches often made a dozen years prior to the a
ctual nuptials.
My son's mother-and Edmond's wife-Clarinda Fonteyn, had gone with custom a
nd brought the boy with her. I could assume that it was done for the sake 
of form so as not to draw attention to him by his absence. Certainly she w
ould not have shown him off to the other adults. His resemblance to me was
 unmistakable and the reason why she had incited her lover Ridley into mur
dering me. She'd not wanted me around as a living reminder of her past ind
iscretion; it would have spoiled her plans for her future. Clarinda had ha
d ambitions-dangerous for me and for her husband, and entirely fatal for A
unt Fonteyn. Edmond and I had survived them, but what effect the aftermath
 would have on young Richard was yet to be determined. "Here," said Elizab
eth, pausing and touching my arm "I thought you should have a present to g
ive him." She drew a parcel from a hidden pocket in her wide skirts and th
rust it at me.
Nonplussed, I accepted it, staring as if I might see through the wrappings an
d string to what lay within.
"It's a toy horse," she explained before I could ask. "Oliver's idea."
"If that's all right with you, Coz," he added. "I mean, I had one myself. You
 don't mind, do you?"
I spread my hands, deeply touched by their consideration. "Before God, I thin
k I've got the best family that ever was.
"This small part of 'em, anyhow. I'd not be too certain about the rest of the
 lot if I were you. They're all mad in one way or another y'know. Hope the bo
y takes after you and not Clarwell... that is to say ..." He suddenly went ve

ry red.
"Oh, let's not be silly about this," Elizabeth said, regarding us both with 
a severe eye. "All right, so young Richard's mother is what she is. That nee
d not affect him in an adverse manner unless we do it ourselves by behaving 
strangely every time her name comes up in conversation. Jonathan, do you not
 recall how Father dealt with the subject whenever we inquired after Mother 
as children?''
"Vividly."
"How?" asked Oliver.
"He'd tell us that she had to be away from home because she was ill and did
 not want us to become sick as well," she answered.
Was that not the stark truth of it? I thought. Later, when we were much ol
der, Father explained that Mother's illness had to do more with her mind t
han her body. Now did we understand the extent of damage that might have b
een done had she remained with her family and not gone off to live far awa
y from us as we matured.
"Since Jonathan wants to make himself a part of Richard's life, then I thin
k it best that we decide here and now how to behave ourselves concerning Cl
arinda. I had a long talk with Edmond about it today."
"Edmond?" I yelped, leaving my jaw hanging wide.
"Certainly, little brother. You weren't in a condition to do so, and as the boy's
 aunt, I think I have a justified interest in his future."
Clarinda's husband. With all my physical advantages over normal men and de
spite the fact that we were on reasonably amicable terms considering the o
utrageousness of the situation, even I was subject to a tremor or two when
 it came to facing Edmond Fonteyn. That Elizabeth had done so and apparent
ly emerged unscathed raised my already high respect for her capabilities t
o a yet loftier elevation.
"We had a very constructive conversation about the whole business," she sa
id, "and he promises to be quite reasonable about how to deal with Richard
 concerning Clarinda. In fact, he thought that Father's example would work
 perfectly for him in every way as well."
"You told him about Mother?"
"Certainly, since he knew all about Aunt Fonteyn and her ways. He expressed
 great curiosity to me over how we managed to turn out to be so sensible, s
o I thought it the polite thing to inform him."
Unspoken was my thought that Edmond might have been comparing us to Oliv
er and found my cousin somewhat lacking. Not that Oliver was a fool; it 
just suited him to assume the role when the need arose. The need, unfort
unately, seemed to occur most often whenever Edmond was around.
"Is it agreeable to you both that we should follow this direction?" she asked
, knowing full well we'd have to say yes. We did not dare disappoint her. "Th

at's resolved, then. Are there any other points that we need to discuss?"
"I have one," said Oliver. "What does Edmond plan to do when the rest of th
e family twigs on who the boy's real father is?"
"We did not precisely address that issue, but I got the impression he'd stare
 them down and dare 'em to say a word to his face."
"That's fine for him, he can take care of himself, but when people start whisp
ering and the other children start bullying the lad."
"I think that will be best worked out as it happens," I cautiously put in.
Elizabeth favored me with an approving look and turned again to Oliver. "A
nything else?"
"One more thing, I fear. What are we to tell the boy? He'll have to learn abo
ut his true parentage, y'know."
For this, Elizabeth made no response. Both of them looked expectantly at me.
 I raised and dropped my hands, giving in to pure helplessness. "I'll have t
o talk to Edmond about it, I suppose. But for now, the boy's only four, the 
knowledge will hardly mean anything to him, nor would it do him much benefit
. Such a topic can wait until the time is right for it to be addressed."
"Well said," Oliver commented. "I suppose I worry too much and too far ah
ead of myself for anyone's good."
"I believe that it has become your lot to have to do so. You're head of the f
amily now, aren't you?"
He snorted, rolling his eyes. "Yes, God help me. They're already coming for
ward, wanting me to settle disputes-or should I say take sides. You'd think
 I was a judge and not a doctor the way they go on about their squabbles."
"You'll do all right."
"Humph. Easy for you to say, Coz, you're well out of it for the day. Wish I
 could hide in the cellars when they come calling with a new problem."
"No, you don't," I told him with such absolute sincerity that he laughed.
"What? You've no liking for sleeping the day through and avoiding its troubl
es?''
"I told you that it's not really sleep."
"Bother it, you know what I mean."
"Indeed I do, but I'd gladly take on a bit of trouble if a bit of real daylight we
nt with it, too."
My wistful tone turned him instantly contrite. "I'm sorry, I should have thoug
ht first before."
"No, you shouldn't. You're fine just as you are." Best to curtail that kind 
of thinking, or my poor cousin would end up apologising every time he opened
 his mouth for a jest. "I'm the one who's too serious around here. My point 
was that it is a wise thing to have a care on what you wish
for. Now if you really want to spend the day skulking in a damp cellar and n
ever ever taste brandy again,"

He raised both hands in a horrified shudder. "Enough, enough already! Yo
u make my skin crawl. Ugh!"
Good humor was with us once more. "Right then, You've reminded me of some
thing. I've a question for you, Elizabeth."
She tilted her head expectantly.
"Tell me, dear sister, was it you who went home and fetched some of my ear
th today?''
Because of all the many distractions the night before I'd had no time to re
turn to my usual sanctuary under Oliver's house in town and had to seek she
lter from the dawn in the cellars of Fonteyn House. Safe enough from the Ha
zards of daylight it was, but when denied the comfort of my native soil I w
as always subject to an endless series of bad dreams and powerless to escap
e them until the setting of the sun, This time, though, the infernal dreams
 had mysteriously curtailed themselves, and against all expectations I'd ac
hieved a decent day's rest. Upon awakening this evening I discovered that s
omeone had placed a sackful of earth next to me where I'd made a bed on the
 floor of an unused wine cupboard.
"I could not go myself-with so much work to do it was just impossible to get 
away," she said, "but I did dispatch a note along to Jericho to send over a q
uantity. What a blessing it was that you taught him to read and write. To hav
e given such strange instructions to the footman verbally-well-there's enough
 gossip below stairs as it is. No need to add to it."
"Indeed not, and for your trouble you have my thanks. You spared me no en
d of torment today."
"I'd like to study that aspect of your condition, too," Oliver put in. "There 
must be some reason behind it."
"Perhaps later," I said, hoping he'd notice my singular lack of eagerness.
Fortunately, he did. "I see. There's better things afoot than having your doc
tor plague you with questions for hours on end. Come along, then, let's go me
et this brat of yours."
"He's not a brat," I objected.
"How do you know? Weren't you a brat at that age? I was, when I could get a
way with it, and what fun I had, too." Eyes aglow, he tucked Elizabeth's ha
nd over his arm and continued down the hall, leaving me to catch up as best
 I could.
The nursery looked quite deserted now. The cots and bedding were folded an
d put away, and all their occupants long gone home except for one. Nanny H
oward, the tiny woman in charge of this most important post, sat by a stur
dy table with some sewing in her lap, working by the light of several cand
les. She glanced up as we entered and without saying a word managed to com
municate to us that we were very tardy and no excuses would be accepted fo
r the transgression.

Hers was a kind face, though. She'd been Oliver's nanny once upon a time, 
and his regard and respect for her ran very broad and deep. Certainly she 
alone had provided him with his only real source of love and protection wh
en he was growing up under the cold eye and critical tongue of his mother.
 His expression softened and warmed as he looked at her. He silently excus
ed himself from Elizabeth and went over to take the other woman's hand, be
nding to kiss her cheek.
"Hallo, Nanny. I was a bad lad last evening, or so they tell me."
"Indeed you were. No chocolate for you tonight."
He ducked his head in mock shame, then she tapped his wrist twice with her 
free hand in an equally mock slap. "There now, all's forgiven. Stand up str
aight and tell me what you've been about today."
"Oh, just seeing to business. What with all that's happened there's quite a lo
t of it going around-like an outbreak of the pox."
She nodded. "I've not been able to tell you how sorry I am about your mother
's death."
His mouth worked. Her expression of sympathy for him was genuine, probabl
y making it that much harder to accept. He did, though, murmuring his tha
nks to her.
"Are you also here to see Richard?" she asked him, her eyes glancing over 
toward me and Elizabeth.
"I should say so. Past time it was done, don't you think?"
"Well past time. I was about to put him to bed. He gets cross when he's kept 
up too late."
"Oh, but I meant-oh, never mind. Bring him out and let's have a good look a
t him."
She stood and rustled into an adjoining room.
If my heart was still capable of beating, now would be the time for it to re
commence that duty; perhaps then my chest would not feel so appallingly tigh
t. A great lump was trying to rise and lodge in my throat, and I found mysel
f swallowing hard and repeatedly in a vain effort to push it down.
Elizabeth slipped her hand into mine. "It's all right. He's only a little boy."
"I know, but"
"It's all right," she said, squeezing my fingers.
Another unsuccessful swallow. What would he think of me? Would he even
 think anything? Would he like me? What would he call me?
Nanny Howard provided an answer at least for the last of the many panic-in
spired questions bombarding my over-active brain. Herding her charge into 
the room, she said, "Come along now and meet your cousins, there's a good 
lad."
He tottered hesitantly in ahead of her, and such a little creature he seemed
 to me with his diminutive limbs and overly solemn expression. Thick black h

air, fine pale skin, huge blue eyes, and rosy lips, he hung back by Nanny Ho
ward, frowning a bit at this formidable gathering of adults. He came in none
theless.
"He's your living image," Oliver said under his breath.
"In miniature," said Elizabeth in the same hushed tone. "Oh, he's beautiful, 
Jonathan."
As if I could take much credit for the boy. All I'd done was provide seed for
 his mother to conceive him. Despite the hasty and imprudent circumstances of
 that illicit joining, 1 had to admit that the results were astonishing.
Mrs. Howard urged him forward. "Richard, this is your Cousin Oliver. Rem
ember how you were taught to greet people?"
Mouth pursed in concentration, Richard nodded and made a deep bow, hand to t
he waist of his petticoats. "At your service, sir," he said, the seriousness
 of his manner making an appealing contrast to his light, piping voice.
"And yours, young master," Oliver gravely responded.
"Oliver's the head of the family now, did you know that?" Mrs. Howard aske
d of the boy.
Whatever it might mean to Richard, he decided that another bow was in order
 and so executed one in good form. This time Oliver returned it with a dign
ified nod of his head, but he was struggling hard not to smile.
Mrs. Howard turned the boy slightly to face his second visitor. "And this is
 your pretty Cousin Elizabeth."
"How do you do, Cousin Richard?" Elizabeth asked. She was positively quiv
ering from inner excitement. Above all the others I could hear her heart 
pattering away as she extended her hand toward him. He bowed deeply over 
it.
"Very well, thank you." There seemed to be a hint of guarded interest in his 
eyes for her.
"How old are you?"
"I am four, and next year I shall be five. How old are you?"
This brought forth an admonishment from Mrs. Howard that that was not a pr
oper question for a gentleman to ask a lady. He then inquired why it was s
o.
"We'll discuss it later. Now you must greet Miss Elizabeth's brother. This 
is your Cousin Jonathan, and he's come all the way from America to meet you
."
Reminded of his social duty, Richard bowed and I returned it. Doubtless ou
r respective dancing masters would have been well pleased.
"What's 'Merica?" he demanded, looking me right in the eye.
"It's a land very far from here," I told him.
"Is it farther than Lon'on?"
"Oh, yes. Very much farther. Right across the ocean."

"What ocean? I can tell them all to you, the 'Lantic, the Pacific, the Ind'n.
"Stop showing off, Richard." said Mrs. Howard.
He subsided, pouting at the interruption of his recitation.
"You're very well up on your geography, aren't you?" I asked.
He nodded.
"Do you know your letters and numbers, too?"
Another nod.
"Mr. Fonteyn is most particular that the boys have their lessons early and r
egular." Mrs. Howard had not referred to Edmond Fonteyn as Richard's father.
 I wondered if that was a conscious effort on her part.
"Boys? Oh, yes. Richard's older brother." I recalled Clarinda mentioning him
, but not his name.
"Away at school, bless his heart. And then this one will be off himself in a
 few short years. They grow up much too fast for me."
I vaguely agreed with her and found myself first staring at Richard, then tryi
ng hard not to stare. Shifting from one foot to the other, I experienced the u
ncomfortable realization that I'd run out of things to say to him.
Elizabeth came to my rescue with a gentle tap on the package I held in one ar
m and had quite forgotten. I shot her a look of gratitude and knelt to be at 
a better level with Richard.
"Do you like presents?" I asked him. "If you do, then this one is yours."
From his reaction as he took the package, I gathered that he very much liked
 presents. The string baffled him a moment, but Mrs. Howard's sewing scissor
s removed it as an obstacle. A few seconds of frenzied action accomplished t
he release of his prize from the wrappings, and he crowed and held up a trul
y magnificent horse for all to see. Shiny black with a brightly painted sadd
le and bridle, it was very lifelike, carved in a noble pose with an arched n
eck and tail.
"By George," said Oliver, "if it doesn't look like that great beast you brough
t over with you."
Elizabeth beamed. "The very reason why I picked that one over the others i
n the shop. It reminded me so much of Roily."
"You're brilliant," I told her.
"Aren't I just?"
"Who's Roily?" asked Richard, his bright gaze momentarily shifting toward 
us.
"Rolly's my own horse," I said. "He's a big black one with some white on his f
ace just like the one you have there. I'll... I'll give you a ride on him some
 day, if you like."
"Yes, please!"
"Not so loud," Mrs. Howard cautioned. "A gentleman never raises his voice 
to another, you know.''

"Yes, please," he repeated in a much lower pitch.
"And what do we say when we get a gift?"
"Thank you very much."
"You're very welcome, I'm sure," I said, feeling all shaky inside. 'Fore God,
 what was I getting myself into?
Oblivious to my inner turmoil, Richard darted away and began playing with hi
s new toy, strutting back and forth through the room as if practicing the ar
t of dressage. He provided a variety of horse noises to go with his imagined
 exhibition, from whinnies to the clip-clop of hooves.
"A success," Elizabeth observed, leaning toward my ear.
"To you goes the credit, if not the thanks."
"I got my thanks when I saw the look on your face."
"Don't you mean his?"
"I mean yours while he opened it up. You looked ready to burst."
"I'm sure I don't know what you mean."
"Do you not?"
Oliver, not to be excluded, got Richard to pause long enough in his parade to
 ask if he liked chocolate.
"Yes, please!" he bellowed, drawing Mrs. Howard's mild reproof again.
"Well, let's see what I have in my pocket," Oliver said, digging deep. "Here 
we are-I think. Yes, there it is." He produced a fat twist of paper, collecti
ng a thanks from Richard, who carried off this second prize to enjoy on his o
wn in a far corner of the room.
"You're not to be spoiling him, Mr. Oliver," Mrs. Howard said, hands on her
 hips.
"Just this once won't hurt."
"Only this once. More than that and I don't care how big you are, I'll put yo
u over my knee just like I used to years ago."
"No doubt. Then I shall consider myself warned off. Does that rule against s
poiling infants apply to Jonathan and Elizabeth, too?"
He had her there, and knew it, though she continued to favor him with an ar
ch gaze.
"Of course, we won't presume to infringe on what you deem to be best for th
e boy, Mrs. Howard," Elizabeth promised. But I knew my sister and had seen 
that particular look on her face many times before. Richard was going to re
ap a bountiful crop of gifts from his aunt in the future.
"Thank you, Miss Elizabeth." By her tone, I gathered that Nanny Howard was n
ot for one moment fooled, either. "Well, custom says that first meetings sho
uld be brief and polite, and it's past his bedtime ..."
"I don't want to go to bed," Richard announced. Chocolate smeared the lower 
part of his face and coated his fingers. Mrs. Howard moved in on him, pullin
g a handkerchief from her apron pocket. There followed a short struggle as s

he tried to clean away the worst of it before the stains wandered to his pin
afore. She must have dressed him in his best for the occasion, and so her an
xiety to spare his garment from damage was most understandable. It reminded 
me of my own tribulations in the nursery and how glad I'd been to forsake my
 child's petticoats for my first suit of boy's clothing. He was at least two
 years away from that glorious rite of passage. I wondered if he'd lie awake
 nearly all night as I'd done, too excited with anticipation to sleep.
"You seem pensive, little brother."
"Oh, not a bit of it. I was just watching."
Duty done, Mrs. Howard invited Richard to bid us good night. He did so with
 notable hesitation, but I thought it had less to do with parting from our 
company than with a natural reluctance to give up the day and go to sleep. 
Mrs. Howard took him in hand and led him off to the next room. They'd just 
reached the door when with a cry he broke away from her and darted over to 
where he'd left his toy horse. He seized it strongly in both hands, hugging
 it to his body, and marched back.
Then he paused, turned, and looked me right in the eye as before, and flashe
d me the devil's own grin.
Then he was gone.
My mouth had popped open. What breath I had within simply left, as if it ha
d other business to attend. I stood as dumbfounded as one can be and still 
have consciousness, though there was little enough evidence of that in my f
rozen brain. I was dimly aware of Elizabeth exclaiming some words of approv
al to Oliver and his own reply, but blast me if I was able to discern anyth
ing more of their speech.
I felt all light and heavy at the same time, and if my heart no longer beat,
 then surely it had given a mighty lurch when that exquisite child had smile
d at me so. My sight misted over for a second or two. I blinked to clear it,
 wondering, wondering what on earth was the matter with me.
And then I knew, as clearly and as brightly as if lighted up by a thousand 
candles. I knew in that moment that I loved the boy. The boy. My child. My 
son.
Just like that.
"Jonathan?" Elizabeth pressed a hand on my arm. "What's wrong?"
I shook my head at her foolishness. And at my own foolishness. "Nothing. Ab
solutely nothing at all."
"Come on, Elizabeth, you must have something to celebrate meeting your neph
ew," said Oliver. "Since Jonathan can't join in, you'll have to make up for
 his place in a toast."
"I should be delighted to try, but if you give me anything stronger than barle
y water or better yet, some tea, I shall fall asleep here and now."
"Asleep! After all that?"

"Especially after all that."
We'd returned to Oliver's drawing room to find the fire was in need of reviv
al. Eschewing the employment of a servant, Oliver set himself to the task, b
eing full of considerable energy and needing to work it off. He did ring for
 someone to bring in some form of refreshment, though. He chose port for him
self and dutifully ordered a pot of tea for Elizabeth.
"You'll be awash with this later when dinner's done," he warned her after a
 maid had come and gone leaving behind a loaded tray.
"I'm tempted to avoid dinner altogether and have something sent to my room,
" she said, pouncing on the teapot like a she-cat on a mouse.
"What? Leaving me to face the remaining crowd on my own?"
"Hardly a crowd, Oliver. There's just a few elderly aunts and uncles left, after
 all."
"And the lot of 'em starin' at me the whole time like a flock of gouty crows.
 Don't you think they aren't interested in the goings-on last night, because 
they are. I managed to keep out of their way so far, but there'll be no escap
ing them at dinner." He shuddered, pouring himself a generous glass of the po
rt, then downing the greater part of it.
Elizabeth was not without pity. "Very well, for your sake I'll play hostess
 and talk about the weather should anyone ask you an embarrassing question.
"
"Thank you, dear Coz. The weather! Excellent topic! There's nothing they li
ke better than to discuss how bad it's been and how much better it was when
 they were younger. We'll give 'em a real debate on it. Well, that's all so
lved. Now, about young Richard ..."
"What about him?"
"I was only going to say what a fine lad he seems to be. What about you, 
Jonathan? We've not heard a peep from you since we came down."
Both looked at me, but I really had nothing to say. I was so full of feeling 
that words seemed pointless.
"I think my brother is still in the thrall of shock," Elizabeth observed.
Smiling, I shrugged in a way to indicate that she was more than a little corre
ct.
Oliver's face blossomed with sudden anxiety. "You don't dislike him, do yo
u?"
My sister answered for me. "Of course he doesn't, that's why he's in such sh
ock. Give him some time to get used to the idea, then you'll hear him talkin
g about nothing else."
I shrugged again, adding a sheepish smile.
Oliver raised his glass, saw that it was nearly empty, and took the opportuni
ty to fill it again. "Then here's to the very good health of my cousin Jonath
an and his son Richard."

Elizabeth raised her teacup and joined him in the toast. I spread my hands 
and bobbed my head once, modestly accepting the honor. I was yet unable to 
offer coherent conversation and quietly eased into a comfortable chair near
 the fire. They occupied themselves with their own talk about Richard, not 
excluding me so much as allowing me time for my own reflections and specula
tions. I folded my hands and watched the flames, content with all the world
 and my lot of it in particular.
"Heavens!" Elizabeth hastily set down her cup and gestured sharply at the ma
ntel clock. "See the time-I'll be late for dinner if I don't go up now and d
ress for it. You, too, Oliver, unless you want to pique family curiosity eve
n more about what you've been doing today."
"No," he said, sighing deeply. "Can't have that, though it's bound to be a rot
ten tribulation. Jonathan's the lucky one, he can do whatever he likes while w
e sit chained to the table for the next few hours."
"Or at least until the ladies take their leave," she reminded him. "Then you a
nd the other men can get as drunk as you please while I drown in tea." Custom 
held that all ladies had to eventually retire from the table for their tea or 
coffee until it was time for the gentlemen to rejoin them for the serving of d
essert.
"Well, I did warn you. Tell you what, I'll see if Radcliff will sneak some br
andy into the teapots for you. That should help you pass the time more merril
y."
"Dearest Oliver, it's a wonderful idea, but we ladies have already long made a
 practice of it."
"Have you, by God! First time I've heard of it. Perhaps I should forsake ke
eping company with the gentlemen and fall in with your troop."
"Cleave to your duty," she advised him. "Except for me there's not a woman 
left in the house that's under sixty. You'd be bored to death in five minut
es for that's ever been my fate. Now I really must go." So saying, she swep
t out, skirts swinging wide and bumping against the doorframe, and we heard
 her quick progress down the hall.
"A damn fine girl, your sister," said Oliver. "A pity she didn't find a man wo
rthy of her."
"She probably will, given time and inclination," I murmured. "But whoever s
he may settle on will have to behave himself with the two of us as her guar
dians."
He laughed. "Now, isn't that heaven's honest truth, especially with your tal
ents. Tell me, though, if it's not too impertinent, why did you not question
 that Norwood fellow first before she married him-just to be sure about him?"
What a sore wound it was he'd struck. I actually winced. Oliver started to wi
thdraw the question, but I waved him down. "No, it's all right. All I can say
 is that it seemed an ungodly intrusion at the time. She was so in love with 

him that I hesitated to tamper with her happiness. As it turned out, my hesit
ation damned near got her killed. Be assured, I will not make the same mistak
e again. Should she seriously take up with another suitor I'll be able to tel
l soon enough if he's a right one or a rogue."
"Now there's a good idea for an occupation."
"Hmm?"
"It just occurred to me that since you can't practice law because of your co
ndition, you could busy yourself as some sort of inspector of marriage propo
sals. The ladies could come to you to have you ferret out the truth about th
eir gentlemen prior to committing marriage. That way they can
find out the worst about them before it's too late."
"The gentlemen might also be interested in such a service," I pointed out.
"True ... then it's an idea best forgotten. If engaged couples knew all the
re was to know awaiting them, then none would marry, and humanity would die
 out for want of progeny. Unless they do what you've done and father a chil
d by-er-ah-that is to say-well, no offense."
"None taken. Get on with you, Cousin, and ready yourself for dinner. You w
ouldn't want to leave Elizabeth all alone with the crows, would you?"
"No. But given a choice I'd prefer to leave the crows all alone with themsel
ves, then they could feed on each other and soon disappear altogether."
"Dreamer," I called to his back as he left to prepare himself for the endeavo
r to come.
Alone and comfortably settled before the revived fire, I let forth a satisfie
d sigh. Now could I finally give in to my own dreams for a little time. Not t
he bad ones I'd endured for a brief interval early that morning, but the ligh
t and fanciful ones that possess a man so filled with good feeling that it ov
erflows his heart and makes the very air about him seem to hum from it.
I'd met my son, and all was well.
The trepidation and apprehensions had fled. I was so encompassed with warm
th for the boy that it seemed impossible I'd ever been worried at all. Wha
tever problems the future might hold would solve themselves, of that I had
 no doubt.
There was much work ahead, of course, but it would be easy enough labor. Fac
ing down the disapproval of the family, dealing with the scandal of the boy'
s conception, dealing with Edmond, even dealing with Clarinda, tribulations 
all, to be sure, but not terribly important so long as I could spend time wi
th Richard. I could hardly wait to see his face again, to see it glow with a
nother smile, like Edmond would even allow it. Before God, he could tell me 
to go to hell and be well within his rights and then I'd never see...
My moment of panic came and instantly passed. He would allow it. I'd make c
ertain of that no matter what. If I could turn the likes of Ridley into a l
amb, then I could just as easily convince Edmond to cheerfully welcome me i

nto his home. Elizabeth would probably disapprove-she usually did when it c
ame to forcing my influence upon another person, but this was a special cir
cumstance. Surely she'd not object to my making life a bit smoother for all
 concerned by the use of this strange talent.
Then the only limitation I'd have against being with Richard would be my inab
ility to see him during the day. Damnation, but there was one obstacle I coul
d not influence my way around. Half a loaf was better than none, but it irked
 me all the same. Ah, well, I'd just have to live with it until he got older 
and could stay up later. By then he'd be away at school, though ... but he'd 
be home for visits between terms ...
So much to think about, so much to dream and plan. I stared at the fire until
 my eyes watered, blinked to clear them, but they only watered all the more. 
To my astonishment, first one tear then another spilled forth.
"You're being ridiculous, Johnny Boy," I said aloud, wiping at them with m
y sleeve before remembering my handkerchief. It was the one I'd used in th
e stable, the one bearing evidence of my last feeding in the form of some 
small bloodstains. No matter, I thought, scrubbing away at my wet cheeks.
Though in a way it did matter, for now did I realize why I wept. Mixed wi
th my happiness was the certain knowledge that Richard was the only child
 I would ever father, thus making him immeasurably precious to me.
Because of my changed condition the male member of my body, though still ca
pable of providing enjoyment to any lady so desiring to make use of it, was
 now incapable of producing seed. Though it could come to glad attention, a
llowing me to roger away as happily as any other man, it was no longer at a
ll necessary for the achievement of a climax to my pleasures. That sweet ac
complishment was only to be found when partaking of the lady's blood, a pro
cess we could both enjoy to its fullest for as long as we could stand the e
cstasy. Wonderful as it was and superior as it was to the more common way o
f making love, it had a wretched price. The joys of having a wife and a hea
rth might yet be mine in the future, but my present state tragically preclu
ded any possibility of ever having a family of my own to cherish.
Why was it so? I wondered. The question had long occurred to me prior this 
night, but never before had the lack of an answer seemed so hard to endure.
If I could only find Nora.
Seeing her again had ever been the focus of all things for me since that sum
mer night when I'd awakened in a coffin deep beneath the church graveyard. F
or all its limitations, though, the condition she'd bequeathed upon me had i
ts favorable side. I was grateful for the advantages, but needed to know mor
e about the drawbacks. Ignorance had caused me grief in the past, so I harbo
red a very reasonable desire to learn all there was to learn before committi
ng additional blunders. If I could just speak with her, even once, and put t

o rest all my questions, then might I find a bit of peace for my troubled he
art.
I'd have to tell her about Richard, of course. There was no way around it. I
 hoped she would not be too awfully upset.
If I found her.
Oliver and I would just have to take on the task with renewed vigor. I cou
ld have another look through her London house on the slender chance that I
'd missed something earlier, and Oliver could track down the agents who had
sold it to her. Perhaps they had records on where she'd lived before....
I quelled the speculations. Firmly. They'd had their race around inside my h
ead far too often before to offer any new approach to this particular hunt. 
Time to let them rest and cast my mind back to better, more productive thoug
hts. Like Richard.
Alas, it was not to be. Just as I was summoning the energy to forsake my co
mfortable chair to build up the dwindling fire, one of the footmen came in 
with a message for me. Damnation, if it wasn't one thing it was another.
He handed over a small fold of paper, then stepped back a pace to await my 
reply. I more than half expected it to be from my valet Jericho, who was pr
obably wondering if I planned to return home tonight. An excellent question
, that. I opened the thing, but did not recognize the bold, flowing writing
 within.
For God's sake, will you come speak with me? I beg only a moment.
The signature was a large, florid C placed in the exact center at the bottom o
f the sheet.
Clarinda, I thought, my spirits sinking. What the devil did she want? And did
 I really wish to find out?
Edmond Fonteyn had taken full charge of his wife to make sure she was secu
rely confined for the remainder of their stay at Fonteyn House. Had he not
 been forced by his injuries to rest, he would have swept her away to thei
r own home by now.
A temporary prison for her had been improvised from one of the more distant
 upstairs rooms. I understood it to be cold, bare of all furnishings except
 dust, and horrifically dark and stuffy since it had no window. Oliver's de
scription of it, given earlier when he filled me in on the day's events, wa
s vivid, as the chamber had served well enough as a place of punishment for
 him when he was a child. Hi mother had a great fondness for shutting him a
way to for hours at a time whenever she deemed any given transgression of c
orrect behavior to be serious enough to merit it. That meant most of them, 
he'd added with heartfelt disgust. Nanny Howard hadn't approved, but was fo
rced to comply with orders or risk a dismissal with no reference To mitigat
e the worst of it for poor Oliver, she'd sit jus outside the door and keep 
him company, talking and cheering him while pretending for his parent to pl

ay the stern and watchful guard.
Clarinda had no such companionable warden. Edmond had instructed two of the
 footmen to keep a close eye on her locked door, and see to it she didn't m
ate too much noise. He had been up twice today to see she got her meals, bu
t no one else had come since he'd put the story about that she'd fallen ill
 from the strain of the funeral and needed complete quiet to recover. That 
and the long climb up the stairs had been sufficient to discourage the rema
ining elderly relatives from paying any calls, though Oliver reported that 
speculation on the real nature of her illness was rife. Some took Edmond at
 his word, but others maintained that he'd gotten tired of her infidelities
 and had finally decided to lock her away. Though close enough to the truth
, the chief mystery for them was why Edmond had chosen this particular time
 and place to take action.
They would most certainly connect it with the row last night: Edmond and Art
hur Tyne's injuries, Ridley being held prisoner in the cellar, Oliver gettin
g roaring drunk, and all the other odd goings-on that had taken place in the
 wee hours after Aunt Fonteyn's funeral. I grimly wondered how Oliver and El
izabeth would ever manage to hold fast to topic like the weather throughout 
the ordeal of supper. The gouty crows would likely be disinclined to ask a d
irect question, but there was always a chance one of them might pluck up the
 nerve to try. Just as well for me that I was missing it all, for I'd find m
yself hard-pressed to keep a neutral and sober face.
I dismissed the footman, thanking him with a penny vale. He had most surely 
gotten the note directly from Clarinda, and even if he could not read might 
have some clear idea of what it was about. The fellow would likely go just f
ar enough along the hall to ascertain the direction of my own movements. Tho
ugh the servants of Fonteyn House were fairly trustworthy, they were not abo
ve taking an avid interest in the antics of their betters. Would I go to see
 her or stay? I had intended to have a talk with her, but not really planned
 out when. It was rather like having a tooth drawn, sooner or later it would
 have to be done, but neither haste nor delay would make the process the lea
st bit pleasant to endure.
Well, I thought, heaving out of my chair with a groan, mustn't disappoint the
 below stairs gossips.
CHAPTER
-3-
Edmond had told the footmen on guard to ignore anything Clarinda said or pr
omised on penalty of a prompt discharge from service and the pain of a soun
d thrashing that he would administer personally. Either threat was enough t
o ensure close observance of his orders; together they had the effect of in
spiring a formidable dedication to duty. When I first approached and made k
nown my intention to visit the lady, tit fellows were thrown into a painful

 dilemma. Passing on Clarinda's correspondence-that is to say, the note to 
me slipped under the door along with a penny bribe-was one thing, but they 
had no idea on what to do about visitors. Another bribe to grant me admissi
on was out of the question because Edmond possessed the only key to the roo
m. It would seem my out choice would be to confront him and ask if he might
 grant his consent to this call.
Well, that was one course of action I wasn't too keen to follow. Clarinda wa
s asking much if she expected me to go to far for her. She probably wasn't a
ware of the business of & solitary key-that or she anticipated conducting a 
conversation through the locked door. Hardly wise, considering tit
footmen would hear all and be only too glad to share a detailed recountal wi
th the other servants. Perhaps she would think I'd simply order them out of 
earshot. Indeed, I could do so, but possessed no enthusiasm for crossing Edm
ond's instructions.
With a grimace for my own weakness, I chose the lesser of several evil opti
ons and quietly persuaded the men on guard to avail themselves of a short n
ap they would not remember taking. I borrowed one of their candles and stal
ked up to the storage room door, pausing before it to reflect that this was
 also a not very wise action. However, it would be easy enough to cause Cla
rinda to forget anything inconvenient. I vanished, candle and all, and resu
med solidity on the other side.
Oliver's description was accurate; it was a depressing little closet right e
nough: cold, dark, and with a chamber pot smell to it, but not totally bare.
 A narrow bed with several blankets had been crammed in, along with a small 
chair and table. The latter held the leavings of her latest meal, paper, pen
, and ink, and several candles, though only one was currently lighted. Unlik
e Ridley, Clarinda could be relied upon not to try burning the house down, t
hough I wasn't sure I would have given her the benefit of the doubt. Perhaps
 Edmond based his trust on her acute sense of self-regard, and he knew she'd
 not attempt anything that might miscarry and endanger her own skin.
She faced the door, apparently having heard me outside with the footmen and
 had composed herself to receive, standing in the small space between the b
ed and the desk, hands folded demurely at her waist. Still wearing yesterda
y's black mourning clothes, her dress was the worse for wear with some tear
s and dried smears of mud, so the suffering dignity she strove to affect wa
s somewhat spoiled.
Of course, she could not have possibly expected me to make the entrance that
 I did, but before she could do more than widen her eyes in reaction, I bore
d into their depths with my full concentration.
Forget what you've just seen, Clarinda.
Her mouth popped open and she swayed backward one unsteady step as though 
she' d been physically struck. Had I been too forceful? Bad business for u

s all if that proved true. Fear of the dire consequences made me turn away
 from her until my composure was quite restored.
When I had nerve enough to look again, I saw her shake her head and blink as
 she regained her balance and her senses. Until this moment I'd taken care n
ot to examine my feelings about her; now came the realization of just how st
rong they were and how dangerous they could prove. If I held mere anger in m
y heart for Ridley's actions, then Clarinda's had inspired white hot fury. W
ith all this night's preoccupations I'd managed to thoroughly bury it, like 
heaping earth upon afire. But instead of smothering the flames, the burial h
ad only served to preserve, if not increase, their heat. I couldn't trust my
self to keep my temper under strict control with her. No more influencing fo
r me; that state brought the true wishes of my deeper mind too close to impl
ementation for comfort.
"Jonathan?" Her voice was none too firm, but I found it distinctly reassuri
ng. It would seem that no permanent damage had been done to her mind if not
 her body. The fight last night had left its mark on her. Her jaw was bruis
ed and swollen where I'd struck her unconscious.
"I got your note," I said in as flat and as discouraging a tone as I could summo
n. It wasn't at all difficult.
"Thank you for coming.''
"What do you want?''
"I-I want nothing. That is to say-"
"Clarinda, you didn't ask me up here without a reason," I said wearily, putti
ng my candle on the table.
She snapped her mouth shut.
"Just speak and have done with it.''
She lifted her chin, her eyes steady. "Edmond said that you were well, that w
hen I shot at you I'd missed.''
She had not missed, not at two paces, but I'd been able to vanish for a cruci
al instant, and the darkness and flash of the powder had served well to cover
 things.
"I thought he might have lied to me. I am glad to see he did not."
"Are you?"
"You can believe what you like, Jonathan, but I never wished you any harm.'
'
"Oh, indeed?"
"What was done was done only to protect my child."
"And what rare pleasure you took from it, madam, trying to murder his father
.''
"That was only a sham for Thomas Ridley's benefit. All of it. If I hadn't pr
etended such for him he would have killed me on  the spot."
"You were most convincing.''

"I had to be!"
"Of course."
Her hands formed into fists and dropped to her sides. "I can't expect you to
 understand, but I did want you to at least know why I was forced"
'Clarinda," I said in a clear cold voice. "If you want to waste the effort tel
ling me this rot, that's your business, but I have better diversions to occupy
 my time. I am not a fool and neither are you. I recall exactly everything you
 tried to do last night and how close you came to success, and nothing, no dis
tortion of truth, half-truth, or outright lie from you will change that memory
."
That stung her good and square. Were we in another place, she'd have probab
ly slapped me soundly and marched out. Here all she could do was stand and 
stare and fume. Not that it lasted long. She recovered beautifully, smooth 
as a cat. Her fists relaxed and she assumed a rueful expression.
"Very well, no more pretense. Is it possible that with you I may be able to sp
eak the whole truth?''
A cutting reply concerning my sincere doubt that she would know how hovere
d on the tip of my tongue, but I held it back and gave a brusque nod, inst
ead.
She may have seen or sensed my skepticism, but chose to ignore it. "Edmon
d doesn't know you're here, does he?"
There. She'd just correctly read one of the other reasons behind my abrupt m
anner. I should have to take extreme care dealing with her. "It seemed the t
actful thing to do for the moment."
"No doubt. He's a formidable man.''
I offered no comment, though I could easily agree with her on that point.
"He said that you'd seen Richard."
"Took me by last night."
"Did you like him?"
"What does it matter to you?''
Another sting for her, which was something of a surprise, By now I'd thought
 her beyond all tender feeling.
"It does matter. I'm afraid for my child. Our child."
"In what way?"
"I'm afraid that because of what's happened Edmond might do him harm. He 
could punish Richard for the things I've done."
Clarinda was shut away in a most disagreeable spot with only her own dark 
soul for company, so hers was a reasonable fear, but not one I seriously h
arbored. Edmond could be unpleasant, but I sensed he would not purposely h
arm the boy. Even so, I had an excellent means of dealing with him to guar
antee Richard's well-being.
"I'll see that the child is safeguarded from any harm." Instinct told me to pr

eserve a cool and indifferent front before her, but she was perceptive enough 
to see through it.
"You really do care for him, don't you?" she asked with more than a hint of 
rising hope.
It seemed better not to answer, though my silence was answer enough.
"I'm glad of that. What I say now, what I ask now, is not for my sake, but fo
r the sake of that innocent child. You' re a part of this family, but you hav
en't lived long with them, you don't know them as I do. Richard will need a f
riend. Will you look out for him?"
A fair request, and certainly for something I'd be doing regardless of her int
ercession in the matter. "I shall do what I can. What about your other son?''
She looked away briefly. "He's already lost to me. He's away at school, hi
s life has been ordered and set out for him. Edmond saw to that. Edmond an
d Aunt Fonteyn."
"Whom you murdered." Edmond and I had worked as much out between us, tha
t Clarinda had killed Oliver's mother, but I wanted to know for certain.
Clarinda's lips twitched in a near smile. "If you think I regret helping that
 evil old harridan along to her place in hell, then please do reconsider. You
-any of you-could get away from her. I could not. It was an ill day for me wh
en I married her favorite brother and worse still when I gave him a son. She 
was always there, interfering, sharp as a thorn, and never once letting me fo
rget who controlled the money.''
The Fonteyn money. The inspiration and goal behind all of Clarinda's trespa
sses. "How did your first husband die?''
"What?"' The apparent change of subject first puzzled her, then she divined 
the reason behind it. "For God's sake, do you think-"
"I don't know what to think, so it seemed best to make a direct inquiry."
"He dropped dead from a bad heart," she answered with no small disgust. "I ha
d nothing to do with it. A pity his sister did not follow his example, else l
ife would have been easier for all of us."
"Then you married Edmond?''
"I needed his protection and he needed my son's money, but what a farce t
hat turned out to be with the lot of us still subject to Aunt Fonteyn's w
hims. When Richard was born sooner or later she'd know Edmond was not his
 father, all of them would know, and then what would happen to us? She'd 
have put me out on the street quick enough or packed me off to Bedlam and
 done God knows what to my baby."
I didn't see Edmond or even Aunt Fonteyn for that matter allowing things to
 go so far. The offensive prospect of a scandal would have likely mitigated
 any judgment she made once her initial outrage had passed. Clarinda had th
e intelligence to know and play upon that weakness. No, she'd ever been aft
er the family money; it was just that simple.

"So you got the likes of Ridley to be your protector, to be subject to your w
hims."
Various thoughts were clearly flickering back and forth behind her eyes, too
 fast to interpret. She paused a goodly time to search my face and finally s
hook her head. "You don't under stand," she said with genuine incredulity, t
hen softly laughed.
There was a sound to make my skin crawl. The room seemed to shrink around us
. "I think it's best that I don't."
"Or you might have some sympathy for me? For what my life has been like? D
on't bother yourself.''
"As you wish."
A baleful silence grew between us, filling this dank and chill closet right t
o the ceiling like smoke. There was no room in it for me. My questions were a
ll satisfied; therefore I had no need to remain. I made to pick up my candle.
"No, wait!" Her hand shot out to seize mine. Because of the restricted space
 we'd been close enough to easily toad but had managed to avoid it.
Five years past I'd been more than eager to touch her. Just last night I' d fo
ught off the temptation to do so again only with the greatest difficulty. I sa
w her still as a very beautiful, desirable woman, but any craving I'd ever fos
tered for her was now stone dead.
I shook her off. "I'll leave the candle if you like."
"It's not that. I have one more thing to ask of you."
Tempting as it was to point out that I owed her no favors, I waited for her to
 go on.
"Jonathan, do you know what Edmond has planned for
me? What he will do once we're home?''
"He has not communicated that information to me, nor is it really my busine
ss."
"He'll have me shut away in a room that will make this seem  like  a palace."
"There are worse spots, madam. Would you prefer Bedlam or Bridewell?"
"You speak that way because you're angry, but please, try to see things thro
ugh my eyes, just for a moment, I beg you.''
Again, I waited.
Outwardly, she calmed herself, but her heartbeat was very loud to my acute 
hearing.
I sensed that the earlier talk and questions about Richard had never been a 
real concern for her. It had been but a useful means to sound me out; was sh
e finally coming to the real reason why she'd asked me here?
"There may be worse places, but I can't think of a single one," she whisper
ed. "I am to be shut away forever and ever. I will be completely alone. Aft

er tomorrow, I will never see the sun or even the warmth of a candle flame 
again. It will be always dark and always cold. He's promised as much. Those
 are  his  very words."
I thought that she was lying again, for it would be easy to verify the truth w
ith Edmond, but her fear was genuine enough. I could smell it. I could almost 
taste it.
"He full well knows that it will drive me mad, giving substance to the story
 he'll tell others. No person with an ounce of compassion in them would trea
t a mongrel dog with such cruelty, but that's what he's sworn is in store fo
r me."
No sunlight, not even a candle. God, but could I not thoroughly appreciate wh
at kind of darkness that was? "Very well, I'll speak to him,'' I said heavily
.
"No! I want you to help me get away from him!"
My turn for a bout of incredulity. "By heaven, I think you're mad already."
"Not yet. Not yet! I don't ask you to help me escape, but
just to get me away from him. Devise whatever prison you like for me, let me 
be totally alone, but if I can have but an  hour of daylight I'll ask nothing
 more of you.''
An hour of daylight. What would I not give to have as little for myself? Mos
t of the time the lack did not grieve me. No! much. But then I had diversion
s aplenty to fill the hours. I  had some choices left. Clarinda had none.
"If... if that's impossible," she continued, faltering as her gaze dropped aw
ay, "then I would ask you to give me the means of making another kind of esca
pe.''
"What means?"
She raised her eyes to search mine and licked her lips. "I've heard it said th
at if one takes enough opium'
"Good God, Clarinda!''
"Otherwise I can tear up the bedclothes and find a way to hang myself. It w
ould please Edmond very well, I'm sure."
"There's no need'
"Is there not? I mean this, Jonathan. You still seem to have a heart left, that
's why I thought to talk to you. I can trust no one else. I'm not asking a grea
t deal. You' d put a mad dog out of its misery, would you not?''
"I would, but'
"But what? It's that or take care of me yourself-or help me escape altogether
."
She waited and waited, and for all her skill at deception could not completel
y keep a sharp little spark of hope from showing in her eyes, but I did not d
eign to remark on that last absurd suggestion. Any or all of her talk of anot
her prison with me as keeper or of taking her own life might have been meant 

to soften my resolve so perhaps I would agree to help her escape. Well, I'd a
lready told her I was not a fool. I shoot my head. "There's another way of ha
ndling this. I'll see toil tonight."
The spark flashed once, then dimmed. "What is that?"
"I'll talk to Edmond'
"But that won't'
"He'll listen to me, I assure you."
She made a choking sound.
"You may think otherwise, but I will make him. That's really the best I can d
o for you, and I believe you're well aware of  it."
Obviously this was not what she'd hoped to achieve for herself; on the othe
r hand, it was better than an outright refusal. But however much disappoint
ment she showed, I still had a strong impression that she had accomplished 
something with me and was calculating its eventual effect on her. Mildly wo
rrisome, that, but nothing more.
She abruptly lowered her gaze, shoulders slumped as if in defeat or acceptance
. "Yes, I am aware of it. For what it's worth, I'm grateful to you.''
For what it's worth, I thought. Very damned little, but as she'd said, I'd do 
as much for a mad dog.
Being more unsettled than angry, it was less perilous now to influence her 
into taking a restful sleep; thus would she have no memory of my egress fro
m the room. I suggested nothing more than that, though, preferring caution 
over calamity in the event that I'd misjudged my present state of mind and 
gave in to error. Leaving her reclining peacefully on the narrow bed, I sie
ved past the door and back out into the hall, turning solid again before th
inking to remove myself from the immediate view of her guards.
Thankfully, I found the footmen were still lost in their doze, sparing me a
dditional exertion. It struck me that I should wake them and tell them to f
orget they'd even seen me, but that was too much of an effort for so small 
a detail. They could tell Edmond what they liked, if they dared. I didn't c
are one way or another. Whatever they said would be little enough. I quietl
y made my way down the stairs, for I had much to think about and wanted to 
be as far away as possible from Clarinda. All the relatives and servants wo
uld be busy with supper, so privacy was no problem; I had the pick of Fonte
yn House's many rooms.
Only one appealed to me, though.
The nursery.
Not only would I have another look in on Richard, which in itself was suff
icient enticement to go there, but the superb idea of plying a few questio
ns to Nanny Howard had popped into my mind.
Clarinda was as full of lies as hive has honey. Some I'd picked out without
 trouble, others were more elusive, and by God, but didn't the woman have m

ore than her share of brass? Wanting me to take Edmond' s place as her ward
en or to go so far as to help her escape ... ugh. That was right out. It wa
s also something of an insult since she'd so badly underestimated me. She w
as not without considerable wit; why had she even proposed such a ludicrous
 action? Likely it had to do with the theory of venture nothing, gain nothi
ng. I hoped as much, for then it would seem less offensive to endure.
She was unquestionably afraid, but was her fear for the threat of a dark im
prisonment or for imprisonment alone? Either one would be more than alarmin
g, and certainly Edmond would make a stern and alert keeper, but I found it
 difficult to believe he would be as extreme as she'd claimed. Perhaps he'd
 been giving vent to his own anger with her, making threats he'd probably n
ot fulfill. More likely she'd simply lied to me. Again.
Still and all, I'd have to sort fact from fancy just to be sure, and could th
ink of no better person to consult than Nanny Howard. If she was as intellige
nt as she looked, then she'd know all the happenings of this particular branc
h of the Fonteyn family tree and be able to provide any number of necessary d
etails.
She might be reluctant to talk with an outsider, though, for I was just that d
espite my relationship to Richard. I made a face, not liking the idea of havin
g to influence her. I didn't like it, but would do so if nothing else would mo
ve her.
"What a sneaking rogue you're turning into, Johnny Boy," I said aloud, but 
not too very aloud. Echoes tended to
carry far along these dark corridors, and I had no wish to announce my self
-reproach to any stray upstairs maid who might be lurking about. Best to re
move my mind from the subject until the time was right to approach it.
So I cheerfully speculated on the prospect of slipping in for another peep 
at Richard. If nothing else, Nanny Howard would gladly tell me all about hi
m. What did he like to do? What were his favorite games? Did he have other 
children to play with at Edmond's estate? Did he have a pony yet? Probably 
not, considering his reaction to the painted one now in his possession. My 
heart seemed to quicken with a kind of life again at the splendid thought o
f eventually giving him a real one. I recalled clearly the delicious excite
ment that had possessed me on one of my early birthdays with Father's gift 
of a fine white pony. No more sharing rides with others on the front of the
 saddle, I'd had a brave charger of my own to play out my daydreams. More t
han that, I'd learned much on the care and coddling of equines, and had tak
en to my lessons in dressage like butter to hot bread. Richard looked to ha
ve some of [Rat enthusiasm in him, and what a pleasure it would be to nurtu
re it and ...
Father.
Dear me, but I'd have to sit down to write and somehow tell him what had 

happened.
But later, I thought, bounding lightly down the last of the stairs and taking t
he final turn needed to reach the nursery.
Unfortunately, just outside the nursery door, I encountered my son's other 
father, Edmond Fonteyn.
He was a big man, nearly Ridley's size, and usually as robust, but last night
's activities had left him with a gaunt white face, one arm in a sling, banda
ging 'round both hands, and an unnatural slowness to his movements. Fire stil
l lurked in his dark eyes, though, and he favored me with some of its heat.
I hauled up short, rocking back on my heels in a most undignified way, at t
he same time cursing myself for such absurd behavior. After all, what had I
 to fear from him?
"Where have you been keeping yourself all day?" he growled, not bothering w
ith the courtesy of a greeting beyond a slight raising of his chin. Had he 
always had that mannerism or taken it from Clarinda? Or had she gotten it f
rom him?
"My doctor recommended rest.''
"That fool Oliver."
"He's not a fool,'' I said mildly.
Edmond chose not to argue the point. "What are you here for? Mrs. Howard
 said you'd already come and gone."
"And I've come again. What else did Mrs. Howard have  to say about my visi
t?''
His lips parted as though to answer, then snapped shut. I'd caught him out 
and he was well aware of it. "Come along then. We need to talk.'' When I he
sitated to jump at this command, he added, "The boy's sound asleep and will
 look just the same later on."
When first we'd met, his brusque manner had intimidated me, for I'd attribut
ed it to the fact that he was aware of my past intimacy with his wife. True 
enough, but now I was able to understand that such was his manner with every
one and counseled myself to tolerance. I followed as he led off up the hall 
to again take the stairs to the ground floor.
As he slowly paced along, an uncomfortable foreboding began to assert itsel
f on my spirit, and I soon found my somber expectations fulfilled when he t
urned into the one room in this whole dismal house I least wanted to visit.
Its fireplace held a hearty blaze; that was the chief difference between my
 present intrusion and the very first time I'd come here with Clarinda. The
n it had been rather cold and cheerless-until she made it her business to w
arm things up for me. We'd consummated our fit of mutual passion on that se
ttee under the eye of that same bust of Aristotle-or perhaps it was one of 
the Caesar's-sitting on the mantel. Good God, what did Edmond think he was 
about in bringing me here?

But as he eased his heavy body down on the settee with an audible sigh, I 
comprehended (and not without considerable
relief) that he did not know what had happened here those few short years a
go. His present occupancy must be because of its privacy and because this h
ad been Clarinda's room during the funeral. Some of her things still lay sc
attered about-small things: a handkerchief discarded on the floor, a comb f
orgotten on a table, a pair of slippers peering shyly out from under a chai
r. Of her other belongings there was no sign; perhaps they'd been packed an
d taken away to their home already.
"Sit," he ordered, gesturing to one of the chairs.
I  did  so.
He had a brandy bottle close at hand and some glasses. Without asking my ple
asure, he poured out two portions and nodded for me to take one. I did this 
without hesitation, for if need be I could alter his memory about my lack of
 thirst.
He did not trouble to make a toast, but partook himself of a draught that woul
d have done credit to Oliver's reputation for swilling down spirits. That gone
, he filled his glass again and emptied it just as swiftly, then availed himse
lf of a third libation. I thought he might deal with it as with the first two,
 but he contented himself with only half before putting the glass to one side.
"Something disturbs you?" I ventured, indicating the brandy.
He grunted. "Life disturbs me, Barrett. I've been harshly served."
"If you want an apology from me, I should be happy to give-"
He waved me down, shaking his head. "There's no need, what's done is done. I
 had quite a talk with Clarinda today and got the truth out of her concernin
g her liaison with you. I think it's the truth, anyway. At long last she has
 no more reason to lie to me."
"Sir, if you wish the truth, then by my honor, it's yours for the asking."
"That won't be necessary. You need not tell the husband how enjoyable you f
ound his wife's favors.''
I winced, recovered myself, and spoke through my teeth. "But I did not know
 she was anyone's wife.''
He looked long and hard at me, not moving a muscle. By very slow and small 
degrees the lines of his face relaxed. "That makes a difference to you?''
"It does."
"Then by God, you're probably the only man in England who can say so."
"Like Clarinda, I have no reason to lie to you, nor would I if I did." I let 
him think on it a moment, then said, "You wanted to talk. Was this the subjec
t you had in mind?"
"Not quite, but it is directly related to my wife. And you."
"Richard."
"Our mutual son,'' he rumbled.

"What about him?"
"You surprised me last night. Most fathers want nothing to do with their bas
tards."
Like a runaway fire, hot anger rushed through my body. One bare instant lat
er and I was on my feet and looming over him. It was only by the greatest e
ffort of forbearance that 1 didn't haul him up and toss him across the room
 as he deserved. He flinched, eyes widening, taking in my red face and trem
bling fists. Apparently my reaction surprised him once more, almost as much
 as it startled me. "You will not refer to him in that way ever again,'' I 
whispered, voice shaking with rage.
"Or what?" His eyes had narrowed; his tone was dangerous.
"Or ..." A number of obvious, violence-oriented threats occurred to me, but
 I was starting to think once more and  knew that none of them would be tak
en seriously by this man, not without an immediate demonstration, anyway. "
Or I'll make it my duty to instruct you on the subject of good manners."
We locked gazes for a goodly period, but there was no need to rely on my u
nnatural influence this time. Edmond could see just how earnest was the in
tent behind the temperate words.
Then he smiled.
It was a mere tightening of the straight line of his mouth and very brief, bu
t a smile nonetheless, and enough to give me pause. Had this thrice-cursed vi
llain been testing me?
He leaned back upon the settee. "Thank you, but I've had sufficient instruct
ion to last me a fortnight. Thought you had as well, but you seem to have re
covered. Sit down, Cousin, there's been enough blood spilled in this family 
already."
I backed away, not to sit, but to pace about the room and work off the sudd
en energy that had set my limbs to quivering. Had he always been like this 
to Clarinda? If so, then though I could not excuse her crimes, I could easi
ly understand one of the reasons why she'd committed them. Certainly contin
ual contact with his abrasive manner could not have done her much good. Or 
had it been Clarinda's endless infidelities that made him like this? Had th
ey driven him to live in what was apparently a constant state of bitter exa
speration? Perhaps by now he knew of no other way to express himself to the
 world.
''Why am I here, Edmond?" I asked, when I'd gotten my temper under contro
l.
"Because I wanted to have a good look at you. Your sister and I had quite a ta
lk earlier today ..."
"Yes, she said something of it to me."
"She was most informative about your high sense of honor and good character
, but I needed to see for myself what you're made of. A man usually shows o

ne face to women and another to other men, just as they do for us. It would
 seem that for you there's little difference between the two."
"You have an annoying way of fashioning and bestowing a compliment, sir, if
 that was your intent.''
"The shortcoming has been mentioned to me by others, but for the sake of ac
curacy think of it as less of a compliment and more of an observation.''
I paused by the fireplace. "So you've observed that I seem to be a man of h
onor and good character. What of it? I thought you wanted to talk about Ric
hard. I am more than willing, provided that you refrain from insulting him."
He snorted. "The truth is not an insult, and you'd best get used to hearing
 such once news of this gets out. There are others ever willing to make a c
ruel cut when the fancy strikes 'em. Then what means will you take to impro
ve their manners? More duels?"
"Only when it's impossible to avoid. That business with Ridley-"
"Was all part of Clarinda's scheming, I know. You're damned lucky he didn't 
kill you. Now that you've raised the subject, how the devil are you to be ri
d of him without another fight? However right and pleasing it may be, we can
't keep him locked in the cellar forever.''
"Put your mind at rest on that. I've already dealt with him. He's presently up
stairs in Arthur Tyne's room, and they'll both be leaving in the morning.''
Before he could master himself I had the great satisfaction of seeing a look
 of boundless astonishment seize control of Edmond' s features.'' What are y
ou saying?''
"It's all cleared up and put away, so to speak. He and his cousin will trouble
 us no more. I have his word on it."
"His word!"
"It was all quite easy, once I got him to settle down and listen to reason."
In light of the quarrelsome nature of his character, and not forgetting th
e implausibility of what I was telling him, I was convinced that my very b
est assurance would not be enough for Edmond. Even as the words tumbled ea
sily from my mouth, the corners of his own turned markedly down, and he lo
oked ready to offer a considerable debate and a number of bothersome quest
ions I was not prepared to answer. Consequently, I made sure to come close
 and lock eyes with him again, guaranteeing a successful imposition of my 
will over his own.
"You don't have to worry about him at all...." I whispered into his mind.
He was not easy to influence; for that difficulty I could blame the brandy. 
It was very like talking to a wall-a rather stoutly made one composed of bri
ck. Several moments passed without my noticing any visible effect beyond a s
light deadening of his countenance, but I'd seen that face on him before, us
ually prior to the delivery of some trenchant remark. Just as 1 thought my e
fforts would come to nothing, I observed that he had ceased to blink his eye

s quite so much. For that good blessing I allowed myself a small sigh of rel
ief, but continued to concentrate the greater part of my thought and will up
on him. There was a kind of instinctual feeling within me that if I let my f
ocus wander for even a second, I'd lose him.
"It's all been sorted out. ..."
When finally finished, I'd acquired a nasty, droning ache behind my eyes, bu
t at least there would be no more discussion of Ridley for now and probably 
for good. It was well with me; I was altogether sick of the subject. Returni
ng to my post by the fireplace, I pinched the bridge of my nose trying to di
minish the pain. Though fading, it was an annoyance. I hoped I could get thr
ough the rest of the night without having to resort to that handy talent aga
in.
"Now what about young Richard?" I asked upon seeing Edmond very much 
needed the prompting.
"Yes. Well.. ."He rubbed his face and neck like a waking sleeper. I was ha
ppy enough to wait him out for it had been hard going for us both. "You've
 seen him. According to Mrs. Howard you seem to like him. So what do you w
ant to do?"
A vague enough question, requiring a general sort of answer, though in my h
eart I'd already made a thousand plans for the boy. "What's best for him, o
f course. You're his father as well; what do you recommend?''
"Father? Father in name only," he rumbled, coming fully awake. "I knew he 
wasn't mine the moment I clapped eyes on him. She used to delight in prete
nding-oh, never mind. It's all over.'' He made a throwing-away motion with
 one hand.
I frowned at him. "Did that child ever suffer because of his mother's betraya
l of you?"
His snapped-out answer told me he spoke the truth. "I've never laid a hand 
on him. God's death, I only saw the boy when it was necessary. He never too
k to me."
That I could understand.
His gaze canted sharply over to meet mine, and he correctly interpreted m
y expression. "What would you have? For me to play the saint and clasp hi
m to my bosom as my own? Then wish on, for such sham is beyond my ability
."
"My wish ..." I began with a return of hot anger, but trailed off and made m
yself cool down. There was no point to it now. There was no point in wishing
 the child had had even a vestige of kindness from the man he perceived as h
is father. Whether or not ignoring the boy was better than pretended affecti
on I could not judge. It was just so unutterably sad.
"What is your wish?'' he finally asked.
"Nothing. As you say, it's all over."

For several more minutes neither of us spoke. I was now abrim with dark per
turbation, and Edmond seemed in no better shape. I could almost feel the re
stless shift of our combined emotions churning through the room like some s
ort of fog composed of feeling instead of mist. Very much did I want to rem
ove myself from its ill effect, but there was no help for it; I'd have to s
ee this through.
"Edmond."
He didn't move; only his eyes shifted.
"You've asked me what I want. Tell me what it is that you want."
He laughed once, softly. "Another life might serve me well, or fewer mistake
s in this one."
"I meant concerning Richard."
"I know what you meant. You said you want what's best for him. On that we ar
e in full accord; we should certainly try to do what's best for him. It's no
t his fault that his mother's a murdering sow."
The brandy must be having its way with him, else he might not be so free wit
h his speech, but after looking up the muzzle of a pistol aimed at him by hi
s own dear wife, he was more than entitled to call her names. Indeed, I coul
d respect him for his extreme restraint in the matter.
He glowered at the fire. "For as long as she lives I' 11 have to be her kee
per. It's my just punishment for marrying the wrong woman and hers for marr
ying the wrong man. We're stuck with each other, she the prisoner, me the t
urnkey, not unlike most marriages, I suppose."
Just the subject I'd have to question him about, but it would have to hold fo
r a bit longer, for this one was far more important to me. "What has this to 
do with Richard?''
'I'm attempting to give you an idea of what sort of growing up awaits him o
nce we're all home again."
He allowed me time to think on it. I didn't much like the images my mind wa
s busily bringing forth for consideration.
"What's best for the boy," Edmond said, reaching for his unfinished glass, "is
 to not be in a house where his mother must be locked away like the lost soul 
that she is. What's best is for him to be with his real father.''
"Wh-what?"
He caught hold of the glass and downed the last half of his drink. "Would y
ou consider taking him away?''
"To where?'' I asked stupidly.
"To any place you damned well please."
I shook my head, not as an answer to his question but from sheer disbelief. T
he longer I stared, though, the more certain I became that he was utterly ser
ious. "You'd be willing to make such a sacrifice?''
Now it was his turn to favor me with his disbelief. "Sacrifice? Haven't you

 yet gotten it through your head that I care nothing for the boy? Did someo
ne stuff cloth in your ears when I wasn't looking? God help me, but knowing
 the things I know I can hardly endure the sight of him anymore. D'ye think
 I'm making a sacrifice? Don't flatter me."
"But"
"If it's true that we both want what's best for him, then that's for him to b
e well away from my house."
"But for you to give him up just like that?''
"Damnation, I'm giving him to a man who might be able to provide better for
 him than I ever could. I know my limit, Barrett, and I've long since reach
ed the end of mine."
"This is the brandy talking'
"Brandy be damned, I'm trying to do something right for once. If you don't w
ant him, then I'll find someone else who does and bless him for the favor. I
'm trying to give the misbegotten brat a chance to know some kindness and lo
ve. I've none of it left in my heart; that bitch I married burned it out of 
me." He hurled the empty glass across the room. Though aimed nowhere near me
, I still instinctively ducked as it flew past, so savage was the force behi
nd his action. Next he picked up the brandy bottle and seemed for a moment r
eady to send it crashing after the glass, but the moment passed. He collecte
d himself and fell back on the settee.
"D'ye want 'im or not?" he asked, his voice drained of everything except wea
riness.
There was no need to think on my answer. "Yes, of course I do. I should be 
more than delighted to take care of him."
"Good.'' He took a long drink right from the bottle. "You can sort out the de
tails with Mrs. Howard. Take her along as well if you like. I can give her an
 excellent reference if you need it."
"That won't be necessary. I'm sure she will do admirably with us." God, the
 man must truly be distracted if he thought I'd separate Richard from the o
ne person who had been his chief source of affection and guidance from the 
cradle."What about Clarinda? What if Richard should want to see her?"
"No." There was a finality in his tone reminiscent of the gallows. "Your sister
 and I discussed that already. Until he's old enough to understand better, his 
mother is ill and that's the end  of  it."
"It's a hard business never to see his mother again."
"I cannot perceive that it would be of much advantage to him  in the future, s
ince he saw little enough of her in the past.''
"Hard for Clarinda, too."
"Indeed it would be if she cared a fig for him. For either of them," he adde
d, reminding me of the other child who was away at school. I wondered if tha
t boy was a true son of Aunt Fonteyn's brother or the first of Clarinda's ch

angelings. Now was not the time to make an inquiry, though. Besides, this wa
s in direct opposition to the impression Clarinda had given me on her feelin
gs for either of them and wanted sorting.
"How can a mother not care for her children?'' I mused in a way meant to d
raw him out. Even my own mother, twisted in mind and heart as she was, car
ed after a fashion for her two children. She'd removed her damaging presen
ce from us all those years ago, after all. Not unlike what Edmond was tryi
ng to  do  now  for Richard.
His answer was curt and lacking in interest. "Ask her sometime, you'll find ou
t soon enough that she hasn't a jot of regard for anyone but herself. But if i
t were otherwise with her, it still wouldn't matter. She forfeited all rights 
to them when she did her murder.''
I looked at the stone bust on the mantel. On impulse I picked it up and turned
 it over to see if anything might be marked on the base to indicate who it rep
resented. Neither Aristotle nor a Caesar, the neatly carved inscription identi
fied it to be Homer. That little mystery explained, I put it back in place.
Since Edmond had ascertained for himself the fact of my honor, now would be 
the time for me to return the favor, to make sure that all would be reasonab
ly well for Clarinda, if not for her sake, then for Richard's. "With you as 
the turnkey how will she be treated?'' I asked very quietly.
"A damned sight better than she deserves. Don't worry yourself. It won't be 
a Bridewell, she'll not want for creature comforts, but I'm going to make da
mned sure she has no opportunity to kill ever again."
I believed him. He was as he presented himself. Perhaps Clarinda's constant 
lies had created in him a need to cleave to the absolute truth. So said all 
my instinct as I studied his hard face. It was no small reassurance to me th
at my growing respect for him was not misplaced.
He took another long drink, then glared at me.
"What is it? You want to toast her health or something?" He nodded towar
d my untouched brandy.
Damnation, but I was tired. "No. Nothing like that." Just the prospect of tr
ying to pierce through his brick wall again was enough to renew the ache beh
ind my eyes. He could think what he liked about my not drinking his brandy, 
to hell with it.
"What, then?"
For all his roughness, his willingness to do well for Richard spoke of an inn
ate decency in his heart. This told me that Clarinda would be all right for t
he time being. Complete confirmation of it could wait for another night.
"I just wanted to say that should you ever feel differently about the boy, t
hen you're welcome to come visit him any time."
He seemed on the verge of tossing the invitation back in my face, if I could 
judge anything by the sneer that briefly crossed his own. Then he visibly rei

gned himself in. "I'll consider it," he muttered. "Now get along with you. I 
need my rest."
I took this servant's dismissal in good grace. The man was in pain and only
 wanted the privacy to get thoroughly drunk. God knows, I'd do the same wer
e I to find myself in his shoes. I wished him a good night, getting no repl
y beyond an indifferent grunt, and shut the door on him.
Halfway along the hall I had to stop for a moment, staring at nothing in par
ticular while my thoughts finally caught up with events.
Good God in heaven ... Richard was going to come home with  me.
Then I clamped my hand over my mouth to keep from shouting the house d
own.
CHAPTER
-4-
"Faster! Faster! Faster!" Richard screamed into my right ear. "Yah-yah-yah!
"
I did what I could to oblige him, though things nearly came apart when I mad
e a sharpish turn into the parlour. Our progress was nearly defeated by the 
high polish on the floor causing my shoes to lose a bit of their grip on the
 turf so to speak. I just managed to gain the safety of the parlour rug in t
ime to keep us from taking a slide into an inconveniently placed chair. We f
lashed by Elizabeth and Oliver, who were sensibly sitting and having their t
ea before the fire, whooped a hallo at them, then shot out the other door an
d into one of the narrow back halls where the servants usually lurked. It wa
s a straight path on this part of the course, so I stepped up the speed and 
galloped hard and with lots of needless bounce, much to the delight of my ri
der. Richard giggled and gasped, tightened his stranglehold around my neck, 
and dug his heels more firmly into my flanks.
"Have a care," I told him, making sure of my own hold on his legs. "We're co
ming to a hill."
He shrieked encouragement to his steed and I carried us up the back stairs t
hree at a time, wound my way through the upper back hall to the upper front 
hall, then jounced roughly down to the front stairs landing, startling the o
ne maid in the house who hadn't heard our noisy progress. She let forth a sa
tisfying screech, throwing up her hands, an action that amused Richard might
ily. He yelled out a view-halloo, told her she was the fox, and we gave roar
ing chase as far as the entry leading to the kitchen. Showing an unexpectedl
y fleet turn of foot, she ducked through to safety, smartly shutting the doo
r in our faces just in time.
"Outfoxed!" I cried in mock despair to my laughing rider. "She's gone to gr
ound and the dogs can't find her. What shall we do now? Another steeplechas
e?''
"Yes, please!" he bellowed, freshening his hold 'round my neck. I took us 

through the house twice more as we pretended each corner was a church stee
ple we had to make in time to stay ahead of a pack of pretend horsemen who
 were hot on our heels. We naturally won each race, for I was a steed of s
uperior stock, a point I'd confided to him when I initially proposed our h
orseback riding game.
This was his first night in London, and it was proving to be a memorable one
-for us b<5th. I could not have been happier, and never before in my life ha
d I felt this particular kind of happiness. No plans, no speculations, nothi
ng I'd ever imagined had remotely prepared me for the actuality of his const
ant and immediate presence. He filled the house, he filled the whole world f
or me. At times I could scarce take in that he was real, and at others, it s
eemed that he had been with me always from the very moment of my own birth.
Once he'd learned that Edmond had given Richard over to my care, Oliver ge
nerously opened his house to the lad and welcomed him in. Elizabeth was ju
st as keen about having the boy in as well and managed within the space of
 a few days to turn a couple of the upstairs rooms into a
very fine bedroom and nursery for Mrs. Howard and her charge.
That lady was not herself adverse to moving out of Edmond Fonteyn's no dou
bt gloomy household and into ours, but with all the row going on, I was ce
rtain she'd be having second thoughts soon enough. Past personal experienc
e with nannies had taught me that they prefer routines of the quiet, restf
ul sort, something that would likely be lacking during those hours when I 
was up and around.
My time with Richard was short owing to the limits of my condition, but hap
pily for the present, the winter nights started early and lasted long. Even
 so, on this first evening the instant I was awake I anxiously bolted from 
my cellar sanctuary to rush upstairs and see him, taxing the patience of Je
richo, my valet. His inviolable custom was to lie in wait in my room, then 
seize upon and subject my person to an interval of grooming and dressing so
 I wouldn't shame him before polite company. As Richard and I galloped past
, we surprised him emerging from my doorway, razor in one hand and cloth in
 the other, indication that I was in for a shaving tonight. Jericho's mouth
 popped open in startled disappointment before he hurriedly retreated out o
f the way.
The rest of the servants had simply been told that Richard was our cousin a
nd committed to our care. If anyone chose to make anything of his uncanny r
esemblance to me, Jericho was to report such murmurings, and I'd have a lit
tle "talk" with the person to discourage idle gossip. Like Nanny Howard, Je
richo knew all about the boy's true paternity, and both could be trusted to
 keep it to themselves. We'd all planned that Richard would also be informe
d but only when he was old enough and when the time was right, It seemed be
st to curtail any possibility of him overhearing something he wasn't ready 

for by making sure all the other servants were just as discreet.
Richard and I made another circuit of the upper rear hall
and emerged into the front again but were forced to abruptly rein in. Nanny 
Howard stood square in our path, hands on her hips, and a stern cast to the 
look on her face.
"Mr. Barrett!" she said in a tone to match the look.
"Oy-oy-oy!" Richard yodeled, thumping the top of my head with one fist wh
ile the other twisted the remnants of my neckcloth around. "See me, Nanny
! We're having a race!"
"You'll race yourself into an upset stomach with all that shouting," she told
 him, fulfilling my expectations about nannies and their preference for a qui
et routine. Her eye fell upon me like the hand of doom. "Mr. Barrett, it will
 be his bedtime soon and now he'll be hours settling for it."
Not at all contrite, I nonetheless came up with a pretty speech of apology a
nd volunteered to help in that task. "What's your best settling remedy, then
? We'll get him fixed right up. How about a tot of hot milk with a little ho
ney for taste? That always worked for me."
This mollified her somewhat, but she still showed some reluctance to let go he
r chagrin. "You needn't trouble yourself over such trifles, sir. I can see to 
things."
"Hardly a trifle. Besides, I got him stirred up; it's only fair I stir him down a
gain."
"But, sir"
"This isn't what you're used to, I'm sure, but we run things differently in thi
s house. I'm very interested in the lad's well-being, so you might as well get 
used to the fact that I'm going to be underfoot quite a lot. You've got him to 
yourself all through the day, but for an hour or so at night it's my turn."
She pursed her lips in swift thought and being every bit as intelligent as I'
d estimated, decided cooperation was preferable to argument. "Very well, Mr. 
Barrett. But I must remind you that Richard is not yet used to such excitemen
ts. Perhaps it's best to ease him into things a little at a time."
It sounded reasonable to me, and I wasn't one to cross her on anything as i
mportant as a growing lad's bedtime. Not yet, anyway. Richard groaned a pro
test as we ducked into the nursery and pulled on my neckcloth again in an e
ffort to turn his steed back to the beckoning fields of the rest of the hou
se. The fabric came all undone and slipped free, and not wasting the opport
unity, he waved it like a banner, then whipped it around my eyes.
"What's happened?" I gruffly asked, blundering about with one arm extende
d to feel my way. "Who blew out the candles?"
This game went over enormously well with him. I played it to the limit, pret
ending to smash face first against a wall resulting in a crash to the floor-
a slow and gentle one with much loud moaning, despair, and calls for caution

. We ended up rolling and tussling like puppies until he was breathless. One
 advantage I had over any other adults he'd ever play with was that I didn't
 get tired.
"I think you need a carpet in here, Nanny," I said, still lying on the floo
r because Richard had decided to hold my legs down by sprawling over them. 
"A nice thick one. Don't want the boy to get any more bruises than necessar
y."
"It's sure to get very dirty, sir." "Then let it get dirty, we can always get a
nother. I'll put my sister onto it tomorrow. London's full of shops; the three 
of you can go pick one out. Does he need anything else-clothes, furniture, that
 sort of thing?''
"Toys!" Richard shouted, taking off one of my shoes and measuring it against
 the other, sole to sole.
"He is well supplied with all that he needs, sir, with more than enough, I thi
nk."
The furnishings from the nursery at Edmond's home had been carted over a
nd put into place in these rooms. Moving from my childhood home to Londo
n had proved to be a bad wrench for me, and I was full grown and well pr
epared
for it. I'd hoped that the sudden change for Richard would be lessened with
 the presence of having his own familiar things around him. It must have wo
rked, for he seemed carefree enough.
"Well, you be sure to tell us of your least little need, hear? The big needs
, too. You have any problems, you come straightway to any of us so we can fi
x 'em."
"Yes, sir."
"One's bigger than the other," Richard observed of the toes. He looked at me
 for some sort of reaction. "One's bigger than the other."
"So it is,'' I agreed, propping up on my elbows to see. "By a fraction of an 
inch. I'll have a word with my shoemaker."
"What's a fraction?"
"A portion of something, usually very small."
"A portion of what?"
"Anything you like."
He now measured my shoe against one of his own. "It's bigger by a fraction
 of an inch," he pronounced.
"So it is, by lots of fractions of inches. I'll teach you properly about them if 
you like."
"Yes, please."
"Nanny, have we got a measuring stick about the place?"
"I'm not sure, sir."
"Then perhaps you'd be so kind as to ask Jericho to find one. He usually kn

ows where everything is."
"But, sir, about Richard's bedtime"
"Oh, bother, I suppose if we must. Tell you what, have Jericho bring a measu
ring stick, and you go turn up that hot milk and honey. I'll give Richard a 
lesson in fractions. With any luck, the combination will put him to sleep. I
t always worked for me."
She tucked in her lower lip in an effort not to smile and whisked out. A mom
ent later Jericho appeared in the door-
way bearing the required stick and a pained expression when he saw the stat
e of my clothes.
"Good evening, Jericho. Have to hold off on the nightly wash and brush up 
for the moment."
"I think it is just as well, Mr. Jonathan. Had you taken the time earlier, it w
ould have all been for nothing."
Richard giggled. "Jericho."
"And what about it?" I asked. "That's his name."
I got another giggle for a reply.
"I believe Master Richard is referring to the unfortunate habit Londoners hav
e of calling the back garden privy a 'jericho,' sir," my excellent friend sai
d with unsuppressed distaste.
Another giggle from below.
Well, I had to put a stop to that. "Richard," I said, fully sitting up and ad
dressing the boy in a serious tone. It took a repetition or two before he cal
med down sufficiently to give me the solemn sort of attention the occasion re
quired. "Making fun of a person's name, no matter what it is, is very rude an
d not at all becoming of a gentleman. You understand that?''
He pouted and nodded.
"Very good. Now I want you to promise not to make fun of anyone's name eve
r again, particularly Jericho's."
I'd had to deal with this subject before with the servants, Jericho was the 
true head of this household when it came to all practical matters, and it wo
uldn't do to have anyone finding amusement in his name and thus undermining 
his authority. His was an excellent name, after all, and certainly not his f
ault that it had been corrupted by the locals into something that might be t
hought basely amusing.
"I promise."
"What an excellent lad you are! Now can you tell us where Nanny keeps your
 little nightgown? If you're all dressed and ready for bed when she comes 
back, then she might not be cross with me for keeping you up so late."
Put this way, he had no objection to helping me avoid Nanny's wrath and rea
dily pointed out a chest with drawers. We searched through its contents and
 discovered a suitable garment.

"I can take over from here, sir," said Jericho. "Perhaps if you would use this 
time to put yourself into order as well..."
I obediently set to work on myself as he turned to take care of Richard.
"Won't that come off?" Richard said, pointing to Jericho's dark skin.
"I assure you it will not, Master Richard. See for yourself." He held his han
d out for the child's close inspection. Said hand was peered at, rubbed, and 
pinched. "See, just like yours but with more color-and a good deal cleaner. A
 trip to the washbasin is in order, I think. Come along."
He gently guided Richard away, and from that so subtle action smoothly as
sumed the same position of command he held over me when it came to proper
 grooming. Jericho could be quite formidable when he chose, but in this i
nstance he was careful not to bowl the lad over by overdoing his grand ma
nner. A soft word here, a delicate recommendation there and he had Richar
d painlessly scrubbed and dressed for bed before the boy knew what had ha
ppened.
"I'll take my turn as soon as I'm done here," I told Jericho.
"One would hope so, sir,'' he replied, raising an eyebrow at my lackluster 
turnout. Since all I'd done was replace the shoe on my foot and straighten 
my waistcoat, he was entitled to all the eyebrow raising he wanted. He pluc
ked my discarded neckcloth from the floor and stalked out just as Nanny How
ard returned with a small cup of hot milk in hand.
"All ready," Richard announced to her, showing off his clean hands, face, an
d change of clothing. "Don't be cross with Cousin Jon'th'n."
The woman was becoming adept at adjusting to changing circumstances, and 
her look went from questioning to acceptance. "Very well, I won't. Have y
ou had your lesson in fractions yet?"
"We were just about to get down to it," I answered for him.
"Very well," she said, and put the cup of milk on a low table next to a minia
ture stool. Richard plopped himself onto the latter and gave the cup and its 
contents a suspicious eye.
"It's too hot," he said decisively.
"No doubt, but it will cool off in a moment. Now where's that measuring stick
?" I quickly found it and sat cross-legged on the floor next to him to more e
asily explain the basic principals of fractions.
For all the fatherly pride that was fast burgeoning in my swelled bosom over 
his many talents, I couldn't say that he took well to this first lesson. To b
e fair, he was still very lively from all his hard riding and full of questio
ns for everything except the subject at hand. It didn't take me long to twig 
to this, so I obligingly did not force him around. Instead, I did my best to 
answer why I preferred not to wear a wig, where I'd come from, the general lo
cation of America in relation to England, and conjectured just how wide and d
eep the " 'Lantic Ocean" might be. By then his milk was of a suitable drinkin

g temperature, and I managed to coax most of it into him.
"Doesn't taste like real milk," he said.
"That must be the honey in it."
"He's used to fresh cow's milk, sir," Nanny Howard put in. "All the kitchen 
had was ass's milk."
"Yes, Oliver is particularly fond of it, says it's more wholesome than what
 comes from a cow."
"Indeed it is, sir, for I shouldn't care to trust any cow's milk bought in the 
city. Too many things can make it go bad."
"Perhaps if we got our own cow"
"Oh, no, sir, for it would still be in the city. Better to have ass's milk or none 
at all."
"You don't care much for the city, then?"
"It's not my place to say, sir."
"Certainly it is if I ask you."
"Well, then, it's fine enough for me, but in all truth, I don't think raising a chi
ld in the city is at all wise."
"What have you against it, then?"
"The bad air for one thing, the bad water for another."
I could offer no argument on those points and motioned for her to continue.
"That's more than enough to stunt growth and turn them sickly. There's als
o soot everywhere you step, rotten food sold by people you don't know, dis
ease, low women, wicked men, and too much noise. How can a child get any s
leep with all the constant row?''
"There's low women and wicked men in the country, or so I've heard," I said
, dodging the question.
"Perhaps that is so, Mr. Barrett, but I've yet to see any and I've lived in t
he country considerably longer than you've been alive. But all that aside, I'
ve seen more country children reach their majority than city ones. Raising ch
ildren is not unlike farming, sir. You need a bit of room to grow, sunshine, 
and sweet water. Take any one of those away and you'll end up with a failed c
rop."
Damnation, but she was making perfect sense. "Then you see nothing favorabl
e about the city at all?"
"I'll allow that it has some passable distractions and entertainments, but th
e nature of such things holds little interest to a boy of four years." Her ob
servations were entirely sensible, but I didn't know what to do about them. T
he first idea that came to me-and the first one to be discarded-was for Richa
rd to return to Edmond's country home. As for the second idea ...
"I could possibly look around for a place of my own,"
I said, without much enthusiasm.
She picked up on that and offered an alternative. "What about Fonteyn Hous

e? It's not too far away and has more than enough room."
That was my third idea, and I wasn't too keen on it. "I don't think it would
 prove very practical. You see, my father and mother may be on their way to 
England at any time, and I rather expect Mother will want to live in Fonteyn
 House."
"That's only natural, it being her late sister's home."
"Natural, yes, but to have her sharing it with a young and rowdy child would 
not be the best for either of 'em."
"But there's more than room enough"
"Room is not the point, Mrs. Howard. It's best that you know about my moth
er."
"Indeed?" She assumed a carefully neutral face, having also picked up on a 
darkening in my tone of voice.
"She's just as horrible in her way as Aunt Fonteyn was." I paused to allow h
er to take in that bit of blatant honesty, giving her a suitably somber look
. "I think we all know what might have happened had Aunt Fonteyn lived to le
arn about, let us say, certain irregular circumstances in the family progeny
. Now multiply that by a factor of ten and you'll have an idea of how my mot
her might react should she learn of it."
"Oh, dear."
"In truth, her hold on reason is altogether infirm, and when her grasp slips 
she is capable of the most violent fits imaginable. I would be loath to expos
e an unprepared innocent to such an irregular temper."
Mrs. Howard nodded. "Yes, old Judge Fonteyn suffered the same sort of mal
ady. Many's the time I had to keep Oliver out of his way when the spell w
as on him."
Oliver and I had had a lengthy talk about what the old judge suffered from,
 an entirely horrifying topic. Though she gave me the impression she knew s
omething about it, I wasn't going to pursue it with Mrs. Howard at the pres
ent and certainly not while the boy was listening.
"Having my own home might be the best for all concerned, then," I said inst
ead. "But I shouldn't like to be too far from London."
"I'm sure there are any number of suitable places, sir."
I had my doubts, but only because I was reluctant to move from Oliver's com
fortable house and assume the responsibility of looking after my own. On th
e other hand, there was a decided appeal to being one's own master. "You kn
ow, if Oliver hadn't invited me and Elizabeth to live with him, I'd have ha
d to find one for us, anyway. It probably would have been in the city, thou
gh, and I'd still have the same problem to face now."
Then perhaps it was past time I gave serious thought to finding a separate 
accommodation for myself, or rather for the Barrett branch of the Fonteyn k
indred. And I hadn't exactly come to England empty-handed, being still in t

he possession of a half dozen cattle that had survived the ocean crossing. 
They'd originally been put aboard ship to provide me with a fresh source of
 blood for the long journey, but my condition had changed that plan by caus
ing me to fall into an unnatural sleep for the whole trip. My unnerving hib
ernation had provided no end of worry for Elizabeth and Jericho at the time
. The only favorable thing that might be said of the phenomenon was that it
 spared me from two months of constant and exhausting mal de mer.
Soon after our arrival in England, the Barrett cows had been turned out to 
mix with Fonteyn stock. My property would soon be in need of a permanent ho
me if they bred as planned. It was my fond hope that when Father arrived he
'd have the start of a fine herd to keep him busy if he wanted to retire fr
om his law practice.
Now there was something else to think about. "Another thing you need to kno
w about this coming household," I continued, "is that my father and mother 
are estranged, and I rather think both would be more comfortable if there's
 some goodly distance between 'em. If I find something suitable, then my fa
ther will likely be sharing it with me."
"How will he feel about the-ah-irregularities? That is, if I may be so bold as
 to ask." She nodded her head very, very slightly in Richard's direction, not 
looking at him.
"Ask away, dear lady. As for your answer, once he gets over the shock, I t
hink he will be utterly delighted." I hoped for as much. Elizabeth and I h
ad come to that happy and comfortable conclusion after much lengthy discus
sion. During moments of weakness, I was subject to the occasional doubt or
 two, but that was from my own inner discomfiture, not because Father woul
d fall short of our expectations. We knew him to be a very wise and compas
sionate man. Certainly he would welcome a grandson, even one from the wron
g side of the blanket.
"There's a comfort," said Mrs. Howard. "I remember him as being a most se
nsible young fellow."
"You do? You knew him before he left England?"
"Not to speak to, I should say. It wasn't my place, of course. But there wa
s many in the servant's hall who were glad he stood up to the old judge and
 won Miss Marie away from Fonteyn House. Best thing that ever happened to h
er, I'm so sorry to know that-that things worked out as they did."
"What was she like then?" I asked, feeling a sudden tightness around my thro
at at this chance to look into another's past. Part of me wanted nothing to 
do with Mother, but a different part wanted to know everything. It was like 
picking a scab to see if it would fall away clean from a healed wound or pee
l painfully off only to start it bleeding again.
"Oh, she was a very beautiful girl. Sometimes quiet and sometimes very he
adstrong. Not what I would call too knowledgeable about the world, but th

en the judge didn't have much use for women learning any more than they n
eeded to run a household. She used to do very clever needlework."
"Mother? Quiet?"
"Silent, then. There's a difference," she said with a sad face.
"I'm done with my milk," Richard announced. His eyes had grown wide and h
is expression pensive with concern. Even if he didn't understand much of 
our talk, he was keen enough to perceive the dark emotions running beneat
h it and be worried.
"What a good lad you are!" she exclaimed approvingly, with a swift brighte
ning in her manner. "Are you ready to go to bed, now?''
"No, please. I want to play with Cousin Jon'th'n."
Nanny Howard shot me a dangerous look, one that I took to heart. "We'll pl
ay again tomorrow night, my lad, or we'll both be in trouble. We have to d
o what Nanny says, y'see. She knows best."
Reluctantly he allowed himself to be led to his bed, and she tucked him in.
"A story, please?'' he asked, as appealing as only a four-year-old can manag
e. I found my throat tightening again, but for a far different reason than b
efore. Mrs. Howard correctly read my face and upon selecting a chapbook from
 a pile on a shelf, thrust it into my waiting hands.
The book's subject had to do with the alphabet, being full of instructive rhy
mes of the "A is for Apple" sort. Richard and I went through it together, wit
h him pointing out the letters and naming them and muttering along as I read 
the rest of the text. He seemed to know the book by heart, but that didn't ma
tter. I'd been told I'd had my favorite stories, too, never tiring of their r
epetition. He was Bleep by the time I'd gotten to the "M is for Mouse" rhyme.
"Thank you, Mrs. Howard," I whispered to her as I prepared to tiptoe out.
"Bless you, sir, but you're the one to be thanked. I think you're the best thi
ng that could ever have happened to the child."
"I can hope as much. I'm new to this and don't mind saying that I should hi
ghly value your guidance if you would be so kind."
"Certainly, sir."
"And about the food, I'll have Oliver arrange it so the pick of Fonteyn House
's country larder is at your disposal Will that be satisfactory until such ti
me as I can find my own home outside the city?"
"More than satisfactory, sir."
I fairly bounded down the hall to my room where Jericho waited to repair th
e damages of my recent romp. Our conversation was a bit one-sided at first,
 with me rattling on about Richard with hardly a stop except when it was ti
me for my shaving. Jericho had a light touch with a razor, but years back w
e'd both agreed that any unnecessary talk from me might prove to be a dange
rous distraction to his concentration on the task. I was close-mouthed as a
 clam for the duration.

He took the respite as an opportunity to catch me up on the day's events wit
hin his own sphere, reporting about who had paid calls and what their busine
ss had been. An invitation had arrived for Elizabeth and me to dine with the
 Bolyn family. It was worded in a flexible enough manner so as to include Ol
iver if he chose to come. He was still officially in mourning for his mother
 and not expected to participate in social gatherings, though an exception c
ould be made for a private informal supper. Considering the restrictions of 
my diet, it was just as well for me. At least then Elizabeth would not be wi
thout an escort if she accepted.
Once Jericho had my chin scraped clean and clothed me in something presentab
le, I was released from the nightly ritual and free to go about other civili
zed pursuits. I had to promise not to indulge in additional boisterous play 
before he let slip the leash, though. Since Richard was safely asleep, it wa
s an easy enough pledge to make. I found Elizabeth to be alone in the parlou
r, very much at her ease on the settee staring at some book. All the tea thi
ngs were cleared away. It was that space of time where most people enjoyed t
he quiet comfort of their home and family while awaiting the arrival of the 
supper hour.
"Hallo, where's Oliver got to?" I asked, idly glancing about.
"Off to his consulting room for a bit of work he missed (luring the day." S
he put the book to one side on top of a pile of well-thumbed copies of The 
Gentleman's Magazine. "Is he going to be busy for the whole evening?" Our c
ousin could disappear for hours on end into his medical studies when the in
spiration was upon him.
"I don't think so. He wanted only to read up on a treatment for a complaint
 he thought too delicate for mixed company."
That sounded interesting. "Delicate?" "Apparently even reading about it wit
h a female in the room was of considerable discomfort to him, so he excused
 himself. I can't see what his problem might be, since it was only somethin
g in a past issue of a magazine about a new method of cutting into the blad
der to remedy the suppression of urine."
"Ugh! Really, Elizabeth!"
"Oh, now don't you object to what is or is not proper for a lady. The article
 was right there plain and open on the page for anyone to examine." She tappe
d the stack of publications next to her with her fingertips.
"And bladder operations are the sort of thing you enjoy reading up on?'' "H
ardly, but it caught my eye. I was really looking for news about the war an
d was distracted away by the account."
"So how is the war going?" I asked, eager for a change of subject, any chan
ge at all. I vaguely recalled reading the bladder article myself and had no
 desire to have my memory refreshed.
"It was a September issue, so their news was very dated. All they had was wh

at we already knew when we left, that, and some account of the rebels indulg
ing in a paroxysm of prayer and fasting last July fourth to aid their ill-co
nsidered cause. But the December issue is no better. There's not one word in
 it about General Burgoyne's defeat."
I threw myself into a chair, hooking one leg over its arm. "They're probably 
afraid it will prove to be too disheartening to the public. Too late for that
, though. I'll wager the King and his cronies know all there is to know, and 
they hope by keeping quiet the whole nasty business will be forgotten."
"Then they are bound to be disappointed, especially if all the rumors in the p
apers are true."
"Oh, I'm sure they are. I overheard quite a lot during the funeral." A few 
of the men in the Fonteyn and Marling clans possessed an inside ear to the 
private workings of the government and when closely questioned, became rath
er free with their information, most notably after the Madeira started flow
ing.
"So did I," she said, one corner of her mouth curling down. "If it's true, th
en we may be here for good."
"I thought we were, anyway. That's what Father-or did he tell you differentl
y?"
She made a sour face at me. "Father's moving here for good, but it doesn't n
ecessarily mean that I have."
This was more than startling news to me. My belly gave a twist as I sat up 
straight to face her. "What? You want to go back? Into the middle of a war?
"
"Certainly not, but the war can't last forever."
"And then you'd go back?"
"I don't know. London's just wonderful from what I've seen of it, but I do 
get so homesick sometimes."
"But you might return to Long Island after the war finishes?" This came out
 as less of a question and more like a woebegone whine.
"I've thought of it. But please don't excite yourself yet, little brother. All I'v
e done is think about it."
"Then thank God for that." But I was still very much unnerved.
"Your concern is most flattering." "I had no idea you felt this way." "Norma
lly I don't, but it caught up with me today after reading this rubbish. I ca
me suddenly all over homesick. Mostly I miss Father and worry for him. Perha
ps once he's here in England, things will brighten up for me."
"I'm sure they will." I sincerely hoped as much, being very attached to my s
ister. Though ever considerate for her happiness and comfort, the thought of
 her moving back, perhaps forever, to Long Island made a cold and heavy knot
 in my heart. I should not like that to happen at all. "I miss Father, too,"
 I added lamely. "Once he's here everything will be all right for you." "Hav

e you written to him yet?"
"Well..." I hedged. "I've started a letter, but there's been so much to do with
 Richard'
"Bother that." Some of her dark mood appeared to drop away, and she favore
d me with a severe eye. "I've heard you complain time and again how heavy 
the early morning hours are before your bedtime when you've gotten tired o
f reading and there's no one to talk to except the night watch."
I favored her with a sour face in return. "Be fair, Elizabeth, how do you th
ink I can put all that's happened into a letter? 'Dear Father, Cousin Clarin
da murdered Mother's sister, and damned-near got her husband and myself as
well. By the way, I've taken in Clarinda's boy, who's turned out to be my so
n, so congratulations, you're now a grandfather. How are things faring with 
you?' He'd burst a blood vessel."
Elizabeth found a cushion on the settee and threw it with a great deal of for
ce, catching me square on the nose. "If you send him such a letter I'll burst
 a blood vessel-one of yours."
The cushion dropped to my lap, and I punched it a few times, feeling quite ch
eered by her show of temper. "All right, all right, I know better, but it's s
till anything but an easy task. If you're so keen to let him know what's happ
ened, why don't you write him?"
"Because it's all concerned with your business; therefore it's your responsibil
ity."
"But you're the eldest, as you so frequently remind me. Besides, yours is th
e more legible handwriting."
"Jonathan, if I were a man I'd call you a coward and issue a challenge here 
and now."
"And you'd never get satisfaction, because I'd here and now freely admit that
 I'm as craven as a rabbit."
"And properly ashamed of it, I hope."
"Dreadfully ashamed. In fact, I'm quite paralyzed from it, so much so that I d
on't think I could possibly lift pen to"
Elizabeth reached for another cushion.
"That is to say ... never mind."
She put her potential missile back, smiling a cat's smile. Now that was a ver
y good sign.
Teasing done and peace preserved, I continued. "It would be easier for me if
 we heard from him first. Surely he's written us by now."
"I'm sure he must have, but with the war going on, his letters might be del
ayed or stopped altogether. Those damned rebels have ships and guns, too."
"Oh, I'm sure he'd find a way to get something through.
He's got enough well-placed friends to help him. What I'm thinking is that 
he might have sold the house by now and already be on his way here."

"I hope not-a winter crossing ..." She shivered, expressing a very real concern
 for the dangers. "But all that aside, you still have to do something about thi
s yourself. Oliver and I will help all we can, but in the end, it is your task.
"
"I know. But making a proper job of it requires a lot of thought and I'm not s
ure I'm up to it."
She made no effort in the least to stifle her laughter. I threw the cushion b
ack, but missed. It landed harmlessly on the magazines next to her.
"Very well," I grumbled when she had control of herself again. "I'll make a re
al start on it tonight, though what I'll say to him will be anyone's guess."
"I'm sure the simple truth in the order it happened will be fine."
"But there's such a deuced lot of it and-oh, heavens what if Mother should 
see it?'' We both knew Mother was not beyond opening and reading her husban
d's letters when the chance presented itself.
Elizabeth's mouth crimped into an unflattering frown. "If she's determined 
to commit such a trespass, then she should be prepared to accept the conseq
uences."
"I'm all for it, but my worry is what the consequences will be for Father."
"I expect that should the worst happen, he'll just call Dr. Beldon to give h
er a draught of laudanum, then Mrs. Hardinbrook will pat her hand and offer 
shrill sympathy as usual."
"If he manages to keep the letter from Mother, I hope Father won't tell her 
about Richard." My description to Mrs. Howard of Mother's likely reaction wa
s no exaggeration. Far better for all concerned that she never learned of th
e child's existence.
"He probably won't, but all you need do is ask for his discretion."
"Be assured of my utter determination to do so. But I'm tired of all this, let'
s talk about Richard instead."
"I wondered how long it would take for you to get 'round to him. Sooner tha
n this, I would have thought."
"Don't fret, I'll make up for the delay. We had a wonderful time tonight."
"So Oliver and I observed whenever you came hurtling through. Did you wi
n your race?"
"Oh, dozens of 'em." Taking this as an invitation, I told her every detail of
 what we'd done. "He's very smart, y'know." I concluded, sometime later, afte
r letting her know all about the attempted lesson in fractions and the chapbo
ok.
"I know."
"I think he really was reading along with me. He knows all his letters, at le
ast up to M, anyway. I'll take him through the rest of the alphabet tomorrow 
night."
"That should be nice."

"Something wrong?"
"I hope not." But her face was all serious again. I feared a return of her earl
ier melancholy.
"Then what is it that you hope is not wrong?"
"Perhaps I'm too much the worrier, but I need some assurance from you."
"On what?"
Her ears went pink. "This is entirely foolish of me. I know you, but I can't s
eem to quell the worry."
"What worry? Come now and tell me."
"It's just that Richard is tremendous fun for you right now. Everything's al
l new and exciting. But I have to know that you'll be there for him when he 
needs more than a playmate. That you'll look after him when things are serio
us as well, the way Father's always done for us." Her
words came out all in a rush, clear evidence of her embarrassment.
In my own heart I'd already thought along those very same paths. I'd worried 
over the fear that once the novelty of Richard's presence wore off, I'd find 
other pursuits to occupy me. After a lengthy heart search, I'd concluded the 
fear to not be worth further examination. "Of course I will," I answered quie
tly. "Elizabeth . .. know this: That boy is part of my very soul and always w
ill be. That's as certain as the sunrise."
Her face cleared somewhat. Then she smiled, a small one, and gave an equal
ly small sigh. "Thank you for not being angry with me."
I shrugged. "If you care for Richard half as much as I do, then hearing your 
concerns for him is my duty and pleasure. You've nothing to fault yourself wi
th. I won't pretend to assume I'll make as good a job of it with him as Fathe
r did for us, but certainly I'll try my best."
"I don't understand why I thought you might do anything less. I just needed t
o hear you say it, I suppose."
"It's because you're my sister. You've seen me as a child howling away ove
r scraped knees and a bloody nose, and it's hard to accept that the boy yo
u hold in your memory can handle a man's business when he's grown. Good he
avens, there's many that can't no matter how old they get."
"Too true." We regarded each other, peace restored-I hoped-to her heart and
 mine. For all the fun and frolic I had with Richard, I held a keen and cle
ar awareness of the attendant responsibility. In odd moments I sometimes ga
ve in to fear and quailed at the enormous weight of it, of raising a child,
 but then I'd had a more than decent raising and could draw upon memories o
f my father's example when necessary. With this and guidance from others I 
had a more than reasonable expectation of not making a mess of things.
Still and all, I would be very, very glad when Father arrived in England.
Perhaps I should wait a bit before seeking out a house, on the chance that 
he would want to help in the choosing. Much of his law practice had been oc

cupied with the details on the buying and selling of property and boundary 
disputes. I'd very much welcome his vast experience. Damnation, but there w
ould be a thousand decisions to make. The place might even require extensiv
e furnishing. Elizabeth would be of excellent help there. Furnishings... "I
 was just thinking, dear sister ..." Her glance up at me was sharpish. I on
ly used that particular form of address when I wanted something from her an
d well did she know it.
"Do you think you could teach Richard to play the spinet?''
"I could try, if I had a spinet upon which to teach." "I was planning to get y
ou one." "I'm pleased to hear it. But isn't he a bit young, yet?" "Oh, it's ne
ver too early to learn. They say that fellow Mozart started just as young, and
 he ended up playing before all the royal courts."
"Mozart was born with musical talent-what if Richard takes after you?''
"Then I'll teach him to ride horses instead, and you'll have a fine instrumen
t left over as a souvenir of the attempt. Tomorrow I want you to run out and 
find the best spinet in London and have them cart it over right away. But all
 that aside, I miss hearing you play."
Her expression softened. "Why, thank you!" "And get a carpet, too."
Now did her expression abruptly pinch into blank perplexity. "A carpet?"
"Yes, a nice big thick one, the thickest you can find. I promised Mrs. Howar
d one for the nursery and said the three of you could go shopping for it tom
orrow. Richard should have a say in the choosing, too, I thought."
"How kind of you to find so many enjoyable things for me to do," she said d
ryly.
"Not at all. I suppose you'll need to take measurements or something so it w
ill fit. You'll find a measuring stick up there, unless Mrs. Howard has give
n it back to Jericho. I was teaching him about fractions-Richard, that is, n
ot Jericho-with it, if you'll recall. Perhaps you can find a carpet for Mrs.
 Howard's room, too. An excellent woman, we're so lucky to have her, and I w
ant her made as comfortable as may be."
"Heavens, Jonathan, I don't even have a carpet for my room!"
I waved a careless hand. "Then indulge yourself at my expense."
"Don't worry, I will," she muttered darkly.
Dear me, but I knew that look. Time for a bit of placation or I'd have anoth
er pillow in my face. "Well, I've gone on quite long enough, why don't you t
ell me everything you did today?"
Elizabeth sighed, apparently exasperated by this latest sudden change in sub
ject, then composed herself to give a summation of the day's events. As with
 Jericho, it had become a regular custom between us for her to tell me all t
he news I'd missed while lying oblivious in the cellar.
"Well, to start with, Charlotte Bolyn has invited us to"
"No, no, no, I don't mean that rot! Tell me all that happened with you and R

ichard."
She picked up the cushion and once more-and with considerable force-mana
ged to strike my nose dead on.
In an effort to preserve my battered countenance from additional damage, I
 decided to intrude upon Oliver's ruminations, hoping he wouldn't be too f
ar gone in study for a bit of company. Upon hearing my knock he grunted
something that might loosely be interpreted as an invitation to enter. I took
 it as such and pushed the door open.
His own sanctuary was part study, part consulting room, to be used on those 
occasions to interview patients when he was not out making calls on them. Hi
s practice wasn't a busy one, but he kept himself very active with it. Most 
of his patients were from within his broad circle of friends, and being a gr
egarious sort, he often as not paid visits as much to socialize as to render
 aid. Unless his services as a physician were actually required, he never ch
arged for those visits, claiming he was content enough with the distraction 
of agreeable company. This made him popular, but it was just as well for him
 that he had income inherited from Grandfather Fonteyn or he'd not be living
 in his present comfortable circumstances.
At the moment he was very comfortable, indeed, having pulled his favorite c
hair close to the fire and treated himself to some port while reading. Like
 Elizabeth, he had a respectable stack of The Gentleman's Magazine nearby a
nd held one in his hand.
"Hallo," he said, looking up. "Is the house still standing?"
"Was it too much row for you?''
"Not at all. You should have heard us earlier when Richard and I were playin
g hide-and-seek. I was just wondering whether the walls were still intact af
ter the races."
"Intact and likely to stay solid," I said, easing into another chair. "But we'l
l be more stately tomorrow night if you like."
"Please say you won't. I grew up being forced into state-liness and can't re
commend it. Let the boy laugh and shout his head off; I like that kind of no
ise. The reason I came here was to keep from getting trampled."
"Sorry."
He dismissed my contrition with a wave. "And because I feared you'd invite 
me to join in and I might not have
the will to refuse. The little brat already tired me to the point of fainting on
ce today. Once is more than sufficient."
"He did?"
"Well, perhaps not quite so far, but I was pretty blown. Don't know how Na
nny can keep up with him. Paces herself, I suppose."
"She and I had a nice little talk about this and that," I said. "She managed, d
uring that talk, to throw a sizable rock into my tranquil pond."

He squinted. "Sorry, but I don't quite follow."
"Because I've not yet explained."
"Then please do so, Coz."
I did so, recounting to him Mrs. Howard's objections to raising a child in the
 city.
"Then you also think young Richard would be better off in a rustic setting?''
 he asked.
"It didn't seem to hurt either of us or Elizabeth."
"True enough. It may have been hard going for me with Mother, but Nanny saw 
to it I got my share of fresh air and exercise. You'd also be limiting his c
hances of getting the pox, too."
My dormant heart gave a sudden and sickening lurch. "Pox? Good God, I hadn
't thought of that."
His normally jocund expression was now as gloomy as that of a judge. "And we
ll you should. I've seen far too many young souls carried off before their s
ixth year from that curse, and pox aside, there's any number of a hundred ot
her things that..."
Another lurch in my chest. It felt like a great ball of ice was rolling around i
nside.
I wanted Oliver to stop talking, to stop filling me with fears I didn't want, b
ut as hard as the facts were to hear, they were inescapable.
"He'll have to be inoculated," 1 whispered.
"Oh, yes, certainly that. I know a good man for it, grinds 'em through a doze
n at once."
"What?"
"He's got a big house he's turned into a sort of inoculation mill. Has in a 
dozen children at a time. They stay for about a week for a bit of purging an
d bleeding to purify their systems, then he makes the inoculation. They're d
own sick from it, of course, but he keeps them all bedded up and cared for u
ntil they're ready to go home, say after about two weeks. He's very good, ve
ry successful."
I recalled my own ordeal had not been quite so involved and said as much.
Oliver frowned mightily, then his face cleared. "Oh, well, that's because it
 was a few years back and on the other side of the world. There's been a lot
 of advances made since, y'know. You won't find 'em practicing any wild colo
nial experimentation here in England! But there's no hurry. The lad needs a 
little time to grow. Elizabeth made a point of hiring servants who'd already
 had it, so things should be safe for now. Just make sure it's done before y
ou send him off to school."
If I send him off, I thought. At the moment, the idea of hiring a private t
utor looked much more appealing to me. Many other boys, myself included, ha
d not suffered from such schooling in the safety of one's home.

So many plans. So many responsibilities. That ball of ice would turn into a l
eaden weight and take up permanent residence if I let it.
Always move forward, laddie. We're all in God's hands and that's as safe eno
ugh place as any in this world.
"Jonathan?"
I'd been staring at the fire and now gave a start.
"Don't come all over melancholy on me. Everything's going to be fine."
"Yes, I'm sure you're right. It was just a bit of a jolt, don't you know."
"I know, and I'm glad to hear it. Means you'll be doing something when the
 time comes."
"Upon my honor and before God, you may be sure of it."
"Excellent. There's nothing that breaks my heart more than hearing the parent
s wailing away because they'd forgotten or had put it it off until it was too
 late."
"You won't have that with me."
"Excellent." He tapped his fingers along the spine of the magazine in his ha
nd. The silence that now settled between us thickened like a sudden patch of
 fog. I didn't care much for it and he seemed not to, either. He cleared his
 throat. "About this idea of moving to a country home?"
I gratefully seized his opening for a change of subject. "Mrs. Howard recom
mended Fonteyn House, but I'll have to find some other place." I clarified 
this statement by mentioning the probable situation ahead once Father and M
other arrived in England.
When I'd finished, he was in full agreement with me, adding, "But whether o
r not your mother takes up residence there, you still wouldn't want Richard
 shut away in Fonteyn House. It's much too dark and drafty, but there will 
soon be changes. I'll be making a deal of those when things settle a bit. C
hanges, that is. Dress up the insides, knock a few holes in the walls and p
ut in more windows and damnation on the window tax. Once I'm done you won't
 know the old pile. But as for your having a place of your own'
"There's no hurry yet. I'm thinking I'll wait until Father's here."
He shrugged. "As you wish, but I was going to say I know of a perfectly nice 
house standing empty that might suit. The land's been fallow for years, but t
hat can be fixed. There's room for your cattle and what not, and it's just a 
few miles north of the city. The house will need a bit of work; it's been emp
ty a long time."
"Why is that?"
"Oh, one of Mother's grand imperial orders, y'know.
The estate belonged to my late father. Seems when he died, she closed it dow
n hard and fast, wouldn't even rent it out."
"Strange to do that."
"Consider her nature, old lad. Y'see the whole lot was my father's, free an

d clear, and in accordance with his will it was to come to me when I came o
f age. But she shut the house up and let the property go, thereby making su
re it would eventually become pretty worthless. I remember her sending Edmo
nd around with an offer to buy it from me a day or two after I turned one a
nd twenty."
"Which you turned down?"
"Not exactly. Edmond didn't say it in so many words, but he gave me to unde
rstand that her offer was much too low and that I should hang on to the dee
d for a bit longer. I didn't at first know what he was up to, but twigged t
o things after she sent him on a second visit and he managed to discourage 
me again. Mother had been going on about how she was doing me a favor by tr
ying to take the place off my hands since it was essentially a ruin, so I w
ent out to see things for myself. It seems that Edmond had been less than h
onest with her."
"In what way?"
"Oh, whenever a storm came through, he'd tell her another shutter had droppe
d off or there was a new hole in the roof. The truth was he'd made it his bu
siness to keep the place in tolerable repair. The doors and windows all hang
 straight and close snug, and it's dry as a drum inside. The land's all over
grown and that gives it a forlorn, ruinous look, but otherwise everything's 
sound."
"And Edmond did that for you?"
Oliver nodded. "He took a dreadful risk over the years. I mean, he'd have b
een out in the street quick enough if Mother had ever taken it into her hea
d to pay a visit to the old Marling hold. He must have hidden the expense o
f repairs and the taxes from her in some clever way. Edmond's
as intimidating as a bear with the gout, but deep down quite a decent chap a
t heart. We should all have such a fellow handling our business, don't you t
hink?"
"Great heavens, yes. Makes you wonder what other little secrets he's got hi
dden away."
"I'll be finding out soon enough, I'm sure. Before he packed himself and Cla
rinda off home the other day, he said he'd have to soon sit down with me to 
go over the accounts. Seems there's a lot of legal nonsense that needs my at
tention now, and I can't put it off much longer. Anyway, if you want to look
 the place over some night'
"Certainly, I'd be most happy to do so." What a painless way to find a home.
 By keeping all the business within the family I wouldn't have to wait for F
ather's arrival to avoid any purchasing pitfalls. "If it takes my fancy, the
n we can work out some sort of rent-or were you thinking of selling?"
"I was thinking of neither." He sat well back in his chair, lifting his chin sl
ightly to peer down his nose. "If you want it-well, then ... for the price of t

he yearly taxes you may have it!"
For a yawningly long moment I was in complete distrust of my ears. "What?
"
He repeated it, grinning away like an ass and most certainly because I must
 have looked exactly like one myself.
CHAPTER
~5-
He'd utterly stunned me. That was the only word to describe my feelings wh
en the whole import of his proposal finally sank in. For some considerable
 period I could do nothing but gape, inspiring a good deal of amusement in
 him.
"But I couldn't," I objected in a faint voice when partial recovery asserted it
self sufficiently for me to speak.
"And why ever not?" He was still grinning.
"It's too magnificent a kindness."
"Don't be sure of that until you see the place-it might not suit, y'know. But
 all that aside, it's my property and I can do whatever I please with it. Bes
ides, I know damned well such an arrangement would have sent Mother into an a
poplectic fit, so that's yet another good reason for me to do it."
I argued a little more, but not too terribly hard. A firm and outright rejecti
on of his generosity in the name of good sense would have been very rude and h
urtful, of course, but aside from that I found myself partially willing to let
 him have his way. It was a magnificent gift, but if it proved
to be too much so, then perhaps Edmond and I could argue him into somethin
g more equitable for all concerned. I had no wish to cheat my excellent co
usin out of any of his rightful incomes. For now, deeply moved, I warmly a
nd sincerely thanked him; he clapped his hands, practically crowing, then 
sat forward and told me all he could remember about the house and lands.
It was a sizable place not all that far to the north and east of Fonteyn Hous
e, but not all that close, either. There were fields and woods in the generou
s acreage, all overgrown and running wild by now, at least one clear running 
stream, and several buildings. Edmond had seen to the care of the house, but 
Oliver wasn't as certain about the condition of the barns and stabling. The h
ouse itself had been erected not long after the Great Fire of the previous ce
ntury.
"Was it involved in that in some way?" I asked, fascinated.
"What, you mean burned up and then put something in on top of the ruins? No,
 nothing like that. The property's not even close to where all the destructi
on happened. The story is that one of my Marling ancestors liked the look of
 all the new buildings going up in London at the time and decided to have on
e of 'em for himself. Found himself a fashionable architect for the job and 
..."

The more he talked the greater waxed my interest and the more eager I beca
me to see the place. Though it promised to involve a lot of work to make t
he house livable and get the land producing again, the prospect of underta
king such a project was enormously appealing. Now could I understand some 
of my father's youthful wish to cross a wild and dangerous ocean to a new 
land in order to create a place of his own.
In my case it would be going to an old land, but still virtually a foreign co
untry from the one where I'd been raised. That had a very compelling appeal a
s well, for I'd ever been intrigued by the history of my English ancestry.
Who knows but that some famous battle or great event might have taken place
 on the Marling lands in ages past. Oliver expressed a degree of doubt over
 this speculation, but that did not dampen my enthusiasm. Even if nothing m
ore exciting than a bit of sheepherding had ever occupied the property over
 the centuries, what is commonplace to the local is exotic to the visitor.
When Oliver's store of description ran out, we resolved to visit and give th
e place a thorough inspection within a week if the weather cooperated.
"I'll probably go earlier to have a look 'round in the daylight," he said. "Sh
an't get much out of it at night I'm afraid, no matter how many lanterns I car
ry. Are you sure you'll be able to do as well?"
"As well if not better, especially if the sky is clear."
He shook his head. "Amazing business, your condition. That reminds me, I w
as meaning to ask if I might draw off a bit of your blood."
Again, I found myself gaping at my cousin. "Good God, whatever for?"
"For the purposes of scientific research, of course. A friend of mine has one
 of those microscope things, and I thought it might be interesting to use it 
to peep at a sample of your blood and compare it to that of another's, see if
 there's anything different between the two."
"A microscope?"
"You know, like a telescope, but for much smaller work. I may get one myself
 now, it's a marvelous toy. You wouldn't believe the things you can find in 
a humble drop of pond water with one of 'em. Most of my colleagues don't thi
nk much of the things, but my friend is always peering through his and makin
g drawings of what he finds. Has an enormous collection of the most fascinat
ing sketches. I don't think he quite knows what to do with any of it, but as
 a curiosity it'll hold your attention far better than a flea circus."
"And if you find a difference between my blood and another's, what then?"
He gave a great shrug. "It's knowledge and so it must be important. Come to 
think of it, perhaps I might take a sample from young Richard, then compare 
it to yours and see what's different and what's the same. I'll wager that mi
ght be very interesting, indeed."
"Really, now, Oliver, I don't want you poking at the poor child with one of y
our fleams unless it's absolutely necessary."

"I doubt that I'll need to; he's bound to get a scrape or two while playing-
children are so good at that. I had my share of skinned knees and elbows and
 know it's only a matter of time for him to turn up with one. All I have to 
do is wait until he takes a tumble, then sneak a quick sample off him before
 binding up the wound. He'll never know a thing."
"Oh, you've reassured me to no end," I grumbled, with more than a trace o
f annoyance. "Now I'll not only be worrying about the pox-which is worry 
enough-but about skinned knees, broken arms, and who knows what else."
"Yes, the joys of fatherhood. You'll do all right, Jonathan. I've been in man
y a house where the parents are more concerned about the lapdog than the chil
d, so be glad that you have such a heart in you that cares so. Anyway, God wo
uldn't have brought the two of you together unless he meant for it to last a 
bit. Just enjoy Richard one day-I mean, one night at a time, and let the futu
re take care of itself."
"You sound like Elizabeth."
"Well! Thank you! I'll tell her you said that. She's a damn fine girl. Damn fi
ne. I don't mind telling you that if she wasn't my first cousin I'd be sorely 
tempted to pay her court. With your permission, that is," he quickly added.
This wasn't precisely news to me, for I knew Oliver had
been quite taken with her from their first meeting. Certainly I wouldn't hav
e minded having him for a brother-in-law. "Cousins have married before, y'kn
ow," I ventured with an optimistic air.
"I know," he said, rolling his eyes. "For the last century or so the Fontey
ns have been famous for it and look where it got 'em. Any rustic huddled in
 his cottage will tell you about the dangers of inbreeding their stock. No,
 I don't think the Marlings and Barretts would benefit from such a course. 
Suppose Elizabeth would even have me, our children might turn out like Moth
er, and then where would we be? Ugh. No, thank you, I shall content myself 
with admiring your dear sister from afar only."
"Such an inheritance of temper might not happen. Elizabeth and I aren't in th
e least way like our mother, after all, and I'm going to do my best to see th
at Richard doesn't turn out to be like Clarinda."
"If anyone can do it, Coz, then it is you. I say, you mean you wouldn't have obj
ected to me and Elizabeth ... that is, if she'd ... that is?"
"Not at all. You're an excellent fellow. Not a bit like your mother, either."
This pleased him to no end, and he told me as much, saying it gave him grea
t hope for Richard's prospects. "It was Nanny Howard that trained me up rig
ht," he pronounced. "If it hadn't been for her, Lord knows how I might have
 ended up. Between the two of you, well, maybe the three or four of us-what
 with Elizabeth and me hanging about the lad-there won't be so much as a tr
ace of Clarinda left in the boy."
"And that's just as well," I muttered.

"Yes, wretched business. I'd never have suspected it of her, but then I'm likel
y not to suspect it of anyone. It's just not in me to do so."
"Then you are a very blessed man, Coz."
"Not so blessed that I don't have a dark moment here and there. Sometimes I
 don't know if I should condemn Clarinda or thank her for what she did," he
 mused. "Murder's a horrible, awful thing, but I don't know of anyone in th
e family who was truly sorry to see Mother gone, myself included, once you 
woke me up to it. Do you think I'll be damned for even considering such stu
ff?''
"I think rather that you might need to go dancing on her grave again and pur
ge any lingering remnant of guilt out of your soul."
"Perhaps you're right on that. What really bothers me about the business is 
that Clarinda's idea to marry me would have probably worked because, damn it
 all, I liked her. Suppose I still do in a way, though it's all mixed up wit
h a sort of revulsion, like Eve and that serpent, y'know. A pretty animal, b
ut so bloody dangerous. I don't envy Edmond's job of keeping her caged for g
ood and all."
"Neither do I."
"What about Ridley? In a way you've become his keeper, too. You're sure th
at the influencing you did will hold him and Arthur in check?"
His reminder of this unpleasant task waiting in the near future was hardly 
a welcome one. I found myself rubbing my arm again. The bone ached yet wher
e Arthur Tyne had nearly severed it. That, or it only seemed to ache in my 
mind whenever I recalled the incident. "They'll be fine for the time being.
 I'll visit them within a week or so and bolster things up so they'll behav
e themselves."
"Pity you can't do the same thing for Clarinda."
"Oh, but I probably could. But I don't think it would'
His eyes widened. "Really? Well, that would take the load off poor Edmond.
"
"Indeed, but then I'd have to explain myself to him. I'm not quite prepared 
to do so just now. It's a damned heavy confidence."
"Yes, that's the stark truth right enough. Edmond might think you'd gone ma
d and toss you out if you ever told
him about your little secret. It's so extraordinary. He'd have to have proof, y'
see."
"And then I'd have to give it to him, and I'm not too terribly confident in 
the benevolence of his reaction." Which is a mild way of putting it, I thoug
ht, with a nasty cold twisting in my belly. For Edmond to find out that the 
father of his son was some sort of extra-natural blood drinker didn't bear l
engthy consideration. My own immediate family accepted my condition well eno
ugh, but then we were held close together by the ties of our deep, mutual af

fection for one another. Not so with Edmond. "He'd be within his rights to t
ake Richard away from me," I said, thinking aloud.
"Then you could just influence him into leaving well enough alone," Oliver 
said, with some little heat. He seemed ready to enlarge upon the subject, b
ut the look on my face stopped him. "Whatever is wrong?''
I'd come all over glum at his idea of influencing Edmond, for the very same o
ne had occurred to me as well and made my vitals twist in another direction. 
"I... well ... damnation, that wouldn't be right."
"In what way?"
"Father and I have talked the length and breadth of this business about enfo
rcing my will upon other people, the good points and the bad. It all comes d
own to a question of honor."
"Honor? How so?"
"Your suggestion of my influencing Edmond-it's all very well to talk about it
, but to actually carry it out would be an unconscionable intrusion upon him.
 To be telling him what to do just so it's convenient to my needs ..."
"But you're doing it all the time to keep the servants from being curious abo
ut your eccentric habits," he objected.
"Yes, but I'm not telling them how to arrange their very lives. That's the di
fference. I don't think you're fully aware of just how frightening a power th
is is for me, Oliver. If I wanted to I could make my way right to the bedcham
ber of the king himself and play him or any of his ministers for a puppet on 
matters of state."
"Good God." His color flagged. "I never thought of that."
"Then think hard on it now. I have, and in weak moments it makes me tremb
le."
"I don't fault you for it," he whispered, then recovered somewhat. "Mind you
, it would be a way of settling things out with France. You could take a lit
tle trip to Paris, talk here and there with some of old Louis's ministers, a
nd remove the threat of them jumping into the war to help those damned rebel
s."
"God help us, but I could if I had a mind to try."
"Without the French sticking their noses into that which doesn't concern 'e
m, the rebellion would die down fast enough." He was fast warming to the id
ea of my becoming some kind of invisible agent for the crown, quietly manag
ing the direction of foreign powers to suit the policies of the king and co
untry.
"Hold and cease, Oliver," I said, raising both hands palm out in a show of no
t so very mock terror. "I want no part of any of that."
His eyebrows went up. "But you could be of no end of service to the king. 
By God, you could even make peace with Ireland if you put your mind to it.
"

I shook my head and continued to shake it, until Oliver finally saw I was n
ot to be moved by any argument.
"Why not?" he demanded.
"Politics is better left to politicians. I am, or would have been a humble law
yer, fit for arguing the law, but not for recreating it to fit my idea of perf
ection. Besides, even if I had the guidance of the whole of Parliament for my 
actions I would still have to listen to the reproach of my conscience should t
hings go wrong."
"You're just being the pessimist." "I'm being an abject coward," I said trut
hfully. "Suppose I bungled things and started a war? I'm not prepared to hav
e all those deaths haunting me. Other men are able to stand it, but not me. 
I'll gladly choose my own path, but will not presume to tell others where to
 walk themselves." He scowled. "Well, put that way, I can't really blame you
, though one might argue that you would also have an equal chance of prevent
ing a war, thus sparing untold lives."
I shifted, uncomfortable, scowling back at him. "There's that," I admitted. "
But I'm not wise enough for such work and know it. Please, Oliver, let's not 
pursue this subject, it's making me liverish."
He acquiesced, much to my relief. "Very well, can't have you coming down si
ck on me because there's no tonic you can take but the one, is there?''
"Right enough," I agreed, but I was not feeling especially hungry at the mom
ent. Quite the opposite.
"Then politics aside, what about Edmond? You've no plans for him one way 
or another if he decided to take Richard away?"
"But he's not going to, I only mentioned that as a remote possibility, born o
ut of my own fears. It's true that I could influence Edmond, or most anyone e
lse to suit to my needs, but where does one stop once one has started? No, si
r. That takes it back to the political once more and my liver won't stand for
 it."
He gestured to indicate his dismissal of that topic. "But then what about Ri
dley and Arthur? You're doing your best to completely change their lives."
"And don't I wish to high heaven to be free of the responsibility. I've come 
to take no pleasure in any of it, even if it is to change them for the better
. I'm hoping that the need for my influence will eventually cease for-believe
 me-I've a tremendous dislike of playing the god in men's
affairs. I am absolutely stuck having to do this to them for the present, becau
se for the life of me I can't think of any way around it. If there is a way out
, I shall take it, and if you've any better ideas I should gladly hear them."
"None at the moment. But the changes you are making within them are for the
 better. Surely that mitigates some of your strong feeling against using yo
ur talent for influence?"
"Oliver, how many times have you writhed inside when someone told you th

at they were doing something awful to you simply because it was for your
 own good?''
He thought that one over, then said, "Oh."
"And recall your feelings when you remembered how Nora had dealt with you b
ack at Cambridge. It was for your good as well as hers that you should forg
et your liaisons with her and what she did with you, but still..." I spread
 the fingers of one hand, using a gesture to complete the thought.
"Oh." He gulped, the corners of his mouth turning earthward in a bleak frow
n.
"Indeed. And again, where does one stop? Who am I to decide whose soul is i
n need of improvement and whose is not? Who am I to decide what's best for 
me is also best for another? Remember how you felt when you found out I was
 influencing you into not noticing my 'eccentricities,' as you call them? I
t wasn't so intrusive as to make a major change in your life, but I still h
ated doing it, especially to you of all people. Before God, as hard as it w
as to go through at the time, I am most thankful that you walked in on me a
nd Miss Jemma that night in the Red Swan or else I might yet be having to g
ull you of the truth."
He went very pink around the ears and nose and made a business of clearing 
his throat before speaking again. "No need to be so harsh on yourself, Coz.
 You did what you thought was necessary and explained things to me quick en
ough. I don't think badly of you, y'know, for I do understand why you had t
o do it. All's forgiven and forgot, I hope."
A little wave of relief washed through me and I nodded.
"Well, then, that's that." He gave a shake and shrug of his shoulders. "But ju
st to end my curiosity on the topic for good and all..."
In a comical manner I groaned, raising my eyes to heaven, making us both laug
h. We needed it, the relief of it, it seemed. "What is it?" I asked after we'
d settled ourselves.
"I was just wondering that since you're already influencing Ridley and Arthur
, you might think of it in terms of in for a penny, in for a pound."
"Think of what?"
"Of influencing Clarinda, of course. You mentioned it as a possibility earlier
."
"A possibility I'm not ready to undertake for all those reasons I've just set 
before you. Besides, before you took the bit and ran with it, I'd been about t
o add that I'm also very doubtful it would work on her."
"Why so?"
I hesitated, making a face. "If she's mad-and it is my admittedly unqualified 
opinion that she is-then it won't work very well-if at all."
"How do you know that? Oh, do stop glowering and tell
me."

I stopped glowering and sighed instead. "All right. The first night I was i
n London I paid a midnight call on Tony Warburton"
"You what!"
"-and tried to find out if he knew anything about Nora's whereabouts." Befo
re being struck down by sudden insanity, Tony had been an especially close 
friend of Oliver's at Cambridge. He was now one of Oliver's patients.
"The Warburtons never mentioned this to me," he said.
"Because they didn't know about it. I let myself in through a window and le
ft in the same manner."
"What, like the way you passed through Ridley's door that time, and how yo
u get from the cellar to your room here?"
"Exactly the same way."
"And you then influenced him?"
"Tried to. It didn't work. I just couldn't catch hold of his mind-like trying t
o pick up a drop of mercury with your fingers."
"But what has this to do with Clarinda? She may be as she is, but she's not m
ad that I can see."
"Are there not kinds of madness that are less obvious to the eye?"
"Of course there are."
"Then my feeling is that Clarinda might be in that number. My mother's like 
that."
"But I thought your mother yells a lot, then goes into fits."
"She does, but most of the time she's merely disagreeable. When she's with p
eople other than her family, she gets on quite well. One might think of her 
as being somewhat highly strung, but otherwise unremarkable. I've seen her b
eing very cordial, even charming when she puts some effort into it. She's al
l right as long as she can keep hold of her temper. Only when her grasp slip
s does she go flying off into one of her fits and shows all that she's kept 
hidden about herself."
"I saw no sign of that sort of temper with Clarinda, but then, as you say, he
r madness must surely be of a different kind. She hides it well enough."
"It's the madness of being so single-minded that she will overcome all obst
acles by any means possible in order to obtain what she wants."
"But lots of people are like that," he protested. "Just look at the House of 
Commons." "True, but for the most part I don't think they normally
run about arranging duels, committing murder, and shutting their spouses in
to tombs preparatory to shooting them dead to achieve their goals."
"Granted, but doesn't all that just make her clever rather than mad?"
"Good God, Oliver, listen to yourself!"
Apparently he did, and went flame red in reaction. "Yes, I see what you mean
. I believe I've been hanging about with you too much, I'm starting to sound
 like a lawyer, trying to offer a defense when there is none. Very well then

, you're telling me that because Clarinda has a touch of hidden - for the mo
st part-madness, you don't think your influence will work on her?"
"Perhaps for a time, but I'd not want to trust my life or another's on it. I c
ouldn't do anything with poor Tony because his mind just isn't there to be tou
ched; Clarinda's is-but it's much too focused and strong to hold for any lengt
h of time."
I'd been able to make her forget my unorthodox entry to her temporary priso
n at Fonteyn House; that was one thing, but to change the very pattern of h
er will was quite something else again. Add to that my own still very caust
ic feelings toward her and the likelihood of successfully turning her about
 became a very remote, if not impossible expectation.
"But how can you be sure without trying it?"
"My mother," I said, not looking at him.
"You mean you tried to influence her?"
I felt myself color a bit in my turn. "Yes. Once. I tried to get her to stop be
ing so cruel to Father. It didn't last long, not long at all. I'm not proud of 
what I did, either, so promise me on your word of honor that you'll say nothing
 to him about it."
My tone was so forceful he immediately gave me his solemn pledge of silen
ce.
"From what I've heard from you about Nora and the Warburtons," I continued
, "I'm sure that she's been trying to help Tony in the same way, to influe
nce him out of his madness."
"She did spend a goodly time with him when they were all in Italy-or so his
 mother told me."
"With indifferent results, sad to say." For the present it seemed best I not 
inform Oliver about Nora causing Tony's madness in the first place.
No, that wasn't precisely true. Not at all true, in fact.
Tony had been mad to start with; Nora's influence merely sent him more deep
ly into its embrace. Perhaps later I might tell Oliver the whole story of t
hat dreadful night when Tony tried to murder Nora and me, but not just now.
"I wonder why she stopped visiting him?" he asked, leaning well back in his c
hair to gaze at the ceiling.
A long moment passed as I tried to dredge up the words to answer. It was prov
ing unexpectedly difficult to cast them into speech. They felt sticky, hardly
 able to release themselves from my throat. "Tony said. .. said that she was 
ill."
"Ill?" He looked hard at me, brows drawing together. "What from, I wonder
?"
I spread my hands. "I just don't..."
He perceived the sudden rawness of my feelings well enough and, sitting fo
rward once more, raised a hand to make a hushing gesture. "There now, don'

t come apart on me just yet, you'll make the most awful mess on the floor 
if you do."
An abrupt choking seized me. Laughter. Brief, but it seemed to clear things
 inside. Trust my good cousin to know exactly when and how best to play the
 fool. "Sorry," I mumbled, feeling somewhat sheepish. "It's just that whene
ver I think about it, that she might be lying sick and helpless somewhere, 
I come all over"
"Yes, I know, it's as plain as day-or as night, in your case. No need to feel 
badly about feeling bad, y'know. Did
Tony say anything at all about the nature of her illness?"
"Couldn't get anything else out of him. Maybe he didn't know."
"But his mother might. She's very fond of Nora, very touched by her kindness 
to Tony, y'see. I'll call 'round first thing tomorrow and have a nice talk wi
th her."
"But you've already questioned Mrs. Warburton ages ago."
"And time and again since, lest we forget. She made no mention of Nora bein
g ill, either. On the other hand, that's the one question I managed not to 
ask her. Can't make promises, though. It's been so long and her main concer
n is ever for Tony. The lady might not remember anything useful."
I heaved from my chair, needing to pace the room. My belly was twisting ar
ound again from an idea I did not care for one whit. "Oh, God."
My manner puzzled Oliver. " 'Oh, God' what?"
"Oh, God in heaven, why am I in such a cleft stick?"
"What cleft stick?"
"The one where I spend all this time telling you the worthy reasons why I s
hould abstain from influencing people, and now I see an equally worthy reas
on to use it again."
"On Mrs. Warburton?'' His brows shot upward, his eyes going very wide. "Yo
u mean you could influence her into a better memory for a past event?''
"Saying one thing and then wanting to do another," I snarled, but to myself, 
not to him.
Oliver watched open mouthed as I made a few fast turns about the room. "W
hat are you on about? You are thinking of influencing Mrs. Warburton, are
 you not?"
"I'm a damned hypocrite, that's what I am."
He shook his head at me. "A damned fool, you mean."
"Yes, I'm sure of it. To inflict it upon some innocent woman is"
"It's positively brilliant! I see where you got the idea, if you and Nora are
 capable of making people forget certain (kings, then you're just as capable 
of helping them to remember others. This is marvelous."
"It's deceitful... dishonorable ..."
"Oh, rubbish! It's not as though you were changing the woman's life-and if 

not precisely honorable, then it's certainly nothing harmful. Heavens, man,
 you could even ask her permission to do so."
That stopped me exactly in my tracks. "What?"
"Ask her permission," he said clearly and slowly.
"How the devil could I do that? I'd have to tell her all about myself and'
"No, you wouldn't. You think you have to explain yourself to everyone you me
et? Vanity, Coz, beware of vanity. If her memory isn't up to the work, then 
all you have to do is tell her you have a way of refreshing it and ask if sh
e's willing to try. She doesn't have to know how you do it, only that you ca
n and that it is perfectly harmless. I'll be there to back you up. Now what 
do you say?''
Asking permission. It was so obvious I felt like one of nature's great block
heads. Perhaps I should put myself on display at Vauxhall or Ranleigh for th
e entertainment of the crowds.
"If she tells you it's all right, then your conscience is clear, ain't it?" he 
asked in the manner of a person for whom only one answer will suffice.
"I... that is ..."
"Excellent! I knew you'd be sensible. I'll just tell her that it's something 
you learned how to do in America. People will believe anything you tell them 
about that land, no matter how outre, y'know."
Oliver went off to supper, leaving me alone in his study to find my own amus
ement. I did not ordinarily join in on any of the evening meals as the odor 
of all that cooked
food in a confined space was overwhelming to my heightened sense of smell. 
Here, though, I found a degree of relief from its unseen presence, and if t
hings got too much for me I could always open a window. So far, there was n
o need to let in the winter cold, and when he returned Oliver would find hi
s room as warm and comfortable as he'd left it.
With weary resignation I seated myself at his desk, found paper, a pen with 
a good clean nib, and opened the ink bottle.
Time to write to Father.
As I began the salutation and paused to gather my wits, the fervent hope s
tabbed through me that he was already on his way to England, making this m
issive unnecessary. Selfish, Johnny Boy, I thought.
Extremely selfish it was of me to want to place him on a freezing cold ship c
rossing a dangerous winter sea just to spare me a bit of letter writing. Yes,
 that was the light explanation for it. The heavy truth was that I very much 
wanted to see him again, to have his dear face before me, and to hear his voi
ce. Try as I might, I could find no fault in that wish, for I knew it would b
e his as well.
Like any other chore, the hardest part was in the mere starting, and once thi
s was achieved I was more of a mind to keep at it until it was finished. I be

gan writing steadily, filling page after page with a recountal of events sinc
e Elizabeth, Jericho, and I had first made landfall in England. So much had h
appened, so many details, events, and speculations rushed at me, that I had t
o make notes to myself on a bit of used paper to be sure they were all includ
ed.
I scratched and scribbled away, hoping Father would be able to read my handw
riting without too much difficulty, taking pains to go slower over the more 
involved bits of narrative so it would be clear to the eye as well as to the
 mind. One memory jogged another as I set it all down, and I was only occasi
onally aware of my surroundings, now and then noticing a footstep in the hal
l without, the snap of the coal in the fireplace, or the wind outside trying
 to pierce its way through the window. Twice I got up to throw coal on the f
ire, more to give myself a respite to stretch and think what to write next t
han for any need of warmth on  my  part.
The candles on the desk burned down to the point where fresh ones were need
ed. Rather than halt my work by calling for them, or even opening the curta
ins to the general glow of the night sky, I simply thieved more from the sc
onces on either side of the mantel, shoving them into the desk  holders.
Some portions of the letter were easier to write than others. Surprising to 
myself, my past liaison with Clarinda proved to be the easiest of all to get
 through. I'd resolved to tell it plainly and make no apologies for my actio
ns or hers. Father was a man of the world in his own right, having a dearly 
loved mistress as well as an estranged wife, so I had no doubt he would clea
rly understand the needs of passion when they so firmly seized hold of me. I
 did, however, make it clear to him my surprise and regret at finding Clarin
da to be married and of my sober intention to avoid a repetition of the circ
umstance with other ladies. I then told him that there was a very good reaso
n why I had written at all about my encounter with her, and so word by word 
and page by page, as I told all there was to tell about Clarinda's now broke
n plans, I led up to the subject of Richard.
Again I surprised myself, for now the ease of writing deserted me. I could 
not seem to put pen to paper about him for very long. Each time I tried, my
 mind wandered off in a dreamy speculation of a happy future, rather than f
raming a solid report of the happy present. How that child could lay hold o
f my mind and keep hold of it-had my father felt this way about me at my bi
rth? Perhaps, though, he'd have had several months to anticipate the event,
 thus getting used to the prospect of having another baby in the house. Ric
hard had been-to grossly understate it-a complete surprise.
At least I could and did say with all truth that there was no question in m
y mind whatsoever about the child's paternity, adding that I considered mys
elf to be one of the most fortunate of all men. I added also that unless up
on finding Nora and she told me otherwise, Richard was like to be my only c

hild because of my changed condition. With that in mind I expressed the pro
found wish that Father would receive the news he was a grandparent as joyfu
lly as I gave it.
After that, I couldn't think of anything else to say. His acceptance of Ric
hard meant much to me. He would or he would not, but I had every confidence
 in his love for me and felt he would have no trouble welcoming my son into
 his own heart as well as I had myself.
I blotted the last page and shuffled them into order like a huge pack of flims
y playing cards. They'd make a sizable parcel and would cost a fortune to post
. Well, it wasn't as though I didn't have the money for it. I rolled the lette
r into a cylinder and tied it up with a bit of string filched from a drawer. T
hen I wrote a short note to Elizabeth, asking her to wrap it up and post it fo
r me.
The thought came to me on the wisdom of making a copy of the thing. That mi
ght not be a bad idea, especially should something adverse happen to this p
ile of paper while en route to Long Island. But to do all that work over ag
ain? Ugh. Though I could easily have the whole thing copied for a modest fe
e....
Oh.
Good heavens, no. I snorted at myself for being such a fool.
To hire someone, to allow some stranger a look at the intimate doings of the
 Fonteyns and their relations? That was impossible-not to mention ridiculous
. The schemes, lying, adultery, assaults, and murder? No, no, no, far better
and safer to keep all that within the family where it belonged. I'd do the cop
ying myself.
Then all I had to do was hope neither letter fell into the wrong hands.
Well-a-day, maybe I should have used that as an argument with Elizabeth aga
inst writing the whole lot down to start with and saved myself an evening's
 toil. Too late now. For that matter, how late was it, anyway?
When I finally glanced up at the mantel clock, the hour shocked me. Listeni
ng closely for a minute or so, I determined the whole house was fast asleep
 and had likely been so for a long time. If I wanted company to help me pas
s the meager remains of the night it would have to be chatting with the wat
ch again or reading another book.
Or copy work.
I shuddered and pushed away from the desk. It could keep until tomorrow nig
ht; I'd devoted quite enough time on the project.
Quite enough and quite a lot, since I'd been left alone for nearly the whole 
of the night. In this mild form of abandonment, I sensed Elizabeth's hand. Gu
essing that I might be writing to Father, she'd probably told Oliver all abou
t it and had cautioned him against a return to his study lest he interrupt th

e task. If I grew tired of the work, I'd be out to visit them in the parlor. 
Since I hadn't once emerged, she was likely to be quite pleased with me. I th
ought of confronting her about it tomorrow and teasing her a bit by saying I'
d spent the whole time reading old magazines. It would serve her right for kn
owing me so well as to predict my behavior with such accuracy.
But my inclination for mischief passed; it occurred to me that Jericho mig
ht also have had something to do with it. He possessed an uncanny ability 
for understanding and predicting the actions not only of me but of others 
if given enough time to come to acquaint himself with them, and he knew me
 better than I did myself. He would be aware of Elizabeth's wish for me to
 write-he knew all the goings-on of the house-and would have arranged for 
me to work on undisturbed. A keen observer of life was my good friend and 
valet.
I found evidence of this in the central hall. On a narrow settee he'd laid ou
t my heavy cloak, hat, walking shoes, gloves, and stick, anticipating that I'
d want to take a turn about the early morning streets before diving into my c
ellar sanctuary for the day. Not wanting to disappoint him, I donned the thin
gs and quietly let myself out without bothering to open the entry door.
It was a fine clear night, if windy. I had to keep a tight hold on my hat le
st it go flying. The ends of my cloak whipped about as though alive and tryi
ng to make good an escape from my shoulders. Finally giving up on the hat, 1
 held it close to my chest with one hand and bravely walked into the wind wi
th my cloak streaming behind like a great woolen flag. Not an arrangement to
 protect one from the elements, but I wasn't one to feel the cold as sharply
 as other people do. My chief annoyance was the way its collar tie tugged li
ke a hangman's rope at my throat. I thought it might be better after all to 
turn back to the house and fill the time with a book, but I'd been physicall
y idle for hours and my body craved exercise. Though the wind was a nuisance
, it freshened the air marvelously, a rare thing in London, inviting me to p
artake of it while it lasted. Coming hard out of the north, it reminded me o
f the wholesome landscape of the country and my desire to eventually move th
ere.
The street was empty, though the tumbling of a stray newspaper and the cons
tant dance on either hand of tree branches in the breeze made it seem less 
so. The creaks and whispers they made unnerved me at first until I grew use
d to the sound. Not so for a dog I heard occasionally giving vent to his un
ease by barking.
Most of the houses had lamps burning outside to aid in the lighting and thus 
the safety of the street. Oliver's was one of their number because of his pro
fession. Once or twice since moving in, I'd witnessed him being called forth 
on a late medical errand, and it was best for all concerned that his door be 
easily found by those in need.

Within the houses all must have been peaceful with sleep, though now and the
n I'd see candlelight showing through the curtains or shutters. When I did, 
it was always my hope that it was simply an early riser or another wakeful s
oul passing the night in study, rather than sickness.
I found the watch, in the person of an elderly man named Dunnett, uneasily 
dozing on his feet in his narrow box. He wore two cloaks wrapped close abou
t his sturdy frame and a long muffler wound around his hat and head against
 the bitterness of the night, but the way he huddled in them gave me to und
erstand they were somewhat inadequate to the task. So light was his sleep t
hat he jerked awake at my soft approach, his startled gaze meeting mine in 
an instant of fearful suspicion until he recognized me.
"Good e'nin', Mr. Barrett," he said, rubbing his red nose with the back of his
 gloved hand. "Up early or out late ag'in? That is, 'f y' don't mind my askin'
."
"Good morning to you, Mr. Dunnett. I'm out late, as always."
"Mus' be rare 'ard for a youngun like you to 'ave such trouble findin' sleep."
"Oh, it comes to me eventually. All quiet tonight?"
"Aye, too cold for the bully boys, I'm thinkin'. Saw 'alf a dozen o' them Mo
hocks earlier tonight. Gave me a turn. I was afeared they'd be makin' some g
rief, but they left me alone, thanks be to God."
"I'm glad to hear that." The night watch, mainly composed of unarmed old me
n, was ever a favorite target for the malice of the city's rowdy element.
"A foolish lot they are, but mebe too cold fer their pranks. Tis fine with me.
"
"Any other visitors aside from them?" "None as I could see. 'S been rare quiet 
tonight. 'S I said, 'tis fine with me."
"What, not even footpads?" I asked, pretending surprise. " 'Tain't no one out f
er 'em to rob," he said with a cackle. " 'Ceptin' me, 'n' I don't 'ave nothin'.
 There's you, but I 'eard as 'ow you can take care o' yerself."
"You have? Where?-if you don't mind my asking." " 'Eard it 'round or by the 
Red Swan. I done a favor f the landlord 'n' he sees I get a tot o' rum once 
a night 'f it's to me fancy." From the look of the many veins decorating his
 nose, one could deduce it suited Dunnett's fancy very well indeed.
I knew about his favor. The Red Swan's chief business was not the sort to h
ave the approval of the law. According to Oliver-himself a regular customer
 there-Mr. Dunnett had warned the landlord of an impending raid from the fo
rces of justice and decency in time to save the establishment from serious 
damage. The story went that the raiding party burst into the place ready to
 face the worst kind of resistance this side of a battlefield, only to find
 it occupied by a large group of Quakers having some sort of a meeting. The
re was vast disappointment on all sides once they worked out their business
-the raiders had no one to arrest, and the Quakers failed to interest any o

f the newcomers in joining them on the closing prayer. Both sides eventuall
y retired unbloodied from the field to go their separate ways. The next day
 the Swan was open for normal custom, free now of the harassment from the f
orces of morality because of a well-placed bribe from the landlord.
Dunnett said, "I was in 'avin' me tot not long back, 'n 'eard some gentlemen d
rinkin' to yer very good 'ealth."
I smiled, feeling absurdly pleased. "Some friends of mine, I suppose, or my 
cousin Oliver."
"Friends," he confirmed with a nod. "I know Dr. Marlin' well enough. Many's
 the time I've seen 'im staggerin'
from 'is coach to 'is front door when 'e's had a bit o' fun. Always 'as a frie
ndly word for me no matter 'ow much 'e's swilled."
"That's Oliver and no mistake. But you didn't know these men to name? If som
eone's toasting my health it's only right I should return the courtesy."
"Not to name, nosir, but I've seen one or two of 'em visitin* the doctor now 'n
' then. One was a 'andsome perky chap with a mole right 'ere," Mr. Dunnett poin
ted to a spot on his nose. "I noticed 'im special for it, 'n' for 'im bein' the
 one t' name you 'n 'is toast. Talked all 'bout that duel you was in, called yo
u a real fire-eater, sir. Those were 'is very words. So that's 'ow I 'eard 'bou
t you takin' care o' yerself so well."
I felt my face going red, and not from the wind. "I know the fellow," I adm
itted. The mole on the nose was the clue; he could only have been Brinsley 
Bolyn. Since the night of my duel with Ridley, young Mr. Bolyn had become m
y most devoted admirer and supporter. Good lord, but I'd have to find a pol
ite way of asking him not to be so free with his enthusiasm or I'd have no 
end of challenges from men wanting to test themselves against me. I could f
ight, but had an unfair advantage over them in terms of strength, speed, an
d an unnatural ability to heal from even a mortal wound. Besides, unlike mo
st of them, I had killed before and found no pleasure in it.
Dunnett noticed the change in my expression. "Not a friend o' yers, sir?''
I quickly sorted myself and laughed a little. "He's a friend, but he's doing 
me no favors with such praise, however well intentioned."
"1 see 'ow it is, sir," he said with a quick wink. "Too much talk like that make
s it 'ard to live up to the 'onor."
"Exactly. You're a most perceptive man, Mr. Dunnett."
"I do wot I can, sir."
"And very well indeed."
"Thank you kindly, sir, 'n' bless you," he said in response to the shilling
 I slipped him. I bade him a good morning and began to walk away, but he ha
iled for me to stop a moment more. "There's one thing botherin' me 'bout th
em Mohocks, sir."
He had my full attention. "What would that be?"

"They walked right past me without hardly a look which as I've said, 's fine 
with me. But 's been my experience that they always 'ave at least a curse or 
two to throw at me. Nothin' like that tonight. They just walked past, lookin'
 at all the houses like a pack o' damned foreigners. It was dark 'n' they was
 a ways down so I couldn't see too good, but I think they was payin' some ext
ra mind to yer 'ouse-Dr. Marlin's 'ouse, that is."
I certainly didn't like the sound of this. "Staring at it, you mean?"
"That's what I'm not too sure of, sir. 'F it'd been plain I'd 'ave come 'round to
 let you know about it, but it wasn't, so I didn't. The 'pression I got was they 
might 'a' looked at it a bit longer than the other 'ouses, 'n' for that I can't r
ightly swear to on a Bible. Just thought I should mention it now since yer 'ere '
n' all. I don't mean t' be troubling 'r worryin' ye'."
"Not at all, Mr. Dunnett, as I see it, you're only doing your duty. I'm very
 grateful you told me. Do you recall what time they came by?"
"Not long after midnight, 'f the church bells rang true."
By then I'd have been deeply occupied with my letter writing and the rest o
f the house asleep. It may have been nothing, but recent events gave me man
y excellent reasons to be cautious. Also, though I was endeavoring to bring
 a change for the better to Ridley and Arthur, it did not mean their friend
s would also be favorably affected by such reformation.
This time I pressed a handful of shillings into Dunnett's hand, and he was su
fficiently overwhelmed to start protesting that it was too much. "Not nearly 
enough," I said. "If ever you see anything of a similar nature in the future,
 I want you to come straight to the house as soon as you're able and let me k
now about it. You need have no fear of waking me no matter how late the hour-
that is to say, if I'm home. If I'm not, then you be sure to tell Dr. Marling
 or Miss Barrett or Jericho, understand? I'll see to it they hear what you've
 just told me."
"You 'specting' trouble?"
"Not expecting, but it suits me to know all I can about anything to do with
 Mohocks. That duel I fought may not be quite finished yet. Friends of the 
man who lost might want to reopen the contest, but not on the field of hono
r, if you take my meaning."
"God bless you, sir, I understand clear as day. Y' can count on me."
I bade him a good morning and continued along the street, wanting to stretch
 my legs and needing to think. Neither activity took very long. I walked fas
t and thought faster.
Tomorrow night, before anything else, I'd pay a call upon Ridley and see to i
t he kept his friends in check. Arthur Tyne would also briefly receive me as 
his guest, like it or not. I didn't believe either man to be much, if any sor
t, of a threat to me or my family now, but had learned to value caution over 
carelessness.

Of course, the Mohocks Mr. Dunnett had observed might have had nothing to 
do with Ridley. There were dozens, if not hundreds of their ilk roaming th
e city at all hours of the night. Word of the duel might have reached some
 kindred group and they'd only come to look at the house out of a sense of
 curiosity and nothing more.
And, of course, I was not prepared to believe that.
Even knowing it was much too late by now to look for any sign of their band
, I surrendered to the desire to take in a broader view of the area. Tuckin
g the ends of my cloak close around my body, I gave the street a quick glan
ce up and down to make sure it was deserted. Only then did I vanish. The wo
rld faded to a gray nothingness, though I soon had ample evidence of its co
ntinued existence despite my apparent leaving of it.
Well-a-day, but I'd underestimated the wind.
The beastly stuff must have blown me a good hundred yards before I knew wha
t was happening. It tumbled me about as easily as that discarded newspaper,
 and I had to fight it with more than the usual effort of will required for
 this mode of movement. The wind felt every bit as solid to me without a vi
sible body as with one. After a stint of hard work I managed to force my wa
y back and upward until I reckoned myself to be well above the tops of the 
immediate houses. Then did I take on the barest amount of solidity to see e
xactly where I'd gotten myself.
I was just within sight of Mr. Dunnett's box and silently crowed with an inw
ard congratulation I certainly didn't deserve, for it had all been luck. I h
overed over this one place a moment, decided it was possible for me to conti
nue with this folly despite the weather, then went higher. The wind slacked 
off a bit, easing my work. Doubtless its strength was worse closer to the gr
ound, being whipped up by its passage between all the city's many buildings,
 like that of a river being forced to flow between the pylons of a bridge. T
he more narrow their placement, the greater the speed of the water.
When I was well over the tops of the tallest chimneys and holding in one spo
t like a kite on a string, I gave all the streets within range of my cloudy 
vision a thorough examination. All was as I'd expected, quiet and unremarkab
le-if one could describe so unorthodox a view as such. I chided myself for t
aking this aspect of my miraculous condition for granted.
Below stretched the walkways and cobbled streets, some empty, others showi
ng scatterings of people either starting to wake for the coming day or tru
dging wearily off to bed from the closing night. None of their number look
ed to be Mohocks; on that point I was torn between annoyance and relief.
Relief, I finally decided. If I'd spotted any of them from my high prospec
t I might have been tempted to investigate their business, and that might 
have led to all sorts of unpleasant and time-consuming complications. The 
morning would be here soon to send me into another day's oblivion. I'd hav

e my fun tomorrow night. For now, I would have to put away my worry since 
there was nothing I could do about it and try to enjoy my remaining moment
s of consciousness.
Not a difficult task, that.
Except for a rare balloonist, no others would ever share this sight; I was 
one of a tiny number and needed to be more aware of and thankful for the pr
ivilege. A cartographer drawing at his map might also have so fascinating a
 view, though all would have to take place in his imagination. He could mea
sure out the streets and write their names, even add tiny squares to his wo
rk to mark individual houses, but could never put in all the details as I s
aw them. Could he see the shadows of the people coming and going from those
 houses and wonder how their lives and fortunes fared? Could he fill his fl
at paper streets with the movement of life that I observed like a god from 
on high? Perhaps he did to some extent, but he could never actually see and
 know it as I did. It was glorious and at the same time sadly dispiriting. 
My dismay came from the knowledge I could not share this with anyone. I was
 doing the impossible and though exhilarating beyond imagining, it was also
 unutterably lonely.
I thought of Nora. Of all the people of the earth, she was the only one who c
ould possibly understand my feeling, could possibly share it, cherish it.
Though she must certainly possess this ability, I'd never heard her speak of
 doing it. She was ever careful to keep the differences of her changed natur
e well hidden, using her own talent for influencing others to maintain the i
llusion she was no different from any other normal woman.
But she was different. Different because I loved her.
The remembrance of her face, her voice swept over me more strongly than the
 wind. I twisted like a leaf and began to descend. Swiftly.
The need to keep that illusion was important to her. I'd seen how it had bee
n when, with the cruel thrust of a blade, Tony Warburton had torn it away fr
om her.
I spiraled down, down, down, skimming close to the harsh brick of the build
ings.
Where are you, Nora? Why did you let me go? Why did you not tell me wh
at would happen?
I took on solidity. Weight.
Perhaps she'd been unwilling to share her knowledge with me because of tha
t need to pretend. God knows she was reticent enough with all else.
I dropped faster.
Perhaps she thought her silence had all been for my own good.
Faster.
Perhaps she'd been unsure of my love for her, or worse, unsure of her own f
or me.

With a jolt that shot right through my spine I landed hard on the cobbles. T
he violence of the impact was too great for my legs to bear. A bone snapped.
 I heard the sickening crack quite clearly. I fell and rolled. The pain foll
owed but a second later, wrenching from me a strangled cry. I sprawled on th
e freezing cold street trying to writhe away from the torment.
Perhaps ... she'd never really loved me at all.
CHAPTER
-6-
"Melancholia," Oliver pronounced, glaring at me from his chair by the parlou
r fire.
I said nothing, only shrugged, though I tended toward full agreement with h
im.
"It must be from all this black stuff hanging from the windows and mirrors,"
 Elizabeth put in, also favoring me with a dour look as she stirred her tea.
 "And having the curtains being drawn all the time so as not to offend the n
eighbors."
"Oh, that will soon change," Oliver said, reaching for a biscuit. "And I'll
 not care who's offended. God knows Mother never worried about offending pe
ople-but back to your good brother's complaint-put those things together wi
th it being winter and all, and without a doubt you have a rampant case of 
melancholia.''
"What will you do about it?" she asked him.
"An outing is in order, I think. Nothing like a change of scenery to change o
ne's outlook. Didn't he say he wanted to go to the bookstalls and hunt for pl
ays?"
"Yes. He promised our cousin Ann ..."
And so they went on, drinking their tea and talking about me as though I wasn
't there. All intentional, of course, sounding almost rehearsed. I stood it p
atiently.
Melancholia was a fairly close description for my state after all.
Earlier this evening my hour with Richard had helped, but only for that hou
r. Once he was tucked away and well asleep I tiredly trudged off to my own 
room for Jericho to repair the damage wrought by playing with a lively four
-year-old. He caught me up on the day's events and, as he brushed out my co
at, cautiously asked if I'd enjoyed my walk the night before. I told him I 
had, offering no explanation for the condition of my clothes, made filthy f
rom my fall to the street.
The broken bone in my leg from that abrupt landing had mended with my next 
vanishing, which had taken place soon after the pain jarred me into a brief
 period of common sense. Brief, I say, for it fled from me quickly enough. 
Despondency about Nora seized my spirit once more, slowing my steps toward 
home even as the vanguard of dawn began to creep over the eastern sky. The 

watery light was nothing to the early risers I passed, but blinding to me. 
For all that I held to a perverse need to risk myself-that, or I simply did
 not care what happened.
Despite my deliberately laggard progress, I managed to reach my bed in the c
ellar with time to spare. With time to think.
And I did not want to think.
I'd cast off my cloak and shoes and stretched out on the bags of earth that s
erved as my grave for the day and tried very, very hard not to use my mind. A
nd failed. Miserably. Nora's face was the last image I saw before oblivion fi
nally came and the first there at its departure. I could still almost see her
, in the corner of my eye, in the flame of a candle, in the shadows of an unl
ighted corner-almost, for invariably when I looked more closely, she disappea
red.
Trying to escape the phantasms, I'd eventually come downstairs to join my s
ister and cousin, mumbling only the most minimal acknowledgments to their g
reetings. Oliver immediately remarked that I looked like a dejected grave-d
igger and inquired why, since last night I'd been fairly cheerful. My vague
 reply was anything but satisfactory to either of them, and that must have 
set things in motion.
Their rapport with each other had now grown to the point that with the excha
nge of a single look they were able to conduct quite a detailed discussion w
ithout uttering a word. The conclusion they reached on the best course of ac
tion to take soon manifested itself in this rather artificial conversation a
bout me. I took no offense from it since the overall bent was to eventually 
put me into a good mood. I wasn't adverse to the idea of a change to a more 
pleasant state of heart, but my spirits were so low that I couldn't see how 
they'd ever succeed.
However, their obvious concern touched me enough that I at last roused mysel
f to speak in an effort to at least meet them part of the way.
"I'd prefer not to go Paternoster Row," I said, interrupting them. Both looke
d at me expectantly. "Not yet, anyhow. Perhaps a little later."
"Where, then?" asked Elizabeth.
"The Everitts house."
She raised her brows slightly, knowing the Everitts to be one-time neighbor
s to Nora Jones.
"I just thought I could look in, find out if they've heard any news about Nora 
since Oliver's last visit."
She promptly expressed her full approval of my errand. Being familiar with 
all my moods, she was fully aware of the usual reason behind my past despon
dencies, and saw the proposal as a means to lift this one.
"Would you like some company?" Oliver asked, trying to hold to a neutral to
ne, but still managing to express hopefulness.

"Very much so, Coz. What about you, good sister?"
"I've had more than my share of London for now, thank you very much." She
'd spent nearly the whole day out with Mrs. Howard and Richard, shopping 
for carpets. Their choices were to arrive sometime tomorrow along with El
izabeth's new spinet.
"Probably just as well," I said. "I'll feel easier knowing you're here to loo
k after things." It was then I told them about my conversation with Mr. Dunne
tt and the men he'd seen looking at the house last night.
"Damned Mohocks," Oliver growled, for once forgetting to apologize to Eli
zabeth about his language. "Something should be done about 'em."
"Not to worry. If I see them, I most certainly will do something about them,
" I promised.
"Well, it can't be safe leaving Elizabeth on her own with those louts lurking
 about."
Elizabeth snorted. "I'll be safe enough if Jonathan loans me his Dublin revol
ver. Besides, the staff here has nearly doubled in the last week. I'll just w
arn them to keep their eyes open, the doors bolted, and have a club handy."
"It's a disgrace," he complained. "Decent people having to go about in terror
 of a lot of worthless bullies with no more manners than a pack of wild dogs-
it's just not right."
"No, but I'll be fine, nonetheless."
"One of us should stay here with you."
"Leaving the other to wander the city all unprotected? I think not, Coz. Now 
you both go along before it gets too late to visit and find out what you may 
about Miss Jones, and I wish you the best of luck at it."
With this combined blessing and firm dismissal upon our heads, Oliver rang f
or someone to tell the driver to ready his horses and carriage, then shot of
f to his room to ready himself. He didn't get past the lower hall; Jericho w
as coming down the stairs with our cloaks, hats, and canes. He
must have heard my proposal for an expedition out and made suitable prepar
ation.
"You're even more uncanny than your master," Oliver remarked, staring at th
e things.
Jericho's eyelids dipped to half-mast and his lips thinned into a near-smil
e. I understood that look; he was insufferably pleased with himself. He hel
ped us don the cloaks he'd long since retrieved mine from the cellar and br
ushed it thoroughly clean-and handed over our canes. Oliver's was topped by
 a fine knob of gold, marking him as a medical man; mine was less ostentati
ous, but still identified me as a gentleman of means. Hidden within its len
gth was a yard of good Spanish steel that would also identify me as a gentl
eman of sense to any footpad or Mohock. I thought of carrying along one of 
my duelers as well, but decided it was unnecessary. The two of us, along wi

th the driver and two footmen, would likely be safe enough even on London's
 dark streets.
Of course, they were not at all dark for me. Another advantage in our favor.
The carriage was brought along to the front, and I took this time to excuse m
yself, passing quickly through the house as a shortcut to the stables. They w
ould be empty of activity for a short time while the men and lads were busy. 
I slipped inside, patting Roily and by way of a greeting slipped him a stolen
 carrot from the kitchen. Forbidden fruit-or in this case vegetables-must tas
te best, for he crunched it down with obvious relish. Moving on to Oliver's r
iding horse, I offered him the same treat. The bribe was greedily accepted. I
n return, I just as greedily supped on a quantity of his blood and felt the b
etter for it. Last night's efforts and injury had used me up, leaving my body
 in sore need of refreshment.
This admirable provender, on top of the prospect of our outing, was beginnin
g to have a favorable effect on me already. I didn't really expect the Everi
tts to have any fresh news, but it felt good just to be able to make the eff
ort to find out for certain. Besides, whatever the outcome, the trip we'd pl
anned afterward to Paternoster Row held more attractions for me than mere sh
opping for plays. This was London, a city all but bursting with women and op
portunities to share their company. If I could not immediately find Nora and
 settle my questions with her, then I might, for a while at least, find dist
raction with someone else. Not the same, of course-of that I was very well a
ware-but passing time with a pretty lady had ever been the best way I'd foun
d for gladdening a sorrowful heart
Yet another excellent reason to refresh myself. Should things work out as I
 hoped, I'd not want my prospective liaison spoiled by the needs of my body
 confusing lust with hunger. I could and had fed on human blood before when
 forced to by dire need, but when partaking the pleasures of a woman, it wa
s best for us both that I kept control over my appetite. Thus could I prolo
ng our mutual enjoyment without worrying about causing harm to my partner b
y taking too much from her. Such was the way of it for most men, food first
, then love, and so I was unchanged from my fellows in that respect, at lea
st.
Necessity seen to and finished, I hurried 'round the house and climbed into t
he carriage with Oliver.
"What kept y-oh!" he said, when he caught a glimpse of my reddened eyes in 
the lantern light.
"They'll be all cleared up by the time we get to the Everitts," I assured him.
"I'm glad to hear it. Most alarming when one doesn't expect it. You sure it d
oesn't hurt?"
"Can't feel a thing."
He grunted, then called directions to the driver, who in turn called them to

 the two footmen. They ran with their torches just ahead of the horses, ligh
ting our way. The lot of them had come from the staff of Fonteyn House. Rath
er than dismissal, since for the time being there was little work
for them there, Oliver had moved them to his house in town and kept them busy
. He was still getting used to the idea of having to deal with his vast inher
itance, and taking the weight of it in this manner, a little at a time.
I didn't talk much during the ride, content to let Oliver rattle on about hi
s day. He'd paid a call on Tony Warburton and chatted with Mrs. Warburton ab
out her son. Eventually he'd led the conversation around to Nora.
"I made out that Tony had muttered something to me about Nora being ill," h
e said. "Then I asked his mother if she knew what he was talking about. She
 didn't."
"You're certain about that - I mean he's certain?"
"Very certain. There's no need for you to jog her memory with your influen
ce, so your conscience may rest easy now. Her recollections of Nora's time
 with them in Italy are most vivid. What with the girl's kindness for Tony
, Mrs. Warburton was quite taken with her. Hung on her every word, if you 
know what I mean. Anyway, the last she recalled, Nora was fair blooming wi
th health, though perhaps a bit troubled over something."
"Over what?"
"That I could not say, for the lady herself could not say. She asked if all wa
s well with Nora, and was told that things were fine. Still and all, she was a
 bit surprised when Nora didn't turn up in London that summer as she'd practic
ally promised to do so in order to look in on Tony. I know it's all the same a
s I'd written before, but at least you know Nora isn't ill."
"It could have been something sudden," I said, unwilling to relinquish the w
orry so easily. "Something to keep her on the Continent."
"It could," he admitted. "But you must try to be optimistic, old lad. Your con
stitution's as tough as a country bull's. Who's to say that Miss Jones is any 
different?"
Who, indeed?
We arrived at the Everitts, where I came up with a suggestion. "What about 
you going in and paying your respects while I give Nora's house another qui
et looking over? It'll save some time."
"Save time for what?"
"As long as we're out, I've a mind to visit Ridley and Arthur tonight. May
be we can catch them while they're at supper. If those Mohocks that came b
y have anything to do with them
"Say no more, Coz. I'll hurry things through. I'll say I have other calls to ma
ke, else old Everitt will have me up to his study to look at his beetle collect
ion again."
We left the carriage and went our separate ways. As it was still somewhat e

arly and the streets busy with evening traffic, I quietly slipped into the 
shadowed space between the Everitt's house and Nora's. Free from observatio
n and hidden in the darkness, I vanished and sieved my way into her former 
home through a shuttered window, returning to solidity in what had once bee
n a music room. Nora hadn't been much for playing herself, but delighted in
 letting her guests indulge themselves. In one corner crouched the rectangu
lar shape of a spinet and close to it stood a tall harp, both protected by 
musty shrouds. Similar sheets covered the remaining bits of furniture.
I held still and listened, but already knew that I'd hear nothing but the scurr
y of rats and mice. She was not here.
My last visit had left me very downhearted. Things were only a little impr
oved now, the chief difference being that my hopes were almost nonexistent
; therefore any disappointment awaiting me would not be such a crushing bl
ow.
With the shutters all closed fast the house was almost too dark for even my 
eyes to see. This time I'd thought to bring a candle and, after a bit of wor
k with my tinderbox, soon had it lighted. As before, I moved ghostlike throu
gh all the rooms, and as before I found no sign of recent occupation. There 
were only my own footprints in the dust.
I'd been wrong about the disappointment. Any blow,
even one that's expected, hurts just as much as another.
Dragging from one room to the next and up the stairs, I checked the whole p
lace over. I knew I would find nothing, but went through the motions regard
less, just to be thorough. The overall gloom of the house gathered heavily 
on my soul as I seeped into her own bricked-up sanctuary in the cellar. The
re she had slept during the day on a large chest that held a store of her h
ome earth. Everything was the same as before. The bags of earth were undist
urbed, the air around me still and stuffy and wholly silent. I eased the ch
est lid down, but my fingers slipped, and the sound boomed off the hard wal
ls of the chamber like a cannon shot.
Damnation.
Noise of any kind was all wrong here. It was like laughing in church. A stric
t one.
The hair on my neck was all on end. I knew there was nothing and no one e
lse in here with me, but my imagination provided the fancy that this plac
e was occupied by some disapproving guardian who had just been awakened b
y my clumsiness.
I fled by the fastest means, reappearing again just outside the cellar door,
 candle still alight, but unsteady because of the tremors in my hand. And I 
thought I'd conquered my fear of dark, closed-in spaces. It would seem I nee
ded to conduct more work in that area, but not tonight. I scuttled away from
 the door, firmly denying the frightened child in me from giving in to the s

trong inclination to glance behind. Nothing had followed me up, because noth
ing was there in the first place. I wasn't so sure about Oliver, but if Eliz
abeth had been with me, by now she'd likely be doubled over with laughter at
 my cowardly flight, I was sure of it.
The last stop was the downstairs parlour to look at the note I'd written and 
left for Nora on my previous visit. I pushed open the door and my gaze went s
traight to the mantel ... but the folded and sealed square of paper I'd place
d so carefully there was missing. My heart, suddenly coming to a kind of life
 again, gave a painful leap against my ribs. It was all I could do to hold on
 to the candle, and then the flame nearly guttered out in my rash to cross th
e room for a closer look.
The note was gone, truly, truly gone.
"You're sure a rat didn't eat it?" Oliver asked once he'd come back to the ca
rriage. I'd impatiently given him the news of my discovery twice over, having
 babbled it out too fast the first time. "I don't mean to throw a blanket on 
your fire, but one must be certain about these things."
"I understand, and believe me, I did consider it, but if it had been a rat I'd
 have seen signs in the dust. No, I checked the mantel very carefully, and it 
was untouched except for a thin line where the paper had rested. I also found 
footprints in the floor dust. A man's shoes by their size and shape." Possibly
 one of her servants, I thought, sent to see that all was well with her house.
"Might have been a passing thief, y'know."
"I doubt it could be a thief, the house is still locked up tight-I made sure 
of that. The only person who could get in would have to have a key. That mean
s it must have been a servant or a house agent."
"Or Miss Jones, slipping in the way you did. But then it was a man's shoe....
"
I nodded, my mouth too dry for words.
"Or someone like Miss Jones. Have you ever considered there might be more
 chaps about like you, others to whom she's passed this condition?"
I nodded again, trying to clear my throat. "I have. If there are, then I don'
t know of them; she never mentioned them to me."
"If you don't mind my saying it, your Miss Jones never mentioned a very gre
at number of things. I should be very
severe with her about that when you see her again."
The possibility of seeing her ... it was a possibility once more. My poor he
art gave another leap, or seemed to, making me gasp with a half-realized lau
gh.
Oliver grinned and thumped my back. "Well, then, congratulations, Cousin. 
This must be the best news you've heard all year."
"Just about," I said, with a flicker of warm thought for Richard. "I'd all but 
lost hope. But... but what if she doesn't want to see me?"

"Why the devil shouldn't she? You know in your heart what a great regard she
 held for you, and probably still does. Even-and mind you it's not likely-if
 that regard has faded, at the very least she'll be curious about why you're
 back in London. Of course she'll see you!"
"But she could have had that note a week or more by now. Why hasn't she c
ome by or even written?"
"She might only have gotten it today, it might be en route even, especially i
f she's still somewhere on the Continent. Patience, Coz, patience. Give the l
ady some time to pack. You know yourself how difficult it is to travel-especi
ally with your sort of limitations."
"I have to leave her another note. Just in case the first one did go awry. I hav
e to be sure."
"Of course you do, but did you bring along any writing paper?"
I made a face. "You know I didn't." Nor pen, nor ink, nor...
"Well, then!"
"Well, then, what?" I demanded, growing annoyed.
"It'll have to wait a bit, don't you think? You still have to look in on Ridley to
night, after all."
I let out a thunderous, exasperated sigh. "Damn Ridley and all his cousins'
"Especially Arthur," he put in brightly.
"-especially Arthur," I echoed. Then I couldn't bring myself to finish. The l
aughter bubbling up inside prevented it. We hooted at one another like lunati
cs.
"You can leave another note anytime," Oliver said when he'd recovered some 
of his breath. "You'll like as not come back later while all the world slee
ps, or am I wrong?"
"You are perfectly right." But my good spirits sagged, dragged down by my 
ever present doubt.
"What is it?" he inquired, seeing the change.
"Well, just look at things. The note I left is gone, and so I make all these assum
ptions that she has it and will reply as soon as she can."                   
He sat back, sobering. "You're right, it's not much, but if the worst happen
s and nothing comes of this, we can still continue on as we'd planned. I was
 going to go 'round to more house agents tomorrow. Everitt gave me the name 
of one I've not tried yet-oh, in your mad rush to tell me of your discovery,
 I've not had the chance to say what I've learned. No, no, don't excite your
self, because I didn't learn a damned thing that's new. No one in that house
hold has the least idea of Miss Jones's whereabouts, sad to say."
"But there's obviously been a visitor or the note would still be there."
He waved one hand. "Then they just didn't notice his coming or going."
"How could they not?" I was outraged.
"I'm sure it wasn't intentional, but certainly they've better things to do wit

h themselves than stare at an empty house all the time. Anyway, be of good che
er and keep thinking she's got your note and is on her way to see you. The wor
ld's not that big; she'll get here eventually. Or we'll find her first."
I wanted to believe that, and Oliver's manner was such as to half convince 
me of the truth of it. Some of my doubt sloughed away.
"Now, then," he said cocking his head, "what about you taking care of the 
vile Mr. Ridley and his Mohock hordes?"
Not much time passed before our driver, following Oliver's directions, guide
d the carriage to the right street. While Ridley had still been a "guest" at
 Fonteyn House, my cousin had taken pains to get his exact address.
"There, I think." He pointed out one in a line of doors as we slowly passed.
 "He told me it was the fourth over on the west side of the square. Not a ve
ry fashionable neighborhood, I'm sure."
His disdain was well founded as he looked down his long nose at the row of 
narrow, dingy houses. Most buildings in London were dingy regardless of the
ir quality because of the soot-tainted air, but these specimens seemed to b
e a bit more so than most.
"I thought he had money," I said.
"He does, but only if he doesn't live with his family. The gossips at one of
 my clubs say they give him a quarterly payment to be elsewhere as much as p
ossible."
"Can't be much of a payment."
"I'm thinking he spends most of it on his pleasures and this is all he can affo
rd on what's left."
We drove by and had the driver stop a hundred yards down, then I got out to 
walk back. I might not have otherwise troubled myself with such caution, but
 Mr. Dunnett's observations inspired me to take greater care than usual. If 
any of Ridley's friends were lurking about, I wanted the chance to spot them
 first.
The building housed several flats, all occupied, if I correctly discerned t
he varied noises coming through the many walls. Ridley's was on the first f
loor. I hurried lightly up the stairs and gave a jaunty double knock on his
 door as though I were expected. No one answered. After a moment I found my
 own way in, slowly reforming on the other side of the threshold with my ey
es wide for any sign of him.
He had two small chambers, this one serving as a sitting room, and I guessed th
e one beyond the half open door across from me to hold his bed. From the untidy
 condition of things, he had no servant. I listened hard, but heard nothing, no
t even the soft breath of a sleeper. The place was dark, cold, and empty. Well,
 that's what comes of it when one doesn't make an appointment. I would have to 
return later.                                                     
On my way down I reflected that though I was interfering in the very direction

 of Ridley's life, it might not be such a bad thing after all. If I got him to
 improve himself, he might even be able to do the Prodigal Son business with h
is family and at least end up in a better place than this to live. The trick w
as to catch him at home. But later.
My spirits had lifted-because of this failure, not in spite of it. I'd been sp
ared getting a headache from the work, if only for the moment; there was still
 a call to make on Arthur Tyne. Perhaps he wouldn't be at home, either. Pleasa
nt thought, that.
I walked up the street toward Oliver's carriage, not in a hurry, but not es
pecially slow. Pacing me on the opposite side were three other strollers in
 gentlemen's dress. None of them seemed to pay me much, if any, attention, 
but my guard went up nevertheless. I had the strong impression they were ve
ry well aware of me, though none looked in my direction beyond a glance or 
two. They seemed very comfortable with themselves. That's when I understood
 why I felt the need for caution; their ease of manner did not fit. Only a 
gang of bullies confident in their numbers would have such bravado. That me
ant they were likely to be Mohocks.
A quick look behind confirmed that three more of them followed me on this si
de of the street. Well-a-day, but I must have walked into a veritable nest o
f rowdies. I quickened my stride to a trot. Taking this as a signal to drop 
all pretense, they set after me like a pack of hounds on a fox. I broke into
 a dead run and started yelling at the driver to whip up the horses. The man
 turned in his seat, divined my intent, and called something to the footmen.
 Those worthy lads, well used to the rigors of their work, started smartly a
way with their torches. I wasn't too very worried about coming to harm, but 
felt a distinct a wash of relief when I tore open the door and jumped onto t
he carriage. It rocked from my sudden weight, but kept moving forward as I b
ellowed for the driver to go as fast as he dared.
"What is it?" Oliver demanded, and though astonished at this development, h
e helped haul me in. I sprawled upon the opposite seat, righted myself, and
 pulled the door shut.
For an answer I told him to look out one of the windows. He saw all six of t
he men running after us, waving their sticks and shouting abuse. Fortunately
, none was as fit as they might want to be for such exertions and had to giv
e up the chase after a very short distance. They were soon left behind, brea
thlessly cursing and shaking their fists.
"Good God," he said, drawing his head back inside again. "What on earth was
 that about?''
"Friends of Ridley, I suppose. He wasn't home, by the way."
"Just as well. If they'd charged in like that while you were trying to influenc
e him'
"I'd have vanished in a blink, dear Coz. Left 'em with a proper mystery."

He laughed at that idea, but uneasily. After another look back to make sure n
o one still followed, he told the driver to slow to a safer, more civilized s
peed. "Was Ridley in that lot?"
"I didn't see him, and he's too large to miss. Of course they might not be c
onnected to him and only be up to general mischief."
He shook his head. "I can hardly believe that. If they're
the ones that came by last night, then they must know you both."
"True, and if so, then I'll have a lot of work on my hands finding them one
 by one and warning them off. I can get their names from Ridley."
"This is positively beastly. There's no reason for such unpleasantness, y'kno
w. Not one that I can see."
"It's bound to be just pure meanness, or revenge. Maybe they've noticed the
ir leader isn't behaving-or misbehaving that is-as usual and have determine
d I'm somehow responsible."
"I hope to God Elizabeth's all right."
"She's fine."
"How are you so certain of it?"
"If all of Ridley's friends are here then they won't be anywhere near your ho
use."
"Oh."
"Well, shall we pay a call on Mr. Tyne?"
"You are a one for taking chances, aren't you?"
"Hardly, but perhaps Ridley's with him and I can catch them both in one go.
"
He acquiesced with a short laugh and called fresh directions to the driver. T
his time our destination was to a long crescent of identical houses in a very
 fashionable area of town.
"I'd hate to have to find my way home without a guide," Oliver commented. 
"Look at 'em-like a row of peas in the pod. Too much to drink and you coul
d end up in your neighbor's bed instead of your own."
"I expect one gets used to it-oh, stop braying, you great fool, or you'll hav
e the watch down on us. I meant it in terms of finding one's own door and you
 know it."
For all their similarity, the overall effect of the houses was very grand. M
ade of white stone with large windows, the wooden trims still looked freshly
 painted despite London's soots. The people who lived in these palaces took
pains to keep them as perfect as possible. They probably even had vicious r
ivalries going on amongst themselves over the fine points of how to keep ev
erything clean.
"Is this Mr. Tyne's place or his parents?" I asked.
"His own. Arthur must be rather better than Ridley at keeping his carousing 
within his means, that or he's confoundedly lucky at the gaming table."

"Where are his parents, then?"
"They live in the country and generally take themselves away to Italy at the f
irst sign of winter. Not a very sociable lot, except for Arthur."
As before, Oliver pointed out the right door and we stopped the carriage a 
distance down the way so I could walk back. And, as before, the object of m
y quest was not at home according to the servant who answered my knock. He 
informed me that the master was staying over with one of his friends, but c
ould not say who it might be. The master had a wide circle of friends. I th
anked the fellow with a small vale and retracted my steps. This time the st
reet was clear of bullies.
"There it is, then," said Oliver as I passed the news on in turn. "Nothing fo
r it but to enjoy the ride back home unless you have a mind to go along to Pa
ternoster Row? It's not that far away."
"If you think the bookstalls will still be open."
"Some of 'em are bound to be. Don't you recall there are parts of this city tha
t never close?''
"It has been a while...." The other sort of stop I had in mind I knew would m
ost definitely be open for custom.
"Then you need to become reacquainted with things."
My thoughts exactly.
Navigation through the sometimes cramped and nearly always crowded streets
 was quite a demanding art. Happily our coachman was a master at it. The t
wo footmen were also skilled, shouting for people to clear the way, their 
calls getting more frequent the closer we came to our destination.
As they labored, Oliver and I discussed the chances of hunting down some d
ecent plays to send to Long Island for our cousin Ann to read. She'd come 
to have a fondness for Shakespeare, but wanted to read others. Oliver unde
rstood that despite her exposure to such writing she was still not especia
lly worldly, which meant that numbers of the more easily understood modern
 works would be most inappropriate for her delicate character.
"A pity, really, for some of 'em are quite amusing," he said.
"You mean quite obscene."
"That's what's so amusing about 'em. Here, this place should do, I know the 
proprietor." He had the driver stop and led the way to a spot that was half 
shop, half open stall, lighted now by several lanterns. Every horizontal sur
face was covered with books and manuscripts of all size and description. It 
was just the sort of place to appeal to my own sense of the hunt, though in 
terms of knowledge, not for trophies or food. The time fled and so did a goo
dly quantity of coin from my purse. In a very short hour I had not only a st
ack of books containing plays suitable for a young lady to enjoy, but severa
l volumes for my own amusement. The weather for the coming year promised to 
be vile, so I'd probably not be as inclined to fill the early morning hours 

with outdoor exercise as was my habit. Better to settle before a warm fire w
ith a book when the time came than to brave the fury of the elements.
"I think you bought the store out," Oliver commented, eyeing my purchases.
"Not yet, but next time for sure. Good thing we have the carriage. All this w
ould be a bit much for a sedan chair."
"It may be a bit much anyway. Where are we to sit?"
"I thought we could send the carriage home without us."
"Did you now? To what purpose, other than leaving us stranded?"
1 gestured slightly with my head in the direction of a nearby gaggle of tro
llops who where presently trying to attract business. Some of them were ver
y fine looking, indeed. "Remember at the Three Brewers you suggested we tre
at ourselves to a real celebratory outing?''
"No, but it certainly sounds like something I'd suggest."
"I was still recovering from the ocean trip at the time, but I gave you my wor
d that'
He raised a hand. "Say no more, Coz, I take your meaning exactly. Now that y
ou've brought the subject to my attention, it seems to me that we've been de
nying ourselves a real sampling of the pleasures of life for far too long."
"Have you also a mind to do something about it?"
"More than a mind, though I think we can do a bit better than those ladies, 
excellent though they may be."
"The Red Swan?"
"Oh, better than that. Since we've been forced to delay celebrating your ar
rival, I propose we avail ourselves of a place with more sophisticated form
s of diversion. What do you say to a few hours at Mandy Winkle's house?"
That surprised me. "I thought you didn't care for Turkish bathing."
"Indeed not. As a doctor I know that frequent indulgence in full bodily imme
rsion in water can be very dangerous to one's health-however, this is in you
r honor, so we shall yield to your preferences this time. Besides, Mandy has
 added some dry rooms for her more sensible customers." He jutted his long c
hin out to clearly indicate himself to be a part of that select group.
"Say no more and lead on, then," I said, laughing. A night at Mandy Winkle
's had ever been a favorite diversion during my student days. Not only did
 I share company with a delightful lady, but had soaked to my heart's cont
ent in hot scented water up to my chin. Though free running water had beco
me a nuisance to me since my change, I had no trouble with the contained s
ort-especially if contained in a large tin tub with a near-naked woman sta
nding dose by to scrub my back before proceeding on to other delights.
My heart did provide me a slight twinge of guilt for thinking of having spo
rt with other women when the possibility of seeing Nora again loomed so nea
r. However, she was not near at the moment, and they were. Having a positiv

e horror of any form of jealousy amongst her gallants, she applied the same
 rules of conduct to herself, so when apart from her I'd ever been free to 
nourish my carnal appetites without incurring her disapproval. But I was se
nsible and sensitive enough not to speak of such little encounters as I had
 to her. That would have been extremely boorish.
Oliver instructed the driver to go home without us, that we'd find our own w
ay back later. If the man held an opinion on the business he kept it to hims
elf, but the footmen exchanged knowing grins with each other, indicating the
y were well aware of the nature of our plans.
"Rogues," Oliver commented to their backs as they trotted off with the car
riage in their wake. "Heavens, but we should have given some message for E
lizabeth so she wouldn't worry."
"She won't. She understands these things."
"Indeed? Doesn't that make her a rare jewel? Well, come along, then." He star
ted off in what I first took to be the wrong direction.
"I thought Mandy's was back that way."
"Not anymore. One of her neighbors was a magistrate and getting too demand
ing for his bribe money. Mandy found it cheaper to move to new digs. Wait 
till you see the place."
He threaded his way across the square, down one street and up another, fin
ally stopping before an unpretentious door. He knocked twice and was admit
ted by a half-grown black child. The boy was such as you might find servin
g in any genteel home, except for his clothes; he wore sweeping silk robes
, had a curved sword thrust through his belt, and perched on his head was 
a purple and green striped turban trimmed with glass jewels.
Oliver greeted him. "Hallo, Kaseem. Very busy tonight?"
"Busy, but not too busy, sir," came the reply in a very London accent, givin
g lie to his having any possible eastern origin despite his exotic name. "We
 have room for you and your friend."
"More than a friend, my lad. This is my cousin from the American colonies, Mr
. Barrett. If Mrs. Winkle does her job right tonight, you'll be seeing a lot 
more of him in the future. He's fond of bathing, y'see."
A flash of white teeth appeared in the boy's dark face, and he bowed, indic
ating the way with one hand while holding his turban in place with the othe
r. Oliver led me down a short hall, and pushing aside a dark red brocaded c
urtain, ushered me into a most surprising room.
The war between the Turks and the Greeks had created a vogue for all things e
astern in certain quarters, but I'd never seen so much of it gathered into on
e place before. My eye was so diverted by the mass of colors revealed by the 
light of dozens of candles that I honestly did not notice the girls at first.
 The floor was awash with layers of patterned rugs, low tables of intricately
 carved wood, and mountains of pillows, and it took a bit of concentration to

 finally pick out the lovely hour is reclining over them like so many flower 
petals. Once partially accustomed to the confusion, I spotted one beauty afte
r another, each a sultan's dream, wrapped in bright wisps of scarves, some of
 the fabrics so light you could see right through to the charms of the lush f
lesh beneath.
The only prosaic element in the whole fantastic chamber was Mandy Winkle he
rself, who was dressed in the normal fashion, and a rather sober version of
 it. In the past, I'd learned that such conservative garb often served her 
well when dealing with the forces of morality. On those rare occasions when
 the law was compelled to take notice of her business, her habit of looking
 and behaving like any respectable, well-to-do matron was very advantageous
. She swore that such affectation had ever kept her out of the stocks.
"Dr. Marling, isn't it?" she said, coming forward, all warm smiles.
"It is, Mandy dear," Oliver replied with a slight bow. "You remember my co
usin, Mr. Barrett?"
"Of course I do. The girls still talk about 'the 'andsome infidel from 'Mer
ica.' " She turned her warmth on me. "Where have you been keeping yourself,
 sir? It's been much too long since we've enjoyed your company."
"He's here to make up for it, I'm sure, so mind you to put forward someone w
ith a hardy constitution."
"My little pets are very sturdy, else they'd not handle all the traveling the
y've done," she said with a perfectly straight face. Mandy Winkle maintained 
the illusion for her customers that all her girls had been liberated from the
 seraglios of various unnamed sultans. Since they knew no other skills than t
hose required for the arts of lovemaking, they were more than happy to exerci
se that knowledge in order to earn honest living. Some of her customers belie
ved the story, and for the rest of us it was an innocent enough fancy to carr
y forth.
Mandy did have a fine eye for the exotic, and though none of her girls could 
have come from farther east than Dover, they yet looked as foreign as one cou
ld ask for. Instead of wigs powdered the usual white by rice powder, theirs w
ere made by Mandy's orders to be black as jet. It was at first a shock to the
 eye, and then a compelling lure to all the rest of the senses, for the dark 
color made a striking contrast against their pale skin.
"They certainly look to be in excellent form," Oliver said, casting about hi
m with an admiring gaze.
"I'm sure any one of them will be happy to prove themselves to you. Would 
you gentlemen prefer some refreshment for starters? We have tea or stronge
r if you like."
With this gentle prompting, Oliver tore his attention from the girls and set
tled the business side of things with Mandy. It was expensive compared to th
e Red Swan-guineas instead of shillings and lots of them. I protested, but h

e insisted.
"Think of it as a present to welcome you back to England, Coz."
"A Turkish hareem? Not terribly English, y'know."
He shrugged. "No matter, just so long as you feel welcome."
"No fear of that."
Several of the girls were eyeing me speculatively. Playacting, perhaps, bu
t ably done and thus quite tempting. My previous experiences at Mandy's ol
d location had ever been satisfactory, and it had not been nearly so well 
trimmed. This event promised to be even more memorable.
"You may recall that Mr. Barrett is fond of the full treatment," he said to 
Mandy. "I hope you have room for him."
"Him and all his cousins."
"Ah, no, not this time. I should prefer something a bit less aquatic for my o
wn entertainment tonight, if you don't mind."
"Lord bless you, sir, if I minded anything you gentlemen did, I'd lose all m
y custom before you could turn 'round."
Mandy got things started with a quick double clap of her hands, and the girls
 came to their feet for inspection. Unfortunately for me, they all appeared t
o be equally tempting.
Perplexed for a choice, I appealed to Mandy. "I recall you had someone name
d Fatima the last time I was here. Might she still be around?''
Mandy was all sympathy. "She's busy with another gentleman, sir, but if you'd
 like to wait... ?"
Hardly, I thought to myself, shaking my head.
"If I might make a suggestion?"
"Suggest away, dear lady."
"Yasmin over there is enough like Fatima to be her sister."
To be truthful, I wouldn't know Fatima from Yasmin or vice versa, the form
er having been but a name dredged up from memory to help make a choice, bu
t I promptly expressed my pleasure to become better acquainted with the ce
lestial Yasmin. Mandy clapped her hands again and one of the girls swayed 
over to take my arm, smiling-as far as I could tell-through the folds of t
he nearly transparent veil she wore over the lower half of her face.
"Charming," I said, bowing slightly and patting her hand. "Yes, I think we sha
ll get along just fine."
"If I might be so bold ..." said Mandy.
I reluctantly paused. "Yes?"
"The specialty of the house has been paid for, sir, so if you would care to•E'
Shocked, I rounded on Oliver. "You didn't!"
He grinned and nodded. "Welcome back to England, Coz."
Mandy, reading this as a sign to proceed, called for another girl named Sam

ar to come forward. Like Yasmin, the lower part of her face was concealed b
y a veil, and neither of them wore very much else, only a few scarves with 
some beads and bangles. Their eyes were thickly outlined in black paint; th
eir eyelids dusted in a soft gold. The effect on me was not altogether diff
erent from the influence I used on others, the difference being that I was 
yet able to rule my actions somewhat. One of the things I could not rule wa
s putting up any and all resistance to being led away by Yasmin and Samar t
o the inner areas of the house. The last thing I heard as we departed from 
the receiving room was Oliver calling after us, wishing me to have an excel
lent good time.
Given the circumstances I didn't see how I could possibly have anything else
.
Giggling, the girls took me step by step down a wide hall. I had an impress
ion of more eastern decor, but didn't pay all that much mind to it, not wit
h these two squirming against me. Well-a-day, but I was already primed to m
ake a conquest of them here and now. My body felt very alert and flushed wi
th desire, and my corner teeth were out. I smiled with my lips sealed shut,
 not wanting to alarm my companions.
I eventually noticed the air becoming warmer and more moist as we progresse
d, a reminder of the other unique offerings of this particular house. That 
helped me shake off some of the combined spell these beauties had cast. I w
as here to loll about and enjoy myself for as long as it suited; it would b
e ridiculous to hurry things. From the sounds coming from behind some of th
e doors we passed I could tell some of the other customers might disagree w
ith me. Their loss, I suppose.
I was ushered into a charming room, and Samar cautioned me against falling i
nto the bath. No fear of that, I had to stop in my tracks and gape a bit. Ma
ndy had gone to considerable effort to enforce her illusion of foreign elega
nce; I felt as though I'd been whisked halfway 'round the world in a blink.
No tin tub for the sultans in this palace-the bath was a great square pool set
 right in the floor. I'd read descriptions of those used by the Romans, and th
is seemed to be an accurate recreation of one. Small tiles, carefully placed i
n intricate patterns, lined the thing, spilling over the edge to cover the flo
or. Away to one side was a sort of couch, having a very broad sitting area and
 armrests, but no back. It was covered with shawls and cushions and looked jus
t as inviting as the bath.
"Does the master wish some help undressing?" asked Yasmin.
Oh, but this girl knew her business. I answered that their help would be ve
ry welcome, and she and Samar set to
work, leisurely removing my clothes. Each piece was carefully placed on a 
delicate-looking chair that was far enough from the bath to avoid being sp
lashed. They worked their way down through my coat, waistcoat, neckcloth, 

and so forth, and, once stripped of everything but my growing feeling of w
ell-being, took my arms to lead me into the bath.
Without removing her own insubstantial garments, Yasmin eased into the wate
r first, drawing me after her. The pool was nearly a yard deep and provided
 with foot-wide steps along one side so that one might have a choice of dep
th in which to sit. Samar followed, descending into the pool like a swan. T
he loose scarves she wore spread out on the water, and once soaked through,
 flowed around her body like feathery seaweed. I thought of mermaids, and i
f such creatures bothered with clothing, then this would likely be the kind
 they'd bother about.
As the hot, scented water crept up my bare chest, I knew without a doubt that
 this bath was to be the second best thing I was going to feel tonight.
Yasmin continued to hold my arm, and Samar backed away to give her room
.
"No need to be shy," I told her, drawing her close again.
"Does the wise master desire both of us at once?" Yasmin asked.
"Yes, but I doubt that would prove me to be very wise. But what do you thi
nk of making the attempt for a while and seeing what happens?"
"As the master wishes," they whispered in unison, closing in on me.
It was a difficult thing, but I just managed not to cry out for mercy.
CHAPTER
-7-
After an initial frenzied bout of shared kissing and fondling that overwhel
med my senses to the point where I hardly knew which girl was doing what, w
e paused more or less at the same time to collect ourselves.
"Does the master desire refreshment?" asked Samar, whispering in my left e
ar. Yasmin was busy putting her tongue into my right.
Oh, how did I desire just that, but not in the form they might be expecting. 
Still, I was polite and told them to refresh away. Samar clapped her hands tw
ice, and immediately another young lady appeared from behind a brocaded curta
in. Instead of a black wig, she wore a turban with a veil attached to conceal
 her lower face. She also affected a short satin coat with no sleeves or butt
ons that ended just above her trim waist, and draped around her hips was a le
ngth of thin silk that revealed far more than it hid. She carried a huge silv
er tray loaded with wine, goblets, fruits, and other edibles.
"Have you got any more like her hidden about the place?" I asked as she set t
he tray near the edge of the pool.
"We are your two most obedient servants tonight, but if the master should d
esire to have more companions..."
I knew my limits-at least for the present. "Very kind of you, I'm sure, but I t
hink you'll both prove just fine for me to be starting with."
The serving maid giggled and bounced her way out.

Yasmin glided over to the tray and poured wine for all of us. I excused myse
lf from joining in by saying that I wanted to have all my wits about me the 
better to appreciate their favors, which seemed to please them. However, I i
nsisted they indulge themselves all they wanted. Very soon, both girls had t
ucked away a goodly portion of several bottles and were feeling very lively,
 indeed.
They now set to work on me in earnest, first one resting a bit and looking on
, then the other, all of which had me stirred up to an uncommon fever. I'd no
t felt it this strongly in far too long a time, and knew I would very shortly
 have to do something about it or suffer mightily.
Taking Yasmin by the hips I turned her back to me and guided her onto my la
p. The buoyant effect of the water was both a nuisance and a titillation fo
r it was hard to keep her anchored in one spot. She had to clamp her legs a
round mine and brace her arms against the pool's edge and one of the steps 
to hold on. By this time both girls were highly interested in what they wer
e doing, a very important element to my pleasure-taking, for my own satisfa
ction was ever the greater when the lady was pleased as well. Yasmin, leisu
rely moving up and down on me, was happily occupied, so I felt free in lean
ing back along the steps to make room enough between us to draw Samar close
 across my chest, facing me.
I kissed her through her wet veil, then slowly peeled it to one side to wor
k my way past her jaw and down her throat. Running my tongue over her taut 
skin, I felt the blood pounding just beneath, tempting me to release it fro
m the vein. Yasmin was just starting to moan as I buried my corner teeth in
to Samar, who gasped and made a short soft cry. Both women writhed with the
 rapture of the moment, but because of the nature of our joining, Samar's e
cstasy, like mine, continued on and on long after Yasmin's was exhausted. I
 held Samar close and sipped from her like taking nectar from a flower. Tho
ugh her breath was heavy and fast, she held herself as still as possible in
 my arms, then every few seconds a gentle shuddering wave over-swept her bo
dy from head to toe. Each time she did this, my own flesh responded, giftin
g me with a fresh surge of rapture that rushed like flames throughout my wh
ole being.
Time ceased to be. The world ceased. I ceased. I was not a man, but a non-thi
nking creature of pure flesh and carnal appetite. I was joined to another lik
e to myself, and all that mattered was our shared exultation for as long as w
e could endure the fiery joy of it.
At some point I became dimly aware of Yasmin gently easing away from me, th
en drifting around to come close to my side. She ran one of her hands throu
gh my hair, down my shoulder and back, and with the other caressed Samar. S
he would not have done this had she divined what I was really doing to her 
companion and so must have mistaken it for an especially long kiss. As my a

wareness of her presence increased I first resented it as an intrusion on w
hat I was doing, but as she began kissing us both, I welcomed it as a new p
ath to try. I blindly reached out for her....
Then Samar arched against me, falling into yet another long shuddering clima
x; as it rolled through us both, she suddenly went limp in my arms. I felt t
he change take her, but was so deeply enthralled in sensation that I could d
o nothing right away. It was a heavy waking, a reluctant waking, for me to g
o from a state of luxuriant gratification to ... to almost nothing at all. I
 was still drawing blood from her, but her response to it had utterly ceased
. Finally rousing, I put my back to Yasmin to block her view and pulled away
 in sudden fear. Had I hurt Samar? The wounds I'd made were very small; for 
all the needs and drives of my passion, I'd taken care to be gentle.
I shook her a little, saying her name, but her eyes remained shut. She brea
thed normally through her slightly open mouth, and though her heart was not
 thundering as it had been a moment before, its beat was yet steady and str
ong.
Then was I flooded with quick relief. She'd only fainted. I heaved a thank
ful sigh. This had happened once or twice before when I'd shared company w
ith Molly Audy back in Glenbriar. The cause was not loss of blood, but too
 much good feeling.
I guided Samar's lax form over to one side, lifting her up enough so her h
ead and upper body were well out of the water. She'd waken when she was re
ady.
"Is something wrong, sir?" asked Yasmin.
"Your friend's just having a little rest, nothing more."
Eyes nearly closed so their red color would not cause alarm, I turned my fu
ll attention upon her, hands and mouth moving lower and lower on her body u
ntil she expressed the worry that I might drown myself. At my suggestion we
 quit the pool to make use of the backless settee, throwing ourselves upon 
its silk pillows with no mind to the water still streaming from our bodies.
Yasmin had already taken her pleasure of me, but I was determined to offer 
her yet another, and resumed my work on her with this in mind. She moved mo
re slowly than before, probably because of her recent climax and the wine s
he'd consumed. Oddly enough, I felt myself slowing, too, as though my bones
 were gradually turning to lead. Puzzling for a moment, until I recognized 
the symptoms and realized the wine in Samar's blood was responsible. Of all
 things-I was becoming tipsy. I hadn't been drunk since ... lord, I couldn'
t remember. It had been more than a year, at least since my last visit to E
ngland. I laughed aloud as I roamed freely over Yasmin's breasts and belly.
"The wise master is enjoying himself," Yasmin said, in a manner to make it 
half-question, half-observation.
"The wise master is..." but I couldn't think how to finish it, so I fastened

 my mouth on a place just below Yasmin's navel. It must have tickled her, fo
r she gave a slight jump and squealed. I went on kissing her just there, usi
ng my hand on her most intimate area in a way that soon had her squirming.
My corner teeth were well extended and it was a sore temptation to use them 
to gouge into this soft plain of flesh, but recalling my interest-need-to se
e to Yasmin's happiness, I progressively worked my way up her body. The quic
kening of her breath and heartbeat were proof that my efforts were all to th
e good. Hip to hip, I finally burrowed into her in the normal fashion, then 
sought out her throat. The sharp gasp that came from her at this double inva
sion of her person was such as to assure me that her gratification was equal
 to, if not better than, my own. She pressed her hands first upon my backsid
e to push me in more, then my head to drive me harder against her throat. We
 thrashed and groaned together like animals in a fever of rut.
She twisted under me, shaking her head side to side; giving in to the heat o
f the moment, I bit down a little harder, releasing a greater flow of blood.
 Some of it trickled past my mouth. I raised away from her, but judged that 
the bleeding wasn't heavy enough to be harmful. With my fingers, I smeared t
he blood around her throat, first staining her pale skin like paint on a can
vas, then licking it clean again. She cried out and demanded more of the same.
Tumbling through my mind and but partially formed was an urge to go beyond 
this, to somehow carry us just a little distance farther along this path to
 something even better.
Now I drew my reddened fingers across my own neck and lifted her head that 
she might kiss it clean as well. She was so caught in the frenzy of the mom
ent she did so without the least demur, licking and biting in imitation of 
my actions. She could not pierce me in the same manner, but her touch was m
addening. Fingers once more at my throat, I now tore hard at my skin, tryin
g to break it.
My nails raked in and I felt the razor-edged sting of success. My blood pat
tered down on her breasts. The sight and smell of it sent me hungrily back 
to the wounds I'd made on her. She bucked and moaned as I drank from them, 
sending her into another peak of pleasure. I tasted the wine she'd had earl
ier, felt its drowsy strength taking a firmer hold on my body.
I pushed away with an effort. The wine's effect was all the more potent sin
ce I'd not had drink in so long a time. Sleep would overcome me if I contin
ued like this, and I wanted no sleep, not now. I wanted, needed, desired be
tter and knew its achievement was very close. Staring at my blood bright up
on her fair skin, I understood its import, understood why I'd made myself b
leed. She could drink from me, allowing me to ascend to an even greater lev
el of feeling. I wanted her to take my blood, I wanted her to take and then
 return it again. Nora had done as much for herself, had she not?
The slashes I'd given myself burned. But if I put Yasmin's cool mouth to the

m ...
That would not be right, though.
My movements were slowing, turning sluggish. I had to hurry or the moment w
ould pass; it would be too late for either of us. Her arms came up, trying 
to pull me close again, to guide my mouth back where she wanted it. She had
 no idea yet how much better it could be for us. I did.
But... it would not be right.
Doubt made me falter, made me think despite the wine's influence. Never bef
ore had I been taken to the physical point of wanting so badly to share my 
blood with another;
I'd never allowed myself to go that far because ... because ...
...it would not be right.
A few more fat drops struck her flesh. A thin stream of it ran from my neck, 
leaving a hot red trail into the hair of my chest. It would be so easy to cra
dle her against me, to press her lips against my throat, to let her touch be 
the means to sweep me out of myself for a time.
I wanted... and could not have. Not this way.
Eyes burning from the frustration I thrust myself fully away from her, sinkin
g straight to the floor. She mumbled something that sounded like a protest. I
 ignored her. If only she'd just fainted like Samar.
The room dipped once and righted itself. The wine, I thought with a stab of
 anger, scrubbing my face roughly with the back of one hand. I was light-he
aded yet sleepy, and the leaden feeling yet possessed the rest of my body. 
Most definitely the wine.
And the bloodsmell.
It teased and tugged at me. Yasmin's hand fell upon my shoulder, fingers wea
kly pulling as she asked me to return to her. Sweet heavens, but I wanted to
; the girl would have me drain her to death so long as the draining pleasure
d her. It would do that all right. Well did I remember what it was like to b
e kissed in that manner, and how I'd hated for Nora to stop.
Removing myself from the immediate temptation of Yasmin's blood, I literal
ly crawled back to the pool and slipped into the water. Remarkably, it was
 still hot. Some way must have been found to maintain the heat other than 
constantly pouring in fresh steaming buckets. I wondered if Mandy would pa
rt with the name of the one who had designed this miracle so I could have 
such a bath for my own.
Gladly did I concentrate on such mundane distraction, forcing myself to mak
e use of it until my body calmed, and I could rely on my mind to start thin
king again. Not that the thoughts awaiting would be especially comforting.
As my hair was already fairly soaked, I pulled off the ribbon that kept it ti
ed back and completely immersed myself. Instinct made me take a deep breath b
efore going under, but it was hardly necessary. Without the need to regularly

 breathe, I was able to stay down as long as I wished. It wasn't all that lon
g, though, the water getting into my ears bothered me. I rose to the surface 
and tried shaking the stuff out again, with indifferent success.
My movements caused Samar to stir. She lay where I'd left her, half in and 
out of the pool. There was some blood on her throat, but the wounds had clo
sed. Cupping water in my hands, I cleaned her off, which made her wake up a
 bit. I didn't want to deal with her at this time, though; in answer to a w
hispered entreaty from me, she swiftly fell asleep again.
I lightly touched the marks I'd left on her. They were small and would give
 her no trouble. She'd likely had worse from other patrons, or so I told my
self. For all the delight that ever passed between myself and my mistresses
, I could not help but feel a pang of remorse for having to bring this nece
ssary injury to them. No more than a pang, though. I'd borne such marks as 
well during my times with Nora and knew they did not hurt; it was only sham
eful to have to mar such otherwise unblemished skin.
Faint as it was, I could yet smell the blood hanging in the air, but its effe
ct on me was not as it was before. Though pleasant to the nose, the scent of 
food is less potent to a man once he has a full stomach--unless he's in the t
hrall of gluttony. My own fit seemed to have passed, thank God.
Yasmin was also starting to recover as well. She moved as though to sit up
 and murmured a sleepy question concerning my whereabouts. I heaved from t
he pool to see to her.
God, but she looked like she'd been murdered. Her throat and breasts were a
 horrific mess, but most of the blood was mine, so I wasn't worried. She on
ly wanted cleaning up right away lest someone else see her or there'd be no
 end of trouble and alarm. Again, I whispered soothing words to make her fo
rget and sleep, then carried her to the pool. There was water aplenty to co
mpletely wash away the evidence of my passion.
Near-madness, more like.
My head was quickly clearing, making it difficult to see how I could have fo
rgotten myself so thoroughly. I wanted to blame the wine. That could easily 
excuse my actions, but my conscience wouldn't allow it. The wine had had its
 influence, but the fact was that I'd come too close to losing control. By G
od's grace or the devil's own luck, I'd found enough strength to stop things
 before it was too late. Who was I to impart this condition without warning,
 without consent, to another? I had not the right to pass it on no matter ho
w glorious the physical fulfillment might prove.
As for Nora ... well, Nora hadn't been as careful or considerate with me.
No, not fair, for I clearly recalled all that happened between us that night 
when we'd first exchanged blood. It had been a very deliberate act on her par
t. She'd asked if I trusted her and I had. If only she'd trusted me in return
 and given over the knowledge of the change that lay ahead, she'd have saved 

me much fear and sorrow.
Perhaps she thought her condition to be unique to herself, that it could not
 be passed on. But if such were so, then why not exchange blood with her oth
er courtiers and afford herself the fullness of carnal pleasure all the time
? No, there was some other reason involved. I'd been special to her, or so s
he said. She might not have wanted to share it with the others, only me. She
 might not have known I'd become like her and had thought there would be no 
need to explain
things. Perhaps her ignorance about this unnatural state was equal to my ow
n.
Horrible thought, that. I shook it right out of my head.
I carried first Yasmin back to the settee, then Samar, laying them close to
gether and pulling over them some sheets I'd found to spare them from becom
ing chilled. They made a sweet picture, like two black-haired angels. I wen
t to the chair where they'd put my clothes and found my money purse. They w
ere honest girls, I noted, neither had filched so much as a penny when they
'd undressed me earlier, but then Mandy had ever been very strict about tha
t at her other place of business. I placed a guinea each in their hands as 
they slept. Aware of it or not, they'd performed above and beyond their usu
al duties for the house and deserved a special vale for their trouble.
The wound I'd made on my neck reminded me of its existence by a prickling it
ch. I started to scratch and halted just as my fingertips made contact with 
the flesh. Close, Johnny Boy, close. I might have opened it up again. To eli
minate the problem, I vanished for a moment so it could heal. The vanishing 
was strangely difficult, taking much longer than usual to accomplish; I blam
ed it on the lingering effect of the wine.
The fire had burned low. I saw to its replenishment for the sake of my drow
sing hours, then sought the solace of the bath once more. There was time en
ough and then some for me to loll and soak in its welcome heat and clean of
f the last of the blood. The water had turned a bit pink. I tried to think 
of some way to explain it, should anyone ask, then thought better of it. Sa
y nothing and let them come up with their own reasons, but chances were no 
one would even notice.
Resting my head on the most shallow of the steps so my face was out of the 
water, I let my body relax and float. The pool was just large enough for it
. I had nothing remotely like it at home-though that might change-and
would enjoy the luxury while it was yet mine to have. Already I was forming 
plans to return to this earthly paradise next week. I might indulge myself w
ith the company of but one lady, though, and see to it that she not partake 
of any wine or spirits until afterward. Much safer for both of us that way.
Notwithstanding the turmoil of soul my lapse of control had thrown upon me, I
 was well content with Oliver's munificent gift. I felt tired, refreshed, wea

k, and strong all at once. Not an easy combination to attain, but wonderfully
 satisfying. I'd have to think of a suitable thank you to give him in return.
As I mused on possibilities, my quick ears caught the distant beginnings o
f a commotion taking place elsewhere in the house. Raised voices, from bot
h men and women, but nothing really alarming. One of the men was drunk and
 singing a bawdy song, sometimes even in key. A little row was only to be 
expected in a brothel, even in those as well run as this one. Mandy had va
st experience in dealing with them, and like any sensible procuress, would
 have several bully boys in her employ to enforce the peace.
The song soon died away to drunken laughter, then loud talk that progresse
d up toward my end of the hall. The men had imbibed just enough to make th
em randy, but not so much to prevent them from doing anything about it, I 
judged. I hoped their ladies for tonight were as hardy as Mandy claimed, f
or these noise makers would likely give them a strenuous time of it.
I relaxed again, glad that they were someone else's problem and not mine.
Wrong you are entirely, Johnny Boy, I thought with disgust as the door to m
y chamber abruptly opened. Water sloshing about me, I sat up and turned to 
face the intrusion.
There were three of them, all masked, but that caused no alarm in me. Title
d men often wanted anonymity while cavorting outside of their class, and I 
assumed this lot were
no different. They were cloaked, gloved, and muffled to the ears, and their h
ats obscured the rest. All I could see was a bit of mouth and nose and little
 enough of those.
The men spilled unsteadily into the room, still laughing at whatever obscure
 jest had just been made. I debated whether it was worth the trouble to call
 for assistance or deal with them myself.
"We're in the wrong room," one of them observed, stopping to stare at me.
 "Not unless they've got uncommonly ugly wenches here."
"That's a man, not a wench," said another with heavy humor. "Though it mig
ht not make any difference to you."
The third member of the party whooped in appreciation. For the joke, I hoped
. I tried to look past them to see any sign of help, but the view was blocke
d by their bodies.
"Gentlemen," I said, "as you can see, this room is already occupied
"Right you are-by us," declared the wit. "So you can just remove yourself."
I ignored his ridiculous command. "Perhaps your room is just next to this o
ne. If you but look, I'm sure you'll find some very impatient ladies waitin
g for you there." Quite an assumption to make on my part, but I wanted to b
e rid of them. There was a draft coming through the open door.
"Don't I know you, sir?" he asked peevishly, stumbling forward.
"I doubt it, sir." Two more steps and he'd be in the bath with me.

"Yes, I do, you're Percy Mott, aren't you?"
"My name is Barrett, and I'd very much appreciate it if you"
"His name's Barrett, lads."
And with those words, spoken in an unexpectedly stone cold sober voice, the c
omedy forthwith and bereft of no other warning changed to calamity.          
       
Like an idiot, I still tried to finish my sentence, but the words died on my
 lips when from the folds of his cloak he smoothly drew forth a primed duele
r and aimed the muzzle right at me. Though not faster than thought, he was c
ertainly faster than my thought. I had less than an instant to react, but th
e pure shock was sufficient for me to waste it. Few others would have had th
e presence of mind to do aught else but stare as I did for that blink in tim
e between seeing his pistol and the tardy arrival of comprehension of his pu
rpose.
But there it was: a blink and nothing more.
Then, at the distance of two short paces, he fired right into my chest.
The roar of discharge did not impress itself upon my senses so much as the 
powder smoke. The acrid stuff seemed to fill the whole room more thoroughly
 than the deafening noise. I saw, rather than felt, the ball reaming throug
h me, leaving behind a great blood-spurting hole. My body gave a violent je
rk, then collapsed, pitching heavily forward into the water. I had no time 
to even bring my arms up; I could not feel, much less control them. With al
l my inert weight I struck the shallow step with my forehead, feeling and h
earing the shattering crack of the impact with my whole being. Paralyzed, I
 lay as one dead for an unutterably long period during which I lived lifeti
mes of undiluted agony.
Voices and shouts and alarms went unheeded somewhere above him. In the c
onfusion the pistol shooter and his companions would find easy escape.
But he didn't care about them.
It was impossible for him to care about anything.
He simply was not able.
All inner awareness had been brutally compressed down to nothing, and what
 had once been Jonathan Barrett was replaced by a blazing sphere of misery
. He didn't exist anymore, only his pain. Perhaps in a hundred years or so
 when the pain went away he might think about returning, but no sooner.
His body floated facedown, bobbing and bumping against the sides of the ba
th, arms and legs dangling and useless in the bloodied water. People swarm
ed into the room, raising more noise. Somewhere a frightened woman wept, a
nother tried to calm her. A large man seized one of Barrett's arms and tur
ned him over, then dragged his motionless body from the pool. Others stoop
ed to help or backed out of the way. Water streamed from Barrett's nose an
d open mouth. His open eyes were fixed in place like those painted on a do

ll.
He could not move, only lie where they left him. The humiliating helplessne
ss should have brought him great distress, but nothing, no thought or actio
n from within-for both were beyond him-no pleas, no prayers, no tears of an
guish from without could break past the bloated wall of pain that had fixed
 itself between him and the rest of the world.
The large man pressed an ear to Barrett's immobile chest, then pronounced 
him dead. Comments were made about the blood in the pool and the singular 
lack of any kind of wound showing on the body. Other people joined the pre
ss to see for themselves and ask what had happened. They questioned the tw
o girls who had been with Barrett, but could learn nothing useful since bo
th had been fast asleep. Then all talk stopped when an unanticipated tremo
r ran through Barrett's body, and it gave a powerful cough, dislodging som
e water clogging its throat. This inspired a fresh bout of commotion as th
ey concluded, with reasonable doubts attached, that he might be alive after all.
The wall of pain was marginally shrinking, but Mr. Barrett was too prudent a
 man to rush right back into things again. He waited, in no hurry to try ans
wering the frantic questions being flung at him by these absurd strangers.
They weren't inside his body; they had no hint as to what it was going thro
ugh, and until the ordeal was finished, they could damned well wait themsel
ves.
Then his cousin Oliver was there next to him, and care and concern for thi
s one man's fear prompted Barrett to attempt a response. The wall of pain 
between them was thinner, perhaps enough now to allow him to speak past it
 and be heard.
"M all ri' he mumbled, lying.
That held things together for a little, kept them busy. Coverings were thro
wn upon his nakedness, a pillow was slipped under his head. The jarring inv
olved in the latter nearly sent him farther away, but hovering just within 
him there existed a vague but compelling need to remain where he was. Exact
ly why was out of his ken for the moment.
"God, he's cold as a corpse," Oliver urgently observed to no one in particular
.
"This will help," said a woman.
"No, don't do-"
But the deed was already done. Someone-probably the woman-poured what see
med like a gallon of brandy past the lips of Mr. Barrett.
"Told you," she said with more than a small degree of smugness in her tone 
as Mr. Barrett's otherwise numbed and lax body twitched and rolled over int
o a fit of forceful and messy coughing.
That burning, vile, hideous excuse for drink accomplished what all the co
ddling and sympathy could not - brought me straightway back into the thic

k of things, groaning and cursing and holding my exploding head. This cau
sed some relieved murmuring among the crowd. A man who could still curse 
his pain had a good chance of surviving it.
Exhausted by the business, I eased onto my back again. Whatever good fee
ling had been mine while in the company of Yasmin and Samar had vanished
 completely. I was shaken to the core and trembling despite the covering
s heaped over me.
Between weakening spasms as my body sought to rid itself of the poisonous 
brandy, I managed a feeble scowl for my benefactress, Mandy Winkle, who kn
elt on one side of me with a flask in her hand. She scowled right back, bu
t with much more ferocity. Couldn't blame her for it, this sort of row cou
ld not only get her closed down, but land her in Bridewell.
Oliver regarded me with much more compassion (mixed with barely controlled t
error) and strove to find out if I really was all right and if I might give 
an account of what happened to me. I assured him of the partial truth of the
 one, but had to be circumspect about the other.
"One of the bastards shot at me." My voice was so faint I hardly knew it.
"Shot at you?" he echoed.
"Missed. Hit my head when I ducked." Dear God, but hadn't I just? I wasn't
 able to decide which had suffered the worst of it, my head or my chest. T
hey pounded and ached for all they were worth, though in different ways. O
ne at a time I might have managed with considerably less hardship to mysel
f and others, but both at once had been too much.
"Who was it?" demanded Mrs. Winkle, bristling with anger. Whether it was 
for me or for my attacker was hard to judge.
"Don't know. Masked. They were all together. You must have seen. Did yo
u not know them?"
Some of her anger faded. "They were new ones or pretended to be so. I've a
n eye for faces, but that doesn't work when the face is covered. Why in Go
d's name did they shoot you?"
I could not give a good reply, only adding again that I'd not been shot. A blat
ant lie, for I'd been caught square in
the chest, but it was important-I remembered why, now that I maintain the fi
ction that the shootist had missed.
"You must be wrong, sir," she said, glancing at the pool. "There's blood apl
enty in that bath or my name is Queen Charlotte."
I followed her gaze and saw the water was not a faint pink as before, but a
 decidedly nasty and unmistakable red. The pistol ball had inflicted a subs
tantial portion of damage to my flesh, but that same flesh had quickly heal
ed itself, a miraculous but painful process made worse when my head struck 
the tile steps. Either injury should have caused me to vanish, thus sparing
 me from much discomfort, but I had a lurking suspicion the wine had yet ag

ain mucked things up.
Oliver stared at me all wide of eye and open of jaw. I'd told him in full a
bout my past experiences with pistols and rifles, and he'd apparently just 
worked out what had really happened. Afraid he might blurt something, I fas
tened him with my gaze and shook my head once. He gulped and cleared his th
roat.
"Nosebleed," he pronounced in good imitation of the pedantic tones used by 
all physicians when they were absolutely certain about something, particula
rly about something beneath their notice.
"Nosebleed?" asked Mandy.
He nodded emphatically and with a delicate touch pried one of my eyelids u
p with his thumb as though he were giving a normal examination to any of h
is other patients. "Oh, yes. My poor cousin is frequently subject to them.
 Alarming, but harmless. This one must have been brought on by this uncons
cionable attack."
Mandy snorted, either in acceptance of or derision for his diagnosis; it 
was hard to say. She then noticed all the people who had crowded in and b
arked an order for them to remove themselves. While she was occupied, Oli
ver caught my eye and mouthed the word Mohocks, drawing up his eyebrows t
o make it into a question. I nodded once, We frowned at each other.
"I very much would like to go home," I whispered.
"Are you able to?" he asked, astonished.
"I should be. And if not, I will be anyway."
Mandy had overheard. "Lord bless you, sir, but you can stay until you're mor
e recovered." I could see in her face that this invitation was anything but 
what she really wanted to say. Hers was a reluctant hospitality, her desire 
for us to immediately leave coming hard against common Christian charity and
 the natural wish not to lose a client with such deep pockets as my cousin.
"You're very kind, but it's best that we go so you can put your house in orde
r as soon as may be."
"Perhaps," Oliver added, "you might have one of your men hire a carriage 
from somewhere to take us home."
Not quite successful at hiding her relief at this proposal, Mandy promised t
o see what she could do and left to do it. On her way out she cleared the ro
om of remaining stragglers.
Oliver continued to kneel by me, playing the part of attending physician, bu
t as soon as the door closed his shoulders drooped and he released a great s
igh. He favored me with a very close look.
"Are you sure you're all right?"
"Yes, though I've been better. I just need a little time."
"What really happened?"
"I was shot. Dueling pistol. You'll likely find the ball still in the bath."

He went back on his heels, biting his lip. "Dear God. And there's no mark o
n you. How can that be?"
"I'll ask Nora, should I get the chance."
"And I shall thank her, should I get one as well. If not for her you'd be - H
is gaze flicked to the pool, then he suddenly rose up to pace the room. He'd 
passed the point of being able to hold in his emotions any longer and was in 
sore need of expressing them. "Of all the vicious, cowardly ..."
I rested and let him rant against my would-be killer. I'd have indulged in s
ome myself, but was yet feeling a bit frail. Strength would soon return to m
e in full measure, if only peace of mind could come as well. The horror I'd 
been through had made that impossible, nor would I know peace again until I'
d dealt with the instigators of this outrage.
When Oliver had divested himself of the worst of his anger, I asked for his 
assistance to stand, which he instantly provided. The pain in my head was mo
re of an unpleasant hindrance than the one in my chest, for it affected my a
bility to balance. I excused myself to him and sought relief by briefly vani
shing. Again, though difficult to achieve, it worked a charm on both complai
nts, but upon returning, I found I'd traded two specifically located hurts f
or an overall weariness.
"You look perfectly awful," he said. He didn't look too well himself, but at
 least he was dressed or nearly so with only a partially tied neckcloth and 
some buttons left undone. He must have finished early with his evening's ent
ertainment.
"Which is exactly how I feel, but I think a little refreshment from any stabl
e in the city should fix me up again." Something unpolluted by wine, I silent
ly added.
He looked at the pool again. "But I thought... that is ... didn't you ... with the
 girls?"
"As it happens I did. That's my blood, not theirs."
"Oh, that's all ri-I mean... but I thought when you were with them you ..." He
 turned a fierce pink about the ears.
Good lord, no wonder he'd looked so odd when Mandy had pointed out the state
 of the water. "I'm not so wasteful as that, Oliver. Now stop being so miser
able. What's in the pool happened when I was shot. I need to replace it soon
, then I'll be fine. Are the girls all right?"
"I don't know. I suppose they must be."
"Look into it, will you? They were asleep, but may have seen something afte
r the shooting."
He was reluctant to leave me, but though tired to the bone, I was able to fend 
for myself. I was dressed, feeling the better for it, and ready to leave at his
 return.
"They're right as rain, though quite frightened," he said. "They didn't have 

anything to tell me, sad to say. The wine they drank left 'em fairly befuddle
d so they're only just now understanding what's happened, and even they can h
ardly believe it."
"Then including you that makes four of us."
He grunted. "You must have made an impression on them, Coz, for they were 
most concerned about your well-being. I tried my best to assure them of it
. I think they'll have a warm welcome for you the next time."
"Much good it will do either of us. Mandy Winkle won't let us within a mile o
f the place after this."
"Oh, she'll settle down. She's not happy over what's happened, but knows none
 of this is your fault. We had a short talk, and I fell in with her idea that
 the men were thieves after your purse."
"That's some good luck."
"Don't crow too soon about it. She understands more than she's letting on to 
the others. If the bastards were real thieves they'd have been busy stealing 
from everyone, not roaring through the place with their playacting, then blaz
ing away once they'd identified you. Mandy knows this, knows they were trying
 to kill you, but she's not keen to let it gel out. It's bad for business. Yo
u're not planning to report this to any magistrate, are you?"
"Much as I'd like to, it wouldn't be practical. I've nothing to tell them that
 wouldn't eventually do injury to our family if the whole story got out. Besid
es, the courts generally keep daylight hours."
"Then that's a relief for all of us, as Mandy's not keen having the law in, eit
her. We'll also not have to worry about her carrying tales. She's as close as a
 clam when it suits her."
That was good to know. "What did you see of any of this?"
"Damned little. I was in one of the dry rooms toasting the health of the wen
ch I'd been with when I first heard them." From that point his account was s
imilar to my own experience, of hearing the progress of joking and laughter 
up the hall that ended with a pistol shot. "Then it was women screaming and 
people getting in the way of each other. I saw the last of the bastards tear
 past me-he was in a mask so it must have been one of 'em. Didn't think to s
top him or give chase, just stood there like a sheep." He scowled, going pin
k again with shame.
"Thank God for that," I told him, causing him to look up for an explanation.
 "They might all have been armed. If they've got the kind of cowardly brass 
to walk in and shoot a man in his bath, then they won't think twice about cu
tting down another trying to stop their escape. You did well by doing nothin
g and I'm glad of it."
That seemed to ease any hard feelings he'd taken on himself for his lack of
 action. He shrugged. "It wasn't just any man in his bath, y'know. It was y
ou. They made a special point of getting your name first. Why would strange

rs try to murder you?"
"Because they might be friends of my enemies?"
"Ridley and Tyne? I know, stupid question. Of course it has to be them."
"I can think of no others bearing me a grudge, but for my influence to have 
worn off so fast..." Granted, I hadn't all that much experience in changing 
the dispositions of others, but I couldn't fathom how either man could have 
shaken free so quickly.
"Maybe their friends had some influence of their own. Nothing like falling 
back in with ill company to make bad habits easier to resume."
I nodded, having no better suggestion to make. "But how could these fellow
s know where you'd be? All that lot who chased us from Ridley's place were
 afoot. Then again, it may not have been all of them. Just one man on a ho
rse could have followed us this far and we'd not have noticed him."
"Then it's best we get home to Elizabeth in case "Good God, yes!" The ment
ion of her name and the hint that she might be in peril got him moving alm
ost too fast for me to keep up. I wasn't too worried for Elizabeth's safet
y, though; the men had been specifically after me. My present concern was 
the possibility of there being some immediate endangerment to Oliver since
 he was in my company.
But I learned Mandy had ensured the street outside her door was clear of ev
eryone except her own lads. A fearsome-looking lot, they saw to it that we 
were safely loaded into a very smartly turned out carriage and sent well on
 our way without additional incident.
"Well-a-day, but I think this is Mandy's own conveyance," Oliver said admiri
ngly as he took in the silk and velvet trimmings within. "Certainly gives on
e an idea of the sort of profit she turns. Did you see the horses? They look
ed like racers, we'll be home soon enough if not sooner in this wonder."
As the hour was getting late the streets were fairly clear of the worst of 
the crowds. I might have been able to make better time on horseback, but no
t by much. I could have certainly arrived faster by floating home on the wi
nd, except for being much too tired for now to try. And cold. I made some s
ort of a reply of agreement and wrapped my cloak more tightly around my shi
vering body. It didn't seem to help.
"Uncommonly kind of her to lend it to us, don't you think?" he asked. "I'll 
have to find a way to thank her aside from going back after a decent interva
l and dropping another purseful of guineas on her. What do you say?''
He was only trying to cheer me again. That had been the whole reason behind 
our going out, after all. It had succeeded very well up to a point. I shrugg
ed, unwilling to speak through my chattering teeth.
"Here now, it's cold, but not that cold. You must have gotten too used to the
 heat and now this outside air is hurting twice as hard as it might. I told y
ou that bathing was dangerous to your health-in more ways than one it seems. 

Your hair's still wet, too. If you'd just shave your head and get a wig like 
the rest of us you wouldn't have to worry about catching a chill."
An ugly gasping sound came from me, suspending his prattle. The gasp came aga
in; I choked, trying to force it back into the icy depths of my belly. Desper
ate, I sucked in air and tried to hold it; it hiccuped out again. - "Here now
," Oliver repeated, but in a tone very different from the mock scolding he'd 
just used. "There's a good chap, you'll be all right."
I felt a fool and was bitterly embarrassed, but there was no helping it.
"You've had a dreadful shock is all," he told me. "Nothing to worry about. T
here's a good chap."
The hiccups wrenched away from my futile effort at control and turned into tr
ue sobs. I doubled over, unable to stop, and wept into my folded arms. Oliver
 put a steadying hand on my shoulder and kept it there the whole time, occasi
onally giving me a reassuring pat and telling me in a low voice that I'd be f
ine, just fine. After a long, difficult bout of it, the sobs came less freque
ntly, then not at all. Sitting up slowly with all the grace of an old man, I 
leaned well back into the seat, feeling absolutely wretched.
"Sorry," I mumbled. It hardly seemed, nor was it in truth, an adequate apolo
gy.
"For what? Finally having a reaction?"
"It's so bloody stupid of me to be like this." My vision was so thick with t
ears I couldn't see a damned thing. I fumbled out a handkerchief and roughly
 scoured my face as if to wipe away my mortification.
"You give me the name of any man who could do better given your circumstan
ces and I'll adopt him for a favorite cousin. You've been through a terrib
le ordeal; why shouldn't you be upset?"
"It's not as though I'd never been through others."
"Those others don't matter as much as the one you've just had, and don't te
ll me you can get used to someone trying to murder you, because that has to
 be impossible."
"But I just sat there and let it happen. How could I allow it?"
"Allow it? Listen to yourself, you great ninny. You act as if it was your own
 fault the man did what he did. Do you really think that?"
After a minute I was able to answer. "No, I don't really think that, but I feel i
t. There's a difference."
"Yes, I understand the difference. None better. You recall how I was the night
 of Mother's funeral? I was in a pretty state then, was I not?''
He'd not said much about that night, of how he'd been in much the same cond
ition I presently found myself, and the incident that erupted between us, b
ut his mention brought it vividly back to mind. I'd seen him at his worst, 
just as he saw me now.
"You knocked some sense into me then," he went on. "Am I going to have to 

return the favor?" He looked as grim as a tax collector.
I felt another hiccuping gasp coming from me, but this time it was the precur
sor to a laugh, not a sob. As with the weeping, I could not stop it, but unli
ke the weeping, Oliver was able to join in. When at last it died away, I foun
d I was no longer shivering.
Thanks be to the Almighty, all was safe and secure when we got home. Elizabe
th had gone upstairs, but was not yet asleep, and the commotion of our retur
n brought her down again. She had but to glance once at us to know something
 was seriously amiss. Orders were flung at servants who were still astir, an
d as they scurried off my good sister swept us into the parlor and saw to th
e building up of the fire herself. Just as one of the maids brought in a tra
y loaded with a hastily thrown together tea, Jericho magically appeared, str
ipped us of our outdoor things, and replaced them with dressing gowns and sl
ippers. Without being asked, he unlocked the cupboard where the household sp
irits were kept and placed the brandy bottle on the table next to Oliver's c
hair. By the merest raising of one eyebrow and cant of his gaze he silently 
inquired if I should like a serving of my own special drink as well. I shut 
my eyes briefly and shook my head once. I'd see to it myself later. He nodde
d and stood to one side so as to listen in. Not one of us had any thought of
 dismissing him.
"You look worse than ghosts," said Elizabeth, rounding on us. "What on ea
rth happened?"
Oliver made the first attempt to deliver an answer and initially tried to shi
eld our reputations by passing Mandy Winkle's place off as being a public bat
h house-a fiction that lasted all of two seconds with Elizabeth.
"I understand your wish to protect my sensibilities from being shocked," she 
said. "But I'd appreciate it more if you just be as plain in your speech with
 me as you would be with Jonathan. Things will go a lot faster if I don't hav
e to interpret what you're really talking about."
While Oliver went red and blinked a lot, I took over the task of relating t
he incident to her. Of course I left off a large part of it, for my busines
s with Yasmin and Samar had nothing to do with the actual shooting. Elizabe
th went very ghostlike herself upon hearing of the attack and my consequent
 injuries and had to be well assured that though shaken, I was mostly recov
ered in the physical sense. Her own reaction matched Oliver's, being compos
ed of equal parts of fear, relief, and fury. Once she'd expressed a portion
 of each to the world at large, she then plied the same questions already p
laguing us: Who were the men, how had they found me, and why should they wa
nt to murder me? The who and possible why of it were fairly obvious, but th
e how was more elusive. Jericho quietly excused himself at that point. Just
 as we'd concluded that we must have been followed from Ridley's flat, he r
eturned accompanied by our two footmen, both looking exceedingly uncomforta

ble and crestfallen.
"Didn't mean no 'arm, I'm sure, sir," blurted Jamie, the younger of them. " 
'Ow uz we t' know 'e weren't a proper gennl'm'n?"
"If I might clarify things, sir," said Jericho, stepping in before the boy could
 go further.
"Clarify away," I said, with a wave of my hand.
In a few succinct words Jericho related his formation of the idea to check 
and see if the other servants had noticed any strangers lurking about the h
ouse that evening. None had, except for the footmen, who, in light of Eliza
beth's instructions to be watchful, had made a quick circle of the house an
d grounds before turning in for the night. Coming around to the front they 
met, as by chance, a very well dressed, well-spoken gentleman who said he w
as in need of a physician, and asked if Dr. Marling was at home. Having bec
ome used to such inquiries, they saw no harm in telling the man the doctor 
was away that evening, adding that he might be found at Mandy Winkle's. The
 gentleman seemed to know of the place, gave them each a penny vale for the
ir trouble, and walked off into the darkness. "We din' think twicet 'bout i
t, sir, as there's alus somen
comin" round to fetch the doctor at all 'ours." Poor Jamie looked to be close 
to tears. "Then when Mr. Jericho 'ere told us that someun 'ad tried shootin' y
ou, sir"
"What did he look like?" I asked.
Jamie and his companion offered a flood of information on the man; unfortu
nately none of it was very specific or useful. He'd been muffled to the ea
rs against the weather like most of the upper-class male population of Lon
don. He could have been any one of our many friends, but between us, we de
cided he was most likely from Ridley's crowd. Only a Mohock from the upper
 class could have combined easy manners with such ruthless action.
Oliver sourly admonished them to be more careful and to report any additiona
l incidents to Jericho. "I could dismiss the both of you on the spot without
 a character and no one would blame me for it, but you'd only inflict your i
gnorance all over some other luckless master and then he'd come after me wit
h a pistol. Off with you, and if you've any wits left, use them sharp the ne
xt time a stranger talks with you or your next billet might be in the King's
 navy."
They fled without another word.
My good cousin diluted his brandy with a little tea and drained his cup away
, making a fearsome face. "Damnation, but if I didn't sound exactly like Mot
her just then."
"You weren't anywhere as severe with them as she might have been, so take h
eart," I said.
"It's myself I should be severe with, standing by and talking about takin

g you to Mandy Winkle's with the two of 'em hanging about with their ears
 flapping. Those damned Mohocks came straight back here when we slipped '
em and waited. Good God, we'll be murdered in our beds next."
"I think not," said Elizabeth. "At least not right away."
"Come again?"
"They're probably off having a celebration of their own. After all, they think
 they were successful. Until they learn better, they're under the clear impres
sion that Jonathan is dead."
That shut us all up for a time as we thought it over. Then Oliver began to la
ugh.
"Well-a-day, but won't they be in for the shock of a lifetime when they find o
ut differently?''
"Until they get over it and try again," I put in, sobering us all. "And who's 
to say they might not try for you as well? Or Elizabeth?"
"By heavens, if they do"
"They won't. I'll see to that before another hour's past."
"What?"
"There's plenty of night left; I've time enough to track down Ridley and his
 crew and sort them out for good." That was putting it in the most mild of t
erms. When I found them I'd probably wring their necks. And enjoy it.
Elizabeth must have sensed the anger churning inside me and gently touched
 her hand on my arm. "Stay home, little brother. Please. You've been throu
gh too much already for one evening."
"Yes, and it's to prevent my going through any more of it that I must go out
 again as soon as possible. As you said, they'll all be congratulating thems
elves over my demise What better time to deal with them?" My every instinct 
was against waiting. If I left things until tomorrow evening. who knows what
 mischief Ridley's friends might plan and accomplish while I slept through t
he day? There was no reason to think they'd limit their activities only to t
he hours of darkness.
"He won't go alone, Elizabeth," Oliver said, standing up.
"Oh, yes, he will," I countered.
"But, Jonathan"
"Believe me, Coz, there's no better man I'd want along to help, but I'd be d
istracted worrying for your safety. Mine 1 need not be so concerned about. B
esides, you know perfectly well I can travel alone a lot faster and with muc
h less notice."
"You'll still need help once you find them, or do you propose thrashing the w
hole lot all on your own?''
"I'm not thrashing anyone unless they force it on me. First I find Ridley and
 make sure he is indeed the one behind this attack."
"Surely there's no doubt over that."

"Not in my mind, but I also have to see why my influence didn't last on him.
"
"How will you find him, though? If you wait till the morrow I can
"Not one minute more. I'll go to his flat again. He may have returned by now,
 and if not then to Arthur Tyne's. I was too polite with the butler earlier, 
this time I'll get some names out of him." Perhaps I'd wring his neck, too.
"What will you do when you find them?" Elizabeth asked, wearing a troubled 
expression. "Not that I give a fig for their welfare, but I wouldn't want y
our conscience troubling you later with regrets."  My conscience is my own 
business, I thought.
"It makes you too difficult to live with," she added with a crooked smile.
I looked at her. She was trying to be light, but her eyes told me the lie of it.
"What will you do?" she asked again.
I patted her hand. "Not to worry, I'll stay within the law." Or try to, I add
ed to myself, shrugging off my dressing gown. Jericho was already holding my 
cloak ready in the entry hall.
"That did not answer my question!" she bellowed after me as I hurried from
 the room.
CHAPTER
-8-
I'd not noticed the wind before quitting the ground. Insubstantial as I appe
ared to be, skimming across the sky like a wisp of cloud, there was yet enou
gh of me left to feel its effect and have to fight it. But my strength had r
eturned, so the struggle was more of an annoyance than a trial. A clandestin
e stop in a nearby stable had provided me a swift and much needed physical r
ecuperation. Normally I'd not bother courting the risk of discovery by suppi
ng on a neighbor's stock, but our driver and lads were wide awake and like t
o remain so for longer than I'd wanted to wait. Rather than influencing them
 all to sleep I simply went elsewhere for my meal. With its red fire still f
resh on my tongue and glowing hot in all my limbs, I found a recuperation ha
d taken place in my heart as well as my body, inspiring me to an even greate
r determination to sort things out for good and all with Ridley and his ilk.
Rooftop and tree, park and street, all rushed beneath my shadowless form a
s I sped in a nearly straight line from Oliver's house toward the dingy sq
uare where Ridley lived, Even though my memory of how to get there was fro
m a
much lower perspective than the one I presently enjoyed, I had no trouble fin
ding the way. Unwilling to give up the advantage of so fine an outlook, I sol
idified on the roof of his building to have a good look at things before goin
g in.
The square below was as quiet as could be expected in London, even at this s
mall an hour on a winter night. A few figures paced along on their own obscu

re errands, some wearing rags and their walk unsteady, probably from gin, ot
hers more respectably garbed, but no less tottery in their gait. I dismissed
 them from notice, peering closely into the darkest corners within my view. 
All were empty except for a narrow gap between buildings where a tart was bu
sy earning some money. If her expression held any clue to her true thoughts,
 then her patron had no gift of talent for his purpose whatsoever. After asc
ertaining by his humble clothing that he wasn't likely to be part of Ridley'
s circle, I left them to it and partially vanished.
Moving down the front of the building I found what I guessed to be the windo
w to Ridley's sitting room, it being hard to see anything through the glass 
while in this state. But it was the work of a moment to vanish altogether, s
eep through the cracks, and reform again just on the other side of the close
d curtain.
I'd found the right flat. All was dark, all was silent. Apparently he was not
 yet home. Probably out getting drunk or plotting new crimes, the bastard. I 
drew breath for a soft curse to express my disgust and stopped cold.
Bloodsmell-so thick on the air I could taste it. The hair on my head quivere
d to attention, and my knees wanted to give out as a shudder of recognition 
tore through me. I knew it to be human blood.
So strong was the urge to leave, I nearly faded away and shot back through t
he window again. When my nerves settled to the point where I could think, I 
held as still as possible and listened. I sensed many other people in the bu
ilding, but none in this room or the next. I was very much
alone. Moving cautiously and with leaden feet toward the bedroom door, I pau
sed at the sight of a bold red smear marking the threshold. It was like a li
ne drawn by a bully daring me to cross.
But the bully was dead, I found, when I worked up the courage to look.
The curtain for the window in here was pulled aside, allowing me ample outs
ide light to see every horrid detail. Ridley was sprawled on his back acros
s the bed and very much the source of the bloodsmell. His throat was cut. T
he blood from that fearful wound saturated the bed linens and his clothing,
 for he was fully dressed, and a puddle of it stained the floor. His white 
face was turned to one side, toward me. His were eyes partly open, sending 
the hackles up along my nape, for he seemed to be aware of my presence. It 
was fancy only, as I discovered when I stepped farther into the room, and h
is gaze remained fixed in one spot. Not that that brought any comfort to me
; my teeth were chattering again.
It required a great effort to master myself and closely examine the room fo
r any sign of who might have killed him and why. Ridley must have had many 
enemies, considering the life he'd led; I was almost certain one of them ha
d had his fill of the man and committed the deed. Almost, for this death co
ming on the heels as it were of Clarinda's failed scheme struck me as being

 too highly coincidental for belief.
The room was bare of anything that might be helpful. Il was strewn with hi
s clothing and other personal items in such a way as to confirm he had no 
servant to see to his daily upkeep. Thrown into one corner was the discard
ed costume he'd worn to the Bolyns' masqued ball where so much mischief ha
d sprouted. I turned this and other things over with a gingerly hand, for 
I was reluctant to touch any of his property, as though what had happened 
to him might somehow taint me in turn.
Ridiculous thought, but there it was, joining hard and close with the leaden
 suspicion that I had somehow caused his death.
I searched through every cranny but found nothing that shouldn't be there. H
idden in one of his boots was a small purse with some guineas and a few smal
ler coins. I guessed it to have been a sort of emergency fund and put it bac
k. Beyond that there were no papers-no letters of any sort, not even a disca
rded bill, which was rather odd, though I didn't exactly know what to make o
f it.
Going to the next room I had to find a candle. There wasn't enough light co
ming past its window's closed curtain to serve, and I wasn't going to chang
e it lest the rattling of the rings on the rod be noticed and remembered la
ter by his neighbors once word of this matter got out. Though it seemed ver
y unlikely, someone might hear me moving around and be curious enough to in
vestigate, and I had absolutely no desire to draw attention to myself or th
ese rooms until I'd finished with them. With shaking fingers I coaxed a spa
rk from my tinderbox, begrudging even that - small noise.
The single small flame was all I needed to resume my search, but if anyone 
had asked what I might be looking for, I'd not be able to provide a good an
swer.
The sitting room was not the same as I'd left it, at least to the-best of my
 recollection. If only I'd paid closer attention earlier I might have been a
ble to notice more. Two things did leap forward: A chair was no longer pushe
d against its table, and an empty brandy bottle and glasses now on the table
 had previously occupied the mantel. Had the murderer shared a drink with hi
s victim to work up the courage to kill? Or, the deed done, had he come out 
here to revive himself for an escape? There were four glasses, all the ones 
in his possession, all with traces of brandy at the bottom. Four murderers? 
Five, if yet another drank right from the bottle. Even six or more if they s
hared. Six Mohocks had chased me earlier, but why would Ridley's own men kil
l him? Or had those six been part of some rival group of troublemakers?
I could carry this no further without more information.
It would be instructive to speak with the other tenants to learn if they'd h
eard or seen anything, but any inquiry on my part would place me in a most s
erious position. I could influence people into completely forgetting my exis

tence, but only for a time, and then might they not talk amongst themselves 
of the gentleman asking questions about a murder prior to the discovery of t
he body? Might that gentleman be the murderer himself? London was not so lar
ge a city that I could hide in it forever.
Ridley's acquaintances would afford another and probably better outlet for 
my questions, but with them lay the same danger-unless from them I might le
arn the name of the killer. Then could I influence the fellow into turning 
himself in and confessing, keeping my own vulnerable self safely removed fr
om necessity of appearing before a judge.
All these thoughts rushed through my mind as I searched, each examined and p
ut to one side like the items I sorted through, none of them being too terri
bly helpful to the present situation.
Except for the chair, table, and brandy being out of place from my earlier v
isit, and the fact there were again no papers to be found, nothing else seem
ed amiss in the sitting room. There was no more reason to delay a closer loo
k at the most important source of information remaining to me.
I returned to the bedroom with the candlestick in hand, making sure to keep 
it well below the level of the window. There was close work ahead, this litt
le light was wanted to scour away any and all shadows. There was a risk some
one might see from the street, but I was willing to take it so long as I mis
sed nothing of import.
Careful to step well over the smear of blood at the entry, I squatted and hel
d the candle near and determined the stain
had been caused when someone had stepped into the pool by the bed and then tr
acked it to this point. Easy enough to follow the trail he'd left, he must ha
ve realized it, then tried to wipe the blood from his shoe by scraping its so
le across the wood planks of the floor.
I looked closely at the puddle next to the bed and could make out the scuff
ing indicative of someone having had at least one of his shoes in the mess.
 Why would he find it necessary to stand in that spot? In my mind I put mys
elf forward to stand in the same place to try determining the answer. It ca
me quickly. Ridley must have been sitting on the other side of the bed with
 his back to whoever else was in the room. That unknown man must have certa
inly leaned forward across the bed, perhaps with one knee on it, and one fo
ot anchored on the floor for balance. With a knife in his hand, he could dr
ag its sharp edge hard through Ridley's throat, then retreat, letting the b
ody fall toward him. Thus would he be spared of the initial spray of blood;
 it would instead strike the wall Ridley faced. Indeed, to confirm this the
re was a fearful splashing all over its otherwise plain surface. Anyone who
 had ever seen a hog hauled up by its hind legs for butchering would unders
tand how the blood would spurt from a man in much the same manner and take 
care to avoid it.

Then might the killer have stood a moment over his victim, looking down at th
e final struggles to hold on to life, waiting until it had all run out. Ridle
y's hands and arms were all covered in dark, dried gore. He'd put them to his
 throat in a futile effort to stay the flow. His last sight must have been of
 his murderer backing toward the doorway.
Going around the narrow bed, I now began a reluctant search of Ridley's pock
ets. It was impossible to avoid contact with his blood. Though my appetite w
as so completely altered that blood had become the single support of my exis
tence, in this case I felt the same kind of pitiful repugnance any other man
 might feel. So distracting was it that I could barely control the tremor in
 my hands; I nearly missed the thin fold of paper secreted deep in one pocke
t of his waistcoat. Surprised, I carefully drew it forth, turning it over once.
The outside surface was very damp, but it had been closely folded so the ins
ide part had been fairly well protected from damage. Given the fact no other
 paper was in the whole of the place, I hoped that this one piece would prov
ide some important insight to his death.
It did, but not in a form I could have ever expected.
I took it into the other room to spread it flat on the table. The staining ha
d ruined a portion of what was evidently a letter. The upper half of the page
 was gone, the ink and blood blending and obscuring everything. The lower par
t was yet readable:
. .. an unsettling, dangerous fellow. I do not believe it will reflect badly
 upon my manhood to admit I harbor a certain cold fear of this Mr. Barrett a
nd of what he might do. He is very handy with his blade, as he proved to my 
chagrin at the Bolyns', though I was very intoxicated at the time. Certainly
 upon reflection I realize now how my drunken remarks coming from so befuddl
ed a brain insensed him to the point of giving challenge that night. But I d
oubt his defeating me then has ended the matter, for he and his cousin, Dr. 
Marling, have made it obvious they bear me much ill will I hope that by invi
ting Barrett to meet with me he will hear my sober apology and we might then
 calmly settle the differences between us, but if not, then I expect we shal
l have to have another trial of honor. As I am not yet fully recovered from 
the cut I got at the previous encounter, I cannot be certain the outcome wil
l prove favorable to me, unless he relents and gives me  leave  to  delay  t
hings  until I am better able
to defend myself. If at the conclusion of my conversation with him I must cro
ss with him again, then I should be very desirous that you act as my second a
s you did before. I don't reckon him to be quite so ill-bred as to force a co
nflict between us without going through the proper forms, but in the event th
at I am wrong, I hope this letter will find its way to you so you will let ot
hers know the truth of things.
The letter had the usual closing compliments and was signed by Ridley.

If I had been cold enough before for my teeth to chatter, now was flesh and s
oul chilled so solidly that I could hardly bring myself to move or think.
The monstrous unfairness of it was the first thought to blossom to mind. The 
missive contained just the right amount of truth mixed with lie to be perfect
ly plausible, especially to anyone not in possession of all the facts.
The second bud to sprout was the absolute certitude that anyone finding the
 letter on Ridley's corpse would come to the reasonable conclusion the meet
ing had not gone well, and Mr. Barrett had foully murdered his host, taking
 a cowardly and dishonorable revenge for past grievances.
And the last bloom to burst forth was the urgent need to quit the premises 
and take myself directly home as quick as may be. Recognizing my own panic,
 I forced myself to stop and consider the even greater need for caution. Ha
d I left the moment upon finding the body, I'd have missed this damning let
ter-what if another such item yet remained?
Pushing the cold, choking fear back down until it was an icy knot twisting 
deep in my belly, I made another, much more thorough, search of the flat an
d Ridley's corpse, this time looking for anything that might somehow connec
t me to the crime. I went so far as to turn him over and check through the 
bedclothes and felt a wave of relief mixed with revulsion when I found noth
ing more. Only then did I dare put out the candle and leave, never once sto
pping until 1 reached the sanctuary of home.
"Goodness, that didn't take long," said Elizabeth, looking up from her boo
k with no small surprise. "We thought you'd be away for hours yet. Did you
 not find him?" Then she took a second, longer look at me and rose from he
r chair by the parlor fire. "Jonathan? My God, what's happened?"
Oliver, who had been much at his ease dozing in his own chair, also stood. 
I must have been in a very poor state indeed for them to wear such expressi
ons, and neither improved when I stumbled out with the bad news. Their init
ial stunned disbelief followed by a lengthy period of shock and horror as I
 told them of my discovery was in every way a match for my own reaction. No
ne of us wanted this burden, but stuck with it we were, and none was more a
nxious than I to be rid of it as quick as may be.
Over the course of the next hour I was questioned, requestioned, and the le
tter I'd taken from Ridley's pocket was read over and over again, inspected
 and discussed down to the most minute detail. None of it changed the fact 
that Ridley had been murdered, and the letter was meant to blame me for the
 crime.
"It explains why there were no other papers in the flat," said Elizabeth. "An
yone with half a brain would notice the lack and thus be doubly sharp to pay 
attention to this one. It might be thought you'd cleaned everything out yours
elf with the idea of disposing of just such a threat."
"But why should Ridley write a letter and then not send it?" asked Oliver. "J

ust so it could be found on his corpse?''
"If Ridley did write it. His killer may have penned it instead."   "That's hard
ly likely. Anyone familiar with Ridley's fist
would spot it for a forgery, wouldn't they? Perhaps he was tricked into writin
g it. He might have been told to do it as a devilry against Jonathan, then onc
e finished, his throat's cut and... well, there you are."
"Yes," I said. "There I am, dancing a jig at Tyburn or leaving the country for
ever as fast as sail can take me."
"And you think Clarinda might be connected to this?"
"Who else would have a reason? She hates me enough for how I ruined her p
lans."
"But she's locked up at Edmond's."
"And probably has friends outside who could still help. Ridley might not ha
ve been her only lover, y'know."
"Oh. But if they're so cosy together, why then would she want to kill him?"
My gaze dropped and dragged over the floor. "Perhaps because I was trying 
to change him. And that could be true whether or not Clarinda's involved. 
Suppose some of his friends came by to invite him out to a night of prowli
ng and making trouble, and he turns them down?"
Elizabeth shook her head. "That's no reason to kill a man. Besides, such an a
ction would have been a sudden and reckless thing, but the clearing out of th
e flat and this letter indicates a great deal of planning. Also, if Ridley co
uld be induced to write such a letter in the first place to make mischief, th
en it's likely he wasn't as heavily influenced into good behavior as you thou
ght. He may have possessed the sort of mind and will to be able to resist bet
ter than any of the others you've dealt with before."
Oliver cleared his throat. "You're not planning to take any of this to the auth
orities, are you?"
"God's death, man, and get myself arrested on the spot?"
"I just wanted to be sure," he said, unoffended by my reaction. "Well, then,
 what are we to do?"
"Try to find out who did kill him, while avoiding all connection to the crime
."
"That may be a bit difficult."
"I'm well aware of it."
A glum silence settled upon us until Elizabeth finally threw it off. "You'r
e forgetting the attack made upon you at Mandy Winkle's and those men who c
hased you from Ridley's earlier."
"I've not forgotten; I just haven't wanted to think about it," I muttered.
"It's time you did. Certainly the two are linked together."
"Then please enlighten me," said Oliver.
"Let us suppose they saw Jonathan going in and out of Ridley's flat on that f

irst visit this evening, and gave chase just for the sport of it. Then when t
hey went up to see Ridley themselves, they may have had a falling out, forced
 him to write the letter to put the blame on Jonathan and killed-no, that doe
sn't work at all, or why should they try to murder Jonathan in his bath later
? They need only wait for the body and the letter to be found and laugh thems
elves sick while the law took its course."
My gaze lifted from the floor. "You almost have it."
"What, then?"
"All right, assume they saw me go in and come out, gave chase and went back
 to see their friend then discover Ridley's already dead."
"Oh, hell," Oliver whispered.
"They wouldn't need to search the body for any letter, but naturally conclu
de I'd just cut his throat. They have a quick talk among themselves, cleani
ng out Ridley's brandy, and decide to come after me in a fit of revenge. On
e of 'em sets himself to watch our house, finds out we're at Mandy's, and t
he next thing you know I'm being hauled from the bath like a dead rat. None
 of that could have been planned by the real killer; he couldn't have known
 I'd come calling that evening. He'd meant for the body to be found and me
to get the blame, which is as it turned out, but not in the way he'd expected."
"But if Ridley was already dead when you called, how could you go into th
e flat and not notice a dead body? You found him quick enough the second 
time."
"The second time I stayed long enough to draw a single breath of air. The sce
nt of blood is what led me to the body. I must not have breathed at all the f
irst time. I was in there and gone in but a matter of seconds."
He sat back to digest this.
Elizabeth, more used to the eccentricities of my condition, found it easier to
 take in. "Good God, if that's true ... to think Ridley was lying there dead a
ll that time... ugh. I wonder when he was killed, anyway?"
"Perhaps just before dark and a little after," I said.
"Why do you think that?"
"The curtain in the bedroom was open and the only candle I found was out in 
the sitting room. The killer would have had light enough to do his work unti
l the sun went down. He cleans the place of other paper, shoves the letter i
nto Ridley's pocket, and when it's dark enough to hide his face and form he 
goes off to wait for Ridley's friends to come over for a visit so they will 
find the body, not knowing how things would really turn out. They see me lea
ving the place and assume without reading the accusation in the letter that 
I'd done it."
"But he gets what he wants; Ridley's dead and you're blamed."
"Only by the Mohocks, and for the moment they think I'm dead."

"Until they learn better and make a second try," said Oliver. "Thank heave
n you found that letter or the magistrate's men would be hammering on our 
door any minute now to take us away."
"Ridley knew his killer," Elizabeth said, again breaking into the short sile
nce that followed as we counted our blessings. "Who of his friends could do 
such a thing?"
"Any one of 'em, as far as I'm concerned," Oliver grumbled. "The letter was t
o go to that pasty-faced gull who was his second at the duel. His name's Litt
on, if I got it right. He's not too smart, but loyal as a lapdog to Ridley. I
f you want the names of any of Ridley's other friends-such as they are-you ne
ed only go to Litton to get them."
"I have to," I said. "You know where he lives?"
"No, but I can find out unless he's been murdered in his bed as well."
"Not likely, or why write a letter to him? He's needed to raise a hue and cry
 against me."
"What about Arthur Tyne?'' asked Elizabeth, looking at each of us and getti
ng an answer from neither. "He was Ridley's cousin and closest friend, clos
e enough to him to be willing to help murder Edmond and Jonathan. Where's h
e gotten to in all this?"
I spread my hands and shrugged. "For all I know he might have been the on
e who shot me."
"For all you know he may have cut Ridley's throat himself."
"I doubt that, though stranger things have happened," said Oliver, shaking 
his head. He turned his gaze on me. "Weren't you going to talk with him as 
well?"
"It will wait until tomorrow night. I'm much too shaken for further rambles."
"Then perhaps I should have a turn."
"No, you should not!"
"The very idea!" exclaimed Elizabeth.
"I just want to help. Why should Jonathan do all the work?"
"You'll have work aplenty tomorrow finding where Litton is without getting c
aught at it."
"Without getting caught?"                       
"You'll have to pretend not to know anything about Ridley's death."
"Yes, I suppose that would be rather odd if I•E
"Odd? It could be fatal, dear Cousin. Promise me you won't risk yourself in
 any way."
Well, Oliver was as soft as a down pillow when it came to Elizabeth, so he r
eadily gave his word to use the utmost caution in his inquiry. "Tell you wha
t, I can call on Brinsley Bolyn. He knows everyone and can keep his mouth sh
ut when he has to. All I need do is get him started about that duel and let 

him run with it. He'll probably blurt out the address of Litton and all his 
relatives without my even asking."
That satisfied Elizabeth, but I saw another problem arising. "That letter wa
s meant to bring harm to both of us, Coz. I may be out of the way of injury 
for now, but you could be next."
"Or any one of us, for that matter," he added with a glance to Elizabeth.
"Therefore, I propose you move your household to someplace safer until we
 understand exactly what
"Move? You think the danger is that great?"
"Certainly I do, and until I learn better, it's wise to expect the worst, is it not?
''
"But we're in the heart of London."
"So were Ridley's lodgings."
"Well, his was hardly a decent neighborhood
"And you think his killer or killers incapable of traveling to this one?" I t
apped the spot on my chest where the pistol ball went in. "Here was I deliver
ed ample proof that they know exactly how to get around the city."
He sucked in his lower lip and nodded.
"We have to think in terms of safety and are in need of a fortress. I can th
ink of none more suitable than Fonteyn House."
"Surely not!"
"It's removed from the city, has lots more servants to keep an eye on things,
 and a good high wall with a gate."
"May I remind you that none of those things prevented Ridley and Arthur fro
m invading the place earlier."
"But that was during the funeral when the gate was open and no one was expect
ing trouble. Things will be different this time. It won't be forever, just a 
night or two until I can sort this business out."
"You're really serious that we should go?"
"So much so that I'll send Richard and Mrs. Howard off there alone to keep 
him safe."
That was enough to stir Elizabeth to a decision. "Then my mind's made up. T
hat child will have my company, if no one else's."
Thus did she decide for Oliver, who immediately fell in with the idea. "We c
an start packing a few things tonight."
"Not too much," I advised. "I think we should be as deceptive as possible s
o this place looks like we're all still at home and nothing is amiss. Load 
any cases you might want to take into the coach while it's still in the coa
ch house. When you leave, it should be separately and by different routes. 
Elizabeth, Richard, and Mrs. Howard can take themselves away in the coach a
t some time in the morning as if going on another shopping expedition. You 
can take your horse, pretending to go on your usual round of calls. The ser

vants can leave by ones and twos throughout the day
"But what about you?" he asked. "You'll be helpless in the cellar all that tim
e."
"I'm well hidden, and it's not likely for anyone to look there, anyway. I sh
ould be safe-the Mohocks think I'm dead, so why should they look for me? Bes
ides, they're not likely put themselves in jeopardy by breaking into the hou
se in broad daylight."
"How do you know?" he muttered.
"I don't, but it's an acceptable risk. More than acceptable."
"I'm not easy in my mind for you to be completely unguarded," said Elizabe
th. "What if we ask Jericho to stay until you wake? That way he can answer
 the door and put off any callers. It will make the house appear more occu
pied."
I was reluctant to put Jericho in the way of any peril. "Only if he is made f
ully aware of the danger and has one of the larger footmen for company. Jamie
 will do. He's as big as a house and can redeem himself for talking to strang
ers. Once I'm up for the night, then off they go."
Oliver was sucking his lip again. "But could you not just leave for Fonteyn
 House tonight and save them the trouble?"
"I could, but I plan to be here tomorrow evening to keep watch."
"Alone?" Oliver looked ready to offer me some serious argument on that poi
nt.
I gently waved him down. "Yes, alone, and I've an excellent reason for it, if
 you but hear me out."
He worked his mouth. "If I do that, then you're sure to talk me into somethin
g I won't like."
"Only if you let me.'
"I won't, then."
But in the end, he did just that.
When I awoke the next night it was to a disturbing near-silence, the sort th
at would have otherwise given me alarm had I not expected it. I was aware of
 mice going about their business, the scratch of a tree limb brushing agains
t the walls outside, and the tiny creak of my own bones in their sockets, bu
t nothing else. Rising from my pallet on the bags of earth, I traveled invis
ibly up through the empty floors as usual to my room, reforming just in fron
t of Jericho, who had been waiting for me. He was long used to these appeara
nces from thin air, and without batting an eye in my direction finished shak
ing out the clean linen he'd picked for me to wear.
"Evening, Jericho, how went the day?"
"Tolerably well, sir," he answered. "Everyone left for Fonteyn House with
out incident, except for some loud objections from Master Richard when he
 understood where he was being taken."

"What? He didn't want to go back there?"
"He was simply reluctant to leave without the carpet."
"Carpet?"
"The one you bought for his playroom. It seems he's rather fond of playing r
ough and tumble over it and insisted his recreation would be seriously limit
ed if he had to leave it behind."
"Well-a-day! Think of that!" I was absurdly pleased with myself.
"He insisted it accompany him for his stay."
"Tell me everything he said, every single word." Since I would be bereft of o
ur regular hour of play tonight, this second-hand accounting of my son's acti
vities would have to do for now. Jericho was well used to this, too, for I al
ways asked him to provide me with all the details of Richard's day, at least 
for those times when their paths intersected. Jericho didn't mind any of it, 
for while he spoke at length of domestic things, I would then sit still long 
enough for him to give me a proper shave.
"Miss Elizabeth's new spinet finally arrived," he said. "It was just as well 
young Jamie and I were here to take charge of the delivery. The maker's sent 
along a man to see that it was in perfect tune, a rather abrupt Frenchman, bu
t he knew his business."
"You mean it's not likely he might have been a spy for the Mohocks?"
"No, sir. All he had mind for was the spinet. He played it very well. I comp
limented him on it in his own language,
which surprised him, and after that he was somewhat less abrupt in manner. 
He let it be known that he was a teacher of music for diverse instruments, 
as well as dance and deportment and should anyone here be desirous of lesso
ns he was available for hire."
"A French musician hanging about the place? That's just the sort of diversi
on Elizabeth needs, I'm sure. Handsome fellow, was he?"
He knew I was joking and raised both eyebrows in agreeable response. "Pass
able, I'm sure, though I cannot pretend to be an accurate judge of male co
meliness. However, I was thinking you would wish rather to hire him as an 
instructor for Master Richard."
"I'd have to meet him first. Isn't it a bit early for that? No, I suppose not.
 Elizabeth's offered to teach Richard the spinet, but suppose he wants to play
 a fiddle instead? He could learn French at the same time. Well-a-day, but loo
k at me, I'm talking myself into hiring the man already. I'll have to look int
o it all later; this other business at hand wants clearing up first. What else
 happened today? Any news on Ridley?''
Jericho had been apprised in full of my wretched discovery the night before
, though if we three had said nothing to him, I'm sure he'd have heard abou
t it anyway. Oliver was right about the man's uncanny ability to know all t
hat was going on.

"There was a notice in one of the papers of the incident, sir. You may read f
or yourself." He gave me the germane sheet, and I squinted at the tiny print.
"Doesn't say much. After all the hue and cry, it only identifies him as Tho
mas Ridley, Esquire, and says his throat was horribly cut under mysterious 
circumstances. You'd think they'd have more details. There's not even a spe
culation on who might be responsible."
"Upon consideration, that lack is in our favor."
"You're right of course, but still..."
"I would venture to guess that the murderer may be experiencing the same sor
t of frustration as yourself."
"Really? How so?"
"Looking at this article, he might expect to read that you'd been taken into 
custody because of an implicating letter found in Mr. Ridley's clothing."
"Yes, I see it. He's probably grinding his teeth wondering what's gone wrong
."
"Unless he's learned from Mr. Ridley's Mohock friends that you were killed
 by them. Or so they believe. The papers had no mention of your misfortune
."
"I should say not. A scion of Fonteyn House shot in a brothel? Unthinkable!
 They'll assume the family closed ranks with Mandy Winkle to hush it up for
 the time being. I daresay this Mohock tribe will all be frightfully confou
nded when I start showing my face around."
"One might hope as much, sir, but please go carefully. Miss Elizabeth and D
r. Oliver were most concerned for your safety."
"No more concerned than I am myself. You can tell 'em I'll be extremely care
ful. Anything else on this?" I gestured with the paper.
"Only that his death is the talk of London society. There were several call
ers today. Some of Miss Elizabeth's new friends were disappointed that she 
was not in, and very disappointed to know you were unavailable as well."
"Marriage-minded females with their mothers?"
"Yes, sir."
"It's all from that damned duel. I should have let Ridley kill me."
"Yes, sir."
"Anyone else?"
"A few gentlemen to see Dr. Oliver came by before he left, and I had opportunity
 to entertain their servants and learn all the news from them."                 
      
"Which was?"
"Little more than what was in the paper. The general opinion they held, whic
h for the most part was the same as their masters, is that Mr. Ridley, in li
ght of the double life he led, had it coming to him. Speculation on the culp

rit ranged from it being one of his Mohock cronies to a jealous husband to a
 cheated procurer."
"Doesn't want for variety. Wonder which, if any, is the correct choice? Did O
liver offer an opinion as well?''
"The doctor thought it best to pretend total ignorance of the issue and let h
is visitors do the talking; thus did he learn all there was to know. He was v
ery pleased about the ploy and asked me to mention it to you."
"Then you can pass my admiration for his wit on to him in turn."
"I will, sir."
"Did he find out where Mr. Litton keeps himself when he's not playing the s
econd at duels?"
Jericho drew a scrap of paper from his pocket and gave it over. "Here are t
he directions as they were given to him by Mr. Bolyn."
' "That's hardly a half-mile from here. You can tell Oliver this will be my s
econd stop on my evening rounds, I'm calling on Arthur Tyne first and yes, I 
will be careful."
"Very good, sir. Any other messages?"
"If I think of any I'll deliver 'em myself, though he and Elizabeth are not 
to wait up for me as I'm not likely to be by unless something extraordinary 
happens. Otherwise I'll just leave a note on his writing desk and you can gi
ve it to them tomorrow. Are you finished with me? I'm ready to set sail from
 port? Excellent. Time you got away yourself. Have you the means?"
"Jamie and I were going to walk to Fonteyn House."
"Walk? I won't hear of it. Take this and hire yourselves a cart or some sedan
 chairs."
"I don't think that would be very proper, sir. Jamie might think himself above
 his station if he"
"Oh, hang that. These are exceptional times. If he shows any signs of snobbe
ry you deal with it as you please, but I won't have you walking all the way 
out there on your own after dark. Mohocks aside, it's just too dangerous. Be
 sure to take one of my sticks, and see to it Jamie has his cudgel."
I saw the both of them off out the scullery door. From there they were to ma
ke their way past the stables, down a back lane, and then emerge onto a stre
et some distance from the house. It was the same route the other servants ha
d taken; I hoped that it was still safe. Just to be sure of things, I follow
ed them the whole time, albeit from a height. Neither they nor-presumably-an
yone else was aware of my presence, as it's most unheard of for a gentleman 
to take the evening air by taking to the air. Once they were aboard a hired 
cart and lurching in the right direction for Fonteyn House, I left them behi
nd and returned, making a high circle of the neighborhood to see that all wa
s well.
No loitering dandies, no unfamiliar carriages, chairs, or coaches lurked in t

he area. I wasn't sure if I should be relieved or annoyed when I slipped back
 inside the house.
My plan called for me to wait about the place a bit, making sure lights sho
wed in the windows and moving them from room to room to give the impression
 all was normal. Then would I make another near-invisible circuit of the st
reet, looking for spies. After a reasonable period or until my impatience g
ot the better of me-I would venture forth as though to take a walk and see 
if that drew anyone's notice. Going to see Litton might do it for me, but i
f need be I'd try attracting attention by walking all the way to Arthur Tyn
e's home, ostensibly to offer condolences, but primarily to interview him. 
Should he prove ignorant of all these doings, I would at the very least get
 from him and Litton the names of others who might be more helpful.
After a quarter hour of pacing and peeking past curtains every few minutes, 
I decided the house was entirely too quiet for me. Lighting more candles did
 not seem to help, though they gave the place a very occupied look to any wa
tchers-much good it would do me if there was no one out there watching. Perh
aps I'd counted too much on the villain's abilities. That or I was just too 
eager for trouble to start.
Not wise, Johnny Boy. Not wise at all.
Another few minutes crawled by while I examined the new spinet. Elizabeth 
had done herself proud, for it looked to be a very superior instrument. I 
was sorry to have to deny her the pleasure of playing it now that it was h
ere. My own clumsy fingers picked out a simple tune remembered from long-a
bandoned childhood lessons. The sound coming from it was beautiful enough 
to my untrained ears; how might it be once she sat down and called forth i
ts full potential?
My speculations were cut short by a fearful pounding on the front door tha
t made me near jump from my skin. Now, that was unexpected. Were the Mohoc
ks going to try for a bold attack after all? I peered through a window to 
see who it might be and rocked back on my heels in surprise. What on earth
 was he doing here?
I hurried around to the entry and opened the door to the full force of Edmond
 Fonteyn's baleful glare.
"Thought you had a butler," he growled, not deigning to cross the threshol
d. "Never mind that. Throw on something and come with me. I want to talk w
ith you, but not here. Come along with you."
Too bewildered to question him before he turned and walked off, I had the ch
oice of doing what he said or calling after him and insisting he return. Wel
l, he looked to be in a pretty foul mood already, so there was little point 
in adding to it. If nothing else this might draw the eye of any watchers. I 
caught up my heavy cloak from where Jericho
had laid it out, jammed on a hat, and grabbed my sword cane. Slipping into

 the cloak was made more difficult when I realized something heavy was in 
its inner pocket. The thing banged against my side and caused me some puzz
lement until a quick look confirmed the weight to be my Dublin revolver. J
ericho had, indeed, thought of everything,
Edmond had traveled in his coach, but he'd left it standing before the hous
e and was stumping off down the street even as I twisted my key in the lock
. I came even with him and asked him a reasonable question concerning his b
usiness with me.
"Someplace less public than this first," he said, and kept walking. We went
 by Mr. Dunnett's little watch house. I passed a quick greeting with him, n
oting with pleasure the man had treated himself not only to a new cloak, bu
t a thick muffler and gloves. He bade me a cheerful good evening in return,
 but was allowed no more than that because of the quick pace Edmond had set
. Apparently he was fully recovered from his misadventures at the funeral.
I thought he was heading for the Red Swan yet another surprise-but instead
 he proceeded on to Hadringham's Coffee House. Happily, the smells associa
ted with this place of refreshment were somewhat less objectionable to my 
sensitive nose than most, and I followed Edmond inside with hardly a qualm
. Within all was warm and smoky, the very timbers permeated through with t
he exhalation of countless pipes of tobacco over the years. Quite a few pa
trons lingered at the many tables even this late, for the establishment wa
s a favorite meeting place for the local illuminati. It provided a place t
o enjoy the exchange of good conversation with one's fellows, the same as 
a tavern, but without the resulting drunkenness and debauchery. There were
 other places to pursue those when the mood struck.
The gentlemen scattered about the main room looked up to see who had come 
in; one or two were familiar faces since I occasionally came here to pass 
the time when it pressed heavily upon me. I acknowledged each with a polit
e bow while Edmond dealt with a waiter. He ordered and got a small private
 room and two dishes of coffee, then told the waiter not to disturb us fur
ther. The man had barely set down his tray before money was thrown at him 
and he was practically booted out.
"This sounds serious," I ventured to say as Edmond closed the door rather ha
rd.
"It damned well is serious," he snapped back. "I want to know what the devil
 is going on."
"Could you be more specific?"
From his coat pocket he drew out a folded newspaper and slapped it on the ta
ble before me. Though different from the one I'd seen earlier, it was open t
o a story about Ridley's murder.
I did my best to emulate the proper reaction of one who, though the news be b
ad, has already heard and discussed it at length with others. Not a difficult

 ruse to maintain, since it was true. "This is a terrible thing, but I know n
o more about it than anyone else."
"That account mentions the duel you had with him, 'Mr. Barrett of Fonteyn H
ouse.' "
I looked at the print and saw that was exactly how I'd been identified. Oh, d
ear. More notoriety. Father would hardly be pleased when he heard, Mother mig
ht leap into one of her fits, and Edmond was positively furious. "The duel is
 a matter of fact. I can't help if some fool put it in print. All I can say i
s that I'm as shocked as anyone about the murder."
"Are you now?" He all but loomed over me. "And who do you think is respo
nsible?"
" 'Fore God, man, are you implying
"You told me this whole business with Ridley had been taken care of and a fe
w days later he turns up with his throat cut."
"So you assumed I had something to do with it?" I felt my face going all hot 
and red as the anger flared inside.
"I haven't assumed anything yet. That's why I'm hereto find out what you kno
w. I don't care if the bastard's dead or not or even who killed him, but whe
n the family name is dragged about in public in connection to such a scandal
'
"Oh, yes, certainly, the last thing this family needs is another scandal." I 
couldn't keep the sarcasm from welling up and spilling over into my voice.
Edmond pushed his face closer to mine, freezing his gaze to mine with the sa
me sort of intensity I'd used often enough to force my will upon another. "S
top to think a minute and you'll see the sense of it." His tone was low but 
not at all benign. He looked as if he wanted to break me in two. "If the law
 somehow connects Ridley's death to the goings-on after the funeral, then ch
ecks into my household and finds out about Clarinda, she'd cheerfully talk h
er head off to get back at us all even if she goes to the gallows for it."
Now did I realize why he was so angry. It was his way of expressing a very re
al fear. "There's that," I said, easing back into a calmer voice and posture.
 "But you know very well Clarinda is too fond of her own skin to put it at ri
sk."
He grumbled something that might have been an unwilling concurrence for my 
logic and finally backed away. Despite my lack of need to breathe, I wanted
 to indulge in a sigh of relief as he put more distance between us by pacin
g the room. Resisting the impulse, I glanced at the forgotten coffees, whic
h were cooling. Soon they'd be too cold to drink. Just as well, given my li
mits.
"Have you questioned her?" I asked.
"Of course I have. She claims to be ignorant of the incident and put on a pre
tty show of tears at the news."

"You think she lied, then?"                        
"The woman doesn't know how to do anything else,
except lift her skirts to anyone in breeches."
I gave him a sour face, but might as well have frowned at a wall for all the e
ffect it had on him. "Perhaps I can talk to her and learn a bit more than you 
did."
"What makes you think she'll tell you aught?"
I wasn't ready to confide to him about my talent for influence just yet, if eve
r, and so came up with what I thought to be a plausible excuse. "If I let her t
hink I'm worried, afraid of this business, she might be tempted to gloat a litt
le."
He snorted with scorn. "Yes, I'm sure she'll jump at the chance to do that and 
thus tell all."
"It's worth a try. Look, I've some errands to do tonight, but I could come by
 tomorrow evening. Perhaps the magistrates will have Ridley's killer in custo
dy by then and all this will be unnecessary."
He grumbled and growled, but finally gave his assent that I could see her. 
"But you've still not answered me. What do you know about this?" He tapped 
the paper with his lingers.
"Enough to think the law should seek out his friends for his killer, not his e
nemies."
"Who? Arthur Tyne?"
"Possibly."
"Then I hope to God you're wrong. He'd be worse than Clarinda if he ever sta
rted talking."
"If he's guilty of this murder, he's not likely to bring it up in conversation."
"He is if he's a fool, and he did not impress me much with his wit at the fune
ral. Just to be sure, I believe 1 should go see him."
"That would be a very bad idea." He favored me with another scowl, but I was
 growing used to them. "You want to avoid a scandal, so the best course is t
o stay as far away from Mr. Tyne and his ilk as you can for as long as you c
an. He's not in your usual circle of friends, is he?"
"Of course not."
"Nor mine. We'll just go on as though nothing's amiss and this business will
 simply pass us and the family by. But if you go barging in and stirring thi
ngs up, that could change faster than the weather."
Edmond had no liking for the suggestion, if only because it came from me, b
ut in this case he reluctantly saw the sense of it. The magical word family
 had worked well to persuade him to caution. I'd have to remember to invoke
 it more often.
"I shall take myself along now," I said, rising. "The evening is wearing."
"What sort of business can you have then?"

He'd probably think it anyway, no matter what I told him. "Just a bit of we
nching, dear cousin, nothing more, There's a very fine lady not far from he
re. I'm sure she can get you an equally fine companion should you wish to c
ome along. Or we can share, if you like."
By means of a most contemptuous and forbidding sneer he gave me a perfect 
understanding that going with me to such an assignation was the very last 
thing he desired to do.
"Another time, then," I said with a bright, guileless smile, picking up my c
ane. At the door, though, I felt a twinge of guilt for my impudence and turn
ed. "Edmond, I know you're upset over all this, but there's nothing to worry
 about. There's even a chance the murder has nothing to do with Clarinda."
"I don't believe that," he said flatly.
"Neither do I, but there is a remote chance. Hope for it, but keep yourself pr
epared for the worst."
"And just how do I do that?"
I pulled out enough of the Dublin revolver for him to see what it was. "Get 
yourself one of these if you haven't already, and watch your back. If Clarin
da's involved in some way, remember she holds no love for either of us.
Make sure your servants are trusty and fully understand the virtue of bolti
ng the doors and windows, and though I hope to God it's unnecessary, give t
hem instructions to notify me or Oliver immediately should anything inimica
l happen to you. Left without, she might persuade one of them that she's mi
stress of her own house again and thus gain her freedom."
He pursed his lips and frowned, but he was listening.
"Otherwise, put an ordinary face to the world and carry on as usual."
Brave words, I thought during a quick walk back with him to his coach. To 
ensure our mutual safety, we agreed to go together. On the way I gave the 
street a thorough inspection, finding nothing of note, and made a casual i
nquiry with Mr. Dunnett when we passed him again. He said all was quiet, a
nd considering the vale I'd given him, I knew his report was to be trusted
. Edmond grunted approval at this evidence of my own caution.
I saw him into his conveyance and felt significant relief after the driver 
had clucked to the horses and driven them all away out of sight. My worry h
ad been Edmond would find a reason to go banging on Oliver's door and disco
ver the house empty. Then I'd either have to explain it or influence him in
to not caring, and both would delay me for longer than I'd planned.
Rushing into the house, I went from room to room, putting out the candles 
I'd left alight. Normally I'd not be so foolish, but Edmond's arrival had 
surprised me, and I was too used to there being servants around-neither be
ing much of an excuse to give to Oliver for burning down his home. There w
as no harm done, thank God, and the place had looked occupied for Edmond's
 benefit, but the time for such shamming was past.

Locking the door again, I found my conscience yet smarted over him. I shou
ld have told him at least some of
what had happened so he might be even more prepared for trouble. But before
 I did that, I hoped to make it altogether unnecessary. Far better it would
 be for all concerned if I could clear everything up tonight, and I would, 
God willing. If the Mohocks or the killer or both would not come to me, the
n I was surely going to come to them.
It was getting near to the dark of the moon, but the sky had cleared, and wh
at few stars were visible between the city smokes served well to light my wa
y. I felt rather exposed walking along like a normal man, and would have muc
h preferred to rise up and take to the sky. I'd become quite spoiled. Though
 not so vulnerable to the world's hurts, I was yet as subject to a certain a
mount of anxiety as anyone. With all that had happened, my nerves were unset
tled to the point that I wanted to start at every unexpected sound, and in t
his precarious state of mind, all sounds seemed unexpected.
I told myself not to be a blockhead and forged onward, determined to cleave 
to the plan I'd placed before Oliver and Elizabeth. All I had to do was foll
ow it through. I had only to visit Arthur Tyne and hear his story, then, dep
ending on what I heard, call on Mr. Litton or one of the Mohocks and finally
 sort things out.
But it had made so much more sense when argued before a cozy fire in a wel
l-lighted room.
Close upon my approach to the crescent-shaped row of houses where Arthur r
esided, I half expected to garner some sort of notice. By this time my une
ase had become so much of a familiarity that it had surprisingly transform
ed itself to aggravation. If a round dozen Mohocks had leaped out to confr
ont me, I'd have certainly yelled my head off, but would have also pervers
ely welcomed the attack as a sign of progress. However, I proceeded unscat
hed and somewhat disappointed straight to Arthur's door.
I delivered a brisk knock and waited. Though the hour was rather late for a ca
ll, I knew the rigid rules for genteel
society were likely to be very bent where someone like Arthur was concerne
d. I knocked again, but no butler answered.
Damnation, if I'd come all this way for nothing... I stepped well back from
 the door to see the upper windows. One of the curtains twitched. Quick as 
lightning, it passed through my mind that Arthur, far from being the perpet
rator of Ridley's murder, might likewise be a target for harm himself. If s
o, then he'd have good cause to skulk in his own house, and have especially
 good cause to avoid me should the rumor have reached him that I had done t
he deed. I could knock all night and get no reply.
The lamp by the door was unlighted. A favorable thing. 1 glanced once up a
nd down the street. Not completely empty, but no one seemed to be paying m

uch mind to me, and it was very dark. To the devil with it. I vanished and
 ghosted through.
The entry was very dim even for my eyes. All the curtains were drawn, and ve
ry little outside light seeped inside. I sniffed the air. No bloodsmell, tha
nk God. I listened, hearing nothing on this floor. Some stairs leading up we
re on my right. Rather than announce my presence by the scrape of a shoe or 
finding a squeaky tread, I made myself transparent and floated to the next l
anding, solidified, and listened again.
There it was. The intervening floor had muffled the sound of his breathing.
Beyond that door. Soundlessly I glided toward it, taking form only when I wa
s on the threshold. I peered in.
It was a bedroom. A single candle burned on a table by the bed. By the win
dow, his back to me, stood my man. He had one eye pressed close to a very 
slim opening in the curtain and his posture was such as to indicate his wh
ole attention was upon the street below. Had he seen me vanish? Not that i
t mattered; I could make him forget, and now was a good time as any to begin.
"Hallo, Arthur." The devil was in me, else I'd have had mercy and given hi
m some gentler warning of my intrusion.
He fairly screamed as he whipped around. I gave an involuntary jump at the s
ound and hoped it wouldn't disturb his neighbors to the point of investigati
ng.
And then ... I didn't give a tinker's damn for any of them. The dunce who was
 pressed against the far wall panting with fear was Arthur's butler.
"Damnation!" I snarled. "Where is your master?"
Under the circumstances I was much too optimistic about getting an immedi
ate response from him, and too impatient to wait for him to calm down and
 collect himself. While his knees were still vigorously knocking one agai
nst the other, I stepped close and forced my influence upon him, once mor
e demanding an answer.
"N-not home," he finally choked out.
"So I gathered. Where has he gone?"
The combination of his fear and my control was a bad one. His heart hammere
d away fit to burst. I relaxed my hold on his mind and told him to be easy.
 It worked, after a fashion, and I was almost able to hold an ordinary conv
ersation with him.
"I don't know," he said in a faded voice after I'd repeated my last question.
"When did he leave?"
"Earlier today."
"Did he know about his cousin's death?"
"Cousin?"
"Thomas Ridley."
"I don't know."

Well-a-day. And I thought it was impossible to keep anything hidden from on
e's butler. "Where are the other servants?"
"Dismissed."
"What? All of them?"
"Yes."
"Why did he dismiss them?"
"I don't know."
"Did he dismiss you?"
"Yes."
"Why are you still here?"
The answer was not instantly forthcoming, having stopped somewhere halfway u
p his throat. And little wonder, I thought, once I'd looked around the room;
 the man had been so terrified not just from my sudden appearance in the hou
se, but because I'd interrupted his thieving. Two bundles lay on the bed, on
e tied up and ready to carry, the other open to reveal a pile of clothing, s
ome trinkets, and a couple of silver candlesticks. I also noticed why I'd mi
stook him for Arthur, for he'd donned some of his former master's clothing, 
a silk shirt and a dark green coat with gold buttons.
"You'll not get a good character doing that, my lad. A noose more like."
He didn't disagree with me.
I spent the next quarter hour in a weary bout of questioning, and though pla
gued with headache for my efforts, learned a few very interesting things.
Arthur had been somewhat mysterious in his behavior for the few last days, 
being rather quiet and subdued. Nothing odd in that, considering the injuri
es he'd suffered along with the effect of my influence, I thought. He'd kep
t to his room, resting for the most part and refusing to see a doctor for h
is condition, which was rapidly improving. Today he'd recovered enough to w
alk to his favorite coffee house to read the papers there as was his usual 
habit. Hours later he'd returned a changed man, being very nerved up and re
stless. Pale and abrupt, he ordered the packing of a traveling case, had hi
s horse brought around, and mounted up. He then summarily discharged the en
tire household and rode off without another word.
This had astonished the lot of them, to say the least.
Some departed immediately after packing up their own belongings. The kitche
n staff saw no reason why the food, wine, and spirits should go to waste an
d walked off with all they could carry in lieu of their unpaid wages. The b
utler, left ostensibly in charge, made no objection and let them plunder at
 will. Once gone, though, he had his own plan to enrich himself by lifting 
whatever choice objects Arthur in his haste had left behind.
The pickings were lean. No money, not even a stray silver snuffbox was to be
 found. If it was small and valuable, Arthur had already taken it. However, 
he'd left behind some very fine clothes and some other, less portable things

, enough to keep the butler in comfort for the next year, longer if he decid
ed to strip and sell the household linens, too.
And though I pressed him until the sweat ran down his face, he could not tel
l me or offer the least clue on where Arthur had gone.
Disgusted at this turn, I asked where Arthur kept his papers and was directed
 to a downstairs room that served as a sort of library. I told the man to con
tinue his business, and pay no mind to me, and in fact he could forget he'd e
ven seen me at all. I had no care for his thievery; he could do what he liked
 so long as it did not interfere with my own searching.
The library had few books, certainly not in the numbers I was used to havin
g about. Some of them had to do with law, indicating what Arthur had read f
or when he'd been at university. I'd heard nothing about him to indicate he
'd taken up practice, and thought it likely he was merely biding his time o
n a quarterly allowance until coming into his parental inheritance like so 
many other young men of our generation-that or hoping for a rich marriage.
The writing table he used as a desk held an untidy pile of paper, mostly old
 invitations, bills, and household accounting. It was very haphazard; some o
f the stuff was
months out of date. I found a few letters from his family, who were present
ly enjoying the Italian climate, but no other correspondence. A note from o
ne of his Mohock friends with a name and address would have been useful, bu
t none were to be found. I pocketed a letter from his mother on the small c
hance its address might be of use later, then checked the fireplace. He'd b
urned paper there recently. The stuff missing from Ridley's flat, perhaps? 
The ash was very thoroughly stirred and broken up so there was no way to te
ll what it had been. I couldn't think why he'd want to kill his own cousin,
 though; their fellowship of murder had struck me as being thicker than col
d porridge. Perhaps Clarinda could clear things up.
Or Litton.
I'd wasted too much of the night on this project. I'd best get along to see Ri
dley's lapdog before he got frightened and disappeared as well.
This time I took to the sky-after first ascertaining the event went unobserve
d. The wind was not so bad tonight. My progress was swift and exhilarating, b
ut I had little mind for enjoyment of it as a diversion. Perhaps later, after
 all this business was past, I'd be free to explore and appreciate, but not n
ow.
As Litton's place was so close to Oliver's I decided to delay going there ju
st long enough to look in on our house and street. All was quiet and normal 
for the latter, not so for the former. Immediately upon my touching to earth
 and growing solid I saw the lights showing past the edges of the drawn curt
ains. Of all the infernal cheek-had the bastards invaded our home and were e
ven now plundering it like Tyne's butler?

Of course, Edmond might have come back ... but no, his coach wasn't waiting 
for him. More likely Oliver had gotten tired of waiting at Fonteyn House and
 returned to see how I'd progressed. Blast the man. I'd tell him a thing or 
two about putting himself at risk-if it was Oliver.
Just to be safe, I let myself inside without using the key and listened har
d. Someone was in the sitting room. The door was open and the golden glow f
rom many lighted candles spilled out into the hall. I heard the crackle of 
flames in the fireplace, and a faint step or two, then came a few experimen
tal notes from the new spinet. Good God, Elizabeth? Fingers ran up and down
 the scale, faltered, missed a note, then stubbornly resumed.
I drew my pistol-in case I was wrong-and hurried forward, intending to sur
prise the player. But when I rounded the doorway and saw who stood within,
 the surprise doubled and redoubled back upon me. I stopped, turned to sto
ne with disbelief.
The woman standing before the spinet was not my sister, but Nora Jones.
She looked up, blank-faced at first with startlement, then her features rela
xed into warm recognition. That slow smile, that bewitching smile, the one s
he gave to me alone emerged to light her expression.
I'd forgotten, forgotten, forgotten how beautiful she was; my heart gave su
ch a tremendous leap that my chest hurt, I staggered forward a step. I trie
d to speak, but the words wouldn't come out. Through a blur of tears I saw 
her coming toward me, arms outstreteched. She whispered my name. I wanted t
o shout hers, but it was hopeless. Giving up, I simply held her hard and cl
ose as we wept and laughed at the same time.
CHAPTER
-9-
Eventually we had to part, if only to look at each other.
She touched my face with one hand, even as I touched hers, and probably for 
the same reason: to reassure herself of my reality.
   "I got your letter," she finally said. "The one you left in my house. I did
n't know you were in England or I'd have come sooner. I'm so sorry."
"It doesn't matter."
"Can you forgive me for what I did at Cambridge?"
I could forgive her anything now that she was here and told her as much, s
wiping at my eyes with my sleeve.
"I had to do it. You needed to go home, and I had to take care of Tony Warb
urton and'
"Never mind. It's past. Other things ... there are other things to speak of. Oh
, God, there's so much to tell you!"
She smiled up to me, a little one, wavering between joy and tears. I'd misse
d how her lips curled in just that way. I kissed them, softly. The hunger fo

r her was very much with me, but there would be time for that soon enough, I
 hoped. For now I was content to hold her close.
"Where have you been? I've had Oliver searching for you for more than a yea
r. Are you all right?"
"Of course I am."
I pulled away to look at her. "But Tony Warburton said that you'd been ill. A
re you all right?"
"I'm fine, as you see." She covered her hands tightly over one of mine. "Yo
u spoke to him, then?"
"Almost as soon as we landed in England-I thought he might tell me where yo
u were. You've been trying to help him all this time, haven't you? Oliver s
aid that you'd been in Italy with the Warburtons, and
"Then you remember all that happened that night?"
"Every minute of it."
Lifting my hand, she kissed it. "And I'd hoped to spare you from
"It's nothing, now. It doesn't matter. You're here and well, and that's all th
at's important to me. Why did he say you were ill? I was so worried for you. I
s it to do with his madness?''
"No, no, he must have been speaking of my aunt. Mrs. Poole took sick just be
fore we left Italy. We've been living quietly in Bath since then."
"Very quietly indeed. Why, then? No one in our circle had any word of you.
 I was coming to think you'd dropped off the face of the earth-or somethin
g awful had happened to you or you were purposely hiding for some reason."
"For one such as myself privacy is very necessary. I have to maintain a cer
tain distance from people, as you well know."
"But so much distance? And for so long?"
"I'd had my fill of society. It was empty without your company."
For this I embraced her again, laughing. It promised well for us both to kn
ow she'd missed me. I was sorry about Mrs. Poole's sufferings, but within w
as a selfish gratitude that it had not been Nora. My arms wrapped around he
r, I
gave heartfelt thanks to the heavens for her present and continued well-being
.
"How fares your aunt?" I asked, at last recalling my manners.
"The waters there have been a help to her, thank God," she answered. "She'
s recovered enough that I thought of coming back to London. I sent one of 
my men to check on the house, and he found your note telling me to see Oli
ver. I came as soon as I could. No one's here, though. What's going on? Wh
ere's Oliver? Why are all the servants gone?"
Suddenly remembering the Dublin revolver I'd been holding all this time and
 why I was holding it, I leaned over and put it on a table. There was no ch

ance that I would complete my dark errand tonight. Compared to Nora, the im
portance of finding and dealing with Ridley's murderer lost all impetus. To
morrow would do just as well for that unpalatable task.
Her eyes went large at the sight of the weapon, bemusement drawing up the
 corners of her mouth. "What on earth? Jonathan?"
"This may take awhile. You've walked into the middle of a very bothersome si
tuation. I'll explain everything, I do promise." I gently led her over to th
e settee. We seated ourselves, each turned slightly so as to better regard t
he other. I wanted to look at her all night-that, and other things. "So much
 has happened I hardly know where to begin. I've so many questions for you n
ow."
"And I for you."
I gave a short laugh. "I've the feeling yours will be easier to answer. You go f
irst."
She fell in with my humor. "Well, is your family all right? The war news that
 letter you got from your father. .."
God, that was ages ago. "They're all fine or were when I left last September
. Father's decided to move the family back to England. That's why I'm here n
ow, or part of the
reason. I'd have come back to you no matter what you have to know that, bu
t•E
"I know."
"But I was afraid you didn't want to see me again. You made me forget, and 
I didn't know why. And I couldn't understand I caught myself. This wasn't t
he best way to go about it, plunging into the middle with questions soundin
g too much like accusations. One thing at a time. "My sister Elizabeth came
 over with me, I can't wait for you to meet her. She very much wants to mee
t you."
She stiffened. "You told her about me? About us?"
"Of course I did. I had to in order to try to explain what had happened to me
."
"What has I don't understand."
"I didn't either at first. And I was so frightened then." I was frightened no
w. The words were trying to stick in my mouth again. Rather than fight them, 
I took her hand and pressed its palm flat against my chest. I knew she would 
sense the utter silence there even as I perceived the stillness of her own he
art. "This is what's happened."
She went absolutely quiet, and her color drained away. She shook her head, fir
st in doubt, then in denial. "No... it cannot be."
"I'm like you, Nora."
"No, you can't, oh, no." She pulled her hand away, stood, and backed quick
ly from me, shaking her head the whole time.

I reached out, but she drew farther and farther off until she bumped against 
one wall. She stared at me as one stricken and said nothing. "What is it? Wha
t's the matter?"
She would only shake her head and stare.
"What is wrong? For God's sake, settle yourself and talk to me!" All I wante
d was to go to her, but some wise instinct told me to stay as I was and not 
make the slightest move. She was like a terrified bird ready to take flight.
 Why
was she like this? Why was she afraid of me? I softened my tone. "Nora, plea
se ... I need you. I love you. For all that's happened I have never stopped 
loving you."
Trembling now, she made an effort to steady herself. At least she was listeni
ng.
"Whe-when?"
"A year ago last August," I answered, divining her meaning.
"How?"
I touched my chest. "I was shot... here. When I woke up, I came to realize I
 was like you. Those times when we exchanged blood ... that's how it was pas
sed on, wasn't it?"
She nodded once.
"Since then I've been living as you live
"Feeding as I feed?" she demanded sharply, voice rising.
"No, not exactly."
There was no breath left in her. Her next whispered question was inaudible.
 I only saw the words forming on her white lips.
"I'm sorry, what did you say?"
She swallowed hard and breathed in through her mouth. "Have you ..." anoth
er swallow, another breath. "Have you killed anyone?''
I gave back a blank stare. "Killed?"
"You heard me."
Certainly I had killed, at Mrs. Montagu's when I had to save Father and D
r. Beldon from those damned rebels, at Elizabeth's house when I'd shot As
h and thrown Tully like a doll across-but how could any of that matter to
 Nora? Could she somehow know what was going on here in London? Have hear
d some garbled story about Ridley?
"In my own defense, in defense of others," I began, but stopped, seeing the d
ismay taking hold of her features. "Nora, what is it?"
She closed her eyes, refusing to meet mine.
Comprehension, ponderous, slow, and appalling, finally dawned for me. "Dear
 God-I obtain what I need to live from horses or cattle. You don't think I'
d kill someone for their blood?"
Oh, but that's exactly what she was thinking if I read her aright. Had I not c

ome close to it with Arthur Tyne? I'd been injured, starving, and mad for reve
nge of my hurts. but still...
"I'd not do that. I'd never do that! You must believe me, Nora."
"Never?'' Her voice was high with doubt.
I nearly groaned, but nothing less than the truth would serve either of us wel
l. "I almost did. Once. He'd nearly killed me, and I had to take from him to s
ave myself... but I didn't kill him. I let him go."
"Who?"
"No one important, no one unimportant. Just a man."
"And what of women?" she murmured.
Here did I begin to blush. "Well, I've not been celibate, but no woman I've 
been with has ever suffered for my appetite. Do you know so little of me to 
think I would hurt anyone for the sake of my own pleasure?" I'd had the hard
 lesson of that only last night. Never again.
"That's the whole point, Jonathan. You've changed. The abilities you have 
now put you above all other men, beyond their laws, beyond their punishmen
ts
I responded with a snort of disbelief. "I think not, dear lady."
"Then you just haven't fully grasped it yet."
"Ah, but I have, with both hands, and just as quickly ungrasped it."
"You're still young."
"So my sister tells me, but I'm no fool. Is that what's upset you? You though
t I'd turned into some sort of murdering bully?"
"It's not that simple."
"I think it is, but for pity's sake, be assured I am the man you knew before. 
Perhaps a little wiser, even. Believe me, I've been all over this subject of b
ullying with my father and sister
Another stricken look took her. "Your family knows!"
"Only Father, Elizabeth, Oliver, and, of course, my valet Jericho.
She continued to stare.
Impatience got the better of me. "How could I not tell them?"
"And they ... accept you?"
"Of course they did, once they got over the surprise."
"They must be marvelously understanding."
"I'm not saying it was easy for any of us, but between the choice of having m
e like this or buried and rotting in the churchyard, they had no trouble maki
ng their decision. In fact, they want to thank you for what you did."
"Thank me?"
"For all the trials we've been through, this change brought me back to them, 
and for that we are all grateful to you. My condition has given me a greater 
appreciation for life, theirs and mine together. I know how precious and frag
ile it all is, how quickly and easily it may be destroyed by a careless hand.

 I think the whole point now is not so much that I've become like you, but wh
ether or not you can accept it yourself. I pray that you will."
"I have no choice," she said unhappily.
This low temper of hers baffled me. "Don't you?" I snapped. "Did you not 
make a choice that time? You took me to your bed and we made love and you
 gave your blood to me. Did you not choose then to make me as you are? Or
 was I just a convenient means to increase your own pleasure?"
"No!" She raised her fists, all frustration. "Oh, but you don't understand any
thing."
"Then help me to do so!"
But she said nothing. My anger had accomplished that much.
I suddenly wilted in my seat, and turned from her, overcome for the moment b
y the black pall of fading hope. She was afraid, and I could not fathom why.
 "Forgive me, Nora. It's that I've waited so long to see you. I have so many
 questions, and you're the only one who can possibly answer them. But if you
 can't or won't, I shan't press you. I'll respect whatever reason you have, 
even if you don't share it with me."
A long time, long silence later, she asked, "Do you really mean that?"
"I've made it a habit to only say what I mean. It's no guarantee against my 
making a fool of myself, though. Perhaps I'm being a fool now, but better th
at than for me to distress you in any way. Obviously this has been a shock t
o you, and an unpleasant one; I don't want to make it worse."
"A shock only," she said. "More than you could ever know or guess."
I hardly dared to look at her, but did. She'd relaxed her tense posture and 
was no longer trembling. That was some little progress. "Will you talk with 
me, Nora? Please?"
Another long silence as she looked hard into my face. Then she nodded.
I closed my eyes with relief. "Thank you." I remained where I was so she mig
ht make the first move. That wise instinct told me she was still quite capab
le of taking flight, and it was best she advance at her own pace without any
 push to hurry on my part.
Very guarded and pulled into herself, she perched on Oliver's chair by the f
ire. I would have to be careful and slow. Difficult, for the strong urge ros
e in me to enfold her in my arms and try to give comfort. Later, perhaps, if
 and when she was ready for it. Now was not the time.
"Where shall we start?" she asked, clasping her hands together. She reminde
d me of a schoolboy about to be tested on a disagreeable topic.
Though the question wanted to leap out as a bellowed demand, I made my v
oice mild. "Why did you not prepare me, tell me this would happen?"
Her gaze dropped to the floor. "Because I didn't think it ever would."
"What do you mean?"
"You're not the only man I've loved in that way, Jonathan."

"There was another?"
"Several others, long before you."
This was hardly news considering how much she enjoyed the company of her ga
llants. As skilled as she was in making love, she'd have had to practice wi
th and learn from someone, or many someones. All past and done with to be s
ure; there was no reason for me to be jealous, but all the same I couldn't 
help feeling a familiar barbed thorn trying to sprout in a dark place in my
 mind. I firmly ignored it.
"Others with whom you exchanged blood?" I prompted.
"Yes."
"So they could be like you?"
"Yes. But when they died ... they stayed in their graves. It never worked."
"One must die for the change to occur?"
She nodded. "Over the years I came to think I would ever be lonely, that I c
ould never share this existence with anyone else. That being true, then it w
ouldn't matter sharing my blood with those I truly loved. It was done for my
 pleasure or our pleasure but also I always hoped that one of you just might
 cheat death as I had. Jonathan, of them all, you're the only one who's ever
 come back."
Silence between us. Thick, viscid, and perturbing. "Wh-why? What makes m
e different?"
"I don't know."
"You have to know!"
"I don't! I don't even know why I came back!"
My mouth was like sand. "Nora, how did you die?"
She shook her head. "I'm not ready to speak of that yet."
Her voice was so hushed and suffused with pain, I gave up for the time bein
g any thought of pressing her on the subject. A disappointment, and now cam
e to roost the distressing notion that she did not possess the answers to a
ll my questions. I'd feared that possibility. Since it was apparently becom
ing a reality, I would have to make the best of it. I nodded acceptance and
 squared up my shoulders. "Well, then. You didn't think any of your lovers 
would return, and yet you still hoped on? That's why you'd exchange blood, 
in that hope. Shouldn't you have given any of us some sort of a warning, th
ough?"
She shook her head decisively. "I did once, and when I lost him forever I cou
ld not do it again for any other. It would have been too hard to bear."
"How so?"
She grimaced, then looked at me. "Pretend it's that night again, that night 
I shared all with you, only instead of taking you to my bed and letting it h
appen as it did, I first explain what I want to do and what might happen to 
you after you die. Would you not have second thoughts?"

"Possibly, but I'm sure I'd have done it anyway."
"But since none of the others had ever come back, I'd only be filling you wit
h false hopes, the kind so brittle and sharp that when broken cut you right t
o the bone."
"None of that would matter to me, though, since I'd be dead and uncaring of 
the business."
"Not so for me, dear Jonathan. I told all of this to the first one, the first 
man I truly fell in love with. I explained everything to him, the consequences
, the possibilities, everything there was to know about this-this condition. H
e had no objections, quite the contrary, and we lived and
loved until the year the plague came. Right on his deathbed he was making pl
ans for both of us for his return-only he never returned."
Tears. I'd seen her weep with sorrow but once before. Now did they stream
 down her cheeks.
"I miss and mourn him to this day. Losing him was made worse for me because 
of the hopes we'd had. He was so certain that he made me certain, and when I
 lost that... it was too much. Ever after I thought it best to live for the 
present and not the future. It made the partings when they came.. .easier."
"For you."
"For me. I was ever the one left behind."
"Until now."
She gave me a look such as would crack my heart.
"If this is what you've hoped for for so long, then why be afraid of me?"
"B-because of the one who made me like this. I was not born this way. He 
was my lover and shared his blood with me."
"Who?"
"You don't know him and likely never will." She brushed impatiently at her 
wet face. "He fed on people, on women. Said he loved them, said he loved me
, but that he couldn't control his hunger. He killed to feed his hunger."
Understanding flooded me. "Dear God, no wonder you-oh, Nora, I'm not lik
e him, and may God strike me dead before I ever become like him."
"But he said he couldn't help himself, that he had to'
"Then he was either mad or a liar."
"Perhaps so. When I came back from death, I feared I'd soon be killing, too.
"
I felt a sharp chill stab through me, but made no sign of it. "And did you?"
"No. It wasn't in my heart to do so. I came to believe it was because I'm a 
woman and made of softer feelings.
I ran away before he knew of my return." "To England?"
"France. I knew the language. There I came to see I need not live in fear of w
hat I'd become, that this life could be very pleasant for myself and others, a
nd there I first tried to make another like me."

"But all the while fearing he'd kill for blood like the first man?''
"I'd grown so desperate, was so wretchedly lonely, 1 was willing to sacrifice 
the lives of others to ease that loneliness."
I tried to imagine such solitude. My own experience with it was limited. I
 knew what it was to be alone, recalled certain miserable patches while pa
ssing from boyhood to manhood, but I'd never endured the kind of isolation
 Nora described. Even in my worst moments of missing her I knew I'd not ha
ve remotely considered taking or even risking the life of some unknown per
son in order to see her again.
"It must have been wretched, indeed," I whispered.
"It still is."
"Was," I hazarded, adding a note of hope to my tone.
"I don't know."
An honest response. "Then time alone will prove to you I'm no monster killi
ng to feed an uncontrolled appetite."
A smile, so brief it hardly touched her lips. "He was mad or a liar or both. 
You are not like him. If you were you'd not be so kind to me."
" 'Tis love, not kindness."
"People change. We've been apart for a very long while."
"I've not changed where my feelings for you are concerned. You've been in
 my thoughts constantly, and not just because of the questions I want to 
ask you. The years we were together here-you've touched me as no other wo
man could, Nora. Can you tell me they meant and mean
nothing? Or have you changed? Or have you ... have you found another?"
A sharp look. "No, I've not."
"Well, then. Do you love me?"
Eyes shut, then open. "Yes. Always."
I closed my own eyes, grateful, humbly grateful for that blessing. The heavi
est burden of all had just lifted from my heart. But when I looked at her ag
ain, I saw she was yet watchful. "Then tell me what troubles you. Why are yo
u still this way with me?"
"You'll learn of it sooner or later."
I gestured, silently urging her to go on.
She looked at the floor. "You know how I live. How I take a little from my 
cavaliers, and in return they gift me with the means to maintain my househo
ld. You know how I must keep them under the control of my will so there is 
no chance of rivalry amongst them, for each other or for me, else they'd be
 righting or worse."
"Such as what happened with Tony."
"Yes. Have you done the same kind of thing yourself, bringing people aroun
d to your will?"
"Necessity forced me to learn to use that talent."

"Talent or curse."
"Both, then. What of it?"
"I cannot use it on you. It only works on those who are not like us."
I shrugged. "Again, what of it?"
"Don't you see how it is for me?"
I tried, but gave up, shaking my head.
"Because of that... talent, I am able to control others exactly the way I want
 to suit my interests, never mind their own."
"But you've never abused it to my knowledge."
"Have I not? With you? Jonathan, I can control them, and at the very last I
 was forced to control you so you would forget certain things, but now that
 you've changed-•E
"You can't control me. Yes, I do see your meaning, but why would you want
 to?"
"It's not a question of want but of need. That's why I'm uneasy, fearful. 
With the others, with the way you were then, I always had that ultimate ad
vantage. I could always be safe from any and all harm, always guide and de
termine things for my convenience, always avoid being hurt. Now that you'v
e changed, I'm as vulnerable to harm from you as any normal woman is with 
a normal man."
"You can't think I'd ever want to hurt you," I protested.
She shifted ever so slightly in her chair, not meeting my gaze. It was answe
r enough.
This was a grievous blow. I bit back the pain as best 1 could. Nora had ev
er been the strongest, most confident of women. Now did I see the foundati
on of that strength and with that came an insight on why she was behaving 
this way. "You were bitterly injured in the past, were you not? By the one
 who changed you, perhaps? You must have, to think so badly of me."
Her expression grew dark. From what memory? "You see the face God gave me, 
because of it I'd ever been property in the eyes of others, a thing to be b
argained and haggled over like a piece of cloth in a market and never more 
so than with him. In the end, when I'd changed, his control over me ceased 
to be. It was the one thing that saved me so I could leave him. But ever af
terward there were always men wanting to possess me, tell me what to do, ki
ll or die for me. I wanted only to be loved, not owned, and using my will o
n them was the one surety I had for achieving something close to that love."
"You risked this with your first love, did you not?"
"Because he was my first. I didn't know as much then as I did later. Things 
are different for me now."
"Things are different because your life is your own
"Then are women no longer property, bought and sold into marriage by cust
om or law or betrayed into the same by their own feelings? Am I not now b

etraying myself to you because of my feelings?"
"Or entrusting yourself, knowing that I would never willingly harm you."
"You say that now, but later, when you become jealous ... I can't abide it. It
's ever been the cause of all my sorrows."
"Then I shall have to give it up," I said lightly. "I only want to make you ha
ppy."
"I cannot live with you, Jonathan, if that's what you want."
"But can you live without me? How long have you waited to share this life w
ith someone? Will you let past fears and hurts control you now that you've 
a chance to give up the loneliness? Or have you grown so used to having thi
ngs your own way, having things so perfectly safe and orderly that you don'
t dare love for real? I'm taking the same risk, Nora. Think of that."
She did, and blushed.
"I'm not the man who hurt you. I am this man. He loves you more than life, 
and will do anything to preserve your happiness. You trusted me once before
, did you not? And asked me if I trusted you. You once said you did not wan
t a puppet. Well, here I am!''
Her eyes had grown wide, her mouth pursed; she was silent for so long a tim
e I worried I'd said too much. "You're not afraid," she finally murmured.
"Only of losing you. But if that is what you wish
"No!" Very quick, very soft. She tucked in her lower lip and looked away. Be
trayed by her feelings, no doubt, as was I.
"Nora?"
"You'll not try to keep me." From the hard, deliberate gaze she now fixed on
 me this was a statement, not a question.
"Only in my heart."
"And not judge or be jealous of me and what I do." "If you'll do the same fo
r me." "I will not marry you."
"Your love is all the marriage we need. Should you cease to love me, then we
'll part if you wish ... but I hope to heaven you won't." "Your word on this
?"
"On my honor as a gentleman. And yours?" "If my word alone before God will s
erve. I lost my honor ages ago, and I'm hardly a lady." "You are and ever wi
ll be in my eyes." That made her smile, bringing one to my lips in turn. Ten
tatively I extended one hand to her, palm up. As placation, as offering, as 
a plea, as all or none, for her to take or refuse as she chose.
She slipped her hand into mine. Thank God.
Now was the time. I stood and drew her up to me, holding her close as I'd w
anted to for so long, able to finally give her the comfort she very much ne
eded but had been afraid to accept. Perhaps she thought my change had alter
ed things between us, and though I didn't see it myself, I'd respect her ex
perience. It was that or lose her. Never again. Unlike our first night in h

er bed, I was now the experienced seducer, not she. Many beginnings suggest
ed themselves, but only one was the best of all choices for this moment. A 
few kisses and caresses, then I unbuttoned my waistcoat, loosened my neckcl
oth, opened my shirt. I waited, looking at her.
She laughed, softly. "Like old times?" "Yes," I whispered. "If you would." Pu
tting forth her hand, she let her spread fingers trace slowly up my bared che
st. "I should like to do more than that... if you would."
Nothing could have better pleased me. As for pleasing
Nora... well, I was determined to do my finest or die trying.
In a few short minutes we'd freed ourselves of most of our encumbering clot
hing. Being much taller than she, I made things more equal by stretching ou
t on the hearth rug, dragging her down on top of me. There was more voice i
n her laughter now, I was very glad to hear.
The body remembers what may fade in the mind, and mine fell unresisting int
o the patterns of the past, recalling her likes and needs without a word be
ing said. To be sure, our time apart did add exceedingly to our mutual desi
re. We kissed and touched, hands everywhere, limbs entwining as the warmth 
kindled and grew between us. Soon the fever of it seized me with greater he
at than I'd ever known before, and Nora was tearing at me like a wild creat
ure.
Even in the extremes of passion with other women, I had to always be mindfu
l of my unnatural strength so as not to bring harm. Now I was suddenly awar
e of the hard muscles of Nora's own body and the realization I could ventur
e more with her and do no injury ... and she with me. I'd often suffered a 
bruise or two from her in an excellent cause; now were we both free to exer
cise ourselves fully, and did so with abandon.
I nipped at the velvet skin of her breasts and throat with my lips only, th
ough my corner teeth were out as were hers. The sight of them in such a sta
te had ever bought on arousal for me just as strongly as the sight of her b
ody; I wondered if she had a similar reaction. Apparently so, I soon conclu
ded, for her responses to my actions increased in aggressiveness and demand
. We rolled and groaned and bucked against one another like animals. One se
cond I was on her, the next she was on me. Neither of us hesitated, but hur
tled forward without pause or waver.
Then was she truly on me, hips grinding away as though independent from th
e rest of her, pushing me up into her
body. This suited well for her initial climax, and as it overtook her she fe
ll forward, moaning, digging her teeth hard into my throat that she might pr
olong it. My blood surged forth, engendering for me a consummation more shar
p, joyful, and delirious than those times past when I'd once merely pumped s
eed into her. She drew on me, her mouth hot, demanding all and taking more. 
Gasping from it, I felt my very life rushing out, but made not the least sti

rring to hinder its flow, so caught was I in the ecstasy of the act. If she 
wanted to drain me to a husk, then so be it; I was hers to have.
Her frenzied movements eventually slowed, but she continued to drink, pullin
g strongly on the vein she'd opened. It was wonderful; I'd never known anyth
ing to match it. It was keen and blinding, harsh and blazing. Brain and body
, mind and spirit, all my being turned itself over to the pleasure. If it we
nt on like this forever, then I'd have no need of heaven.
My sight clouded over. The glow from the candles merged with the shadows;
 the room seemed rilled with a golden fog. It lay warm upon my skin like 
sunlight.
I held still except for stroking a lazy hand up along her bare back. As mor
e and more of my blood went into her, even that easy motion became too much
 of an effort. My arm went lax and dropped away. I could not lift it again.
She's killing me, I thought. But that inner revelation did not alarm me in the 
slightest. I'd already died, and not nearly so marvelously as this; I had nothi
ng to fear.
I fell into a kind of sleep close to that which came upon me during the day
 when I was not on my earth. This was without the bad dreams, though, and m
uch more sensual. I was soaked through, submerged in a sea of absolute blis
s. Waves of it overwhelmed me each time she swallowed. I sank far beneath i
ts crystal surface, not caring if I ever come up again.
"Jonathan?''
I hated to respond, to have any interruption, but when she whispered my name
 a second, then a third time, I finally looked at her.
Her lips were red from my blood. Her eyes burned like living rubies. She r
an one hand along my face, fingers brushing into my mouth, against my teet
h. Some part of my lethargy tumbled away, and though weak as a kitten from
 what I'd given, with her help I slowly sat up. She yet crouched over my h
ips and now wrapped her legs around behind me, locking us together.
"Your turn," she murmured, letting her head fall back.
I could just see the swollen vein waiting under the pale velvet. The scent 
rising from it, the bloodsmell, pierced through my somnolence. My mouth sag
ged wide. Hunger and lust became one. Impossibly, for I'd thought myself pa
st it, the fever rose up and seized me once more.
She made a shrill cry when, for the first time, I gouged into the virgin sk
in of her throat. Her whole body arced into it, pressing, holding, pulling 
me tighter as I swallowed a great draught of her blood, eagerly reclaiming 
that which she'd taken from me. My member flooded with new strength. Hips r
ocking back and forth, she sighed, her breath warm in my ear.
Another draught-no tiny drop carefully teased out and slowly savored, but a 
flaming mouthful of life's own purest nectar. I drank, deep and long as I co
uld not do with anyone else. She clung to me, shuddering in time to it, one 

hand on the back of my head to push me harder, more deeply against her throa
t. I drank until her moans dwindled, hushed, and finally ceased, and she lay
 limp and unresisting against me like a sleeping child. Then did I stop, hol
ding fast to the last quivers of pleasure as they echoed through me.
Some considerable time later we summoned sufficient will to sort ourselves 
a bit. Nora rested next to me on her
back, serene and smiling; I lay on my side, head propped on one hand that 
I might gaze down at her. The candles were low, the fire nearly gone. A fa
int glimmer from the embers remained. Not enough to give warmth, but we ha
d no worry for any chill.
She'd not changed except to become more beautiful in my eyes, and after this
 night she was above and beyond all other women for me. Though she saw it di
fferently, our shared condition had altered nothing about my feelings toward
 her. If she felt the need to set limitations-such as they were-on me, on wh
atever future awaited us, to feel safe, then so be it. Ultimately, I knew on
ly with the passage of time could I show myself worthy of the fragile trust 
she'd just placed in me. That trust would be tested sooner or later; she'd s
aid as much already. When the test came I prayed I would be wise enough to r
ecognize it and put to rest all her fears of jealousy and betrayal.
The testing would likely have to do with her cavaliers. She might expect me
 to come to resent them, for I did not see her giving them and their gifts 
up. Not so much because of the loss of money and blood they provided, but b
ecause of their importance to her sense of freedom and confidence. If I mad
e offer to fully support her-as I could well afford to do-she'd not welcome
 it. I could and would never ask her to cease seeing them. That would viola
te our pact and drive her from me in one witless move. I'd given my word; I
 would hold myself to it no matter what.
As for the pleasure they gave her and got in return... well, I'd ever had t
he decided advantage since my days at Cambridge. She may have dallied with 
them, fed from them, enjoyed their company, affection, attention, and money
, but she loved and went to bed with me. So things would be now, I expected
, but even better. Without her imposed influence in my mind, I might be sub
ject to a pang or two of jealousy, but I'd just have to live with it or los
e her. I could no more resent her diversions with others than
she could my sporting with the ladies at Mandy Winkle's though that sort o
f pastime might be less frequent for me now that Nora had returned. Compar
ed to her, the other women were little more than a charming temporary dist
raction.
But the future I contemplated would be with us soon enough and take care of 
itself. The present had just been and continued to be very agreeable. As to 
the past... there was too much of it that was yet dark to me.
I wondered about this man who had rendered her change. What sort of tyrant

 was he, and why had he been so cruel to such a woman as Nora? Or to any w
oman for that matter? To kill others to sustain one's own life ... ugh. Th
rough no fault of my own and in the most extreme of circumstances I'd come
 close to doing it myself and could understand such hunger, but thankfully
, heaven had spared me from committing that particular sin. Apparently thi
s monster wantonly murdered, excusing his abominations by claiming it was 
beyond his control. What rot-and Nora and I were the solid proof of it. It
 sickened me that she'd known so evil a man, had endured his touch. Certai
nly it was a tribute to her inner strength that she was as recovered as sh
e was from what must have been a terrible ordeal.
Where was he now, and was he yet a threat to her? If so, then he was in for 
a great surprise for here in me was her own special champion. When she was r
eady I'd question her more closely on the fellow. I'd question her on quite 
a lot of things. God knows, I'd barely started yet, but there was time for i
t. Now that we were together again, there would be plenty of time for talk.
"Shall we dress?" she asked, cracking her eyelids a fraction to see me.
"So soon? But it's been such a long time, my dearest." 1 leaned over to kiss
 her forehead, my free hand making very free with one of her breasts.
"That it has, but I'm ill-prepared tonight."
"Not that I could tell."
"I can. I'm so feeble I shall have to find refreshment-no, don't you dare tem
pt me, Jonathan."
"But it's your turn to take from me, is it not?" My hand had wandered down t
o an even more intimate area of her person. She writhed about, but did not r
etreat or make me stop. "It will refresh us both, I'm thinking."
"Perhaps so, but I couldn't-oh! Well, perhaps I could. But only to make thi
ngs even between us. We can't tolerate much blood loss, you know."
I'd tolerate her draining me to the dregs as long as it was this gratifying.
This time were we slower, more gentle with one another. Nora's kiss was sof
t and lingered long, taking my blood away gradually, and giving back a joyf
ul quickening to my senses so intense that I hovered perilously on the edge
 of a swoon from the elation.
It had not been like this for me since our time at Cambridge. I'd missed it,
 craved it. Small wonder I'd been so tempted to want Yasmin to do this to me
; I was glad now to have pushed away from her. It had been for the girl's ow
n good, but aside from that responsibility, I realized her efforts, enchanti
ng and exquisite as they might have proved, would have been but a poor subst
itute. Only Nora could give me such perfect fulfillment.
As always, it was over too soon, alas. She could go on for the rest of the n
ight and it would have still been over too soon, but this would have to suff
ice until our next meeting. She ceased taking from me, licked one last time 
at my wounds, and with a sigh settled into the crook of my arm. I was in no 

hurry to move, both for the opportunity to hold her and because I'd grown we
ak again; not nearly as bad as before, but it seemed best to indulge in mode
ration until I'd restored myself at some neighbor's stable.
"I'm glad you shaved," she said, lightly touching her lips. They were a bit p
uffed and reddened, not from blood this time, but from the constant friction 
against my skin.
"So am I." I was also careful about touching my neck. She'd exercised great 
delicacy on me for the last hour or more, but for all that the area was rath
er tender. Nothing a quick vanishing wouldn't take care of, though. Later, p
erhaps, when I was more recuperated. "When next we do this, I should like to
 lay in a good supply of beef or horse blood. Then we won't have to stop." "
An excellent idea, my dear. I shall look forward to it." "Then let it be soo
n." If I could have moved I'd have tried loving her again. Sweet heavens, bu
t it had been so damnably long. But she was with me again, and things promis
ed to be better than ever between us.
"Was your death painful?" Her question, breaking into my thoughts out of now
here, startled me. "If you don't wish to speak of it•E'
"No, it's all right. I've just never talked about it before. I didn't want to 
cause Father or Elizabeth any discomfort, and it's not one of my favorite memo
ries. But to answer, yes, it was, but it was very quick. I've had worse since 
then."
"What could be worse?"
"If I told you we should be here all night."
"Have you anything else to do?"
"Yes, but I fear it would be too physically taxing for both of us."
"Rogue. You've yet to explain why you were stalking around your cousin's e
mpty house with a pistol."
"Dear me, yes. Are you awake enough for a long listen?"
"You must know by now we don't sleep like other people."
"Indeed I do, and what a trial it was to learn that."
She put her hand on my cheek. "I am sorry."
I kissed her palm. "It's all right. I understand now. Past
and done. Time to move forward." I paused a moment to think and compose .
.. where to begin? At the beginning? And where and when might that be? I 
supposed on the hoi August morning when Beldon and I had our unfortunate 
encounter with Lieutenant Nash and those Hessians. I'd never asked Nash w
hy he'd been blundering about the island with a pack of German soldiers. 
They should have been with their own officers. I suppose he'd been forced
 to use whoever had been at hand to hunt down the Finch brothers. Would t
hings have gone differently for me had Beldon and I left a few minutes ea
rlier or later? Or if I'd worn another color coat?
Past and done, I thought. Thankfully, because of Nora, I still had a future

. One with Nora in it. That was all I ever wanted or needed. Turning on my 
side again, I put an arm around her and commenced telling her everything.
Interruptions upon such a lengthy recital are inevitable, but Nora kept her
s to a minimum. Still, it seemed a remarkably long while before I thought t
o pause, and the fancy was becoming fact the next time I noticed the mantel
 clock. The dawn was too close for me. Now that Nora was here, the dawn wou
ld ever be too close for me.
We'd quit the hearth rug and dressed ourselves. This time she sat next to me o
n the settee, as close as she could get.
"I hope you don't mind about the others," I said, after a diplomatically bri
ef mention of how I'd dealt with my carnal needs with other women.
"You were careful with them?" she asked. She did not seem in the least bother
ed by the subject. A relief, that.
"Always. Perhaps more so than necessary."
"I'm glad to hear it. You seem to have fared well in your change just by fo
llowing your own best judgment."
"And what I recalled of your example .. .though I never once saw you vanish
."
"I don't do it often. It tires me."
"Why is it we can do it?"
She shook her head. "I don't know the why, only that we can. Perhaps it's to
 allow us an easy escape from our graves at night and a quick return to them
 in the morning."
"It was very useful to me that first time, but I've not been back to my grave 
since. I can't abide closed-in places even now."
"For which I cannot fault you."
"Why do we have such awful dreams without our earth to rest on?"
A shrug this time. "I could not say."
"Elizabeth thinks our return to life requires some sort of a compromise, that
 we must carry a bit of the grave along with us in exchange for leaving it."
"That sounds as good a reason as any I've ever considered."
"Why are we not permanently harmed by weapons?"
"I'm not sure. We heal so fast, and we vanish to heal. The two might be co
nnected in some way."
"Why do we not reflect in mirrors?"
"I don't know. Perhaps we're invisible to them the way we're sometimes invisib
le to people, only it's beyond our conscious control. In some parts of the wor
ld it is thought it's because we've lost our souls, but I don't believe that."
It did sound foolish. "Why is crossing water such a hardship?"
"Because it separates us from the earth?"
"Not fair, a question for a question."

"Better than my saying 'I don't know' to you all the time."
"What do you know, then?"
"To always have a goodly supply of earth with me, to always and ever be prep
ared for calamities like fire, flood, and gossips, to make sure my servants 
are loyal, discreet, and well paid, to always be home an hour before dawn ..
." She had quite a list of things, most I already knew, all of
them exceedingly practical. "Will that suffice for you?" she asked when fini
shed. "There's more."
"It seems more than enough."
"Not nearly enough, I fear. I cannot reduce all my experience down to but an 
hour of talk.''
"Nor can I give all my questions to you in one evening." Of course there wou
ld be many more evenings ahead for us, but I was of a mind to fill them with
 other activities than lessons. This brought an idea to mind, though. "Deare
st, you asked me earlier to pretend it was our first night to exchange blood
. I'll ask the same of you. If you had explained all to me at that time, wha
t would you have said?"
She thought for a while. "Well, I would have first asked if you had ever hear
d of nosferatu.'' Quite the foreign word it was to judge by her intonation an
d accent.
Under her intent gaze I cudgeled my brain a moment. "A Baltic seaport, isn't
 it?"
CHAPTER
-10-
She looked at me, perplexed and gaping for an instant, then suddenly explod
ed with laughter, fairly rocking with it. While glad to provide her so much
 amusement, I was also annoyed at not understanding the reason behind it.
"Nora..."
With an effort she managed to restore her poise again, but each time she gl
anced at me, she seemed ready to burst out again. "I'm sorry. So much has h
appened tonight I must be giddy."
"Think nothing of it," I said dryly. "Just tell me where Nosferatu is and what
 it has to do with things."
"It is a what, not a where, and it's the name we are called in some parts of th
e world."
I scowled, pronouncing the unfamiliar syllables in my mind. "Can't say I lik
e it much, then. Sounds like a badly done sneeze.''
More sudden mirth. This time I was able to join in to some extent. When the 
latest fit passed, she said, "There are others you just might know: upier, m
urony, strigon, vrykolakas, Blutsauger'
"Wait-I heard that one from some Hessian soldiers ...
don't like it much, either-especially the way they spoke it."

"There's more. I've studied. The common name you might know in English is
 'vampire.' "
I mouthed the word experimentally. It was just as strange as the others she'd
 named. "Can't say that I do."
"Oliver Goldsmith mentioned it in his Citizen of the World. Have you read o
f it?"
"I fear not."
"Well, it was more than a decade and a half ago. I'm as eager to add to my kn
owledge of this condition as you are and have assembled a nice little collect
ion of all the books I've found with allusions to and reports about vampires.
 I'll let you browse through it if you like."
"Indeed I would."
"However, what you will read and what we are have ever been two very differ
ent things. Many of the accounts of vampires are mixed in with hauntings, g
rave robbing, devil worship, demonic possession, and some goings-on so ghas
tly or nonsensical it makes you wonder if people have any wits at all. I'm 
sure we're linked to it because our drinking blood disgusts and frightens t
hem so much. That's why I have to be so careful about keeping my needs a se
cret. In the past I'd have been burned for it or had my head cut off and my
 heart torn out. It could still happen in certain places."
"That's utterly horrible. Who would do such a thing?"
"Any number of otherwise upright God-fearing people. We're different from t
hem, we drink blood to live, therefore we must be evil. I've often thought 
of writing up my own account of who and what we really are, setting things 
down correctly for good and all, but for the deep roots of the superstition
s and the fact that I've so little real information. The man who changed me
 was not too forthcoming with his knowledge
Either, I silently added.
"-and I have no wish for him to know I'd returned."
"He thinks you're dead?"
"I certainly pray so. I've not seen or heard of him for many years. It would 
be a good thing for the world if he were dead, but considering how the change
 toughens us, I would not expect it. It grieves me, for it means he's still p
robably killing others, but there's nothing I can do to stop him."
"Perhaps the two of us together might do something about him."
She pursed her lips and glanced away. "That is an undertaking I should have
 to think over very carefully. He's dangerous."
"So am I. So are we both."
"I wouldn't know where to start looking for him, though I suppose I could l
earn how. Let me think on it, Jonathan. There's so much more for you to lea
rn first, anyway."
"Such as?"

She stood, as smooth and as supple as a cat, to stretch as much as her corset
ing would allow. I stayed where I was, watching appreciatively. There was a p
ortrait of Oliver's late father over the mantel; Nora went for a closer look,
 then gestured at it. "Do you recall the painting of me in the antique costum
e?''
"The one in your bedroom? The one that makes it obvious the artist was in l
ove with you?''
My reward was a smile. "That one, yes. What you need to know is that was n
ot a costume, but real clothing. My clothing."
Now was I smiling. "What are you saying?"
"The painting was done over a hundred years ago. Just as you see me here, so
 was I alive a hundred years ago to pose for it."
I shook my head. Was she joking? But her manner was entirely serious.
"It's a lot to take in, I know, but I've not gone mad.
This is a very hard truth, the hardest I shall ever impart to you. Please trust t
hat I hardly believed it for myself when 1 learned of it, so I'll not take it ami
ss if you don't believe it, either."
"You're telling me you're over one hundred years old?"
"Yes. Our condition makes it possible. I've not aged since my death years an
d years ago."
"And... when was that?"
She tucked in her lower lip. "No, I'll tell you later. You're still trying to a
ccept it. Best if you think it over first. You may take as much time as you lik
e. In a decade or two your friends will finally convince you."
Her plain-spoken bearing alone was starting to convince me. "This is no jest
?"
"No."
"We do not age?"
"I think it has to do with how the vanishings heal us. It keeps us young."
"But that's impossible."
"Our very existence should be impossible, Jonathan, yet here we are."
Sitting in one spot, staring at nothing, and no doubt looking like a stunned 
sheep occupied me for a goodly period. On top of everything else, this partic
ular revelation was just too much to take in, but the certitude that she spok
e the truth began to trickle into my overworked brain.
She went on. "We do not age, we do not sicken-I don't know if we can even 
die."
"But all things die."
"Then perhaps we will, eventually; that knowledge is presently beyond my ken
. In the meantime, please don't burden yourself thinking on it too much. I t
old you this because you need to know it; it's not meant to distress you."
"How could it distress me?"

"You'll discover that soon enough."
"Tell me now," I said, straightening myself to fix her with a direct look.
She turned away, placing her hands on the mantel. "The sad fact is we outl
ive our loves. That was another reason why I wanted you to forget me. Had 
you remained in England, we might have lived on together. The years might 
have passed, with me staying as I am, and you growing older and older ... 
then dying. I've been through it before. At times it has almost driven me 
mad.
"When you got that letter from your father, I hated the thought of losing yo
u, but it seemed better to let you go on with your life. Then would you alwa
ys be alive in my memory, young and vital as I'd known you best. It was a ha
rd parting for me, but easier than watching the years eating at you. Because
 of this unnatural lengthening of life and youth, I've had to learn to live 
one night at a time, to enjoy and cherish whatever time God grants me to be 
with anyone I love; otherwise I should have truly gone mad years ago from al
l the losses."
Simple words, simply said, and the appalling possibilities began to yawn bef
ore me. That I, too, would live on, that those I loved would age and die whi
le I remained young and strong ...
She looked back and saw the anguish creeping over me. Coming to sit by me 
again, she took my hands in her own. "This is the heartbreaking burden we 
carry that outweighs all the advantages we possess."
"But can-can we not exchange our blood with others? Make them like us?"
"Yes, it need not be done in a carnal manner. I've tried. But except for you 
and myself, it's never worked."
"Then we must discover what has made us different from them. We must."
"But"
"Look, Oliver's taken it upon himself to study all he can of my condition. He
 might be able to help."
She appeared to be dubious over that idea, but made no immediate objection
.
I listened to the tick of the clock as a silence settled between us. Would 
time have a different meaning now that I knew it had no effect on me? Yes. 
Decidedly yes. Knowing I had so much of it and those I loved had so little,
 time with them was now more precious than my soul's rest.
How old was Nora? Was she more than one hundred? Possibly. Probably. Somet
imes she'd say things, odd things ... I'd never paid them much mind before
. There was a bad habit that wanted correcting. She spoke of the plague, b
ut there hadn't been anything like that in London since the Great Fire. He
r portrait, the clothes she'd worn, even the artist's manner of painting, 
those should have given me ample warning. Perhaps she'd worked her influen
ce on me yet again, keeping me from becoming too curious at the time. Well

, I was immune from her influencing, so that was all over and done. The te
mptation to press her for more information was there, but perhaps not wise
 to attempt just now. She was right that I was still taking it all in. Whe
n she was ready-or rather when she judged me ready-she would tell me more 
of herself.
"You do understand that we are not fertile?" she asked.
I stirred, dragging my thoughts over to this new subject, "I came to think as
 much when I failed to expel seed the first time I bedded a lady after my cha
nge."
"Does it trouble you?"
"In honesty I can't say I've really missed it-in regards to my achievement o
f satisfaction, that is; what I take pleasure from now is so much superior t
han what I experienced before my change that I might be troubled by a return
 to my previous state."
"A fortunate blessing, that."
"Most fortunate. Though I may no longer procreate, the desire to do so is ap
parently unimpaired. Quite to the contrary, since the enjoyment is so increa
sed, the desire to have
the enjoyment is also ... increased. Or so I have found it." God, but with t
hat thought invading my mind-and particularly-my body, I abruptly wanted her
 all over again. Tempting, but dangerous. She'd have to leave soon, far too 
soon for what I wanted to do. Kissing each of her hands would have to do for
 now, and a poor substitute it was to be sure.
She favored me with an affectionate smile, for she could certainly read the
 thoughts that had just flickered over my face. "Yes, I know all about the 
desire. We are at least allowed fleshly pleasures, if not the usual outcome
 of them, though this exchanging of blood we do is our own way•Eour one way
 of propagating."
"But for its success to also be such a rare occurrence would seem to make it 
a pointless pursuit-except in terms of expressing affection or giving and gai
ning pleasure."
"Are you going to ask me why it is so?"
1 gave her a wry glance. "Not unless you have an answer."
"Sadly, I do not."
"Then I shall not bother to try."
Soft laughter from her. She seemed very easy in her manner. Now would be t
he time to introduce a difficult subject of my own.
"Nora, are you sure you don't mind the other women I've known?"
"If I did, then I should be a great hypocrite."
"There were other women before I left England, as well."
"I was ever well aware of them, my dear. Though discreet with me, you and 
Oliver made quite a name for yourselves around Covent Garden back then. Th

e gossips had a fine time discussing your adventures with the ladies there
."
Her tone was light, so I pushed ahead. "You need to know about one lady in 
particular, though."
"Do I?"
"It has to do with why I was carrying the pistol." "She has a jealous husban
d? There are other, less forceful ways of dealing with such problems." "It's
 more complicated than that...." I then told her about the family Christmas 
gathering. And about Clarinda. And Aunt Fonteyn's death. And Ridley and Arth
ur's attack. And finally, about Richard. All in all, she took it rather well.
'' Cousin Jon'th'n'
For such a little boy, Richard had quite a bellow. My attention was immedi
ately swept to the top of the stairs where Mrs. Howard firmly held him, el
se he'd have launched himself down their length to give greeting. As one f
ootman closed the entry doors of Fonteyn House behind me, I threw my disca
rded cloak to another, then shot forward and up to the landing.
"Hallo, laddie! Hallo, Mrs. Howard," I said, grabbing him away from her an
d raising him overhead. He squealed and giggled fit to burst, kicking his 
legs. "I've missed you. How have you been?"
"Very well, thank you. Will we go back to Cousin Ol'ver's now?"
I glanced at Mrs. Howard, who appeared interested to know as well. "Not this
 evening, I fear."
"When?"
"I don't know."
Nora's arrival had seriously diverted me from necessary business, and would l
ikely delay things again tonight when I talked to Elizabeth and Oliver. I fel
t badly for all the trouble I'd put them to, for they'd vacated the house and
 waited all this time for nothing since I'd not accomplished all my errands. 
But faced with a similar circumstance I
doubt anyone else would have chosen differently. Nora had returned at long 
last; no matter that she'd come at an inconvenient time so long as she had 
come.
I'd been reluctant to part with her this morning, and very unwilling to let h
er go home unescorted, but she'd insisted, saying she above all people in the
 city was safest from its dangers. In that I knew her to be wholly correct, b
ut it was still a wrench to say good-bye and just let her walk away. Perhaps 
this was a test of my promise not to infringe upon her freedom.
If so, then I failed miserably, for tired as I was, I took to the air and spied o
n her progress.
It was brisk, for she had ever enjoyed a good walk in the past. She was st
opped not once, but several times by men. Obviously an unescorted woman wa
s fair and easy game for such predators as roamed about during the darkest

 hours of the night. But each time she encountered one of these miserable 
brutes, she spoke fearlessly to him. He would then step out of her way, al
lowing her to continue on without so much as a backward glance for him. Ob
viously she was most adept at influencing them, else she'd have come to gr
ief long ago.
I did nearly go solid again when three drunken villains spied her and lurched 
across the street to cut her off. She'd never be able to influence that many a
t once, or so I assumed, and prepared myself to dive to her rescue and explain
 things later. But by the time they got to her, she was, quite literally, no l
onger in sight.
From my high vantage I tried to find her again, but my vision was limited in
 this form. I'd only taken my eyes from her for an instant when I'd seen the
 trio first take notice of her. By the time I'd looked back, she was gone. T
his confused them as much as it did me, until I understood that she must hav
e vanished to avoid them.
Well and good for you, Nora, I thought, headily relieved I did not have to pla
y the hero after all, and feeling foolish
that I'd dared even this much. The lady could take care of herself and had d
one so for better than a century without any help from me. I went home.
Just before retiring to the cellar for the day, I'd left a note in the cons
ulting room addressed to Jericho instructing him not to come by in the even
ing, that I'd be over directly upon my awakening. A second note for Elizabe
th and Oliver promised them I had news, but it was still not safe to return
. Someone apparently found and delivered my missives, for Oliver's home was
 again a silent place when consciousness returned to me at sunset. I quickl
y dressed and had a thorough look 'round the street for unsavory loiterers.
 None were to be seen, but whether that was good or ill remained to be disc
overed. A short walk convinced me I was not being followed, and taking a qu
ick turn in between some buildings where I would not be observed, I vanishe
d and floated high. The wind was fresh and in the right direction; I rode i
t like an eagle to Fonteyn House.
"You like it there at Oliver's?" I asked my son.
"Yes, sir."
"What about this place?"
"It's all right, but you weren't here."
I hugged him tight, dangerously close to choking on a lump in my throat. "
Well, thank you very much. Tell me what you did today."
"We went rabbit hunting, but didn't catch any, and then I played steeplechas
e."
"You want to play it again?"
"Yes, please!"
"All right, time to mount up." After a number of complicated moves, involv

ing turning him upside down and sideways-much to his delight-I finally got
 him on my back. He clamped his arms hard around my neck, and I took solid
 hold of his legs, then we were off.
Fonteyn House, being much larger than Oliver's, afforded us a longer, more
 interesting course to follow. At his whim we galloped through the lengthy
 halls, chased a few of the more nimble maids and some of the younger foot
men, and otherwise won our combination race and foxhunt. We ended up in th
e nursery. Mrs. Howard's supervision of that area was as competent as ever
, for the room was in good order, warm, and-remarkably for this house-chee
rful. Several candles were alight; certainly they were the most helpful in
 chasing off the shadows. In the middle of the floor lay the square of car
pet Richard had insisted on bringing along. Some toys were scattered over 
it; I noted with a glad heart the painted wooden horse among them.
Richard was anxious to show me something, else we'd have had a second circ
uit of the house. As soon as I'd put him down, he pushed the toys out of t
he way and told me several times to watch him. I put on an attentive face 
and obeyed.
Crouching on all fours at one edge of the carpet, he tucked his head down 
and rolled forward, heels over head, making a complete turn. He looked at 
me expectantly. I applauded and told him he was very clever, and if he wou
ld be so kind as to give a second demonstration that I might admire his pe
rformance once more. He immediately obliged.
After many additional exhibitions of this new skill, he started to look som
ewhat red in the face and dizzy, so I asked if he would teach me how to do 
it as well. This struck him most favorably, and he was soon issuing orders 
like an army sergeant. I had to position myself just this way, put my head 
down just that way-he was quite the expert. Finally I was allowed to roll f
orward. My long limbs being an impediment to such games, I tumbled over wit
h a less than graceful form and crashed flat on my back with a thud. The no
ise impressed Richard, so I added to it, wailing that I'd near broken my sp
ine, and I'd never achieve his expertise at this game. He said I only wante
d more practice, so with many a groan I tried again, finishing with even mo
re noise.
"Jonathan?"
Still on my back with my head toward the door, I had a topsy-turvy view of 
Elizabeth looking down at me. Oliver stood behind her, craning his head ove
r her shoulder to see.
"Hallo, sweet sister and most excellent cousin! Oof!" Richard had thrown 
himself on my stomach.
"He's gone mad," Elizabeth pronounced in solemn tones. "Not stark staring, 
but God have pity on us all the same."
"Not mad, just somewhat delirious. Oh, you'll tickle me, will you?"

Richard giggled, again digging his fists into my ribs, responding with more
 laughter when I threatened to pinch his nose off. Fearlessly, he thrust hi
s face forward, daring me to do my worst. I told him it was no sport that w
ay, stood up-with him clinging to one of my legs-and stumped about the room
 complaining about my astonishingly bad limp. When I was on the carpet once
 more, he slipped free, laughing, and started to bolt off, but I caught him
 'round the waist and lifted him high, which was very well received.
"You'll upset his stomach with all that larking about," Elizabeth cautioned.
"I'm fine!" Richard yelled, rather muffled as his petticoats engulfed his fac
e. By now I held him by his heels, and his arms dangled loose toward the floo
r.
"Can you walk on your hands?" I asked.
In answer, he put his palms to the floor, and letting him have just enough of
 his weight to feel it, I paraded once around the room.
"Excellent, laddie! I've never seen better." Reaching the carpet, I eased him 
down until he lay flat, red-faced, and puffing. He'd catch his breath in a min
ute, then we'd start all over again.
"What about the Mohocks?" Oliver demanded during the respite. "What happ
ened last night? Did you see Arthur?"
"I saw-Well, this isn't the time or place to tell you what happened."
Oliver, interpreting this in the worst possible sense, went pale and grim. "
Good God."
"No, I don't mean-that is-I've much to tell you but not about what you think. I
 just can't say anything until'
"Quite right," agreed Elizabeth. "You'll get no sense from him until he's had
 his nightly dose of Richard."
"I'll come to the blue drawing room as soon as I can," 1 promised.
"Soonest, if you please," she told me with an arch look.
Of course they'd be eaten through with curiosity having waited all night a
nd all day for some word from me. The note would have only stirred them up
 rather than satisfied. Damnation. I hated having this matter encroaching 
on my time with Richard.
Time...
No. That was yet too dark a topic to think about. Nora was right to live withi
n the short increments of a single night. Considerations of future sorrows cou
ld wait until their arrival; best to cherish the present while it was here.
Unfortunately, the present was all too brief. Having little else to do that 
day, Elizabeth and Oliver had spent most of it keeping Richard fully occupie
d, or so he informed me when he recounted some of his adventures at rabbit h
unting. He'd summoned quite a burst of dash at my coming, but was fast losin
g hold of it, particularly after a second bout of tumbling over the rug. As 
an alternative to all the exercise, I offered to read aloud from his collect

ion of chap-books. One of the maids turned up with a cup of ass's milk with 
honey for him. Mrs. Howard, who had made herself scarce so we could play uni
mpeded, must have ordered it. The girl stared at us closely, nearly upsettin
g her tray while putting it on a table.
"Have a care," I said, schooling myself to patience.
She'd likely noticed Richard's resemblance to me and my own to him and was 
having trouble dealing with it. Well, Edmond had warned me about this sort 
of thing. I wearily wondered if I'd end up influencing every servant on the
 estate just to spare us the complications of gossip. The maid finally scut
tled out, with many a backward look. Silly creature.
"Tastes different," Richard said, looking dubiously into his cup.
"That's because it's from the country. The asses here eat better fodder than the
ir city cousins, so their milk is bound to be different. It's not sour, is it?"
"No. Sweet."
"The cook must like you then and put in extra honey in your honor."
I found a chair, settled him on my lap, and read as he drank. Both worked a 
charm; by the time I was a quarter through the reading, he'd nodded off.
Though I should have rung for Mrs. Howard and popped him into bed, I linge
red a bit, holding him.
He was so precious. In every sense of the word and beyond, until words faile
d, he was the dearest of all the treasures a generous God had ever bestowed 
upon me. Precious, for his own sake alone, but also for being my son, the on
ly true legacy of my life as a normal man, if not also the most heartbreakin
g; for if my acquired agelessness proved true, then in all likelihood I woul
d long outlive him. Ahead of me lay the awful prospect I would outlive every
one I loved. Nora's gift was not a mere mixed blessing, but could also right
ly be called a curse.
She tried hard to make that clear to me last night.
Once Nora was over the happy surprise of the boy's existence, she went all s
ober again, finally divulging afresh the grim inevitablity of pending hearta
che.
"Why are you so anxious to sadden me?" I asked.
"I'm not, but I've lived through this without knowing
any of it and have ever regretted my ignorance. Now that 1 know better, I do 
all I can to treasure the time I have with those I love and strongly urge you
 to do the same. Life is so damnably fleeting, and not everyone is able to se
e how carelessly they squander their little portion of it. Empty mundanities 
crowd their days, their thoughts, their actions, and before they're aware of 
it their lives are spent and gone forever. I never waste time in futile argum
ent over trifles, but rather cling to the joys I can share and give however g
reat or small they may be. Never, never forget how long your time is compared
 to the brevity of others."

So I held my son and there and then said a humble prayer of gratitude for Ric
hard's life, a plea for his continued health and happiness, and asked to be g
iven the wisdom to provide both to him to the best of my ability. My eyes had
 misted over by the time I got to the amen. Sniffing, I rose and gently lay h
im on his bed, then just watched him sleep for a while. The rise and fall of 
his breast, the soft patter of his heart, the pure translucence of his skin, 
all held me in thrall until Mrs. Howard came back from wherever she'd gotten 
to and asked if all was well.
"Exceedingly well," I answered. "Fell right to sleep on me."
"He had a very busy day what with the rabbit hunting with Mr. Oliver and Mis
s Elizabeth. They didn't find any, but I think it was more for the exercise 
and to pass the time than to put anything on the supper table."
"I shall have to thank them for looking after him. I should like to hear about th
e rest of his day, but it will have to wait 'til later."
"Yes, sir. Will we be returning to Mr. Oliver's house soon?"
"As soon as may be. I thought you liked it in the country, though."
"Indeed I do, sir. If we could stay on here until your father and mother arri
ved from the colonies it would suit me well enough."
But it would hardly suit the rest of us to be deprived of Richard's immedi
ate company. On the other hand, if the Marling estate could be made livabl
e, Mrs. Howard would have her country home within a few months. I kept thi
s news to myself for the moment. Mentioning it would lead to more conversa
tion, and I very much needed to be elsewhere. I wished her a good evening,
 pressed a light goodnight kiss on Richard's brow, and hurried downstairs.
The next hour was an interesting one for Elizabeth and Oliver as I broke th
e news to them of Nora's return. Elizabeth jumped up to embrace me, for she
 saw I was in a mood to rejoice, and Oliver grinned and pounded my back in 
congratulation. Then did they sit again to ply me with a thousand rapid que
stions, and I did my best to give good replies.
"In Bath all this time?" Oliver shook his head, bemused. "She must have bee
n living quietly indeed. A number of our circle goes there for the waters. 
Strange none of 'em saw her."
"Not so strange when you consider she's only up and about at night. It was 
Mrs. Poole who took the waters, and she's not as noticeable as Nora."
"What was the lady suffering from?"
"Nora didn't say. There was so much else to talk about...."
And I talked about it to them-leaving out, of course, the spritely dances Nora
 and I had enjoyed on the hearth rug. I also left out the business of not agin
g, thinking it better to introduce that subject at another time. Having barely
 taken it in myself, I was not prepared to rationally reveal the details to ot
hers. Perhaps Nora could be persuaded to tell them, since she knew more of it.

"What did Nora think about Richard?" Elizabeth asked after I got to that poin
t in my tale.
"Oh,  she's very pleased about the  whole business.
Thinks it's just wonderful, seeing how things are for me now." Thus did I deli
cately allude to my infertile state.
Elizabeth understood, briefly tucking in her lower lip. "Is-is she unable to b
ear children?"
"Sadly, yes."
"Sad is an inadequate word for it, little brother. That poor woman."
"Unless one considers that I'm something of an offspring of hers," I added.
They did, to which Oliver said: "Very 'something of,' Coz, if the achievement 
of this condition is as rare as she says."
"We're hoping your medical knowledge might be helpful in explaining why th
is is so."
His eyebrows jumped. "You do expect a lot from me ... but I'll do all I can,
 of course. What did she think of Clarinda, though? I mean about the boy's c
onception taking place while you and Nora were still... well... you know."
"She was not jealous if that's what you're worried about. At most she only qu
estioned my taste. But I told her I was after all very young at the time." Un
spoken was her reply that I was still very young.
"That's a relief. You've enough complications in your life already. Did you t
ell her anything about our recent troubles?"
"Seeing how closely they're connected with Richard, I had to tell her everyt
hing about them."
"What does she think of it?"
"That it's perfectly horrible, and she's all for my clearing the mess up as qui
ckly as possible. She's offered to help if she can, but at this moment I don't 
see how."
"She knows plenty of gentlemen in the city. Some of them could secretly be 
Mohocks, y'know, and have useful information for us." "We discussed that ve
ry possibility, but she hasn't seen
any of 'em since she left for Italy all that time back. Her offer to help is 
more in the line of lending any and all aid from her household if we need it.
 Fonteyn House is ably defended, but it would harm nothing to have some extra
 eyes and ears about the place until this business is done."
"Excellent idea. When shall we see 'em?"
"I hadn't really settled that with her, but I can go by and talk with her lat
er." Indeed, I was most anxious to see her again. Last night had been a true 
wonder, but we had much lost time to make up.
"When will she be coming for a visit?'' asked Elizabeth. "Did you tell her 
how much I wanted to meet her?"
"Yes, I did, and she was a bit taken aback by it, too."

"Whatever for?"
"This condition of being a 'vampire,' as she calls it, has made her very shy 
about revealing it to people. Times were when one could be burned at the stak
e for taking such peculiar nourishment, so you can understand why she's a bit
 wary. To hear that you not only know of it, but fully accept it is quite muc
h more than a novelty to her. It may take her awhile to get used to the idea,
 but she expressed a strong interest in meeting Richard, so it shouldn't be v
ery difficult to persuade her to a visit."
"We'll have a late tea with her or something," she said, "with the two of y
ou having your own preferred drink in a separate pot." Oliver made a slight
 choking sound, but she ignored him. "Where is she staying?"
"At her London house."
"But I thought it was deserted."
"Not anymore. As soon as she got my note, she came up from Bath in her coach
 with a few of her people. They'll have the place opened and aired out by no
w, perhaps not to the point of receiving guests, but they should have the wo
rst of the cobwebs swept away."               v
"Admirable, very admirable," said Oliver, who was starting to squirm in his 
chair. "But while I don't wish to
belittle the importance of Miss Jones turning up, I shall burst a blood vessel
 if you don't give us any news about the business at hand. Did you talk to Art
hur?''
Lest his growing agitation do him harm, I quickly imparted what I'd learne
d, namely about Arthur Tyne's hasty dissappearance. "He must have got the 
wind up once he saw the story of Ridley's murder in the papers," I added. 
"He's probably halfway to France by now."
"If he has any sense," said Elizabeth. "What about the Mohocks? Did you see
 Mr. Litton?''
"Not a sign of them, and I was interrupted by Nora before I could visit the 
chap. Oh, yes, Edmond came by just before I left to see Arthur."
"Did he? You have had a busy time of it. What did he want?"
I told them of my conversation with our justifiably ill-tempered cousin at t
he coffee house. "He said I could talk to Clarinda to see if she knew more t
han she was telling. I promised to come by tonight."
"Will you be influencing her?"
"Only if necessary," I hedged.
Elizabeth did not approve of this talent, handy as it was to us all, and she k
new what I was trying to avoid discussing with her. "I rather think it will be
 very neccessary, so do be careful, Jonathan."
"Do you want company?" asked Oliver.
"Not unless you plan to keep Edmond entertained while I'm interviewing his
 wife."

"Ulp. Hadn't thought of that, but I'll do it if you
1 waved him down. "No need to make such a noble sacrifice just yet, Coz. I'
d be glad to have you along, but he was reluctant enough to let me in, and 
for the both of us to turn up might be more than his temper will bear. Besi
des, Edmond could heap you with questions neither of us is prepared to answ
er just yet, if ever. I should be much easier in my heart not to have that 
possibility as a distraction while I'm talking with Clarinda, and very much
 easier knowing you were on watch here, keeping everyone safe."
Happily, additional persuasion was not needed. He was more than pleased to 
play the guardian and endure another long wait at Fonteyn House rather than
 spend even a minute with the grim Edmond. At my request, Oliver called for
 someone to ready a horse for me. Though I could travel easily enough to Ed
mond's by the same means I'd used to get to Fonteyn House, it seemed wiser 
to use a more mundane form of conveyance. My recent travel combined with la
st night's endeavors with Nora had left their physical impression, and I wa
s yet a bit weary despite a full feeding I'd made after coming back from fo
llowing her. Later, I'd have to make up for it. Neither of us would benefit
 tonight if I appeared on her doorstep in less than perfect vigor. To fill 
in the wait, I asked Elizabeth how the day had gone.
"Most agreeably," she said, and I was treated to an engaging summation of th
e rabbit hunt. It cheered me mightily, until I realized it was yet another a
ctivity I could never share with the boy. Deeply frustrating, but I swallowe
d it back along with the dark feelings of regret and disappointment. At leas
t I was here and able to share some things with him and not long dead and mo
ldering in the churchyard at Glenbriar.
Blessing and curse. As there was no escape from either, I'd have to accept bo
th.
All the horses in Oliver's stable in town had been taken away to the safety 
of the one at Fonteyn House, including my beloved Roily. He was very full of
 himself tonight, prancing about, hardly able to hold still enough for me to
 mount. Once in the saddle, reins firmly in hand, I had better control over 
him, but was not adverse to allowing him to have his head for a short canter
 to the gates. The two footmen posted on watch there obligingly opened them,
 allowing us to pass through. If they had any wonder for how I'd gotten insi
de in the first place, I heard nothing of it. I waved once to them, clucked 
at Roily, and let him stretch his neck.
Floating high over the land is one thing, but it's no substitute for the shiv
ering exhilaration of riding a horse at full gallop. Your life is in your han
ds, completely dependent on your skill, sense of balance, and sheer luck. A m
isplaced hoof, an unexpected concavity in your path, a startled bird flying u
p in your face, these and a hundred other lurking dangers can make for an eas
y disaster. Roily and I ignored the lot and sped recklessly down the road, my

 laughter hanging in the air behind as we cut through the cold night. He was 
a splendid animal and not for the first time I blessed Father for putting him
 aboard the ship that had taken me to England.
Eventually, though, even Roily had enough giddy exercise for the time being
 and slowed to a cooling walk. I felt the untroubled movement of his breath
ing with my legs; there was no sweat on his neck. He had miles more travel 
left in him yet, I judged. He'd recovered beautifully from the sea voyage. 
He was fit and ready for... well, now, there was an interesting speculation
 to dwell on.
My mind swiftly turned to the prospect of having my own estate courtesy of O
liver's generosity. An estate meant land enough for farming-or husbandry. Ce
rtainly the idea of breeding Roily to some fine English fillies was far more
 tempting than tilling soil. Profitable, too. The gentry's fondness for hors
e racing was never better what with the royal enthusiasm for the sport. I ha
d but to raise a single favorite to win one race to make a name for myself a
nd better my fortune.
And there was Richard to consider. He was already showing an early love for 
horses that could be cultivated into an effortless expertise. What better gi
ft could I bestow upon him than a stableful of assets in a business he might
 enjoy as a lifelong vocation?
But you 're getting ahead of yourself, Johnny Boy. Let the lad make up his
 own mind.
True. He was only four. Anything could seize his fancy between now and the 
time he reached four and twenty-if it was God's will he should live that lo
ng.
Live for the present, I firmly reminded myself, lest I grow melancholy again
.
Very well. But aside from Richard's possible interest, I'd not hinder my ow
n indulgence for such a pursuit. And if my son wanted to join in on the gam
e, then he'd be more than welcome to do so.
Thus did I occupy myself with pleasant considerations, for their own sake and
 for the distraction they offered.
I needed it. Every mile closer to Edmond's home brought me back to the dre
adful business of Ridley's murder and my own attempted murder. The sweet i
nterlude Nora had given with her presence began to fade from mind and hear
t, to be replaced by the brutal memory of a masked coward raising a dueler
 on me with intent to kill.
Of course he was a coward, for only such a man would shoot another in the m
anner that I'd been shot. If and when I found him, I'd teach him a few hard
 lessons about the value of honor-if he had wit enough to learn. Doubtless 
he and his friends would be very much surprised to discover I was yet among
 the living.

Then there was Ridley's murderer to think about. It couldn't have been Art
hur; his actions were those of a frightened man. The Mohocks were unlikely
 to be involved as well, since they'd been so bent on avenging their falle
n leader's death. Someone had killed him and wanted me blamed, and as impr
obable as it seemed, I wondered if Clarinda had somehow arranged it. If sh
e'd had a falling out with Ridley ... though how any of it could have been
 managed with her locked up fast by Edmond I could not imagine.
Unless Edmond was behind it all. If so, then he was a finer actor than even t
he great Garrick; he'd not been the
least startled to see me last night. Besides, what would be his purpose?
No, not Edmond. For lack of solid information I was growing too distrustful,
 not to mention absurd. A short talk with Clarinda would clear this part of 
things up, or so I fervently hoped. If nothing else I'd get the names of Rid
ley's companions from her; between her and Litton, whom I would call on late
r, I expected to obtain solid information to examine, explore, and put to go
od use.
I'd never been to Edmond's home, but Oliver had given me precise directions
, and I found the gate without trouble just where he said it would be. I lo
oked for and spied two small towers made of white stone with an iron arch c
onnecting them overhead. Had I any lingering hesitancy that I'd come to the
 wrong place, it was abolished by the name 'Fonteyn' spelled out in the des
ign of the arch.
The gate stood open, something I found to be rather disturbing since I'd be
en very clear to Edmond about the need to protect himself from attack. I th
ought he'd taken me seriously, but perhaps with the passage of a day with n
othing happening, he'd relaxed his guard.
No. Edmond would not be so foolish. His nature wouldn't allow it. There w
as something wrong here.
Roily had cooled enough from the walk so as to not take harm if I tied him 
up for a while. Dismounting, I led him through the gate and some yards into
 the property. The trees were thick here, which suited me well. I wrapped h
is reins around a low branch and, keeping to their cover, furtively moved p
arallel to the lane leading toward the house.
That structure was not far from the main road. Parts of it had been new whe
n Queen Elizabeth's privateers plied their trade against the Spanish. One o
f the stories firmly discouraged by Aunt Fonteyn was that prize money from 
such raids had built it and founded much of the family fortune.
Changing fashion and the passage of time called for improvements to be made
 by each succeeding generation until one of them had given up altogether an
d moved elsewhere to build Fonteyn House. Edmond's branch of the family inh
erited what came to be called Fonteyn Old Hall, and if it lacked a certain 
freshness of design, it made up for it in history. There was a strong tradi

tion one of the great Elizabeth's ministers had spent the night here, possi
bly with the lady of the hall while her husband was away fighting the Armad
a. Aunt Fonteyn had, not unexpectedly, discouraged that story as well, pref
erring to state it was but a rumor and far more likely Elizabeth herself ha
d been the guest. But as the other legend was more amusing, no one really b
elieved her.
As I came closer I picked out the different architectural styles, one atop t
he other, each an attempt to obliterate the one below. Sometimes such combin
ations work; this was not one of those times. No wonder Edmond was such a st
ick if he had to live in this place. One could only hope the interior was mo
re attractive.
All seemed quiet, but then I wasn't sure what sort of trouble I expected, p
eople running around, waving their arms and shouting perhaps? Not here that
 I could see. The grounds about the place were serene; lights showed throug
h some of the lower windows as normal as can be. I found one with open curt
ains and peered into some sort of parlour. No occupants, just an ordinary c
hamber with too much old furniture. I was tempted to ghost my way inside, b
ut did not relish the prospect of explaining my sudden presence to Edmond o
r, failing that, influencing him to forgetfulness. If something was serious
ly wrong, the best way to discover it was to ring the front bell and see wh
at happened.
Except the house had none. Instead, I made use of a massive brass door knoc
ker in the shape of a ship's anchor. With its obvious link to ships and shi
ps to privateering, I'd have wagered that device had given Aunt Fonteyn muc
h annoyance whenever she saw it. The thing clanked like the chains of hell,
 loud enough to be heard through the whole rambling house.
No one came forth to answer, though. I looked about for a carriage or a hor
se, for some reason why the gate had been left open. None was present. Perh
aps they'd been taken around behind the house. The graveled drive carried t
he impress of wheels, of course, but I could not tell much more than that. 
It could have been from Edmond's own carriage for all I knew.
1 knocked again, the sharp sound hurting my ears. The house was big, but s
urely there was some servant lurking close by to answer. I could not imagi
ne Edmond keeping any laggards in his employ. Perhaps I should check aroun
d the back. The kitchens and stables would be ...
The door swung open, cutting short my invasive plans.
The man who answered was not a servant, or so his garb instantly told me. H
e scrutinized me up and down with a bland eye and invited me in. Stepping p
ast the threshold, I studied him just as closely. Dark clothes of good cut,
 a well-fitted, well-dressed wig, and a calm, commanding eye marked him as 
some sort of professional man. Ruddy skinned and a few years older than I, 
he wore enough Flanders lace to brand him for a dandy, but the frivolous ef

fect was offset by the gravity of his demeanor. He was likely to be a lawye
r, then, probably one of Edmond's cronies. He looked to be lately arrived h
imself, for he still wore his cloak and hat and carried his stick.
"Where is Mr. Fonteyn?" I asked guardedly.
"I was just determining that myself," he replied with an air of puzzled amu
sement. "We'd had plans to take supper together, but he wasn't available wh
en I arrived. I sent the butler off to find him. My name is Summerhill, by 
the way," he added with a bow.
"Mr. Barrett," I said, returning the courtesy. His easy manner did much to 
reassure me. Edmond must have had the gate open in expectation of his visit
or. Not a wise thing
to do, I thought, planning to mention it to him at the first chance. I'd worke
d myself into a great worry over nothing.
"Barrett?" Summerhill appeared surprised. "But you're"
"Yes, Mr. Fonteyn's cousin from America." Thus had I come to introduce my
self to those people who had heard my name but were unable to place where
 they'd heard it. Usually, though, I connected myself with Oliver, not Ed
mond.
Summerhill took this in with more interest than I thought the subject warran
ted. I suppose I was growing tired of it. "Well, well, I've not met many Ame
ricans," he finally said.
"You're not meeting one now, sir, for I have ever been an Englishman."
"Then you are yet loyal to the King?"
"And like to remain so, sir. My family has no desire to involve themselves 
with a mob of radical lunatics determined to send themselves to the gallows
."
He managed a small laugh. "Then you disagree with this notorious declaratio
n that all men are created equal?"
"There are some points in that document worthy of note, but overall it doesn
't even make for a good legal argument. Too many broad and impossible to pro
ve assumptions. Besides, the conflict they started isn't about equality, but
 their reluctance to pay their lawful taxes. By heavens, if it hadn't been f
or Pitt's intervention in the war twenty years ago with the French, I might 
this moment be babbling to you in that language, so I for one don't mind ren
dering to Caesar his due."
Summerhill laughed again.
I'd given the entry hall a careful look 'round while I spoke, but nothing at 
all seemed amiss. Part of the original Elizabethan core of the house, its cei
ling was a good two stories overhead; this and the walls were heavy with blac
k-stained oak trim and white painted plaster work. Off to the
right leading up to a gallery was a steep staircase with a thick balustrade m
ade of the same dark wood. Ponderous furnishings and dim portraits of the lon

g departed lent the room an air of determined respectability. Some walls had 
obviously been cut into to allow access for later additions, and though all v
ery well kept and polished, it had the same unfortunate cobbled together effe
ct as the exterior. Still, if one was of an optimistic turn of mind, one coul
d say that, in terms of variety, it lacked for nothing.
"Wonder what's keeping that dratted butler?" asked Summerhill.
"I wonder what's keeping Edmond." He'd said nothing last night about havin
g a supper guest, but then why should he?
"Will you be joining us?"
"I think not. I've just some brief things to sort out with him, then I must be
 away to another appointment."
He grunted. "A pity, I should have enjoyed hearing more of your views on th
e American situation. It's strange, but I've met many an English gentleman 
with great sympathy for their cause, yet the ones from America are entirely
 against it."
I detected a trace of an accent in his speech. "You speak as one who is not f
rom England, sir."
He gave a deprecatory chuckle. "Oh, dear, but my foreign roots betray me aga
in. I was raised by English parents in Brittany, sir, and I fear the mix of 
heritage and place has left an indelible imprint upon my speech."
Blood rushed to my face. "My apologies, sir. I meant no offence when I sp
oke to you about the French language a moment ago."
"Not at all, sir. I am not in the least offended, but found it most refreshing
ly honest and amusing."
That was a relief. "You are too kind, sir. May I inquire how you are acquain
ted with my cousin?''
"Again, you take me back to my roots. My family has
ever had a connection with shipping. Mr. Fonteyn sees to the legal necessiti
es of my firm."
Shipping ... that would explain Summerhill's ruddy complexion. The stray i
dea entered my head that he was a smuggler and seeing personally to the de
livery of a cask or two of duty-free French brandy to a valued customer. T
housands of otherwise law-abiding English subjects readily shunned the pra
ctice of paying the King's tax on certain goods, but though I could see Ol
iver doing it without a second thought, Edmond would choke himself first. 
1 tucked the ridiculous notion away with a smile.
"Well, perhaps I should ring for another butler to go find the first," said 
Summerhill with a rueful curl to his mouth. "Not that you are unwelcome comp
any, sir, but I was looking forward to my meal."
Reflexively I sniffed the air, but detected no sign of cooking. Of course, 
the kitchens were likely to be very much elsewhere along with their myriad 
smells, which suited me well enough. The miasma of cooked food was not one 

of my favorites these nights.
"And I should like to get on with my own business," I added agreeably. "I hop
e my cousin is not ill." But except for the healing wounds lingering on his h
ands, he'd seemed sufficiently fit last night to take on a bear.
"As do I, but to make sure
"Did you hear that?"
Summerhill struck a listening pose in response to my interruption, then shoo
k his head. "The butler returning, I should think, and about time."
Whatever small noise it was that caught my attention repeated itself. It was
 very distant, but clear to my acute hearing. A woman's voice, I finally det
ermined. I looked expectantly at Summerhill, but he seemed not to have heard
. He shook his head again.
The sound came again and I thought it contained a note of distress, or anger
. Clarinda? God's death, but I thought
Edmond would have the sense to keep her well away from the chance of di
scovery. Thank goodness Summerhill did not have my sharp ears or some a
wkward questions might be raised.
Unfortunately, the intrusion of the faint noise left us in a temporary state 
in which we had nothing to say to each other. So it was that in the pause the
 sounds insistantly repeated, and this time Summerhill heard them, too.
"I say, that's rather odd. There's something happening up there He broke off, 
his gaze drawn to the top of the stairs.
Now did I hear my mistake, for it was not one woman's voice, but two, both 
raised to the point of shrillness by some desperate excitement. Though the 
words were muffled, they were undoubtedly calls for help. Neither voice bel
onged to Clarinda. I glanced once at Summerhill, then hastened up the stair
s with him at my heels. On the landing I paused to listen and determined th
e calls came from the right-hand branching, but before I could take a step 
in that direction, something went crack and the left side of my head abrupt
ly went numb.
As did my legs, for they ceased to hold me.
As did my arms, for they were unable to break my drop to the floor.
The fall knocked the air from my lungs. I lay still, so wretchedly disorien
ted I could not for the moment understand what had happened.
Much to my grief, the numbness did not last. It retreated all too quickly be
fore the onslaught of a miserably sharp agony that swelled in my head to the
 bursting point. The first shock of it left me immobilized, allowing an army
 of drums to march in and take possession. Their deafening thunder left me o
n the far side of merely addled. I was helpless to do anything for myself ex
cept to sprawl on the polished wood floor and start to groan.
Wood... Nora had said we were strangely vulnerable to it.
Summerhill. He'd used his cane on me. Why in God's name had he struck 

me down?
The booming of the army began to fade, and I made out the thin sound of the
 women again, their cries frantic, like hungry kittens. Over them I heard a
 door open, followed by footsteps coming toward me. I felt the vibration of
 their approach through the floor: a man's heavy boots, moving slowly, and 
the lighter clatter of a woman's shoes. Both paused not two paces from my i
nert body.
"All taken care of, as I promised," said Summerhill, as calm as you please.
"Of all the damned inconvenient times for Edmond to have visitors," one of
 the newcomers snarled.
A singularly unpleasant thrill of alarm rushed through me as I recognized t
he man's voice. Arthur Tyne?
The woman uttered a soft curse in agreement. Clarinda.
God Almighty. What had I walked into?
CHAPTER
11
Clarinda spoke again. "That's not any visitor-that's Jonathan Barrett!"
"Impossible," said Arthur.
"But it is. See the hair-he never wears a wig."
"It cannot be," he insisted.
"Then turn him over and prove me wrong."
Hands seized one of my shoulders and I was roughly flipped around. This mis
treatment was nearly too much for me. Unpleasant as it was, I fought to sta
y conscious and won... barely. Groggily and past half-closed lids I made ou
t their looming forms: Clarinda on the left, Arthur on the right. Arthur's 
expression was a study in bald-faced astonishment.
"But Litton told me he was dead! He saw Royce shoot him. Got him square i
n the chest."
"Then he killed another man or simply missed."
"But he was absolutely certain, boasted about there being blood everywhere.
"
"Perhaps you'd care to bring your friend 'round here for a nice debate," su
ggested Summerhill dryly, catching Arthur's reluctant attention. "I got him
 for you. What do you want done with him?"
This induced a lively discussion. Of all the people who might have paid a 
call on Edmond, I was certainly the last one they expected. Arthur continu
ed to gnaw on about how I'd escaped getting murdered at Mandy Winkle's; Cl
arinda cared nothing for such details, however, being more concerned with 
present problems over past failures.
"What in God's name is he doing here?" she wanted to know.
"Come to visit Edmond about your brat, I expect," said Arthur, having prov
isionally accepted the undeniable. He continued to stare unhappily at me a

s though I might vanish and pop up again elsewhere to plague him. Oh, woul
d that I could.
"Unless it's about Thomas."
"How could that be?''
"You were closest to him," she reminded. "They're neither of them fools. 
They'd expect you to know best who would have
"Never mind that," he said sharply, his face going dark as he glanced at Su
mmerhill. "The good captain has asked what's to be done about Barrett and t
ime is passing."
Clarinda looked me right in the eye, as appraising as a butcher considering
 the best way to chop up a carcass, "Can't leave him alive," she concluded.
 "He knows who tried to kill him now."
Arthur nodded. "Very well. I'll see to it, and this time it'll be done right. 
Have you found that chest yet? Then get on with it. Captain, would you be so k
ind as to assist her?"
This last was addressed to Summerhill. My fancy must have been right. He pro
bably was a smuggler, but come up from his ship not with illicit cargo, but 
to convey two important passengers off to a safe port. He'd calmly stood to 
one side, listening, but not interfering with their talk. He offered no comm
ent one way or another at Clarinda's suggestion to kill me and bowed slightl
y in polite acquiescence to Arthur's request.
Husbanding my strength, I continued to remain quiet until Clarinda and Summ
erhill were gone. They hurried off up the right-hand hall where I could yet
 discern faint cries for help.
"And tell those wenches to stop that row!" Arthur called after them. A mome
nt later I heard Summerhill gruffly rumble something in a threatening tone,
 and the cries abruptly ceased.
"Where's Edmond?" I croaked, having summoned enough of myself together 
to do so.
He hadn't expected me to speak. His gaze fixed on me, half-contemptuous, ha
lf-incredulous, and wholly cold. He looked very pale yet from our previous 
encounter and used his walking stick as though he needed it for balance, no
t affectation. "He's none of your concern."
"Where is he?"
His answer was a jolting dig to my ribs with one toe. His riding boots, I di
scovered, were made of a very sturdy type of leather. I grunted unhappily. T
he sudden jar reminded me all too clearly of my bursting head. Overcome for 
the moment, I could do nothing for myself. I'd just have to wait until the w
orst of it passed away; then might I be able to settle things between us mor
e to my satisfaction.
Arthur eased down on one knee next to me. His expression was wary, but wi
th curiosity rapidly overwhelming his caution. "Who was it that Royce kil

led in the brothel?" he demanded.
"He killed no one. He missed," I said through my teeth. It would do no harm
 to repeat the story and might just undermine any confidence Arthur may hav
e had for his tools.
"But Litton had been so sure."
How good to know for certain the names of two of my attackers. Litton and Ro
yce. Shouldn't be hard to find the third one once I spoke to either of the o
thers. If I got out of this. "Probably lied to you or was drunk. Does Clarin
da know you killed Ridley?"
His face went all stony, but he might as well have grinned and nodded in aff
irmation.
"It was her idea."
I had wondered if she'd arranged it and should not have been surprised, but
 was; I should not have been sickened, but felt a twist in my vitals noneth
eless. "How could you murder your own cousin?"
He snorted. "Oh, he was a useful ox, very good for some kinds of work, but 
in the way for others."
"But Clarinda was going to marry him."
He laughed. "He thought so, too. Had himself well convinced that a woman li
ke her would settle for a brainless brute like himself. When pigs fly-perha
ps."
"But she was locked up ... how ... ?"
"Edmond's servants aren't all that loyal or rich. It's amazing how much a f
ew shillings can buy from the right person. Why did you come here?"
"Your cousin was murdered, your friends try to kill me, then you run away-o
r appear to-Clarinda was the handiest one to question."
"You'd have got nothing from her. How did you know I'd run away?"
"Went by your house last night. Your butler told me everything."
"Couldn't have been all that much or you wouldn't have walked in here as yo
u did."
Indeed, I thought with vast self-disgust for having turned my back on the i
ngenuous-seeming Summerhill. My head fairly burned along one side where he'
d struck. I wanted to vanish and heal, but knew it was too soon for that. A
 little more rest, or even better, some fresh blood would ease me. It wasn'
t as bad as the last time this had happened; I was sure the bone hadn't bee
n cracked open again, but it was quite bad enough. I had to keep Arthur tal
king, postponing whatever it was he planned to do to me until I was ready t
o deal with him and the others. "Your own loyal
retainers are all gone," I said. "They picked your place clean."
He made a throwing-away gesture. "I expected as much, but it suits me. Becaus
e of it they'll not be volunteering to talk with the magistrates for fear of 
hanging as thieves. I took what I needed and left them to it. Now I can quiet

ly disappear."
"With Clarinda?"
"And Edmond's money."
"Tired of living on a quarterly allowance from your parents?" I hazarded, ge
tting a sneer for a reply. "Or perhaps you'd hoped to take the whole Fonteyn
 fortune if Clarinda had gotten her way with things the first time."
"I'll settle for Edmond's money chest, if the damned vixen can find it." He
 peered down the hall where she'd gone with Summerhill.
"Why not ask Edmond about it? Where is he?" I demanded.
But Arthur made no answer.
What in God's name had they done with Edmond? My heart sank rapidly, wei
ghed down by the most wretched of conclusions. "What about Ridley?" I as
ked, hoping a change of subject might draw him out. "There was no need t
o kill him."
"That depends on your need. Poor Thomas was no good to us anymore; he lost 
all belly for the task at hand and became completely useless as well as an 
inconvenient witness. He'd have raised a stink about Clarinda running off w
ith me, too. But to have him dead and you getting the blame for it was swee
t. Why should you care for him? He tried his best to kill you."
He waited in vain for a reply. If he couldn't understand my horror, then I'd n
ever be able to explain it to him.
After a moment he shrugged slightly. "Thought you'd have been taken into
 custody by now, anyway. Who did you bribe?"
"No one. I found the letter about me in his pocket."
His eyes flashed wide. "Did you, now? Very mettlesome of you, I'm sure, p
awing through a dead man's clothes."
"Better than cutting throats. You tricked him into writing it, didn't you?"
"It wasn't too hard. When Litton and the others found him first and bolted aft
er you, I thought it wouldn't be necessary. Pity that you've more lives than a
 cat. Where is the letter?"
"Burned," I said truthfully.
"No matter. It was still a clever bit of business to put you out of the way an
d disgrace Edmond's precious family. Too bad for you that you did find it, els
e you'd be safe in a cell right now instead of here."
That sounded ominous, for I was still in a poor state for winning a physical c
ontest.
After a moment's hard staring, he grabbed my right am I could offer no resis
tance. He pushed back my coat and shirtsleeve, exposing the skin, eyeing it 
closely. "I know I caught you there with my blade," he muttered through his 
teeth. "I felt it. You bled like a pig. Where is the wound?"
"You dreamed it," I said, hardly putting breath to the words.
"Dreamed? No, not that. You were half dead when... thought you were dead, t

hen you came out of the mausoleum and ... and ..." His face crimped as he t
ried to remember, but he'd been safely unconscious when necessity had force
d me to take his blood that night. The temptation to do it again rose in me
, but I wasn't quite able act upon it.
"Dream," I murmured.
"Dream indeed, and one of your making. You tried to make it seem so in my
 mind, to change things." Arthur leaned close, his voice dropping to a wh
isper. "What did you do to Thomas?"
I'd have shaken my head pretending not to take his
meaning, but knew better than to try. He'd not have believed me, and it woul
d have hurt too much to move. Instead, I stared hard at him, trying to summo
n enough will to influence. Our gazes locked for a little time. I felt him w
avering as I pushed, but the struggle went awry. Even as his eyes began to g
o flat and blank, an appalling pain knifed tough my head. The harder I tried
 to exert my will, the more deeply it carved until I could stand it no longe
r. On the edge of passing out, I broke off with a sob of frustration and  agony.
Released so abruptly, Arthur wrenched away, then clumsily scrambled to his
 feet. He was much paler than before, sweating and panting like an animal.
"Trying to do it again? You damned bastard!" He raised his cane and gave me 
a vicious stab in the stomach with the base end. My breath hissed out, and I
 twisted onto my side, curling nearly double. I waited in dreadful apprehens
ion and hurt for another blow to fall, but he held back. Not out of mercy, I
 thought when I next dared to look, but from weariness. He'd gone gray faced
 and labored hard for his breath. I likely shared his appearance, but withou
t the desperate need for air. Even so, I wasn't able to move much, not yet.
"What is that?" he snarled. "You must have done it to Thomas, and I know yo
u used it on me after the funeral."
Indeed. And why hadn't it worked on him?
"Is that what you did to turn him on us? Is it?"
Arthur's blood loss keeping him muddled, the laudanum they'd given him, eit
her might account for my failure to successfully influence him. That or he 
was mad. I should have foreseen this; I should have attended to him sooner 
and not let myself get distracted.
"What are you?" he demanded, voice rising.
A vampire, I thought. And a damned tired one. I wished Nora here. She could
 take care of this lout without much effort.
"What are you?"
He looked ready to kill me right there and then. The mix of terror and male
volence on his drawn face was an awful sight, the force of his emotions str
iking me almost as sol idly as his cane. All I could hope for now was one g
ood chance to somehow seize him and drag him down to a more primitive level

 of conflict. Even in this injured state, I was still stronger than most me
n. Out of pure desperation I might be able to manage, but he'd backed well 
out of my reach, cursing me.
Footsteps. Summerhill's long stride, Clarinda's quick pace. Damn, damn, dam
nation to them all.
Clarinda paused in the hall doorway. "What's the matter?" she asked of Arth
ur.
"Nothing," he snapped, straightening with a visible effort. "Where's the ches
t?"
"I found it, but it's empty. My bastard of a husband hid his money elsewhere
."
"What!" This was a grievous blow for Arthur, worse than any I might have gi
ven him. He fairly fell against ok wall, needing its support.
"It could be anywhere in this house," she went on. "We could look all night 
and not find it or my jewels. He might have taken it to his bankers or even 
hidden it at Fonteyn House or with that dunce Oliver
Arthur started to rant to the best of his limited ability, but Clarinda forcefull
y interrupted.
"Don't break a blood vessel, you fool! I've thought of a way around it!"
"Have you now? And what will you do, raise your damned husband from the 
dead and ask him nicely if you please?"
"That's no fault of mine. If you hadn't been so impatient to be rid of him•E
"If he hadn't tried to shoot me         
Edmond. . . oh, God.
"A moment, if you please," said Summerhill calmly with a tilt of his head.
 Such was his air of command that the two of them stopped bickering long e
nough to glare at him. "Very good. Now, sir, Mrs. Fonteyn anticipated some
thing like this might happen and prepared for it. I would recommend you he
ar her out."
"What is it, then?" Arthur barked at her.
His temper did not sit well with sweet Clarinda. She closed her mouth tight.
Summerhill intervened once more. "I believe there was a cabinet full of spiri
ts in one of the downstairs rooms. Mr. Tyne looks in need of a restorative, a
nd it may put him in a better mood to listen, dear lady."
The practicality of the suggestion won their grudging agreement to act upon 
it. Arthur, leaning heavily on the banister, began his descent. Clarinda fol
lowed a moment later, picking up her skirts as she delicately stepped around
 me.
"Where's Edmond?" I asked Summerhill when they'd gone. Damnation, but I 
sounded hatefully weak. My effort to influence Arthur had drained me to 
the dregs.

He glanced down. "Away behind the house. Not to worry, someone's bound to sn
iff him out after the spring thaw. We'd put you in the same spot, but that w
ould look just a little too suspicious. Once just might be thought an accide
nt, but twice ..." He lifted a hand, palm out.
"Killing me will only put you all into more trouble," I whispered.
"Really?"
"I've no solid proof against Arthur about Ridley, so I'm no danger to any of 
you."
"I'm in no danger anyway, not with a dozen of my lads willing to swear them
selves blue in the face on a Bible on my behalf."
His crew? I'd speculate later. "Leaving me here won't harm you. Tyne's just
 running off with another man's wife;
no one will pay much mind to that. But kill me and people will blame it on
 him or Clarinda or both with you as an accomplice. You can't afford the h
ue and cry of murder to be following you everywhere."
"No one will blame any of us for your death, because it will really be just a
 tragic accident. Two in one night might cause some comment, but I think we c
an take that chance or rather they will, since I'm not officially here."
"Smuggler?"
"Merely a gentleman who advocates the practice of free trade between natio
ns."
"Especially if it profits you."
"Particularly when it profits me."
"I'll double whatever they're paying you."
His eyebrows went up. "That would be a princely sum, but I'm a man of my 
word and I have given it to
"Triple."
He blinked, then shook his head. "Tempting, Mr. Barrett, but if all goes well
, even that ransom will seem but a trifle to the bounty we'll be collecting f
rom the whole of your family."
"What are you planning?"
"Not I, but the redoubtable Mrs. Fonteyn."
"What is"
"Soothe yourself, sir. It's nothing you ever need worry about. Now say a pra
yer for your soul like a good chap while you yet have the time." He quickly 
stooped and caught hold of my ankles, dragging me toward the edge of the sta
irs. "Mrs. Fonteyn thought Mr. Tyne might not be up to the labor of it yet-h
e's still feeling pretty thin-so she asked me to see to things. I've no pers
onal grudge against you, this is just business, y'know."
Realizing what he had in mind, panic took over. I started to kick and strugg
le, putting up enough of a fight to inconvenience him. He let go, and with a
 deft move, gave me another bitter tap on the side of my head with his cane.

Lights flashed between my eyes and the rest of the world. 1 heard myself pa
nt out a last breath. My body went utterly limp.
He got a strong grip under my arms and with a great heave hauled me upright
. I was maddeningly helpless. The room lurched. Sickness clawed at my belly
, threatening to turn it inside out. I couldn't even gulp to hold back the 
rising vomit.
My legs were useless; my arms dangled loose. I had a hideous, dizzying view 
of the steep stairs and the entry hall miles  below.
"There now," said Summerhill comfortingly into my ear as he swung me into p
lace. "At least it'll be quick, and that's more than most of us get." He pl
anted a firm hand in the small of my back and pushed for all he was worth.
I was flying in open space for an instant. Almost like those times when I floa
ted.
The room tumbled madly. Almost like my game with Richard.
Then something struck me lethally hard all over my shoulders and back, like 
a hundred Summerhills attacking me not with mere canes but with clubs. I hea
rd thuds and thumps, a pain-filled cry, cut short .. . then nothing at all.
Mr. Barrett lay still as stone at the foot of the stairs, his body as beyond
 movement as his mind was beyond thought.
His head was at an unnatural angle in regard to his neck; one of his arms wa
s also bent in an abnormal manner under him. Some distant and restive portio
n of his brain was very aware of these and other, lesser injuries, but unabl
e to do more than simply recognize their existence.
His enemies were gone.
The house around him was deadly quiet.
A lifetime crawled by before his eyelids briefly fluttered. He got a vague g
limpse of black-stained wood steps stretching upward into cold darkness. Try
 as he might, he could not open his eyes again. It seemed an important thing
 to do, though he could not recall why.
After another lifetime the fingers of his unbroken arm shivered once. He'd 
not consciously initiated the faint movement, but felt its occurrence. When
 he attempted to repeat it, a white hot spike of lightning shot through his
 neck, forcing an unwelcome wakening upon his battered flesh. He tried to r
etreat back to the kind sanctuary of unconsciousness, but the pain followed
, tenacious as a shadow, not permitting him any such mercy. He'd have whimp
ered a protest had there been air in his lungs His fingers twitched again i
nstead.
With them he felt the cold hard surface of the floor he sprawled over and s
lowly came to understand his circumstance.
He was in serious trouble.
And being quite alone now, he could expect no help.
That terrified him, the aloneness.

But he had family, friends, even a stranger on the road would be moved by p
ity to lend him aid. None of them was present, though, or likely to come.
Internal protests against this unfairness rose, fell, and died, but not the sel
f-reproach. That whipped at him with a sting like sleet, unrelenting.
The aloneness worsened every ache and agony afflicting him. It made the pro
spect of escaping them doubtful. It drained away what little strength remai
ned in him. Even silently praying for simple comfort seemed too great a lab
or to dare.
But not weeping. That he could not control. The hurts of his body demanded 
tears, and they flowed over his face, burning like acid.
Then he heard his own drawn-out moan of despair and thought what an altogeth
er wretched fellow he'd become. He was less a mass of pain from all the inju
ries than a mass of self-pity from the misery of his own heart, certainly no
t the sort of son his father could take pride in and not the sort of father 
his own son could admire.
And unless he sorted himself out, he wouldn't see either of them or anyone e
lse ever again.
I came fully and unhappily alert. The half dreams, half nightmares fled, le
aving nothing of themselves behind except an earnest need to overcome the h
opelessness they'd engendered. If the people I loved were not here, then by
 God I'd just have to go to them.
Somehow.
Any movement was a torment, especially movement associated with my head 
and neck. There was something appallingly wrong in that area, and I was 
fearful of making it worse. By comparison, my broken arm and assorted br
uises were nothing. That damned Summerhill had thrown me around like a s
ack of grain and with about as much consideration. When I got my hands o
n him ...
Anger helped. I drew it to me, held it fast, fed on the strength of it until i
t filled me, became my strength. There was an astonishing amount of it... for 
them.
Arthur Tyne. Ruthless cutthroat. Not for long. He'd wish himself dead befor
e I was finished with him.
Clarinda. Unrepentant murderer. Instigator of all that had happened to me. G
uilty mother of my innocent son. I'd bring her back and take poor Edmond's p
lace as her jailer and be glad of the privilege.
The anger flared to fury, warming me, quickening bone, muscle, and nerve.
And for a very brief moment, it displaced the devastating agony.
I seized the chance while it lasted.
Inside, I felt a shuddering swoop, as though falling again. Something harsh 
blasted through my vitals like a frost-charged wind. It scoured me from end 
to end. The sharp

edges of the world swiftly twisted, suddenly faded. I'd have cried out, but 
suddenly had no voice for my fear and pain.
Then it was over.
I was sightless, weightless, formless.
Without a solid body to cling to, to torture, the pain lifted and floated away,
 even as I floated above the floor.
I was free.
And tired. The effort to let go of the physical world had cost me and would
 surely cost more when I came back to it, but for now I reveled in the bles
sed liberty of this discarnate form. Whatever bones had been broken, whatev
er flesh had been torn, it didn't matter now. All would be whole again when
 it was time to return.
Sweet it was, and great was my desire to stay like this, but I had things to d
o or at least to attempt. Giving the alarm about Clarinda's escape was the mos
t important but only after I'd fed myself. Even in this state every portion of
 my being cried out for the nourishment of fresh blood and plenty of it. I'd h
ave to find the stables.
Tentatively I made myself stretch forth.
Using the stairs as a landmark, I pushed away from them in the general direc
tion of the front door. Soon I bumped against the opposite wall and felt for
 openings with whatever it was that now served me as hands. I could have tri
ed materializing just enough to allow me some vision, but was uncertain of m
y ability to maintain the careful balance needed to hold to that partial con
dition. Instinct told me not to take that chance, lest I grow abruptly solid
 and be too feeble to vanish again. Bad luck for me if I did and found the d
oor locked.
An opening, long and very thin, presented itself to my questing senses-the sl
ender crack between the door and the threshold. I dived for it, pouring throu
gh like a river mist. It seemed to take forever.
Outside.                                                     
I felt the familiar gentle tug of the wind and rode it,
letting it carry me along the front of the house. Keeping the building's fixe
d contours on my left, I turned one corner, then another, trying to remember 
what I'd seen of the place when I'd initially approached it. One wing, two? T
he track of carriage wheels in the gravel drive had been to the left, but how
 far? Easy as this form of travel was, I'd have to give it up before getting 
lost.
1 found a clear space and tried a partial reformation, but alas, my instinct 
had been right. Once begun, the process continued unstoppable until I was sta
nding fully solid again.
Standing, but that changed quickly and with no warning; I dropped to my ha
nds and knees, weak as a babe. Normally I hardly noticed the cold; now its

 talons gouged deep and held fast. I was hatless and with no cloak, having
 lost both in the house. The wind wasn't high, but more than enough to ins
pire me to movement again.
I'd come fully around to the back of the house and was not far from the dr
ive. Its gravel path broadened until it covered most of the yard, but some
 places were thin, allowing muddy patches churned up by wheels and hooves 
to show through. The tracks could have come from whatever conveyance they'
d used. My guess was-since the doors to an empty carriage house gaped wide
-they'd taken Edmond's for their escape.
Where was he?
No one was immediately in sight; I saw only the various outbuildings and ya
rd clutter one would expect to find for such a household. Summerhill had sa
id the body was hidden in some way and that the death might look like an ac
cident. Perhaps in the barn or the stables ... but I had no time or desire 
to look. With the return to solidity came also the unimpaired resumption of
 physical need.
My corner teeth were well out and ready. I was ravenous.
Driven by the hunger, I got to my feet and reeled toward the stables. I could
 hear and smell the horses remaining there, then I was at the nearest door an
d saw a half dozen of them in their stalls. A few were curious, heads turned,
 ears twitched; others dozed on their feet. I went to the closest, a bay geld
ing with a drowsy eye. He hardly reacted when I slipped into his stall, and b
arely noticed when I knelt and cut into the vein of his near leg.
The stuff fair streamed into my mouth. I gulped and guzzled, swilling it down 
like a drunkard with his day's first bottle of gin. Its glad warmth, its taste
, its strength flooded through my hollow form, easing the last aches, healing 
the lingering bruises. The chill air around me retreated before this pulsing o
nslaught of hot, red life.
I drank deeply, vanished, and drank again until I was quite filled to the brim
.
Then I had to lean on the horse, fold my arms over his back, and bury my he
ad in them. The heavy beat of his heart coming up through his solid frame w
as a welcome comfort to my battered senses and soul. After all the abuse, I
 needed to touch something that bore no ill will against me, something to r
emind me that not all the world was evil, The big animal snuffled once and 
shoved his nose into the hay manger, supremely indifferent to my little con
cerns. I liked him for that.
It could not and did not last long, but I needed only a moment or two.
Encroaching upon my respite was the need for haste.
Even as I reluctantly straightened, I felt the fresh blood had revived more t
han just my body. Plans for what to do were popping into my head, demanding a
ttention. I'd have to find Roily-heavens, I'd have to find the servants here,

 if any were left. Surely not all of them had been bribed into betrayal....
Dear God, I'd have to find Edmond. What had they done to him?
The anger for Clarinda and the others that had saved me before flared up onc
e again. It burned bright and hot, closer than my own skin. In time, I'd hun
t down and deal with the lot of them, this I promised myself.
I'd start with a search of the house and gather allies and information.
Those cries I'd heard must have been from two of the maids. Locked up some
where,  no doubt quite miserable over it by now. There had to be others as
 well, but before looking for them I'd have to clean myself, having not be
en particularly neat in my feeding this time. Appearance would have to tak
e precedence over all else for the moment. The drying crusts of blood arou
nd my mouth might alarm the servants here far more than their imprisonment.
I quit the stables and went straight to the low rectangular structure in the
 yard that marked the well. The shape of the thing was disturbingly like a g
rave, being two yards long and over a yard wide. Its brick sides rose about 
a foot past the ground, the opening neatly covered by six-inch-thick oak tim
bers. A square cut into their middle was covered by a stout plank lid fitted
 with a lifting knob and simple latch lock. Fixed above was a sturdy winch a
nd rope mechanism and the cranking handle, all polished by frequent use.
The lid was pushed up and open, with the bucket already at the bottom, which
 struck me as odd, not to mention dangerous, but that would save me from hav
ing to do the work. I put a hand to the crank and tried to give it a turn. I
t moved only a little way, then mysteriously stopped. The crank was free of 
obstructions; perhaps the rope or bucket had gotten entangled on something. 
I caught at the rope and tugged. It gave but a little. I pulled hard, and it
 reluctantly came up a few inches then sank again when the weight at the oth
er end became too much. Far below I heard a soft splash ... and a voice ... 
a faint, faint voice?
Someone's bound to sniff him out after the spring thaw. We'd put you in the s
ame spot, but that would look just a little too suspicious. Once is an accide
nt, but twice ...
Unbidden, Summerhill's words ripped through my brain; gooseflesh erupte
d over all my body. Oh, my God, what had those monsters done?
Bending dangerously over the edge of the opening I bawled Edmond's name int
o the blackness. I could see nothing inside. The natural light from the sky
 was blocked by my own form and hindered by the depth of the shaft. I thoug
ht I heard a reply to my calls, but it could have been my own echoes. Hope 
and horror seized me. I stood and stared wildly about the yard and toward t
he house. Help might be there, but I couldn't take the time to go looking f
or it. Could I do something myself? Possibly. But-and I shrank from the tho
ught-could I even bring myself to fry?
The inky square of the opening looked like a gaping mouth, seeming to eat a

ll the ambient light. My acquired fear of little dark places came roaring u
p in my mind like a storm, paralyzing me with its thunderous force. Waking 
in a buried coffin seemed but a triviality compared to descent into this he
llhole. Here was a place where darkness was conceived, born, lived, and thr
ived, devouring everything that came near it. Though fully aware that very 
little could ever really hurt me, imagination was the great enemy here, str
iking hard at my weakness. The reproachful awareness of my own vast abiliti
es made the weakness even worse. I was a hopeless coward, dooming my poor c
ousin to a hideous death because I was too white-livered to Enough, Johnny 
Boy. Stop whining and just get on with it.
I allowed myself one uncurbed sob of pure shuddering terror, then brutally p
ushed it away. It rolled up into a ball of ice somewhere between my throat a
nd belly and held in place, trembling, but out of the way.
My mind was clear. Now, what to do?
The winch mechanism presented an obvious solution. Quickly I made some slac
k by letting out the rope to the end of its length, praying this would work
. Making myself go nearly transparent, I floated up over the short wall, an
d
drifted inside the black mouth.
The wind ceased after a few feet. My sight, ever limited in this form, per
ceived nothing but darkness unless I looked up. The square opening above g
rew uncomfortably small. Every foot I went down was worse than the last, b
ut I forced myself on. If Edmond was here and alive, his need far outweigh
ed my childish dreads.
I moved blindly now. My ghostly hands could just sense the impression of the
 bricks lining the walls and the rope in front of me. Then I was aware of th
e water immediately below. I reached down toward it, trying to find him. Hea
rt in my mouth, I had the sudden hope that he wasn't here at all, that I'd m
ade a hasty conclusion based on an error, that I could leave this awful plac
e and...
An object. Large. Bobbing heavily in the water.
And, unmistakably now, someone's faint moan.
I caught at the rope without thinking. My hand passed through it. Damnation
. There was no way around it; I'd have to go in, too, to get to him. Making
 myself more solid, 1 sank ever lower. First my feet touched the water, the
n did it creep up my legs and waist like grim death. Free-flowing streams w
ere always a problem for me, but this tamer stuff was still perversely mali
gnant. With cold. With excruciating, mind-numbing, body-killing cold.
Completely solid, my weight bore me right into it-and briefly under. Black o
n black, freezing, smothering, it closed right over me, shutting out everyth
ing. Disoriented, I lashed out wildly to find the surface, cracking a hand a
gainst a slimed wall. It hurt, but the pain jarred me out of the impending h

ysteria. I forced myself to hold still until natural buoyancy made me sure o
f my direction. A push, then my head broke free of the water. I spat and ble
w the stuff from my nose and mouth, sucking in cold, dank air I did not need
, but instinct was trying to drive me here, not intellect. Indeed, I was ver
y hard-pressed to maintain a solid form under these adverse conditions and h
ad to fight
an impulsive reaction to vanish again and escape.
Kicking to keep afloat, I cast frantically about for the rope, blessed link 
to the world above. My hands slapped instead against sodden material. My fin
gers closed on 1 know not what.
"Edmond?"
No reply.
If I could only see. I felt around, then unexpectedly touched flesh. It was h
is hand, and it was holding hard to the only other thing floating in this pit
, the wooden bucket. There was no warmth to him, but that meant little enough
 in a place like this. Tracing up his arm, I found his face. It was above wat
er, but only just. With all the splashing and distorting echoes I couldn't di
scern anything as subtle as his heartbeat or breathing. The moan I'd heard wa
s proof enough of lingering life, though.
Trying not to disturb his grip on the bucket, I found its handle, then the ch
ain on the handle, then the rope tied to the chain. The slack was all around 
me I was sure, but drifting and dangerous if it should twist about us in the 
wrong way.
I drew rope through my grasp like a fat thread through a needle until I came 
down to the knots that tied it to the bucket's chain. Fumbling badly from the
 cold and fright, I got my folding penknife from its usual pocket, clutching 
it hard lest I drop it. Carefully, with rapidly deadening fingers, I opened i
t. I made a loop in the rope and began sawing desperately away at it with the
 blade. The soaked fibers were thick, tough, and I was uncertain about the sh
arpness of my tool. But just as frustration set in and I began to think my te
eth would do a better job, the thing finally parted.
Cramming the open knife back into a pocket, I crowded close to Edmond. Anot
her loop, larger, this time threading the rope under his arms and around hi
s back. Not easy, he kept trying to drift away from me, and all the time I 
was
trying to keep both our heads above water. Though in no danger for lack of a
ir, I'd be damned before I let that utter blackness close over me again.
I made several knots centered over his chest, talking to him, babbling out 
waterlogged assurances that everything would be all right and not to worry 
and God knows what other nonsense. Perhaps it was more for my benefit than 
his. He made no sound or response; I still couldn't see a damned thing, and
 was rapidly losing my sense of touch.

One last knot. Time and past time to leave. With a singular lack of control
 I disappeared completely and shot up from the well like a ball from a pist
ol barrel. The little protective roof was in my way, and though it slowed m
e somewhat I'd sieved right through it before regaining command of myself. 
In too much of a hurry to be vexed, I touched upon the earth and went solid
 again.
Water running from my clothes, I put both hands on the well crank and began
 turning. Easy at first as it took up all the slack, it halted as Edmond's 
weight became part of the load. I prayed the thing would support him and pu
t my back info the work. Round and round, with the wood creaking, the rope 
coiling about the dowel, and my heart in my mouth, I pulled him slowly up, 
trying not to think of all the things that could go wrong.
Then from the square of darkness his head emerged. It lolled backward, jaw 
sagging; there was a nasty-looking graze seeping red along one side of his 
scalp. I looked away and gave another turn on the crank until his shoulders
 were visible. He swung to and fro ponderously, a man on a gibbet. Not trus
ting the ratchet pawl to hold, I reached across with one hand while bracing
 the crank with the other as he swung toward me again. I snaked my arm unde
r his and around his chest, then let go of the crank. He abruptly slumped a
way, threatening to drop back in. I got my other arm around him just in tim
e and pulled.
It was a hard hauling. He was a big bear of a man, wet
right through, and utterly motionless. His clothes snagged on the sides of th
e opening. I heaved him as high as I could and finally lugged him past the ed
ge. He'd have scrapes and bruises-if he lived. I lay him flat on the cold gro
und and pressed an ear against his chest. For a terrible moment I heard nothi
ng, then nearly crowed with relief when a near indistinct thump announced he 
was still on this side of the veil.
Determined to keep him here, I slapped his white face, shouting at him to wak
e up. He was past responding, though, and not like to do so soon unless I got
 him out of this winter air and inside near a fire. More lifting and dragging
, this time toward what I hoped was the scullery door. Cursing like a heathen
, I had to stop once to find the knife again and cut him free of the rope. It
 had played out like a leash and we'd reached its limit.
The door did turn out to be the scullery entry and had been left unlocked. 
Clarinda and the others must have come this way to get to the carriage hous
e. That simplified things. I pulled Edmond up the step and inside, bulling 
through to the kitchen. My hope was that like other kitchens this would be 
the warmest room in the house owing to the need for a constant fire. Hope w
as fulfilled, I saw, when I blundered inside with my burden. For once I was
 glad to have the stink of cooked food assaulting my senses.
The fire here was little more than a mass of glowing coals, but easily remed

ied. I lay Edmond on the still warm stones of the hearth and threw on fresh 
dry kindling, knocking over the fire tongs and other things in my shivering 
haste.
The noise attracted notice. I heard a sudden loud banging and a chorus of ca
lls for help coming from behind a solid-looking bolted door.
Edmond's missing servants.
It's amazing how much calamity can be turned about in a quarter hour's tim
e. And what a wonderful, luxuriously
wonderful relief it is to turn one's cares over to others and let them deal wit
h the work.
Most of Edmond's people had been closed up in one of the pantries, except f
or two women who were soon found shut away in an upstairs cupboard. Fortuna
tely, the pantry door had been bolted, not locked with a key, so I soon had
 everyone else out, blinking in the growing firelight after being in the da
rk and asking a hundred questions at once. All were agitated in one form or
 another from red-faced anger to teary-eyed fear, but were otherwise no wor
se for wear. I determined a middle-aged woman named Kellway was in charge o
f them, told her who I was, and after one glimpse at her master's desperate
 condition she forgot all about her own difficulties. She instantly set thi
ngs in motion, shouting out orders for brandy, bandaging, blankets, and hot
 water, sending people scurrying off in every direction.
Evicting all female members of her staff but herself from the kitchen, she
 commanded two of the footmen to strip off Edmond's wet clothes. By the ti
me things reached the point where she would be forced to leave as well the
 blankets arrived, preserving decorum. She made me strip down, also, which
 I did not mind, and questioned me closely over what had happened, which I
 did mind. It worried me at how easily I was given to lying and improvisat
ion when forced to by the demands of an uncomfortable situation. Hardly ho
norable, but certainly necessary.
Wrapped in dry blankets and with a perfectly smooth face I told of my ap
pointment with Edmond and of being surprised by Summerhill and knocked u
nconscious.
"I woke up lying on the ground next to the well. In want of water to ease my
 injury, I tried to draw some, then discovered Mr. Fonteyn was inside."
A general murmur of dismay went around.
"He'd tied the rope about himself to stay afloat, so I managed to haul him up
. The poor man collapsed just as I got him out."
This inspired a general murmur of approval. Considering my cowardly delay in
 getting started, I did not allow myself to bask in their admiration.
"But how did you get so wet, sir?" one of them asked, having observed my o
wn drenched and half frozen condition. I'd been far too thoroughly saturat
ed for them to think I'd gotten in such a state merely from dragging Edmon

d around. At least the immersion had cleaned all the blood from my face.
"The bucket came up with him and was full of water. When I cut him free of t
he rope the damned thing tipped and slopped it all over me, then fell back i
nto the well." I left it to their imaginations to work out just how that kin
d of clumsiness could have possibly happened. "You'll want a replacement."
"God bless you, sir, as if we cared about an old bucket," said Mrs. Kellway,
 wiping tears from her eyes before bellowing at a distracted scullery boy to
 keep heaping wood on the fire.
Indeed, but I wanted to account for everything. They might well have suspect
ed me of being in on the foul deed, after all.
While Mrs. Kellway gently dabbed salve on Edmond's head wound and bandaged
 it, I learned from them that Summerhill, Tyne, and two men dressed like s
ailors had suddenly appeared in the house, brandishing pistols, then smart
ly locked everyone up. Not long afterward the coachman and a groom were al
so forced into the pantry, bearing the news their master had arrived home,
 but not knowing what had happened to him after their own capture. All wai
ted in vain for him to either rescue them or join them, taking turns to li
sten, but hearing nothing until my noisy entrance.
No one knew how the men had gotten in, but after a quick head count by the
 butler, a missing footman was promptly declared to be the traitor who had
 likely given
entry to the intruders. An enthusiastic round of invective aimed at the fell
ow started up, with each declaring him to have ever been an untrustworthy ro
gue and listing all his bad points, slights they'd suffered from him, and va
rious other character flaws. So many piled up in such a short time I wryly w
ondered how the man had ever been employed here in the first place.
Under Kellway's ministrations, Edmond looked a bit less blue than before, b
ut still unconscious. Having myself been through a similar experience of ne
arly freezing, I told them to start massaging his limbs and cover him with 
hot wet linens, replacing them as they cooled. People were sent off to fetc
h more water for heating and to find the household's bathtub. I meant to ha
ve him fully immersed in steaming hot water, but that good intention was da
shed when a boy hefted the unwieldy thing in. It was not much more than a w
ildly overgrown tin punch bowl a half-foot deep. The bather was to sit or s
tand in the thing and have water poured over him, I supposed. Oh, for the s
oothing delights of  Mandy Winkle's house.
"But hasn't he had enough water already, sir?" asked a dubious Mrs. Kellway
, when I explained my disappointment over the limits of their "tub."
"As long as the stuff was good and hot this time. It would have warmed him a
ll over." Then I recalled what Oliver said of people believing anything abou
t my birthplace. "It's something I learned in America. We know all there is 
to know on this sort of thing there."

It worked a charm on her, and thus enlightened, she gave a sage nod of agre
ement.
Oliver. I'd have to go back to Fonteyn house and tell him and Elizabeth abo
ut this latest disaster. Clarinda's mischief was not over yet, I judged. Fr
om what I'd heard, she had something else planned, and we'd have to be doub
ly on our guard now. Edmond needed a doctor anyway, and Oliver was nearest.
I raked my bedraggled hair back with my fingers, untidily retying it with 
a damp ribbon. Now that work had calmed them, some of Edmond's people foun
d time to stare at my revealed features. My sharp ears plucked Richard's n
ame out of a medley of whispered comments. So, Edmond had not seen fit to 
confide family secrets to them. I didn't think that was even possible, but
 he'd apparently managed. Would this weaken my position of assumed authori
ty with them? Might they not think I was somehow allied with Clarinda sinc
e I'd so obviously once been her lover? Better to leave quickly before I f
ound out.
Then Edmond stirred and gave a thick, water-choked cough, distracting us all.
 I pushed in close just in time to see his eyes open.
"Thank God!" cried Mrs. Kellway, saying it for everyone.
He had a stark staring cast to his expression. Understandable, then I had a s
wift flash of perception and told them to gather as many candles as they coul
d find.
"Sir?" questioned a hesitating butler.
"He's been in the very heart of hell, man, give him some light for pity's sake.
"
My urgency and insight got through, and soon the kitchen was brighter than 
a ballroom. Whether it was a help to Edmond or not was hard to tell, but ce
rtainly it could do him no harm. When his eyes looked a bit less feral, I p
ressed a cup of brandy to his lips. He took that down easily enough, which 
was most encouraging.
"Do you remember what happened to you?" I asked him. "Just nod, there's no
 need to speak yet."
He did nod, but ignored the rest. "That bastard Tyne. Where?"
"He got away-for now."
"Clarinda?"
"She went with him. I think they're going to try getting
away by ship." And would do so unless I got moving myself and arranged t
o cut them and Summerhill off.
"Riddance," he sighed out. "Good ... riddance."
By that I could assume Edmond wanted no more to do with her, but it was ou
t of his hands. I had my own special plans for his wife and her charming f
riends. Half-formed, to be sure, but doubtless when I caught up with them 

the other half would be fully matured.
"Tyne shot at me," Edmond said, responding to Kellway's question of how he
 got in the well. "Dismissed the coach. Alone at the front. He and some ot
hers came up. Tried to shoot him. Saw his pistol go off. Couldn't hear eit
her of 'em. Strange. Thought someone hit me from the side." He gingerly to
uched his head and encountered the bandages.
"Just a graze by God's good will," I said, pulling his hand away. "Leave it fo
r now until a doctor can see it. Do you recall anything else?''
His eyes shut a moment, then snapped open, focusing on the nearest of the 
candles. "Blackness. Cold. So cold. Water. Thought I'd been killed. Tried 
hard to breathe. Woke me a bit. Heard you next to me, jabbering on. Wanted
 to box you sharp and shut you up, but I couldn't move."
"That was after you were out of the well," I said carefully, hoping he'd acce
pt it. "You got things jumbled."
"The well" He tried to sit up, but for once the feeble state of his body won o
ut over his disposition. "I was in the well?"
"It's a miracle, sir," pronounced Mrs. Kellway. "The good God and all his ang
els took your part tonight and saved you, and that's a fact. If Mr. Barrett h
adn't been there to pull you out we'd be praying for your soul's rest now ins
tead of for your recovery."
He fastened his dark eyes on me, still trying to take it all in, I suppose. "H
ow?'' he demanded.
I shrugged. "You did the real work tying the rope around yourself."
"But I didn't-you were there ... I know you
"And you damned near broke the winch with your weight," I pressed on, not gi
ving him a chance to continue. "I'd have had an easier task of it if you wer
e built less like Hercules and more like Mercury. Next time you fall in a we
ll I'll leave you there and spare myself a strained back."
I'd hoped a brusque manner would put him off and counted upon raising a sn
arl from him at least. Instead, he gave me a long hard look. I'd have been
 worried, but his eyes were going cloudy. He put a hand on my arm and sque
ezed once with a bare ghost of his usual strength.
"Thank you," he whispered, then fell back into a doze.
I expected to be hanged there and then by the staff, but Mrs. Kellway only d
abbed at her face again and gazed at me with the sort of unaccountable fondn
ess usually reserved for favorite children and small dogs. "Bless you, sir, 
for saying just the right thing to him."
"But I-oh, never mind." I stood up, nearly tripping on my blanket. "Blast it
. I need to borrow some proper clothes. I'm sure my cousin won't mind if I r
aided his cupboard."
"But, sir, you're in no fit state to be"
"I'm quite recuperated, thank you, and someone has to go for a doctor. My ho

rse is out front and all saddled, so if you please..." I'd put on a firm una
rguable manner, asserting my place again after the previous near-familiarity
, and it worked, at least in this household. Jericho would have offered cons
iderably more resistance-and would have probably won.
Dry garments from Edmond's wardrobe were found, all rather large, of cours
e, and I had to wear my own damp riding boots, but none of it was of any r
eal concern for me. My cousin still needed help, and Oliver was but a few 
miles down the road.
I sent one of the stablemen to find Roily, absentmindedly omitting to expla
in why I'd left my horse that far from the house. Donning my reclaimed cloa
k and hat (both found on the stair landing) I was ready to rush outside bef
ore anyone else decided to ply me with questions best left unanswered, when
 a commotion at the front door halted my progress. To my surprise, Oliver s
trode forcefully in past a protesting maid, looked quickly around, and spie
d me. Had Elizabeth gotten impatient for news and sent him along? No, that 
couldn't have been it.
"What in heaven's name are you doing here?" I asked, not bothering to che
ck my utter bewilderment. But even as the words came out I knew something
 was dreadfully wrong. My otherwise cheerful cousin wore an awful express
ion and visibly trembled from head to toe. "What is it? Is Elizabeth"
Oliver bit his lip and gave a violent shake of his head. His hands were clenc
hed into quivering fists, and he looked ready to burst from the extreme inner
 agitation he was trying hard to keep under control. "Th-they got into the ho
use," he finally said in a voice, a terrible broken voice I'd never heard him
 use before.
My belly turned to water. I did not have to ask who "they" were.
"Held pistols on us all. Took him away. You must come."
"T-took who?" But in my heart of hearts I already knew.
"Oh, Jonathan." Tears started from his eyes. "They've kidnapped Richard."
CHAPTER
-12-
"They won't hurt him," Elizabeth told me. "They wouldn't dare."
"That bitch would dare anything," I whispered, staring past her at nothing bu
t my own rage blasting against the confining walls of the room. I couldn't ri
sk looking at her in this state. Too dangerous.
"But she won't hurt him. She'd never endanger her chance of collecting the m
oney for him. You have to believe that of her if nothing else."
Yes, it was one thing we could trust about Clarinda, her avarice. But if s
he was capable of holding her own son for ransom, might she also get rid o
f him the moment he became useless to her? Or if once she had her money wo
uld she even give him up? Not because she held any maternal affection for 
him, but to make him a continual source of spoils from the family coffers.

 How would she treat him? How was he being treated? Like my anger, my angu
ished uncertainty was bottomless.
Oliver came into the blue parlour from his latest trip down to the front gat
es. I didn't quite look at him either as he paused just inside the door, onl
y swung my head part way in his direction, keeping my gaze from touching his
. "No news yet," he said in a subdued voice.
"We should have heard something by now," I rumbled, glaring at the mantel 
clock. Useless thing. Last night Clarinda had promised to communicate with
 us, but she'd not said when. Forced into hateful rest by the rising sun, 
I'd lain oblivious in the cellar through the whole helpless day and upon a
wakening was incensed near to madness to learn no word from her had come t
o us.
"It's only to make us more anxious," Oliver added.
And it was working all too well on me. I paced to the fireplace and back, t
oo restless to sit. That wasn't enough, though. Hardly aware of the act, I 
curled my hand into a fist and smashed it into the wall above the wainscoti
ng. I pounded right through the paper and plaster and whatever lay beyond. 
Something wood, no doubt, to tell from the pain shooting up from my knuckle
s. I pulled free, spreading plaster dust all over, mixed with the smell of 
my own blood. A quick vanishing and I was whole again, ready to do more dam
age.
"I say," said Oliver, sounding shaken. "I say-for God's sake, Jonathan..."
I understood now why Clarinda hadn't been overly distressed at not findin
g Edmond's money. With or without it, she'd planned all along to take Ric
hard away; he was her surety of a clean and profitable escape. She'd made
 careful arrangements, indeed, and had smoothly carried them out with Sum
merhill's help. Last night Clarinda and her friends had forced themselves
 into Fonteyn House in much the same way Edmond's home had been invaded, 
with help from a turncoat inside.
In our case it had been one of the maids. The same one who had brought Rich
ard's milk. He'd fallen asleep so quickly because of the laudanum she'd put
 in it. A half full phial of the stuff was later discovered hidden away in 
her bed. Thank God she'd not given him the lot, though what
she'd done was harsh enough. I'd been right there holding him while it had
 done its work. I should have sensed something was wrong. I should have kn
own.
At about seven of the clock, apparently in accordance with instructions fro
m Clarinda, the traitorous maid then snuck out to the front gate to distrac
t the guards there from their duties. So successful was she in her mock fli
rtations that Summerhill and two of his sailors had the easy advantage of t
hem, knocking them senseless, then the whole party came rolling onto the gr
ounds in Edmond's carriage. They halted far enough from the house so its no

ise would not be marked, and went in through a door the maid had left unloc
ked for them.
Summerhill and his men kept everyone in place at pistol point while Clarin
da rushed upstairs to fetch the sleeping Richard out of his nursery bed. M
rs. Howard had pleaded and finally screamed at her to desist. Clarinda kno
cked the tiny woman to the floor with one swipe of her hand, With Richard'
s unconscious form wrapped in a blanket, she carried him down to face Eliz
abeth and Oliver.
"We're going on a little trip," she told them with a smile. "Not a long one,
 for children can be so tiresome when traveling. You may have him back again
 if you like."
"What do you want?" Elizabeth asked, her voice thin with fury. Oliver, thoug
h infuriated himself, had the presence of mind to hold tight to one of her a
rms to prevent her from charging into their midst and possibly getting shot 
for her trouble.
Clarinda continued to smile unnervingly. "I judge this little man to be worth
 much more than ten thousand guineas to you, but that's all I want for him. Y
ou have all tomorrow to collect it together. When you've got it, tie a white 
rag to the front gate. Don't do anything foolish like trying to follow us or 
calling in the magistrates or I promise you'll not see your dear nephew again
. This is a family matter. Just keep it quiet and within these walls and all 
will be well for him."
When asked if she understood, Elizabeth nodded, giving Clarinda a look that 
should have burned a hole right through the woman's skull. A pity for us all
 that it had not.
The invaders, along with the maid, then backed their way from the house. Ar
thur Tyne had driven the coach right up to the entry doors by then, and fro
m his high perch covered the watching household with a pistol until Clarind
a and the others were aboard. Summerhill climbed up with him to take the re
ins, and off they cantered.
Jericho, driven by his own anger and outrage into taking a chance, broke aw
ay from the house to follow the coach, avoiding the curving drive and makin
g a straight line shortcut through the grounds to reach the gates. Alas, he
 did not get there in time to close them and delay the party, but was at le
ast able to report they'd turned south. Since Edmond's house lay to the nor
th and east, a rider could go there and fetch me back without putting Richa
rd into additional danger. Oliver was mad to do it anyway, to find out how 
she'd escaped and if anyone had been hurt in the process. Thus when he arri
ved, he had his traveling medicine box with him, which was fortunate for po
or Edmond.
Since then, Oliver had been kept busy running back and forth between Fontey
n Old Hall, Fonteyn House, and his bankers in London. The latter had been u

nderstandably curious about why he had need for such a tremendous amount of
 money, but had turned it over to him all the same. Clarinda had calculated
 well; it was more than enough to set her up in royal style wherever she wa
nted, but not so much that it could not be readily collected together. As s
oon as he had it, Oliver sped home, pausing at the gates to rip away his ow
n neckcloth and tie it to the bars for the signal. Since then, Jericho and 
others of the household-including the now recovered and quite angry Mrs. Ho
ward--had spent the time in futile watch for any sign from Clarinda.
"I... I brought along some help," said Oliver, dragging me from the wretched
 past to the wretched present.
"Who? Edmond? I thought he was still confined to bed."
"And so he is." Oliver now came in the room and stood aside. "This way, dea
r lady," he said.
Nora swept in, arms stretching out to me, and my whole world turned right o
ver.
We clung to each other without speaking, she giving comfort, me shamelessl
y taking it, and for a few moments all was well. I choked on some long hel
d back tears, but she said everything would be all right, and that gentle 
reassurance was sufficient to keep me from completely breaking down. When 
I next looked up, I discovered Oliver and Elizabeth had tactfully departed
, allowing us some privacy.
"Oliver told me all that's happened," she said. "I'll do anything I can to help.
"
"It's a godsend just to have you here."
"He's worried about you. Said you were in quite a bad state last night." She g
lanced at the hand I'd put through the wall. "It seems you still are."
"The day's rest took care of my body, but not the torments in my mind."
"That's how it's ever been for me. I've seen wickedness, Jonathan, but nothing
 to measure to this. All that I have is at your service."
"Bless you for it. Just looking at you gives me new hope. Between the two
 of us we have an army." But an army held in abeyance, forced to near-unb
earable waiting until word came from Clarinda. Damn the woman.
Seeming to sense my thoughts, Nora embraced me again, then asked if I was 
up to introducing her to Elizabeth.
"What?"
"Oliver just rushed me right in. I don't want to be rude."
There was more here than simple etiquette, I knew. She wanted to help and wo
uld begin by trying to distract me out of myself. A change of subject, a res
umption of innocuous social obligations, perhaps then I wouldn't feel the br
utal, raging emptiness of guilt tearing my heart to bits.
I glanced at my knuckles with their smears of drying blood and dusting of pla
ster. It's better than beating at the walls, Johnny Boy.

Swallowing back the cloying self-pity, I said, "God bless you, Nora," then w
ent to fetch my sister and cousin.
We all assumed a kind of defiant desperation, resolutely carrying on in a near
ly normal manner against the strain of the situation. I say nearly, for we wer
e drawn tighter than a fiddle string and like to snap at the least noise, real
 or imagined.
Because of this shared adversity, Nora forgot about any trepidations she'd c
onfided to me earlier over meeting Elizabeth. Both ladies took to each other
, but I'd expected as much, knowing them so well; still, it was heartening t
o see them getting on together.
Of all things, Oliver was the one who proved to be the most shy around Nor
a.
"Because of what she did, don't you know," he said, when I went aside to as
k why he was holding his distance from the group. He touched his throat wit
h nervous fingers. "I mean, you know. All this while a chap's not even awar
e of it. Doesn't seem quite right."
"That's why she stopped with you. Stopped a long time ago."
"And made me forget it. Couldn't have me carrying that sort of stuff around
 in my head and not expect me to mention it to someone sooner or later. She
 didn't have much choice, did she, though? Notwithstanding, I feel rather p
eculiar about it."
"You should talk to her, then."
"Well-ah-well, I'm not so sure about trying that. Besides, she already apolo
gized to me about it, y'see, when I went to fetch her over here. Bringing it
 up again might seem ill-mannered."
"True. Then perhaps what you need is some ordinary converse with her to hel
p you see there's more to her than what you've experienced in the past. I w
ill tell you it means a great deal to Nora that, knowing what you know, you
've still extended a welcoming friendship to her."
"Does it?"
"This condition isolates her dreadfully. I've been given to understand that s
he's only ever rarely found people who freely accept it. She was quite thunde
rstruck when I told her how many knew about my change. For her to be drawn in
to a circle of friends where she is free to be herself and not have to lie or
 influence to avoid a fear-filled reaction is a great comfort to her soul."
"Is it, by God?" He looked at her with new eyes. "But she seems so confident
 with herself."
"That's from years of practice." I dared not guess how many years, nor did I
 share this thought with him. "Just be easy with her, Oliver, as you are wit
h me, and be her friend. She'll ask nothing more of you, I promise." My gaze
 darted significantly to his neck and he went beet red.
"Uh--ah-well, of course. Be glad to do it, Coz. If you're sure."

"My word on it."
Then I jerked my head around, as did Nora, being the first to hear. Elizabeth
 and Oliver froze to listen and perceived it for themselves: the sound of qui
ck footsteps in the hall without.
Jericho had stationed himself by the front gate for much of the day, keeping
 watch with others for Clarinda's promised message. Sweating and breathless 
from his run, he burst in holding a thin oilcloth packet in one hand. No nee
d for him to say what it was; tied to it was a scrap of white cloth. We rush
ed him like thieves falling upon a treasure. This time I recognized Clarinda
's bold handwriting; it was addressed to Elizabeth, which seemed odd until I
 remembered that they thought me to be dead. With a great effort
of will I gave it to her to open. I couldn't have done it anyway, my hands sh
ook too much. She tore at it and unfolded the oilcloth. Inside was a single s
heet of paper bearing but a few lines, which she
read  aloud:
"Come to the town of Brighthelmstone by this time tomorrow night. You'll fin
d The Bell to be a most agreeable place to lodge. Don't forget to bring alon
g your special gift for R.''
"No signature," said Elizabeth. "And it's vague enough to be no more than an 
innocent invitation. She's not risking herself here."
"That's fine for her," grumbled Oliver. "Where the devil is Brighthelmstone?'
'
"A little seaside town about fifty miles south of London," Nora told us. "I 
stopped there once years ago after a storm on a channel crossing drove our s
hip off course. Afraid I don't remember much about it, though."
"I'll wager they know all about it, especially that Summerhill rogue. Our go
ing there will make it very easy for them to make their own crossing once th
ey get the money, unless they have us running off to some other place. Clari
nda will lead us a merry dance before this is done."
"Not to worry, she doesn't yet know the tune is about to change."
"Jericho,'' said Elizabeth, "did you see who left this?''
He'd recovered somewhat from his run. "Only a glimpse of him, Miss. We hea
rd a horse galloping up from the southern branch of the road and presently
 saw it. His rider was all cloaked and muffled. As he came even with our g
ate, he threw down the packet, turned the horse, and went back south again
. He'll be halfway to the Thames by now."
"Damn," I said. "I should have been there. I could have followed him, caug
ht and questioned him."
"And have possibly put Richard in more danger," said my sister. "You'll have
 your chance at them, little brother, when they turn up to collect their ran
som. Until then we'll do what we're told and give them no suspicion or excus
e to hurt Richard."

I nodded, seeing the sense of it, but wanting to pound more holes in the wall
. Then my heart sank as another difficulty raised itself to mind. Though I co
uld gallop all the way to this seaside town in one night given the proper cha
nges of horses, no delays, and a guide who knew the road, I'd still have to f
ind some kind of safe shelter before the next sunrise. The limits of my condi
tion chafed at me as they never had before. I imparted these thoughts to the 
others.
"Now that is dangerous," Oliver said. "You talk like you're going to run of
f on your own. I won't hear of it. We've more than time enough to get there
 by coach if we leave right away. Elizabeth and I can look out for you duri
ng the day, and by the time you wake tomorrow night we'll be there."
"Besides," Elizabeth added, "they might have people watching the roads and
 inn, and if you arrived so openly that would put the wind up them."
My impatience to go forth and do something was such that I was ready to off
er argument against all this sense. But even as I drew breath to do it, Nor
a touched her hand to mine.
"My coach," she said in a gentle tone, "is completely enclosed."
We all stared at her.
"Quite sheltered from the light, very comfortable to sleep in for the day, and
 all ready to go," she continued. "Will it do?"
Oliver's face lighted up with unchecked admiration. "Well-a-day, I should say
 it's just the thing. Miss Jones, you are truly a wonder."
"Thank you, Dr. Marling," she said with a gracious smile.
The five of us-for Jericho insisted on coming as well were ready to leave wi
thin half an hour. Along with Nora's coach and driver, we saddled four extra
 riding horses, pro-visions for the road, and, of course, the ransom money. 
Mrs. Howard wanted to come, too, being quite tearful about it, but after a s
hort discussion, I convinced her she would be the best help to us by staying
 behind. I would not have objected to her presence, but for the fact of Nora
's and my condition. All the rest of the party were in on the secret, so the
re was no need to guard our speech or actions with them, but with Mrs. Howar
d in tow, the poor woman would certainly hear or see something she shouldn't
. I had no wish to further influence her into forgetting things.
Nor was it necessary to influence her to stay, for she accepted the inevitabl
e with snuffling grace, and pressed into my hands a little bundle of Richard'
s things: extra clothing, some chocolates wrapped in twists of paper, and his
 toy horse. The sight of the last item near brought me to tears, too.
As for Cousin Edmond, we'd not yet said anything to him about the dark busine
ss, and didn't plan to until it was done. He was still weak from his awful ex
perience, and Oliver thought it better for him to learn about it after the fa
ct, lest he lurch from his sickbed and try to interfere. He'd probably burst 
a blood vessel when he did find out, but we'd deal with it then, having enoug

h problems to occupy us for the present.
We gathered together a goodly number of firearms and a store of powder and
 lead for the journey. England was as civilized as any country in the worl
d, meaning we had plenty of justification to defend ourselves against the 
many thieves prowling outside the family circle. Oliver packed Ms duelers 
and small sword; Elizabeth and Nora each earned their muff pistols; I had 
my Dublin revolver and sword stick, and lent my own duelers and small swor
d to Jericho. Nora's driver had his own weaponry ready to hand. Any highwa
yman foolish enough to stop us would be in for a very disagreeable surprise.
It occurred to us that Clarinda might have arranged to waylay our party at 
some point along the road and simply take the money. Against such a chance,
 I would ride up with the driver to play the lookout, and Jericho planned t
o take my place come morning.
The journey was not an easy one for any of us, but I found it particularly 
difficult to endure. Once the whirl of preparation was done and we'd set ou
t, I had nothing to occupy my mind except the constant worry for Richard. I
 was not disposed to pass the time with Nora's driver. That dour-faced indi
vidual sat silent the whole while I was with him, speaking only to the hors
es. He seemed to know his business, though, never once stopping or slowing 
to ask direction and never expressing even a hint of an opinion about our i
rregular expedition. An excellent man, I thought.
He took the southern road, for all we know following the exact route of the
 messenger who'd brought the packet to our gates. Even at this time of nigh
t London's streets were something of a snarl. He kept to the westernmost ro
ads to avoid the bulk of the city and skirted 'round the west and south sid
es of St. James's Park. He then made his way through a number of turns befo
re finally coming onto Bridge Street and thus Westminster Bridge. The water
 crossing was hard, as usual; I found myself pressed back into the solid ba
rrier of the coach as it took us forward over the Thames. With a tight grip
 on the bench, I shut my eyes and concentrated on not vanishing and not bei
ng sick as we passed over the wide, stinking swirl of gray water.
Then we were free of it and on Bridge Street again, but only briefly, for 
it soon became the New Road, and we now rumbled through empty farm land. A
n astonishing change, that, being in a crowded noisy city one minute and i
n silent
countryside the next. The very air was different, no smokes or night soil fu
mes to assault the senses, but clean and cold and heavy with moisture. It di
d not feel like rain, though, and so it proved as the hours passed and the h
eavens spared us further problems. Not that it was an easy road, being as ru
tted and muddy as any I'd known on Long Island. It took some practice to bal
ance against the irregular swaying as the coach rolled over the ruts, but I 
soon got used to it and was better able to keep my attention on the way ahea

d rather than on my seating.
The miles crawled ever so slowly under us. My impatience was such that mor
e than once I had to fight down the near irresistible urge to float up and
 soar ahead. Not that it would have done any of us much good. Clarinda's n
ote had been clear enough on the time. Even if I got to the town before da
wn, nothing would be like to happen until tomorrow evening. So I ground my
 teeth until my jaw ached, and kept my eyes open for highwaymen. None show
ed themselves; perhaps it was too cold for them.
I think the others managed to sleep a little, for after a few hours the soun
d of voices within the coach finally ceased. It must have been lonely for No
ra, being unable to escape into slumber for herself, but she made no complai
nt or comment on it when we stopped to make our first change of horses at a 
large inn. Elizabeth, Oliver, and Jericho all climbed out to stretch themsel
ves and take refreshment while Nora made special arrangements with the chief
 hostler for the care of her four matched bays.
"We should be back in a day or two," she said, pressing enough money on him 
for a week's worth of stabling. "See well to their care and you'll have this
 much again on our return." Her promise, reinforced by a piercing look that 
I recognized, left me in no doubt her animals would be the pets of the stabl
e.
"How are things with you and the others?" I asked her.
"Most agreeable. Oliver's been even more thorough in his questions about me
 than you were that night. Quite the inquisitor, your cousin."
"He's not annoyed you, I hope?" "Not at all. I forgot how amusing he can be
. There are some questions I'm sure he wants to ask, but his sense of delic
acy in Elizabeth's presence is holding him back from too much frankness. He
 hardly need trouble himself, though, Elizabeth's well on to him."
"Then you're still getting on easily with her?" "Very easily. We won't be exch
anging recipes or lace patterns or that sort of rot, but I think it likely we'
ll be friends long after this crisis is past, however its outcome. She's a ver
y dear, sweet girl, brave and smart. I don't wonder that you love her so much."
"Yes, after Father, she's quite the best, most sensible one in the family."
"You do yourself a disservice, dear Jonathan." "I think not," I said, holding
 up my hand. There was still some dried blood and plaster dust clinging to my
 skin, evidence of my loss of restraint.
She had only a wry smile for it. "That's only natural frustration. I don't kn
ow how you've held yourself together even this long, but hold on just a littl
e longer. We will get your boy back."
Such was her conviction and so strongly did she pass it to me that I almost t
hought myself under the spell of her influence again. It was enough to bolste
r me for miles on end, until the dawn came creeping over the vast stretch of 
sky on our left, and we had to stop the coach so I could take shelter within.

Nora had spared herself no available convenience in its special constructio
n. Each bench opened up like a kind of long chest and might otherwise have 
been employed for the storage of travel cases. Nora had one of them lightly
 padded for her use, the pads containing quantities of her earth. Thus migh
t she comfortably rest during the day. The other bench,
though not so softly appointed, was cleared of the few stores we'd thrown in
 that I might also have room to recline. It was a bit of a press because I c
ould not really stretch out, but no more so than in my own traveling box. It
 was of no matter to me; with my head pillowed on a sack full of my own eart
h, I passed quickly into uncaring insensibility the moment the sun was up.
The coach was quite still when I woke, though I was sharply aware of sund
ry noises about me: the voices of men and women, the clop of hooves, the 
honking of disturbed geese, and dogs barking. I cautiously raised the ben
ch seat and peered out, giving a jump when I realized with horror someone
 was inside the coach. One glimpse of a dark figure crouching between the
 seats and I ducked, the lid slamming down with a thump, giving away my o
wn presence.
"We're in Brighthelmstone, Mr. Jonathan," Jericho informed me in a calm, pa
tient tone.
My hair eased back into place on my scalp. I belatedly grasped the notion 
that he and the menacing figure were one and the same, and the man had onl
y been waiting for me to waken as usual. " 'Fore God, what a start you gav
e me."
"Sorry, sir."
Lifting the lid again, I staggered to my feet, stepped out, and let it drop back
 into place.
"What a row you make," said Nora, sounding rather muffled from her own h
iding place.
To give her room, Jericho backed out of the coach. She emerged from her have
n, looking less crushed than might be expected, though she fussed a bit abou
t her skirts. "Much more of this and I'll take to wearing breeches," she sai
d, swatting at some wrinkles. She gave up trying to flatten them and bade us
 a good evening. Jericho replied in land; al! I wanted to do was kiss her, w
hich I did when the first chance presented itself. That pleasantry accomplis
hed,
I had a look through the open door, but could see little enough past Jerich
o. Part of a muddy yard and what looked to be the windowless side of a larg
e brick building made up the totality of our view. The coach's closed and l
atched windows hid the rest. Nora sat on her bench and signed for me to tak
e the other. Until we knew better, we dared not show ourselves yet.
"What's the news?" I asked Jericho. "Are we at the Bell?"

He'd brought a lantern with him and set it on the floor between us. "We are
, sir, and have been for quite some time. We found a sitting room had been 
reserved for Dr. Marling or Miss Barrett and party by a well-dressed gentle
man calling himself Mr. Richard."
I stiffened at the name. Was Clarinda indulging in some tangled attempt at
 humor or simply tormenting us? Probably both.
"We've been resting there, waiting to hear something from Mrs. Fonteyn. D
r. Marling thinks the man might have been Captain Summerhill from your de
scription of him."
"Perhaps Arthur Tyne is still too feeble yet for such errands, that or they pr
efer having Summerhill taking the risks."
Jericho lifted one hand to indicate his lack of knowledge on that point. "W
hat matters most is for you and Miss Jones to remain unseen here in the coa
ch for the moment; the whole of this inn must certainly be under watch."
"We have a way of leaving without anyone knowing about it," I reminded h
im.
He nodded. "True, sir, but it will not be necessary, we'll be departing short
ly. This was left with the innkeeper not a quarter hour ago." He presented me
 with a sheet of paper. I held it so Nora could read as well.
At your earliest convenience, do come and take the view at the Seven Sisters
. The way is sure to be dark,
so bring lots of lanterns and keep them lighted. Don't go too near the edge be
tween the fifth and sixth Sister, for the chalk crumbles easily. Be sure to br
ing R 's gift.
On the reverse side of the paper was a map and directions with a small circle
 to indicate our destination.
"The Seven Sisters?" I asked after a moment's study. "What's that, another
 inn?" The markings and place names meant nothing to me.
"They're a series of chalk cliffs on this side of Eastbourne," said Nora. "A lo
ng way for us, I fear."
"At least a dozen miles, according to the landlord, sir," added Jericho.
"Then what?" I said with no small amount of bitterness. "A note telling us 
to turn around and go to Land's End?"
"Dr. Marling expressed a similar sentiment; however, Miss Elizabeth thinks 
their purpose in bringing us here may be to see how obedient we are to thei
r orders. So far we've done nothing to merit reproach."
"Let us hope they think so, too," I grumbled.
Another cold night, another cold, jolting ride. Despite my complaining, I al
so thought-fervently hoped-this would be the end of it at last. Surely Clari
nda would be as anxious to collect the money as I was to rescue Richard. Bes
ides, she might not want to press us too far lest we finally rebel and seek 
outside help.

After we quit the Bell and finally Brighthelmstone altogether, we paused lo
ng enough for me to climb up to sit with the driver again. He had to go nor
th a few miles to Lind and follow a thready east-west road through the down
s. The softly rolling countryside held no beauty for me, but rather I imagi
ned spies lurking in every fold of the land or modest clumping of hedges. T
hey could well be there, too, either Summerhill or some of his men, watchin
g from a distance. The night was moonless and overcast, but by observing th
e driver I determined there was just enough light
for ordinary men to see by. The noise and movement of our coach and all the
 horses were visible against the pale chalky soil and dead grass; the lante
rns were but an extra insurance for them. I kept my face well covered again
st any chance of recognition.
"Almost there, sir," the driver announced, and I asked him to slow and stop t
he horses.
The land ahead rose on either side into two great rounded hills with a well-
defined valley between. In the near distance I spied more such formations, a
 large one to my right and several more of varying sizes undulating away to 
the left.
"The Seven Sisters," I said, making it half question, half statement.
"If the map is right, sir. Can't really count 'em from here."
The wind was high, carried a strong sea smell, and was, as ever, cold. It po
unded at my ears and would have torn my hat away if I hadn't already tied it
 fast with my woolen scarf.
Not a place I care to linger, I thought as I clambered down from my perch.
 The others came one by one out from the coach and stood with me.
"Do you see anything?" Elizabeth asked, directing her query equally betwe
en Nora and myself.
We stepped away from the lanterns on the coach and carefully looked all abo
ut us.
"Nothing and no one," Nora answered after a moment.
I pointed at the lowest part of the little valley ahead. "There's something whi
te."
"White?" asked Oliver, stepping forward. "Like a rag?"
"I can't quite make it out. Who's for having a better look?"
They all were, it seemed. Oliver and Jericho carried lanterns while Nora and
 I led the way, with the coach slowly following our little party. We trudged
 as best we could over the uneven ground, until the white object became more
 clear to us. Someone had gone to considerable trouble building up a substan
tial cairn using chalk shards gleaned from the immediate area. Just over a f
oot high at its peak and several feet across, a length of white cloth had be
en placed in its midst, well anchored so as not to blow away.
The sea sound came to me now, strong and unexpectedly loud. The land, even i

n this depressed point, slanted up and away from us, cutting off the view be
yond. I walked past the cairn and abruptly halted, realizing I was getting c
lose to the brink of a fearful drop. Far past the ragged edge of eroded chal
k was the vast restless shadow of the sea, dark gray under a gray sky.
"I'd say this was the place," said Oliver, catching up with  me.
"Have a care," I told him, stepping back several yards and holding out one h
and as a warning. "The earth is badly crumbled here. Clarinda mentioned it i
n the note."
"So she did," he said, frowning. "And very decent of her, I'm sure. Now what
?''
I looked left and right up at the crests of the hills, half expecting armed m
en to appear and come bearing down on us like a barbarian hoard.
"Jonathan, we've found something," Nora called, drawing us back.
Oliver's circle of light joined theirs where Elizabeth and Jericho stared at t
he cairn. I followed the line of their gaze to the white rag, which was not he
ld in place by the weight of the chalk, but from having one end tied to a part
ly buried leather pouch.
"It must be theirs," said Nora. "That hasn't been left in the weather."
Jericho started to drag it out, grunting when it caught on something. He fres
hened his grip and pulled hard. It came
free, at the same time revealing the impediment. The pouch had a long carr
ying strap, and the strap was wrapped around a man's arm. Thus did we disc
over Arthur Tyne's body.
The grim disinterment did not take long; we all worked at it. Shaken as we 
were after the first terrible shock, the activity was necessary to keep fro
m thinking too much, or so it was for me. My worry of the moment was mostly
 for Elizabeth and Nora, on how this might affect them-until I came to unde
rstand they were far more concerned over my well-being than their own.
"Shot," said Oliver after a brief examination. "Clean through the heart."
"Why would they kill him?" asked Jericho, brushing
dust from his hands.
They looked to me. As if I had any answers. "Perhaps he slowed them down
."
"Or Clarinda didn't need him anymore," said Elizabeth. "Or this Captain Su
mmerhill was more to her liking."
"Whatever the reason, they wanted us to find him, to know how easily ... ho
w easily and how willing they are
to kill."
Oliver stood. " Clarinda's not going to let them touch Richard." He said it fi
rmly, as though he believed it.
Any reply from me would have either been a lie of agreement or throwing the 
hope he meant to impart back in his face. Instead, I gestured at the leather

 pouch. "Anything in it?" I asked.
Jericho plucked it up and pushed back the thing's flap. "Yes! Some paper... h
ere!" He hurriedly unfolded it, holding it flat against the wind so we could 
read.
Put the gift in the bag, then throw it over the cliff. R will be waiting below
 if you want him. There's a village about a mile east of this point with a pat
h down
to the beach. Go there, then come west again. Use great care and caution les
t harm befall you.
I left my lantern and tore back to the cliff. The closer I got to the edge, the 
more perilous the footing. I didn't care. Oliver called out to me, but I chose n
ot to listen. The last few feet I fell to my hands and knees and crept up to the
 fragile brink.
Oh, but it was a well-considered spot for them. From this more immediate van
tage I saw how the Sisters, a series of hills overlooking the sea, seemed to
 have been sliced down the middle by a giant's knife to reveal their chalky 
vitals. The knife had been a jagged thing, for the cliff sides rose high in 
long irregular vertical slashes, marred with many cracks and few if any ledg
es, impossible to climb up or down. At their base far below ran a wide strip
 of beach, covered with fallen debris from the cliffs, broken stones, seawee
d, and other tidal flotsam.
On that beach I now spied several figures, a boat, and waiting out in deeper 
water, a small ship.
"What is it?" Oliver demanded. He also dropped to his hands and knees, cra
wling the remaining distance to join me. "What do you see?"
"They're down there," I said. "The lot of 'em, I think. There's their ship. Do 
you see it?" I pointed.
He squinted. "I think so. Where are they?" A pause as I pointed again. "No, 
sorry, can't make out a thing in this murk. Damn good luck for us that you c
an. Is Richard"
"I'm looking."
The figures huddled near the boat, which had been dragged up onto the beach
. I saw several men, then a woman sitting on one of the larger rocks-Clarin
da. My heart jumped right into my throat, for close against her breast she 
held a child-sized bundle.
"God, he's down there! She has him!"
His hand fell hard on my shoulder, keeping me from going right over. "Steady
 on, Coz. Look at this carefully first before you go charging in."
"Your light-hold it up so they know you've come."
"All right, but I'll remind you they might want to blow my head off."
"I don't think so ... yes, that's it! That's stirred them, they're moving about, p
ointing up at us."

"They'll recognize you."
"Hardly-all they can really see is your light and perhaps some silhouettes, 
y'know. That's why she wanted us to carry lanterns. Hah! One of 'em has a da
rk lantern, he's opening it
"Yes, I see it swinging, a signal for me I suppose. Hope to God it is them a
nd not a pack of smugglers going at cross purposes with us."
The others came up with Elizabeth in the lead. "Is it Richard? Is it?"
Oliver looked over his shoulder to her. "I can't see him, but Jonathan can. S
tay back now."
"Is he all right?"
"He's too far away to tell," I answered. "It's all very clever. You throw the
m the money, then by the time you find a way down the cliff to get to Richard
 they're on their ship and heading for France."
"If they even leave him behind,'' she said, putting into words one of my count
less fears.
"They will, whether they've planned it or not."
"What are you thinking?"
"That they'll be feeling very safe from attack thinking none of us can get do
wn this cliff. The very last thing they'll expect is for someone to turn up i
n their midst and take him away. I'll be on them and out before they know wha
t's happened."
"You'll be ... but it's too danger-oh! Never mind. None safer here than you 
and Nora."
"True, but I will be careful, dear sister, if you'll do the same for me."
"Gladly, but for God's sake tell us what you're planning."
My brain fairly hummed with ideas now that I had a definite and visible goal
 to go after. "Oliver, I'll want you to shout at them and get them to come c
loser to the foot of the cliff. Say that you've got the money and for them t
o be ready when you throw it down, but instead of the money, I want you to f
ill the pouch with the rocks from the cairn."
He grinned. "They won't like that."
"Indeed. I want all their attention on you. Distract them as much as you can, 
get their hopes up-it will be that much more of a frustration to them when the
y find their treasure is a false one."
"But won't it further endanger Richard?"
"No, because by then I'll have him. You have to keep them busy for as long a
s you can and give me the time to slip in close and get to him."
"But Clarinda will have them on you first thing."
"No doubt, but after ten paces they won't know me from the rest of the shado
ws. This darkness will be in my favor, I'll be able to run where they can on
ly stumble. The lot of you need to have your pistols ready, too. A few shots
 and•E

Oliver shook his head, outraged. "And chance shooting you or the boy? I thi
nk not! We can't see a bloody thing from up here and could hit one of you b
y accident."
"I can help on that," said Nora. "I'll be able to direct your fire.'' She loo
ked at me. "I assume you just want them busy ducking while you get away, beca
use it's not likely we'll any of us be able to hit someone on purpose under t
hese circumstances."
"Exactly, a few shots straight down the cliff should be enough to send them s
currying for their boat, though I'd
be well pleased if you should happen to drop one or two of 'em by accident. 
Once you see me get Richard you open up and distract them from pursuing us. 
If they were fools enough to give us the high ground, then we'd be fools not
 to use it. If they do shoot back, with the distance and the dark you should
 all be fairly safe, but keep your heads low, and be sure to put out the lan
terns. Right, then."
My sudden energy to do something was contagious. Jericho and Oliver hurrie
d to the coach to get the pistols and powder. Elizabeth began putting rock
s into the pouch.
With a hand on my arm, Nora stayed me from helping. "Remember he won't va
nish with you. You won't be able to bring him up the cliff in the same ma
nner of travel you'll use to descend."
Damnation, but I wouldn't. "Then I'll make for that village in the note. Lea
ve the riding horses here and send your driver ahead with the coach. You can
 catch up with us later."
"Very well-but Jonathan, the shooting. If one of the pistol balls should hit y
ou while you're holding the boy... it will go right though you to him. You're 
taking an appalling risk with his life."
And did I not clearly know it? "F-for all I know he might already be dead." 
I pointed to Tyne's partially uncovered corpse. "But if alive I'm ready to d
o anything to get him away from those monsters. I'll take that chance rather
 than leave him with them."
Her hand tightened, then fell away, and she said nothing more.
When all was made ready, I gave my sword stick and Dublin revolver into E
lizabeth's keeping, knowing they would only be a hindrance.
"You should at least have the pistol," she protested.
"It takes two hands to bring a new chamber to bear on the thing, and I'll nee
d both to carry Richard:"
"Then God go with you, little brother."
I saw her prayer echoed in the faces of the others and suddenly felt a wash 
of fear. Not for myself but for my helpless son. What if my actions brought 
him harm instead of deliverance? What if, God forbid, I got him killed? If I
 truly wished for his safety would it not be better to let him go? My brave 

words to Nora seemed but a hollow pretension. Clarinda could not possibly be
 so heartless as to hurt her own child. Surely some of the worry for him she
'd expressed to me had had some tiny seed of sincerity within. The sensible 
thing would be to give her the money and hope for the best. It was entirely 
reasonable, much more preferable than the wild, perilous, half-thought-throu
gh plan I'd just improvised.
Much more preferable, but for the voice within telling me-all but screaming a
t me-to ignore sense and let my heart lead in this matter. Against all reason
 it cried alone. Undeniable, my instinct told me this was the right thing to 
do, the one thing I had to do.
But that did not make me any less afraid.
Confidence is an intensely ephemeral quality, flooding you fit to burst on
e instant and miles away the next leaving you dry and gasping in the empti
ness. I was wretchedly parched by the time I'd eased my way down the cliff
 face to crouch immobile in a jumble of water-smoothed rock.
Oliver was already calling down from his now distant perch. He couldn't kee
p them occupied forever while I wavered between sense and folly. Perhaps in
 some distant corner of my mind I'd anticipated this hesitation, and that's
 why the pouch was filled with rock, not money. For then against its discov
ery would I be forced to take swift action.
But no matter the reasons-the time had finally come. Working or not, my hea
rt had taken up lodging high in my throat, and I wasted several precious mo
ments trying to swallow it back into place.
I'd drifted down and lighted just to the east of the men
on the beach. The whole area seemed horribly bright, and I quailed each t
ime a head swung in my direction. None of them saw me, though. None. What
 was like day to me was pitchy midnight to them.
"I don't think the pouch is big enough," Oliver bawled from on high. "It's su
re to be too heavy to throw very far."
"Do the best you can, Dr. Marling," Summerhill bawled back, sounding unflap
pable and thoroughly in control. He was turned away from me, but I recogniz
ed his voice and bearing. He stood a prudent distance from the base of the 
cliff, cane in one hand and dark lantern in the other. He'd covered its lig
ht over; Oliver wouldn't be able to see him at all.
"Silly ass," grumbled one of two men hovering close by.
"Long as 'e's a rich ass," put in the other, identifying the object of comment
 as my cousin and not their captain.
I slipped off my cloak, hat, and scarf, forsaking their protection for ease of
 movement. Then did I also forsake solidity and float low over the ground, ski
rting Summerhill and his men, as substantial as a ghost and just as silent. My
 vision limited, but still better than theirs, I made a straight line toward t
he boat and Clarinda.

Changes had taken place. She was no longer seated on a pile of rock, easy to
 get to, but was in the boat itself, with six more men standing around it. R
ichard was in her arms. My instinct had been true. She'd had no intention of
 leaving him after getting the money. No surprise was left in me concerning 
this woman, only fury, which carried me forward-just in time, it seemed.
No sooner was I started than Summerhill shouted something to the men, and t
hey turned upon the boat and began shoving it into the water. I heard curse
s for its coldness and rebukes to hurry as "the Captain 'uz comin'." I hurt
led toward them.
And was stopped.
It wasn't quite as severe as falling off a horse at full gallop, since my body 
was not solid enough for bruising, but the shock was just as brutal.
The sea. The damned sea.
I was hard pressed to cross free-flowing water normally; in this near-nebulo
us state I'd never do it. The limits of my condition utterly prevented me fr
om pushing so much as an inch farther.
No time for thought about the consequences-I reformed and plunged up to my 
waist into the surf. By comparison, the freezing immersion in Edmond's well
 had been a summer lark. This winter sea was so icy that the cold burned my
 skin, seeming to eat right through to the bone like acid. I must have crie
d out from it, for two of the sailors so diligently pushing the boat turned
 to look.
In no frame of mind to be polite or careful, I was on them like a storm, k
nocking them out of the way and devil take the hindmost. My hands found th
e gunwale, grasped hard, and I heaved up and into the boat, sprawling over
 the ribbed bottom, water streaming from my clothes.
Clarinda half stood, but the craft bobbed crazily, forcing her to sit again.
 She gave out with an abortive screech, whether from the sight of me or from
 the danger of falling in, I could not tell. I had a single image of her sta
ring at me, wide of eye and with a sagging mouth, of her trying to back away
 while holding tight to her precious bundle, of Richard's dark head poking o
ut from the illusory protection of the blanket she'd wrapped around him. His
 eyes were shut fast. Asleep or made insensible by more laudanum?
And then the narrow boat was full of men, cursing, shouting, all their ange
r and fight centered upon me, the unexpected intruder. I had no thought for
 anything but to get to Richard, though. They were merely obstacles in the 
way, inconvenient, but surmountable. Even as a man raised a pistol level wi
th my face I kicked out with one leg and knocked him right over into the wa
ter. Two more had slid aboard, one of them falling upon me more by accident
 than design because of the boat's now very erratic rocking. They got in on
e another's way in the confining space, and I took advantage of it by strik
ing the nearest senseless, then pushing him back against his friend.

The way clear for a moment, I found my feet and surged forward again. Now C
larinda let go with a fully realized shriek. I heard Summerhill distantly b
arking commands, trying to instill order upon the chaos, and succeeding. Th
ere was one man left with the wit and speed to act; he bent and picked up o
ne of the oars, bringing it hard around with intent to clout me flat with t
he thing. Fast as he was, the movement seemed slow to my perception. I caug
ht the stave of wood before it could do me harm and wrenched it from him wi
th a strong sideways twist that sent him overboard.
The last man had recovered somewhat from being pushed, tried to drag me d
own, and promptly discovered himself to be on the wrong end of the oar fo
r his trouble. The boat had drifted far enough from shore that Summerhill
 and his ruffians were no immediate threat. The rest of the men were unco
nscious or floundering. None stood between me and Clarinda now. Unsteady 
from the boat's motion I moved closer to her.
"Give him to me," I said, reaching out with one hand. She half rose, but co
uld not back any farther away. Thrice now I'd returned from the dead, from 
the fight in the mausoleum, from the attempt in the bath, from the push dow
n the stairs in her own home, the last being the most impossible to deny. W
hat thoughts were in her mind I could not guess, but the emotions were obvi
ous, being equal parts of rage and terror. Her white face contorting into s
omething inhuman, she lifted Richard's limp form high, and hurled him into 
the sea.
Of all the horrors that had run through my mind since she'd taken him, this 
had never once shown itself. It was too abominable. My reaction was without 
thought, instantaneous. I swung the end of the oar wide and hard toward her.
 I had an impression of it striking her head, the impact traveling up the wo
od to bruise my hand, of her swift and abrupt drop; impression only, for by 
then I was diving into the corrosive water after my child.
No time to register the pain, all my effort was concentrated on maintaining a
 solid form against the overwhelming urge to vanish. He was not far, little m
ore than five yards, but they might well have been miles for my slow progress
. I lived lifetimes until my hand thrashed against the edge of his blanket, e
ternities until I found his small body in the mass of soaked fabric. I got hi
s head clear of the smothering water. After all this his eyes were yet shut. 
Dear God, no...
The shore. Where? That way. Close and too far. Hurry.
More eternities until my toes brushed and caught on the rocky bottom. Stagger
ing, holding him tight, I lurched from the sea's caustic grasp, then fell to 
my knees. Sobbing with dread, I tore away his wet clothes, searching his pinc
hed blue face for sign of life. Pressing my ear to his chest I forced myself 
to silence, listening with all my soul.
There, I thought I heard it... a faint flutter like a bird's wing. His heart. His li

ving heart...
"You murdering bastard," said Summerhill, almost conversationally.
I looked up at him, up into the barrel of his pistol.
"You" he broke off, recognizing me. His aim wavered as amazement finally pe
netrated his imperturbable armor. I'd seen such uncertainty before, such he
sitation; it would not last long. With Richard close in my arms, I rose and
 bolted like a deer.
Ten paces, I'd said. Ten paces and they'd lose me in the dark. I'd been wildl
y, fatally optimistic, and Richard would
be the one to suffer for my misjudgment.
Shots. A veritable hail of fire.
I ran faster.
A second volley.
I flinched and sought shelter behind the low mass of stones where I'd left my
 cloak.
"Run!" someone called in a thin, faraway voice.
Nora.
I glanced up the cliff. Yes. They were firing down at Summerhill and his men
, scattering them, giving me the chance to get clear.
"Run!'' Elizabeth now, strident with urgency.
I swept up the dry cloak for Richard and fled east, threading madly between
 the stones, skidding, nearly tripping, but always rushing forward, and nev
er more looking back.
EPILOGUE
It was a fine, clear Christmas Eve, not too cold, not too windy. Tomorrow pr
omised a continuation of the good weather, though I'd be sleeping right thro
ugh it, as always. No church for me, alas, but we'd made a merry party of it
 tonight having trooped out for evening services. I had innumerable blessing
s to be grateful for-though some weren't fit for the peace of the sanctuary,
 like my grim thankfulness for Clarinda' s death.
But others, like Richard's recovery, brought me to kneel before God with si
ncere and humble gratitude.
Thus far the boy had shown no ill reaction from his kidnapping. Clarinda ha
d apparently kept him drugged for nearly the whole time, as he had nothing 
to tell us of the experience, not even a stray nightmare. I know, for since
 then I'd lately taken to watching him in his sleep when the mood struck, s
itting close by with a book and alert to any change in him that might indic
ate distress. Mrs. Howard complimented my zealous concern and at the same t
ime reproved me for being overly protective. I smiled and told her she was 
right, but begged her to indulge me until I felt more secure about his safety.
Richard continued healthy despite his plunge in the freezing sea water. I'd 
run nearly the whole way along the beach to the tiny village mentioned in Cl

arinda's note and had all but broken into its one tavern seeking help. One l
ook at us and our bedraggled condition and the owner's anger changed to inst
ant compassion as he took us for shipwreck survivors and roused the rest of 
his house to beneficent action.
As fires were built up, broth was heated, and our clothes were set out to dr
y, I improvised a poor tale of an overturned boat for their many questions. 
This inspired even more queries as they wanted to know where the boat was li
ke to be found, why I'd been out at sea at night, how I'd upset the boat, an
d other annoying details. I was spared from additional bad lying by the time
ly arrival of Nora's coach driver, soon followed by Nora herself and the oth
ers. Oliver, taking charge as the one doctor on the premises, pronounced tha
t I was too addled for talk and told me to rest while he tended Richard, som
ething I was more than glad to carry out. What with the number of our party 
and all obviously being well to-do, the interrogators retired to watch and d
raw their own conclusions about the strangeness of the situation.
We stopped long enough on the return trip for Oliver and Jericho to re-bur
y Arthur Tyne. His improvised grave went undiscovered for more than a week
 and was quite a mystery to the Brighthelmstone magistrates as was stated 
in the one paper we found that reported the incident. The man's murder was
 popularly blamed on smugglers or pirates, and in a way the conclusion was
 perfectly right. Certainly no one of us ever stepped forward with further
 information for the inquiry.
Oliver stayed on in Brighthelmstone and kept an ear open to all the news. W
hen talk came of a woman's body found on the beach near the Seven Sisters, 
he went along with the rest of the curious for a look and, putting on a con
vincing show of surprised sorrow, proclaimed her to be his long missing cou
sin, feared lost at sea. Thus was he able to bring Clarinda
back for internment in the family mausoleum. Her terrible head wound was 
dismissed as having been caused by a rough encounter with the rocks when 
she'd washed ashore. So far no one had connected her in any way to Arthur
 Tyne.
I was thankful also for Edmond's full recovery from his own dance with the
 Reaper.
He eventually got the full story of all that had happened from me-or most o
f it. There were certain aspects I chose not to include, like my extra-natu
ral abilities and the exact manner of Clarinda's demise. I baldly perjured 
myself, saying she'd fallen and hit her head in the boat during the fight. 
He grunted, and asked no other questions. The official story given to the r
est of the family was that Clarinda had run away from him and drowned at se
a by misadventure-something just scandalous enough to put off deeper inquir
y. Ed-mond, already in mourning for Aunt Fonteyn, didn't have to change muc
h of his outward show of grief, only to extend its duration. I think he did

 grieve in his heart for his wayward wife. Apparently he had been happy wit
h her, once.
I was also thankful for the end of all persecution from Ridley's Mohocks.
It was but small work to find Royce and Litton, his would-be avengers, as we
ll as a few others who had been connected to him. Though the task of reformi
ng the lot of them into good citizens seemed rather too overwhelming, I was 
willing to take it on, but upon discussing the prospect with Nora, I gladly 
adopted her suggestion. Rather than trying to convert them, I simply instill
ed in each an irresistible desire to take a grand tour of the Continent. Som
e were bound for France, others for Italy, and none was like to return anyti
me soon. They could have Europe and all the rest of the world if they'd but 
leave me and mine in the peace of England.
The only dark spot was Summerhill's escape.
Oliver was yet busy making diligent inquiries about him. It seemed the capt
ain was from Brittany as he'd said, and had in the past engaged Edmond's se
rvices for certain legal mat-
ters, none of it connected with smuggling, though. Edmond had little to ad
d about the man, except to say that Clarinda had taken to him. As Clarinda
 had taken to quite a number of men, Edmond had paid no more attention to 
this particular indiscretion than the others. Since she had been adept at 
using, then discarding a man when another more useful one appeared, I wond
ered whom she might have had waiting when she'd finished with Summerhill o
r if he had indeed been her final aspiration.
It mattered not now, but I would keep my eyes open for the captain. He'd bea
r watching against future mischief, I thought.
But for now, all was peace. We'd moved back into Oliver's home in town, on
ce more leaving Fonteyn House to the care of some trusted servants. The pa
rlour fire roared with warm comfort for the body, while the excellent serm
on we'd recently heard did the same for our souls.
Nora and Oliver were seated near the fire showing Richard how best to toast 
bread. Elizabeth was at her spinet, engaged in learning a new piece of music
, an occupation that held her attention only until Jericho came in with a tr
ay laden for tea. According to the others, supper was too long a wait for re
freshment. Elizabeth played the hostess and served all but Nora and me. We t
hought it best not to indulge our own specific appetite in front of an activ
ely curious four-year-old.
"I hear Jericho gives a good report of a certain French dancing master," Oliv
er said. "What do you say to sending for the fellow after the New Year, see i
f he suits?''
"Indeed?" I arched an eyebrow at Elizabeth, the obvious source of my cousin's 
information, since I'd imparted it to her only last night as but a distant pos
sibility.

She shrugged prettily. "One can't start too soon in teaching a boy the finer 
points of gentlemanly behavior."
"He's very much the little gentleman now,'' I said in mild protest. "Though 
I might consider employing someone. In the not so near future, mind you.''
"Brother, you just don't want to share him with anyone else."
"A palpable hit," said Nora, correctly reading my expression. "Keep pressing,
 Elizabeth, he'll call for quarter in another minute."
"Let's play fox hunt," said Richard, his bright face covered with toast crumb
s and butter.
"There's a perfect example of the need for someone to teach him proper mann
ers." Elizabeth wiped at the boy's face with her handkerchief.
"Example? He just wants a game." I winked at him, a silent promise to steal 
him away at the first opportunity.
"Yes, but he must learn to say 'excuse me,' and 'may I please' when breaking
 into a conversation."
"Excuse-me-may-I-please play fox hunt," said her resolute nephew, his voic
e somewhat muffled by her efforts at cleaning.
"A quick learner, is he not?" I asked, and no one offered to disagree. "Come 
here, Richard, time to ride to the hounds."
He broke away from Elizabeth, leaping onto me like a monkey.
"Gently, Jonathan, not so much bouncing, he's just eaten."
I promised to be sedate, keeping my word for almost one whole circuit of the
 house. Richard's enthusiasm carried over to me, and I forgot about caution 
in the face of fun. We galloped as madly, as noisily, as joyfully as ever be
fore, so much so that I paid scant mind to the outcry that followed when Jer
icho answered a knock at the front door.
Just as I cantered into the parlor by way of the servant's entrance, I saw E
lizabeth and the others suddenly rushing out the main door into the entry ha
ll. I stopped, hearing more exclamations and outcry, the happy kind. I felt 
myself kindling to a unique, near forgotten warmth at the sound of a voice, 
low and clear and very much loved.
Father. Father has come at last.
"Left your Mother at Fonteyn House with all the mourning," he was saying. "I
t's true then? She still wasn't believing it when I had the head groom take 
me here. This will be hard. At least Beldon's there to help. Yes, Beldon and
 his sister came along, quite the mixed blessing on the crossing...."
"What's wrong, Cousin Jon'th'n?" Richard tugged at one of my ears.
"Nothing, laddie. You're about to meet someone very special."
"Who?"
I swung him around so as to seat him on one arm, and with a flock of birds 
flapping around in my belly, walked toward the entry hall.
They were all gathered about Father, Elizabeth still holding tight to him as 

he shook hands for the first time with Oliver. Nora stood close by awaiting i
ntroduction; Jericho also hovered near, his face alight with genuine pleasure
. The lot of them looked up and fell silent as Richard and I came in.
Father broke into a great smile at the sight of me and stepped forward, arm
s open to embrace ... then he faltered. A most amazing expression possessed
 his face as he stared first at me, then at Richard, and perceived the exac
t resemblance between us. His mouth dropped open.
"Welcome back to England, Father." I lifted Richard up to get a better hold o
n him. "I-ah-I have a bit of news for you...."

