His Father’s Son
Nigel Bennett and P. N. Elrod
This is a work of fiction. All the characters and events  portrayed  in this  book are fictional,  and any  resemblance to  real people  or
incidents is purely coincidental.
Copyright © 2001 by Bill Fawcett & Associates
All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this book or portions thereof in any form.
A Baen Books Original
Baen Publishing Enterprises
P.O. Box 1403
Riverdale, NY 10471
www.baen.com
ISBN: 0-671-31981-7
Cover art by Jaime Murray
First printing, April 2001
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Bennett, Nigel, 1949–
His father’s son / by Nigel Bennett & P.N. Elrod
   p.   cm.
ISBN 0-671-31981-7
1. Vampires—Fiction.  I. Elrod, P.N. (Patricia Nead)  II. Title.
PR9199.3.B3782  H57  2001
813’.54—dc21
00-065092
Distributed by Simon & Schuster
1230 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10020
Production by Windhaven Press, Auburn, NH
Printed in the United States of America

To Michael & Sam
with thanks to:
Charles Ballard
Gail Hassell Forestieri
Kath Henebry
Nancy Hill
Nick Marcelja
Helen Mesquita
remembering:
Deborah Heinrichs &
Vashti of the Flaming Tresses—Ruth Woodring
and a special thanks to:
Teresa Patterson & Kevin Topham
Baen Books in this series:
Keeper of the King by Nigel Bennett & P.N. Elrod
His Father’s Son by Nigel Bennett & P.N. Elrod
Quincey Morris, Vampire by P.N. Elrod (forthcoming)

Chapter One
Normandy, the Beginning
He awoke in a meaningless half light that could have been dawn or dusk, and in all truth it did not matter.
His eyes pierced the gloom easily; to him the inside of her tent  was  as  bright  as  day.  He  lay  on  fur  and
beneath fur, and the small of his back was wet with sweat. He shifted sleepily and became aware  of her
next to him. He turned his head and saw she had her back toward him, only partly covered by the stifling
fur. Her dark hair, long and lustrous, tumbled away from her shoulders and across the pillows. The side of
her neck was bare, and his gaze followed the line of her body from that point, over the rise of her shoulder
along the slope of her side and up the sudden sharp rise of her hip. By the slow steady beat of her heart she
was still sleeping.
He smiled at the memory of the long hours of love and  passion  and  pure  pleasure  with  her.  He’d  lost
count of how often they’d coupled and ridden together toward that little death, surrendering willingly to  it.
Each time he’d thought it  the  ultimate  ecstasy,  and  each  new  encounter  had  proved  him  wrong.  They’d
kissed and tasted and sucked and stroked. Their sweat and juices had mingled; every moment was perfect.
He reached out and caressed her thick, heavy hair, absently straightened it, smoothing it down, and yet
his touch was so light, so gentle that she did not wake. Her skin was alabaster cool and delicate as that of a
babe, and he traced her spine with a finger down to the deep cleft between her cheeks.  He  cupped  their
firmness, then slipped his hand around to the flat wonder of her belly, and her thatch of dark curls. She was
still wet, and as he stroked, a soft low moan escaped her.
He hardened quickly and feeling it, laughed under his breath in surprise at the strength of his desire. He
pressed closer and buried his face in her hair. It smelled of blossom and earth and sky and moonlight, and
he  breathed  in  deep.  He  was  fully  erect  now,  hard  along  her  spine,  and  she  pushed  back  against  him,
shifting her legs. Without effort, he was in her, once more held in her sweetness, and he closed his eyes and
gasped at the feeling, at the warmth, at the sense of wholeness.
She  moaned  aloud  now  and  as  one,  they  began  to  slowly  move  against  each  other,  caught  up  in  the
rhythm of creation. She did not open her eyes. Perhaps she slept still, and this was all a dream to her. He
did not know. One of her breasts filled  his  questing  hand,  hard-nippled,  compelling,  and  he  found  himself
pushing deeper, deeper into her. All his being was centered on her, her every reaction to  his  touch.  They
moved together so slowly, so languidly. 
Sweat seeped from his brow and disappeared into her hair. He kissed the soft nape of her neck, tickling
the fine skin there  with  his  tongue.  Lips  parted,  she  murmured  something;  it  sounded  like  a  prayer.  Her
hands pressed against his as he held her, enjoining him to further exploration. He took his time, touching and
fondling, until her breath came short and fast, grew harsh with desire. He brought her right to the edge of it,
then  without  warning  the  animal  took  him  as  well.  A  desperate  urgency  seized  his  being,  and  he  thrust
harder  into  her  slick  wetness,  anticipating  the  coming  explosion,  wanting  it,  needing  it.  In  her  sleep  she
pushed  back,  equally  urgent,  arching  against  him.  He  was  so  deep  inside  her,  yet  felt  himself  opening,
spreading wide as a rose in the sunlight. Then, spasming, quite out of control, at one with his spirit, and out
of  his  body,  he  burst  within  her.  Once  more  she  moaned,  this  time  from  fulfillment,  not  longing,  and  he
glimpsed a smile as it flicked across her sleeping face. 
Dear Goddess, could there be any greater pleasure?

And inside his head came an answering voice, clear as church bells on a summer’s day.
No.
They slept together, he still inside her, softening slowly, until they were once again apart. Yet he held her
close, she, he, they, as one in their shadowy heaven.
He dreamed, and in his dream, she came to him, held his face gently in her hands, and spoke. “It will be
ever thus, my love, ever thus. I am of thee and thou of me. We are truly one and will never sunder.”
He  smiled  in  his  sleep,  and  as  she  watched  him,  eyes  wide  in  the  darkness,  a  single  tear  slid  down
Sabra’s cheek and melted into the pillow.
The  thick  oaken  doors  of  the  great  hall  of  the  Castle  Orleans  creaked  open  on  their  mighty  hinges,
swirling  the  smoke-laden  air  into  delicate  spirals  that  disappeared  upward  into  the  fading  golden  light  of
sunset, and Richard d’Orleans strode through. The rushes on the  stone  flags  crackled  under  his  boots  as
two weary servants hauled hard and pulled the doors slowly shut again, sealing him in the vast, dim space.
He pushed back the thick protective hood of his long cloak and looked about at the wreckage of triumph.
The smell that arose all around him would have given many a man cause to retch. The feasting after the
great tourney had gone on for several days; the floor was littered with rotting  food,  spilled  wine,  pools  of
vomit.  None  of  the  scullions  had  yet  attempted  any  cleaning.  They’d  indulged  as  liberally  as  any.  The
collective  sickness  pressed  heavily  upon  the  whole  of  the  stagnant  keep.  Richard  noted  and  ignored  its
near-physical presence, immersed as he was in his own thoughts and fears. 
He’d been summoned by his father, Duke Montague d’Orleans. Sabra had insisted that he answer to the
old man, and Richard could no more refuse her than stay his breathing. So he’d dressed in the fine linen and
leather that she’d laid out for him with her own hands, kissed her chastely on the forehead, and gone for her
sake, not the duke’s.
As things stood now, he had no need to obey the savage old despot ever again. So far as Richard was
concerned, he was free of him, of all the past, free of everything except his loathing for it.
How mightily his life had changed since the great tourney, since his ignominious defeat at the hands  of
that  damned  boy.  Only  a  few  days  had  passed,  yet  in  that  time  Richard  d’Orleans  had  been—quite
literally—reborn  into  a  new  and  never-ending  life.  While  he  waited  in  the  empty  room,  looking  idly  at
familiar tapestries covering the cold stone walls, the events of the  past  few  days  came  back  to  him  with
startling clarity. From the depths of defeat and despair he’d risen to a fresh beginning given to him by  his
lady, Sabra of the Lake. He was changed, from mere mortal to something much more. 
His heart raced, and he caught his breath at the thought. The impossibility of it was almost too much to
take in, but on his left hand he bore the undeniable truth that it had indeed happened to him. His third finger
had been severed by a dagger thrust at the tourney, but because of his change a healing such as he’d never
imagined had taken place, magically reversing the maiming. Though the scar that went around the base of
his mended finger was not like to go away,  he  felt  no  twinge  of  pain  from  it.  Indeed,  its  white  ring  was
constant and absolute proof that no injury could truly harm him, that no enemy could ever strike him down
again. He had inhuman strength and the skill to use it to withstand anyone now. He clenched his restored
hand into a fist and smiled openly as the raw power surged within him. He was what he’d always longed to
be: a true champion, afraid of none, invincible, free.
Yet there was a price to pay. Sunlight was now his enemy,  as  too  was  flowing  water.  He  discovered
that the first day after his change; Sabra had warned that these would kill him if he lingered in either for too
long. Like her, he was a creature more of night than day, a creature of earth and darkness and shadow like
the Hounds of Annwyn, their progenitors.
But the most important, and most dangerous, price of all was  that  his  appetite,  too,  had  changed.  Like
Sabra, like all their kind, he drank blood and only blood to live. 
Richard d’Orleans was vampire. 
This utterly set him at  odds  to  all  that  he’d  been  taught;  he’d  become  a  depraved  thing  to  be  feared,
abhorred, and destroyed. Blood was precious, sacred, not to be spilled or taken by such monsters.
Or so he’d always been told.
We are not monsters, he thought with quiet certainty. No mindless beast could love as he loved Sabra,
as she loved him. No evil could possibly abide in her, nor would she allow it near her. That being so, then he
was not as others might see him, but something well beyond their limits. They would only perceive him as
an  unnatural  threat  though,  and  act  according  to  the  dictates  of  their  fears.  Abso-lute  secrecy  was
necessary for his survival against such deadly ignorance, but it seemed a small enough price to pay for what
he’d gained. He was a servant of the Goddess now, a protector of her ways. So long as he was careful and
kept silent about the truth behind his new existence, he was ageless and deathless. That was the Goddess’s

gift to him, bestowed through his beautiful Sabra.
They’d awakened together the day before from a long afternoon of sleep and  fleshly  enjoyment  in  the
shelter of her pavilion, but this time Richard’s first thought and desire was not for more love. 
“You hunger, do you not?” Sabra had asked, raising up on one elbow in their bed to look down at him.
“I feel its hold upon me.” He ran a hand over his face and lightly touched his corner teeth. They were
not extended yet, though he felt the potential to do so tingling in their roots.
“But not as strongly as that first craving?”
“Nay, ’tis but a shade to  it,  but  still . . .”  He  licked  his  dry  lips,  recalling  the  first  glorious  red  rush  of
fulfillment he’d taken from the veins of one of Sabra’s servants. The old eunuch had given up his life that
Richard  might  live,  given  it  up  to  be  with  the  Goddess  they  all  served.  “Must  I  kill again  to  satisfy  this
need?” Though troubled by the prospect, he was willing to do so  if  it  meant  a  never-ending  eternity  with
Sabra.
“But surely not,” she replied, smiling at his concern. “Killing each time we must feed would call attention
to us, and we would be hunted down and killed  ourselves  by  those  who  have  the  knowledge.  There  is  a
simple way to satisfy our wants and a pleasing one. I will show you.”
Sabra rose from their nest of cushions and wrapped herself in a long loose robe of the same rich brown
color as her hair. She went to the tent opening and untied the flap, carefully keeping clear of the rays of the
lowering sun that lanced through the cracks. She called to someone outside and soon a young servant girl
hurried in. Richard hastily covered his nakedness with a -blanket. 
“This is Ghislaine, she has helped me many times,” said Sabra.
Ghislaine stood in a modest, respectful pose, hands folded and eyes down for the most part, but stealing
quick darting glances at her surroundings, at him. Richard could hear the swift  patter  of  her  heart.  Sabra
crossed to her, putting an arm around her shoulders to lean close and whisper something, smiling as she did.
The girl flushed deep crimson and stifled a giggle, nodding.
Sabra whispered again, and the girl shuffled a curtsey at him, smiling coyly. Fresh as a peach, she could
not  have  been  much  past  fifteen,  but  already  had  the  fullness  of  a  woman’s  body.  By  her  manner  she
certainly  possessed  a  woman’s  experience  of  the  flesh,  yet  at  the  same  time  she  seemed  to  retain  a
measure of innocence. Richard found the combination highly appealing and felt a predictable stirring within.
Sabra stepped away from the girl and gazed steadily at him. “Now you must tell her what you want.”
“What do you mean?”
“With your mind, with your words, you may beguile her to your will.”
“I-I know not how, my lady,” Richard began, but was stopped from further protest by Sabra’s piercing
stare. He could not look away. And then he heard her as clearly as if she had spoken to him, though  she
had not, for he could well see that her lips did not move.
You have the power as I do. Her voice sounded in his head: warm, sweet, seductive. Will her to do  as
you wish.
He blinked, recovering his own thoughts amid those she’d imparted to him. 
Try, and learn in the trying, my Richard.
“But is this speaking to the mind not your own Gift of Sight?” he asked. “You told me I did not share in
that.”
“True, you do not,” she said aloud. “What I would have you master now is  very  like  to  it,  though.  It’s
part of your new -nature. You’re capable of bringing others to agreement with your desires. If you learn to
use it carefully and to your advantage, with prudence and wit, you will always  be  safe.  No  one  will  ever
suspect you differ from any other man, for you can put all such won-derings from their heads.”
He thought he understood what she wanted of him. He gestured at Ghislaine. “What must I do?” If she
followed the meaning of their talk, she gave no sign.
Bend your thoughts, your will upon her, Sabra whispered. Call her to you.
Facing the girl, he looked  deep  into  her  eyes,  not  knowing  if  it  really  would  work.  “Come  to  me,”  he
murmured so softly that he had doubts she could have heard him. “Come, Ghislaine.”
With no change of expression, she glided toward him. Was she merely obeying her new master’s order
or truly responding to his will? He wasn’t sure.
“Sit beside me,” he said, testing. No servant, no matter what their  ranking,  would  dare  take  their  ease
thus in the presence of their betters, but Ghislaine did exactly that, sinking upon the cushions next to him as
though she owned them. He looked at Sabra, half smiling in wonder. “I did it.”
Indeed, my love. Now lull her to sleep.
With Sabra’s approval to bolster his confidence, he focused on Ghislaine and spoke soothingly, willing her
to submissiveness and finally slumber with his soft words. God, it was so easy. Her eyelids slipped shut, and

she slumped against him. He eased her down by his side on the cushions.
Sabra sat next to her as well, looking at him across the girl’s reclining form. Again, she spoke out loud.
“In the deepness of her throat or at the crook of her elbow, the blood flows close to the surface and is easy
to get to. There are many such places, but ’tis better to take from the arm when you can, for the marks you
leave will be less noticeable to others. Bite gently, and take only as much as you need. You  will  find  you
want but little and seldom. It is rich elixir and filling.”
Richard lifted the unresisting girl’s arm, and pushed up  the  loose  sleeve  of  her  simple  gown.  The  skin
was white and clear. Blue veins lay just below the surface, and he traced them with his fingertips. He could
smell the blood through her flesh. Unbidden, his corner teeth budded, long, sharp, wolflike, and he  felt  the
warm flush as his eyes reddened. His heart began to pound heavily with anticipation, and he could hear the
sound of another heart, Sabra’s, rising to match its rhythm.
Sabra’s voice purred in his ear, and she stroked the side of his face, her  touch  like  fire.  “She  will  feel
little, and what she does will be naught but pleasure, I assure you.”
For us both, my lady, he thought, lowering his head. He paused to taste the smooth young flesh, running
his tongue over the pulsing vein. As he did, Ghislaine’s breath became  deep  and  ragged,  her  lips  opening
slightly, showing even white teeth. Richard recognized arousal when he saw it and turned to Sabra, silently
questioning.
“Take her,” she urged, her own eyes gone red. 
His teeth broke easily  through  the  tender  skin,  and  a  gasp  escaped  the  girl’s  lips,  followed  by  a  long,
delectable moan. Blood gushed into his mouth, and eyes closed, he sucked  hungrily.  Ghislaine’s  heartbeat
sounded like close thunder to him. His hand strayed to her chest to feel the throb of it as he fed. She shifted
under his touch, gasping again as his palm smoothed over the firm rise of one of her breasts. Through the
light fabric of her gown his thumb teased at her nipple. Not too surprised, he realized he was hard,  erect.
He sought release by taking more blood.
The heat of it stole over him, more potent than the headiest wine. The sheer pleasure roaring through his
body was almost beyond bearing; he wanted to shout in celebration, but could not tear away, not yet. What
came out was a smothered groan of ecstasy.
Ghislaine  writhed,  drawing  her  legs  up,  pressing  her  head  into  the  cushions.  He  felt  her  young  body
trembling, then shuddering as he fed. Her back arched, and he had to hold her down. She breathed out the
name  of  the  Goddess  in  her  crisis,  once,  twice,  before  uttering  a  long  wordless  cry  of  exultation.  The
tension  abruptly  departed  from  her,  and  with  a  little  sigh,  she  went  completely  limp.  Disturbing  for  a
moment, it gave him pause, but her heart still beat strongly; her blood still flowed to him. 
He took in another fiery draught.
Sabra’s hand was on  his  shoulder,  fingers  digging  into  his  bare  flesh.  Now  was  he  able  to  break  off,
lifting away to open his eyes. Sabra’s dark head was bowed over the girl’s other arm as she drank from the
same fount. The sight excited him in a manner he’d never known before. He instantly understood what he
wanted to do next, but wasn’t certain how to bring it about.
As if in response to his thought, Sabra raised herself, her blood-flushed gaze meeting  his  before  sliding
down to his hard manhood showing beneath the blanket. 
No use trying to deny it. “Forgive me, my lady, I—”
There is nothing  to forgive. She leaned forward, her  warm  lips  brushing  his  like  a  butterfly’s  wings.
She left behind the taste of Ghislaine’s blood.
“Have you had enough?” she asked, drawing his blanket clear.
“No,” he answered, decisively  reaching  for  her.  He  stripped  away  the  robe  and  lifted  her  small  body
effortlessly, pulling her right across the slumbering Ghislaine and onto him. Her legs straddled his hips and
she gasped as he entered her. She fell forward upon his chest. His mouth on hers, he kissed and licked at
the blood there until it was quite gone.
Not enough.
He was aflame like a fever victim. This was no languorous, dream-filled lovemaking, but a primitive and
frenzied coupling, as needs he’d never been aware  of took him over. Sabra seemed caught up in it as well
as her kisses became  deeper,  more  intense,  more  fierce.  She  rode  against  him  with  bruising  force,  nails
clawing his chest. Then her mouth fastened on his throat, and he felt the sharp dent of her teeth breaking
his skin. He pressed her close, panting as she drank. It was almost the same as when she’d killed  him  to
bring about his change, only this time he stayed gloriously awake as his red life went into her.
She suddenly drew back, eyes  shut,  her  body  convulsing  in  time  to  his  thrusts.  He  watched  her  face,
reveling in her rapture, taking it for his own. When her moans ceased, he pulled her close again, pushing her
head to one side to make taut the skin of her neck. His mouth yawned, his teeth piercing one of her surface

veins, and he drew hard at the wounds until all that he’d shared rushed back to him again. It overwhelmed
all his senses, stealing away the last of his control. Then came his own explosive release as his seed drove
into her; the combined impetus of it and the blood gusted through him like a firestorm. It swept him up and
out of himself, his soul tumbling helplessly in the searing heat. 
The last thing he heard in the chaos was his own laughter as he embraced the red wind.
Sabra’s lithe body gradually slipped away from  his,  leaving  him  sprawled  on  the  cushions,  puffing  and
slick with sweat, invigorated and at the same time exhausted. She lay next to him, -apparently in much the
same state. With a lazy hand he touched his throat. It was sticky with fresh blood, but completely healed.
He saw Sabra’s skin had also knitted, wholly unmarked but for a few telltale smears. Some minutes  later
she recovered first and sat up to examine the still sleeping Ghislaine.
“Is it well with her?” he asked drowsily. “She is not hurt?”
“The  wounds  are  small  and  bled  little  once  we  were  finished.  Mind  that  you  always  cleanse  them
afterward, yourself as well.” Sabra got up, drawing her robe on again and went to a table holding a slender
wine vessel to pour some onto a square of cloth. She used it to wash away the stains on her lips and throat,
then tended to those marring the girl’s arms. “Fresh water from a swift stream or rain will do, but wine is
best; the sting prevents the flesh from corrupting. Fill a cup for her; she’ll need a restorative.”
Richard rolled slowly to his feet  and  did  as  he  was  bidden,  handing  the  cup  to  her,  then  followed  her
example  and  cleaned  himself.  He  found  and  pulled  on  a  long  tunic  before  dropping  onto  the  bed  again.
Sabra touched the girl gently on the side of her face, speaking her name. Ghislaine’s  eyes  fluttered  open,
and she looked about with some confusion, then alarm, struggling to rise.
“My lady, I’m sorry, I did not mean to—”
“Hush,  child,”  she  said,  keeping  her  in  place.  “’Tis  natural.  Rest  yourself  a  moment.  Lord  Richard
is”—she glanced at him, the light of mischief in her eyes—“a demanding man. Drink this, then you may go
to your supper and bed. You’re excused from your -duties until the morrow.”
Sabra’s soothing voice had its effect on the girl, and Ghislaine obediently emptied the wine cup, her gaze
straying  over  its  rim  to  Richard.  He  wasn’t  sure  how  he  should  respond  to  what  looked  to  be  nascent
adoration, and tentatively settled on a smile and nod of appreciation.  Apparently  it  was  enough;  Ghislaine
finished, curtsied low to them both, and departed without another word, leaving him alone with Sabra.
“Will she not speak of this?” he asked.
“She will remember little of what happened  here,  simply  that  you  and  she  gave  each  other  pleasure.”
Sabra’s  gaze  wandered  to  his  still  ample  manhood  outlined  under  the  thin  cloth.  “A  great  portion  of
pleasure, it seems.”
He  began  to  blush  at  his  body’s  betrayal  of  his  still-active  desire.  “Forgive  me,  my  lady,  she  means
nothing to me, I assure you. I know not why it happened.”
“You may say you know not, but I do, sweet Richard. It is our nature to enjoy their lives and flesh in all
ways, and I take joy in your delight. She is a pretty creature, after all, deserving of appreciation.”
“You are not jealous?”
“No more than you should be of me when the blood calls to my hungers . . . all my hungers.”
That gave him pause, the implication being that of Sabra feeding from another man. Richard didn’t care
for the idea, but had no wish to spoil the  moment.  Better  to  deal  with  the  subject  later.  He  pulled  Sabra
back to  the  comfort  of  their  bed,  wrapping  his  arms  protectively  around  her  as  she  lay  her  head  on  his
-shoulder.
“Will all my feedings be thus?” he asked, murmuring into her thick hair. It smelled of flowers.
“Not always. I thought your first one should be memorable, though.”
“My lady is the soul of kindness.”
“Sometimes  you  may  feast  slowly,  others  will  be  catch-as-may  as  you  go  along  with  no  time  for
dalliance. No matter what befalls, make certain the one you choose remains unaware, and that none chance
to see you. It could mean your death.”
He grunted in short reply, knowing the truth of it. The consequences of what had transpired over the last
hour had anyone observed them did not bear contemplation. “I will take care, I promise.”
“One other thing, and mark this well: beware of attachments to them, my love.”
“What mean you?”
“These fragile  children  abide  with  us  but  a  little  while  and  then  are  gone,  and  I  would  not  have  thee
heartsick from the loss. You are ever my true love, and I yours. We two will endure long after Ghislaine is
dust. That is the way. That is why the Goddess chose thee, for strengths even you may not yet know about
yourself.”

“Then you must tell me about them, sweet lady.”
“When the time allows . . . and we have more of time than anything else.”
Certainly while waiting in the empty feast hall away from Sabra’s intoxicating presence Richard had had
an abundance of it to think everything through. He was mildly surprised to determine that from a loss that
should  have  saddened  him,  a  transformation  that  should  have  terrified  him,  a  craving  that  should  have
disgusted him, he could see nothing but goodness and bold promise for his future.
His eternal future . . . with Sabra.
He shut his eyes,  holding  the  wondrous  image  close  lest  it  fly  away  from  him  in  this  chill  and  hollow
place.
But  his  gladness  was  interrupted  when  an  apologetic  servant  hurried  into  the  room  bearing  a  single
candle and placed it on the table. Richard’s vision was such that he’d not noticed how dark it had gotten.
“Does the duke summon me yet?” he asked, staying the man’s excuses for being late.
“I  know  naught  of  it,  Lord  Richard,”  he  said,  ducking  his  head.  “Do  you  wish  anything?”  Cold  was
settling in for the night and the man shivered in his tattered clothes. The castle was always cold, even this
far into spring.
“I thank you, but no. Be off to your bed.”
He stared at Richard for a moment.
Richard met his gaze calmly, but felt a twinge of doubt within. Does he see the change in me?
If he did, he kept it to himself  and  quickly  departed  the  way  he’d  come,  leaving  the  door  ajar.  As  he
hastened  along,  Richard’s  sensitive  hearing  followed  the  whisper  of  his  footsteps,  probably  back  to  the
stinking smoky warmth of a pallet by the kitchen hearth.
Then another kind of sound came forth from  the  entry  and  suddenly  two  of  the  castle’s  great  hounds
bounded noisily into the feasting hall to scavenge the leavings. They were huge hunting beasts, and Richard
knew them both well; he’d been right there in the stable at their whelping. He’d watched their growth from
clumsy  pups  to  graceful  adults  and  trained  them  himself  for  the  chasing  down  of  game  in  the  forests.
They’d often been his only companions for many long weeks at a time. Of all things and people living in his
father’s castle, these hounds were the only souls he could trust and count as friends.
He clapped his hands and gave a short whistle. “Merlin! Prince!”
The two dogs checked in mid-bound, recognizing the voice, looking around for its owner in the dimness.
“Prince!  Merlin!  Here,  lads,  here.”  Richard  stepped  forward,  hands  out  as  the  animals  whined  an
anxious greeting and tore over the flags toward him, tongues lolling as though from laughter. “Come to heel,
come on.”
Merlin reached him first. Richard was almost close enough to touch the massive head, but paused at an
unexpected shift in the dog’s reaction to him. Merlin froze an instant, then backed away so quickly that he
blundered into Prince, halting him in turn.
Both dogs milled in confusion, sniffing and growling at Richard before settling into a guarded stance. The
hair along their backs stood straight on end, and they lowered their heads threateningly. With ears laid flat,
teeth bared and snarling, they were primed for the kill. 
Instinctively, Richard backed away, hefting a heavy wooden stool as defense. The dogs had recognized
him;  what  was  wrong?  Had  they  gone  mad,  inexplicably  perceiving  him  as  an  enemy?  He’d  seen  the
damage that these two could inflict many times and wanted none of it. Who had turned them against him?
He spoke their names again, firmly, not letting the alarm he felt color his voice. Instead, he brought to his
tone all the displeasure he could muster,  slamming  the  stool  on  the  floor  with  a  bang.  He  held  fast  to  it,
though, in case his ploy at dominance failed.
The noise startled them, and his voice seemed to break through before they could charge. First one then
the other stopped and began to whine piteously, eyes averted, as though afraid to look  at  him.  They  spun
around uncertainly, tails between their legs, urinating in  fright.  Richard  lowered  the  stool  and  took  a  step
forward,  speaking  softly.  Perhaps  his  new  clothing  had  masked  his  familiar  scent.  But  the  dogs  backed
away from him, yelping with fear, then turned tail and fled.
He stared open-mouthed at their retreat, then belatedly understood the why of it. With the cold breath of
the  Hounds  of  Annwyn  forever  upon  him,  what  other  reaction  could  he  expect  from  ordinary  canines?
Merlin and Prince had sensed the difference all too sharply. What surprised Richard was the  enormity  of
the hurt he felt from their unexpected rejection. Sabra had not warned him about this particular price for his
change.
Perhaps this won’t be as easy as I thought.
He released his hold on the stool  and  finally  seated  himself  on  it  rather  than  pace  the  filthy  floor.  He
stared at the entry where the dogs had retreated, mourning their loss. He’d have had to leave them behind,

anyway, for all  in  the  castle  and  lands  around  -belonged  to  the  duke,  but  this  wasn’t  the  sort  of  parting
-Richard might have wished for.
Richard had tenuously held his place in the household by strength of arms, bringing honor to  the  family
name with each victory. That had ended with his defeat at the tourney, though, and he knew exactly why
he’d been summoned. It was time for the duke to give his hated child a final censure and banish -Richard
from his house with less consideration and far more rancor than would be heaped upon the lowliest of the
servants.
Richard watched the shadows cast by the candle flame twist and jump in the draughty air, remembering
how he’d snapped a curt dismissal to the duke’s command in Sabra’s pavilion earlier that day.
“You must go,” she told him.
“I think not.” Richard had no desire to forsake her safe, dark  sanctuary  for  a  walk  in  the  burning  sun
only to face his father’s own searing wrath at the end of it.
“You must. It is necessary.”
“Is it not  enough  that  I’ve  endured  a  lifetime  of  abuse  and  humiliation  from  him?  Can  we  not  simply
leave for Britain?”
“For one, you must obtain his release from your oath of service to him. Without it he has the right to hunt
you down like an escaped serf.”
He ground his teeth, for she was perfectly correct. “And for another?”
“We few of us know how to properly say farewell.” Sabra held his hand in hers as she spoke. “It is  a
necessary and important thing. It is the finishing of the round. Without it, whatever we do from then on can
be flawed. Like it or no, he is your father; he is in you always. You owe yourself that acknowledgment and
the closing of the circle.”
Richard started to protest that he could not remember a single occasion upon which Montague d’Orleans
had behaved in any way like a father, but stopped, realizing the humble truth of her words. “He will belittle
me.”
“That he will.”
“And he will shame me and say that I am no son of his. I know it.”
“And you are right.”
Richard thought for a moment and turned her hand over in his, finally kissing her palm. “Does your Sight
tell you what will happen, what will come of this?”
Sabra did not answer.
“Does it?”
The look in her brown eyes as she regarded him could melt the hardest stone. “Dear Richard, what is to
be will be. What will happen is within you. You’ll find it in your heart. You must be your own guide in this,
make your own path for right or wrong.”
“What is it you tell me? That I’ve a choice to make? What sort of choice?”
“I’ll say only that we often have to reach through the thorns to pluck the rose. There is always pain if we
choose to seize it. Just remem-ber that I am with you through all.” She loosed his hand and stepped back
from him. “Now go to your father. He has summoned you, and you must give him that one last obedience.”
He  wanted  to  ask  more,  but  knew  she  would  not—or  could  not—answer.  Her  Sight  was  clear  and
truthful,  but  sometimes  it  revealed  too  much,  showing  her  more  than  one  future,  each  depen-dent  upon
actions made in the present. 
Perhaps that was what awaited him. If so, then might he not make a mistake, choose the wrong  path?
The wrong future?
She’d raised herself on her toes to kiss him lightly on the mouth, and he returned it, pressing his  lips  to
her brow. He wrapped his heavy cloak close to shield his vulnerable skin from the sun and left.
And now here in the darkness, lit by a single sputtering candle he sat, waiting to discover the meaning of
her words. Out of love for her and trust in her wisdom and judgment he could put himself through one more
hour of his father’s malice, though not much more than that. Richard had his limits.
Most of that hour had passed already, according to the tolling  of  the  church  bell.  It  was  full  night  and
vespers had come and gone by now, though it was doubtful that the chapel had been very full. Perhaps a
few had attended to pray for recovery from their revels. 
How like his father to keep him waiting thus. It was a very old game he played, and he never tired of it:
Summon the despised son, then keep him without. It was  an  obvious  insult,  one  he’d  seen  his  father  use
often and to great effect. Richard might be here for hours, even all night if it pleased the duke.
This is the last time for me. It must be the last time.
Finally giving in to a portion of impatience, Richard stood and stretched and paced once around the great

room. He realized that he did not need the candle. He could see quite well, indeed. The change in his vision
was such that this darkness  was  very  much  like  day.  Turning  back  to  the  candle,  its  small  light  seemed
almost as bright as a bonfire.
The moon had risen, the silver-blue glow pouring through the high windows, creeping its way down the
wall  opposite  to  make  the  tapestries  and  banners  there  shimmer.  It  was  so  beautiful.  Everything  was
heightened since his transformation. He could  see  more,  smell  more,  feel  more.  The  sounds  of  the  night
from both within and without the castle came to him very clearly when he paid mind to them. He cocked his
head toward the entry but could pick  up  nothing  to  indicate  his  wait  was  ending.  True,  he  could  cut  this
nonsense short by bulling into the duke’s sanctum, but past experience made him reluctant to try. The  old
man was king in everything but name here, with the power of life and  death  over  all.  To  incur  his  wrath
was to risk  dire  punishment.  Richard  had  dared  to  cross  him  on  this  very  point,  once.  The  beating  he’d
gotten some dozen years past had left an indelible impression on his spirit long after the bruises healed. The
lesson stuck.
He could beat me now—could try—for all the good it would do him.
The  power  of  his  dark  rebirth  surged  through  Richard  once  more,  warming  him.  The  past  should
be—was—less than nothing to him. Perhaps that was what Sabra wanted him to learn from this. If so, then
he could do as he pleased with no fear of reprisal. But if not, and he made the wrong choice, whatever that
might be . . . 
He decided he could wait a little longer.
He righted one of the long benches and sat at the table, idly toying with an abandoned trencher.  There
was a time that he would have gladly picked at the remaining food, indeed, eaten his fill from the leavings
here, but not now, and never again.
Free. I am free of this.
A sudden noise from the doorway to his father’s inner  chamber  along  the  hall  jolted  Richard  from  his
musings, and he stood to meet his sire. The door down there opened sure enough, but all that came out was
a string of curses and the unmistakable scrabblings  of  the  two  terrified  hounds.  The  dogs  pelted  into  the
feast hall, seeking escape from the shouting and then from Richard, finding none. They finally took shelter
beneath one of the far tables, whimpering.
More cursing from the entry. A familiar voice, but not one belonging to a friend. Richard had no friends
here.
First the dogs, then  another  kind  of  cur  arrived,  as  Dear  Brother  lurched  into  the  vast  room.  Richard
braced inwardly, his face settling into the usual blank mask he tried to maintain when forced to deal with his
abrasive oldest sibling.
Ambert d’Orleans was the proud firstborn of the great lord, and had never let Richard forget it. At first
glance,  he  and  Richard  could  have  almost  been  twins,  so  similar  were  they.  In  their  youth  many  had
mistaken them as such. Both over six  feet  in  height,  fair-haired,  with  icy  blue  eyes,  and  both  strong  and
valiant on the field—but that was in their youth. Their differences had  grown  with  the  passing  years  and
were  not  just  those  of  physical  change.  Richard  could  look  at  himself  and  without  blush  know  he  was
principled and intelligent with a strong sense of honor; Ambert, on the other hand, was ever a bully and  a
braggart and, worst of all, a cunning backstabber. Richard had learned the best way to deal with him was
simple avoidance whenever possible.
Excess in all things was beginning to take its toll on Ambert, for his belly now far exceeded his chest in
girth. He had to balance carefully as he made his way into the dim hall, pausing at the head of the table. His
once handsome face was bloated and red from too much wine and fits of  temper,  and  his  fine  blue  eyes
were rheumy and bloodshot. His bleared gaze  quickly  fastened  on  Richard,  regarding  him  with  the  usual
measure of contempt, Ambert’s idea of a superior look.
He  bore  a  goblet  in  hand,  and  swaying  a  little,  extended  it  imperiously  in  Richard’s  direction.  “Wine,
brother,” he said, as though addressing a servant. There was an open cask on the table before him, but he
made no move toward it.
Knowing the uselessness of argument, Richard crossed to him and took the goblet away. There being no
ladle, he tipped the cask with care. It was nearly empty and the wine threatened to spill as it slopped about.
He got it steady enough to control the pouring of a thin stream.
“Don’t stint with it, you fool.” Ambert shot his hand out and upset the cask. It was an old trick, the object
being  to  add  stains  to  Richard’s  clothing.  The  elegant  new  garments  he  wore  now  had  obviously  not
escaped Dear Brother’s notice; the temptation was irresistible. The result was different  this  time,  though,
for Richard quickly moved out of the way, letting the thing crash to the floor. The wine flew in all directions,
a  goodly  amount  of  it  splashing  onto  Ambert.  He  gasped  and  snarled,  but  only  for  a  moment.  The

startlement was clear on his face when he saw just how far out of the way Richard had taken himself  in
the merest blink of an eye. He was at the other end of the long table. 
“That  was  clumsy,  wasn’t  it?”  said  Richard,  calmly  surveying  the  damage.  “Your  fine  coat  is  all
spoiled.”
“Bastard,” Ambert spat, throwing him a murderous look.
“That’s the whole point for you, isn’t it? I’m not a bastard. If I were, you wouldn’t be so afraid of me.”
“I fear you not, sweet Dickon. ’Tis only wisdom to keep a sharp eye on the ambitions of the third-born.”
“And so you always cast  upon  me  what  you’d  want  yourself  were  our  stations  reversed.  A  tiresome
game it’s become. You know I’ve no desire for your share.”
“So you say to all within hearing. You’ve said it too much, too loudly. No one believes you.”
“I’m thinking no one gives a bloody damn anymore. You’ve provided our father with  a  grandson;  your
position is secure.”
“Aye, but brats die so easily. Three times it  took  before  that  bitch  finally  birthed  something  that  lived.
How you must have prayed otherwise.”
Richard held to an immobile face, but his hand, still clutching the empty goblet, compressed into a sudden
fist. There was a crumping sound of strained metal. He looked down. The cup portion was crushed in, the
shape of his fingers clearly defined in  the  thick  brass.  He  felt  a  brief  smile  twitch  over  his  features  and
carefully set the ruined object on the table where Ambert could see it.
Dear Brother’s eyes went wide at the sight, and for once in his life Ambert seemed to have nothing to
say. 
“Sorry,” said Richard, offering him a thin, insincere smile.
“You—you’ll pay for that,” Ambert finally spluttered  out.  “God’s  death,  but  you’ll  pay  for  that  before
you leave.”
“With what, pray?”
Ambert  took  the  offered  bait,  seizing  it  for  a  new  weapon.  “Aye,  you  lost  all  at  the  tourney,  to  the
disgrace of our house.”
“You’ve a new champion to take my place. The honor of the house is safe.”
“With that overgrown pup?”
“At least he’s a true bastard, so you’ve no need to worry over his ambitions. They probably don’t extend
much past his next meal and place to sleep, which he’s already gotten from me.” The boy had been quick
enough to claim Richard’s weapons, armor, and other gear for his winnings. He was welcome  to  all  of  it
now.
“You’re not suffering from  what  I  see.”  Ambert  nodded  at  Richard’s  new  clothing,  the  finely  woven
wools, leather boots, the thick blue cape with gold embroidery along the hem, and the jewel-trimmed knife in
his belt. “Mayhap you’ll get the payment from that rich whore you’ve been riding in her grand pavilion by
the lake.”
That Ambert would know of his liaison with Sabra was no surprise; Dear Brother always  kept  himself
abreast of all the gossip. That he would try for the  easiest  of  insults  was  not  unexpected  either.  Richard
held to his smile,  refusing  to  react.  He  looked  at  the  remains  of  the  goblet  and  tapped  it  lightly  with  his
fingers a few times before flicking it over. It made a thump against the wood.
Ambert stared now with raw  hate,  but  mastered  himself  after  a  moment,  replacing  it  with  a  sly  look.
“Mayhap,” he drawled, “mayhap I should see to collection myself. I have heard she is most fair of face.  If
she will not part with any coin, then she’ll trade something else to me instead.”
He has everything; why does he need to be cruel?
The answer came from within as Sabra’s sweet voice stole gently into his mind. The cruelty hides  the
emptiness of  his spirit, she murmured, her voice so clear she might have been next to  him.  It  gladdened
him to know that in this dreary place he was not as alone as he’d thought. Alas  for  his  pain, she  added
plaintively.
It was easy enough for her  to  be  kind,  she’d  not  had  decades  of  Ambert’s  torment,  but  for  her  sake
Richard  decided  to  modify  his  initial  harsh  reply.  “You’re  drunk,  Dear  Brother,  else  you  could  think  of
better ways to provoke me.”
Ambert puffed out a short guttural curse. It had the strange sound of agreement in it. “Oh, but  I  have,
sweet Dickon. Your new whore is a riddle to all who have heard of her. No one knows aught of her, and
her people keep to themselves like lepers, speaking to none if they can help it. I would know who she is and
who she serves. Before the next hour is gone I’ll have a dozen armsmen through her tents to drag her here
to give full answer to that riddle.”
It  was  no  idle  threat,  not  when  he  used  that  tone.  By  right  of  his  place  in  the  household  he  had  the

authority to carry it out and the wit to justify all to the duke later.
“How does that please thee?” he demanded.
A few days ago  Richard  would  have  swallowed  his  anger  and  suffered  whatever  humiliation  Ambert
cared to heap upon him to prevent such a disaster.
No more. No more ever  again.  He’s like  a  boy  throwing  stones  at  a  chained  wolf  to  show  how
brave he is. He knows not that this wolf is free.
Richard made his shoulders slump with defeat, let his gaze fall to the floor, and slowly closed the distance
between them, his bearing such as to not give any hint of a threat. When he was but a pace away, only then
did he raise his head and look his brother full in the eye.
“What would please me, dear Ambert, is  for  you  to  forget  all  about  it,”  he  whispered.  “Do  you  mark
me?”
Ambert winced as though in pain and drew a hand over his brow. “How—how d-dare you speak thus to
me?”
Richard puzzled for a moment over this surprising resistance. Certainly Ambert had more reason to defy
his  will  than  would  a  compliant  young  girl,  but  he  was  still  made  of  the  same  ordinary  flesh.  Perhaps
drunkenness  had  befuddled  his  mind,  making  him  more  difficult  to  influence.  Richard  bent  all  his
concentration upon his brother, eyes focused so hard and steady he thought he  could  almost  see  past  the
bloated face to the pitted vestige of his soul.
Ambert gave a shudder, breaking into a sweat, and this time he did not look away. 
“You will forget all about disturbing the lady by the lake,” said Richard, his voice calm, but brooking no
argument. “You have no interest for her or her people, none at all.”
Dear Brother’s lower lip sagged, trembling, but no words came forth.
“Forget her. Completely.”
He flinched as though each utterance held the sting of a wasp and still did not look away.
Richard  eased  back  slightly,  fascinated  a  moment  by  this  evidence  of  his  own  power,  then  finally
released his invisible hold.
Ambert staggered, clutching at the table to steady himself.
“Have  a  care,  brother,  the  drink  is  besting  you  tonight,”  said  Richard.  He  was  once  more  standing
several yards away. He watched and waited for Ambert’s reaction . . . which was only to shake his head
as  though  to  clear  it.  Not  one  sign  of  what  should  have  been  red-eyed  fury.  Oh,  but  this  was  most
wonderfully -interesting.
“I’ve not had enough is the problem. What’s become of my cup?” He stared peevishly about, but missed
his crushed property amid the litter on the table.
“Does  my  lord  the  duke  send  you  to  fetch  me?”  Richard  -inquired,  hiding  his  amusement  and
satisfaction. This ability to sway others to his will was very useful indeed.
“Please you to wait,” grumbled Ambert. “You’ll see him soon enough and like it not when you do. You’ll
like it not at all.” He then burst into a harsh laugh, pushed from the table, and tottered back the way he’d
come. Down the hall a door closed with a bang; by its sound it was the one to the duke’s inner chamber.
Ambert  would  have  gone  there  to  apprise  the  old  man  of  the  presence  of  his  other  son.  Either  the
wearisome task of waiting would soon end or Richard would be out here the rest of the night.
The two hounds whimpered, still hiding under a far table. Richard bent to look at them.
“Come on, my lovelies. Am I not better company than  Ambert?  When  did  I  ever  kick  and  curse  you,
eh?”
Merlin whined, head pressed to the flags, but gave a tentative wag of his tail.
“Come and be friends again. I’ll not hurt you.” He put forth first his hand, then his will, to see if it might
also work on animals. “Come, now, come to heel, there’s a good boy. . . .”
Whether it was his voice or his influence that coaxed  Merlin  out,  Richard  could  not  be  sure,  but  after
much hesitation the great dog did finally emerge, slowly followed by Prince. With halting steps they came
close enough to touch. Richard ruffled their coarse fur, praising and reassuring them. As if shamed by their
previous fear of him and wanting to make  up  for  it,  they  licked  his  face  and  hands,  tails  still  tucked,  but
wagging.
“You’re all right, now, aren’t you? Good, good lads. What a pity Ambert and I can’t get along as well as
you two.” 
They rolled on their backs for him to scratch their bellies, friendship restored. Richard sealed it by finding
some choice scraps from the table to give them.
A door opened somewhere. As one, Richard and the hounds swung their  heads  in  the  direction  of  the
noise, alert.

Light  spilled  into  the  feasting  hall  from  the  entry.  Richard  heard  a  rustle  and  grunt  from  his  father’s
chamber followed by the sound of slippered feet. Perhaps his long wait was nearly over.
“Go on, lads. You won’t want to be here.” He pushed the  dogs  off  and  found  a  place  to  stand  in  the
darkness well away from the candle.
A  large  shadow  fell  across  the  floor  as  his  brother’s  ample  frame  obscured  the  entry  light.  For  a
moment, Ambert peered across the apparently empty hall, saying nothing before moving forward, his steps
hesitant and faltering. He picked up the abandoned candle, holding it out ahead of him.
“Richard . . . ?”
Richard remained quite still.
“Are you there, or have you run away like the craven you are?”
The silence that followed must have convinced Ambert that what he thought was indeed the case,  and
his courage grew proportionately.
“Well you may run, sirrah, for you are of no worth here,” he spat to the room. “The midwife should have
strangled thee!”
He turned to go back, but gave a sharp cry when the candlelight shone on Richard, who was suddenly in
the way. Ambert started, letting the candle fall, only to see it caught in midair by  his  brother,  who  calmly
raised it to illumine their faces  once more. They were close enough that, had he been so inclined, Richard
could have counted the  broken  veins  on  his  brother’s  nose.  Ambert  shivered,  and  his  face  twitched  into
what should have been a scowl, but his fear spoiled the attempt. He jerked his chin in the direction of the
hall.
“Fa—Father wants . . .” But he did not seem to be able to finish. His words sounded too thick to escape
the trembling portal of his mouth.
“I await only my lord’s pleasure, dear Ambert,” said Richard evenly. 
“Damn you,” he choked out in return.
Richard placed the flickering light back in  Ambert’s  shaking  grasp.  “Have  a  care,  brother.  One  fallen
candle on these rushes could cost you your castle.”
A booming voice from down the hall cracked through the still air like a whip. “I would speak with you,
Richard!”
Their father’s voice. Even the favored eldest son cringed at the sound.
“Let me see you, boy!”
Richard turned and, released from his sway, Ambert hurried ahead to disappear into another twisting of
the hall. It had -always been one of his greatest skills, not being in the wrong place at the wrong time, and
he practiced  it  now  to  perfection.  Light  spilled  brightly  from  the  chamber  ahead,  and  like  a  moth  to  the
destructive flame, Richard went toward it.
The duke’s sanctum was quite large. Torches in their sconces along the walls provided some heat for the
cheerless  room,  along  with  all  the  light.  Their  smokes  rose  high,  adding  to  the  soot  already  coating  the
ceiling. Several embroidered arras covered portions of the walls. Some stirred gently,  doing  their  work  of
cutting down drafts coming from the doorways they concealed. Off to the  right  was  a  huge  oaken  table.
Benches ran along  each  side  of  it,  and  at  the  far  end  where  Montague  now  stood,  crouched  a  massive
thronelike chair. No one ever dared to come near it. When he was a child, Richard had once been foolish
enough to crawl up and sit there, pretending to be a king of his own castle and lands. His father had seen,
and the outcome was a beating of such severity that many thought  the  boy  would  not  live.  Even  now  as
Richard looked at it, a tremor ran through him at the sick-making memory.  It  had  been  the  first  of  many
other beatings, so many he could not count, but that particular one stood out by its right of place.
The room, full of its vile memories, was empty of people apart from the duke. That was a blessing. At
least there would be no witnesses to the coming censure.
Montague d’Orleans was a giant of a man in all ways: in stature, in reputation, and in deed. He was the
most  powerful  man  in  Normandy,  and  there  was  answerable  for  his  actions  only  to  God,  and  then  but
rarely. He was a brutal pragmatist, a survivor. He had no time for failure, hating it as if it were a contagious
disease that might be spread to him and cause his downfall. Now more than ever before, he had no regard
for Richard, for his son had become a carrier of this contagion since the tourney.
“My lord.” Richard’s greeting was murmured low, and he bowed from the waist delivering it. “Father.”
Montague had his back to his son, and did not turn. “Who is it that calls me father?”
Richard stepped into the golden light cast by the torches, dropped to his knees, and spoke the words of
old ritual that were required of him. “It is I, Richard, your son. You sent for me and, as ever, I await your
pleasure.”
“My  pleasure?  My  pleasure!”  The  old  man  turned  and  leveled  what  Richard  could  only  assume  was

meant to be a murderous look upon him. Unfortunately, the effect was ruined by the slurring  of  his  voice
and a decided stagger as he came forward. He was very drunk. “My pleasure was to have the champion of
all the land within my own household. Within my own family.”
Richard kept quiet. Comment would only draw out the -process.
The old man loomed over his kneeling son, blood in his eye, building in his anger. “Once  it  was  so.  By
some miracle or witchcraft you were champion, but no longer. Now, I have only shame to  distinguish  my
household. My reputation lies in the dung heap!”
Richard stared straight ahead, keeping a stony face.  He could not trade words here as  he’d  done  with
Ambert. That would not stop or deflect the flow of bile.
Montague reeled to one side to refill his empty tankard from a keg on the table and swilled back a mighty
draught. “Explain yourself, boy.”
“I  cannot.”  Richard  replied  honestly,  for  although  he  knew  that  Sabra  had  had  much  to  do  with  the
outcome of events that day, he also knew he would never disclose any of it. It would mean immediate death
both for him and his lady. “I was beaten.”
His  father  lurched  toward  him  and  bent  until  his  face  was  close;  the  rank  stench  of  his  breath  filled
Richard’s nostrils. “Clearly, you were never beaten enough!” He suddenly righted himself.
Richard saw the blow coming. His reactions were sharper, faster since the changing, and he could have
easily  avoided  it,  yet  something  within  him  made  him  hold  his  ground  and  brace  for  it.  No  stinging
open-handed slap, Montague used the full power  of  his  fist.  The  force  of  it  knocked  Richard  flat  on  the
floor, but -surprisingly, he hardly felt any pain. It was no more to him than a sigh of air on a summer’s day. 
Am I beyond being hurt or grown so used to it that I feel it not?
He waited a moment, expecting next to be kicked, but the old man drew away and  gulped  down  more
drink. Richard got slowly to his feet, brushing at his clothing. He felt cold inside, very, very cold. Like the
dead.
“You’ve disgraced me, brought humiliation to my house,” the duke continued. “Wise you were to skulk
away afterward. You missed all the sly looks, the hidden laughter from the others when I had to give  the
purse to that damned bastard pup. That you yielded at all was defaming enough. Couldn’t you have had the
wit to cede to a full-grown man?”
He stared without expression at Montague.
“Well, boy? Give me answer!” 
“The new champion  will  serve  you  honorably  and  with  much  heart,”  said  Richard,  astonished  at  how
steady his voice sounded.
“That is no answer. Why did you yield?”
“He offered me quarter. I accepted rather than—”
“Rather than die,” Montague concluded for him. “Aye, showing the world the kind of coward I sired.”
Richard  clenched  his  jaw  hard  to  keep  back  the  sudden  protest  that  wanted  to  spring  forth  at  this
unfairness. He’d begun the tourney as one of a hundred other fighters  and  managed  to  last  until  but  two
remained: himself  and  the  boy.  To  survive  for  so  long  in  such  a  struggle  was  not  the  achievement  of  a
coward.  He  took  a  deep  breath,  releasing  it  slowly.  This  is  of  no  matter.  There  could  have  been  a
thousand of us and the duke would still speak to me so.
“You don’t deny it, either. Pah!”
“I am my father’s son,” Richard muttered. “But what part of you is in me?”
“What say you? What was that?” he snarled, pausing in the act of raising his tankard.
“I await my lord’s pleasure,” Richard said more clearly, hoping the  duke  would  soon  finish  his  ravings
and make his formal dismissal.
“Your lord’s pleasure would be to see you dead.”
How often has he voiced that wish? It’s come true and he knows it not. Richard hadn’t lost his life in
battle, but in the throes of passion with Sabra to make his rebirth possible—something the  old  man  would
never understand.
“You smile? Do you mock me, boy?”
“No, my lord.” I’m five  and  thirty years,  old enough  to have  sons  and  grandsons  of  my own,  and
still  he  calls  me  boy.  Is  it  to  belittle  me  or  to  keep  his  own  age  and  death  at  bay?  Or  both?  For
Richard’s father was ancient, being a few years past fifty. Many thought the only reason he’d not yet died
was that heaven wouldn’t have him, and the Devil didn’t want to contest with him for the rule of hell. 
But he will die eventually, and I will continue.  The realization got him through the next few moments
as his father ranted on. Richard no longer heard the words, but looked long at the man whose blood flowed
in his veins, the man who had given him  life,  and  saw  only  another  whose  cruelty  shielded  a  sad,  empty

spirit. For all that, Richard could feel no pity, only contempt.
“Well,  boy?”  Montague’s  last  words  rang  through  the  stillness  of  the  castle  and  into  Richard’s
consciousness. “What do you have to say?”
That he’d not listened mattered little; any reply would be the wrong one. “I’ve nothing to say, my lord.”
“Pah!”
The hair abruptly stood on the back of Richard’s neck as he became aware  they were no longer alone.
He could sense another presence here, another drawing of breath, another scent on the smoky air. Out of
the corner of his eye he glimpsed the slightest movement of the heavy arras covering the wall to his left. It
was  not  a  draught  or  a  trick  of  the  torchlight.  Someone  had  come  silently  and  was  listening,  watching.
Richard relaxed as he comprehended who it was, and knew that there would be no interference.
“My lord, as I have failed thee, I ask leave to depart from your service.” There, it was out at last. The
old man could rail all he liked, but eventually he must grant his permission. This had been coming for years.
“Ceding again, are you?”
“My lord the duke is above keeping company with those who displease him. I would shame you no more
and depart quietly.”
“Think you such flattery will make favor with me?”
“I seek no favor—”
“Only escape.” The old man backed his way unsteadily to his massive chair and dropped into it, glaring
at Richard all the while. “I know what dreams fire you, boy. There’s nothing you’d like better than to leave
this place. You’d hoped to do it with that bag of tourney gold, but failed. Now you hope to run off with that
rich whore camped by the west wall. Aye, there’s fitting toil for you, playing whoremaster, or have you sold
yourself to serve in her house instead? Will she finish the work you started on the field? Make a eunuch of
you to disport with her sodomites?” He paused, apparently awaiting a reply.
Richard could find none to give, but stifled the beginnings of a shiver. It was as though ice had taken the
place of all his bones,  chilling  him  from  the  inside  out.  The  duke  was  trying  to  provoke  him  to  make  an
excuse  to  punish  him,  another  of  his  old  tricks,  but  Richard  felt  too  cold  for  anger.  Sabra,  what  is  the
choice I must make?
But she was silent.
Montague leaned well back in the chair and looked at him over the expanse of his belly, all but smacking
his  lips  at  some  inner  satisfaction.  “Well,  you  can  put  that  out  of  your  mind,  boy—I’ve  no  intention  of
releasing you from your oath to me.”
Now did Richard manage to find voice again, and it was choked with disbelief. “What?”
“You will remain here.”
“Why? My lord wishes me dead, banishing me from your house is the next best thing to that.”
“Aye, so you can run off to a life of ease with that woman? I’ll not have it. I’ll not have you nosing after
the bitch and the two of you laughing at me for giving you leave to go.”
“Wh-what does my lord require  of  me,  then?”  It  was  the  question  he  would  be  expected  to  ask,  and
Richard’s guts turned over for he was certain of the answer.
Montague deigned to smile. Unpleasantly. He spoke  slowly,  softly.  “I  require  you  retrieve  that  which
you lost: the honor of my house. You will stay here—I’ll put you in chains  if  need  be—but  you  will  stay
until the next grand tourney.”
Richard  felt  a  swell  of  black  despair.  It  surged  upon  him  like  smothering  death  until  he  remembered
himself. Such feelings belonged to the man he had been, not the man he’d become. He was immune to such
threats, now. The feeling faded, replaced by new strength.
The duke continued unaware. “There you will fight that damned upstart and kill him—or die yourself in
the trying.”
I think not. Richard’s mouth twitched, the only sign of his amusement.
Montague’s bloodshot eyes went narrow, on guard for any hint of an attack; his hand moved to rest on
the hilt of his dagger. “You smile again, boy? What pleases you so much?”
“That my lord has such an excellent way with a jest,” he -replied, mindful of the other ears in the room.
“Jest?” said Montague, his tone beginning to rise.
Richard  held  his  breath,  all  his  attention  on  the  duke.  He  did  as  before  with  Ambert,  as  before  with
Ghislaine, pouring all his hard concentration into it, striving this time to get past the monumental  barrier  of
his father’s anger, hatred, and drunkenness. A small pain formed behind his eyes from the effort. “Indeed,”
he whispered after many long moments. “You did but jest, did you not?”
Montague’s reply was tardy. Richard held out, the ache in his skull growing, but in the end he got a small,
near imperceptible nod in response. His father’s wide face was shiny with sweat.

“It was most clever, but now you will release me from your service.”
“R—release . . . ?” The old man’s lips quivered.
“Say it, my lord, say that you release me. Say that I am free of my oath to you.”
And the words came out, halting at first, and then in a steady stream of ritualized speech. “I, Montague,
Duc d’Orleans, release you, Richard d’Orleans, from all oaths of fealty and service to my house. You are
free to go and make thy way in the wide world, in honor and grace . . .”
“Excellent,” said Richard, when it was all finished. “You’ll not go back on this. No  one  will  be  able  to
change your mind on it. I shall leave soon, and you’ll allow no one to hinder me or the people I travel with.
They are of no interest to you; you’ve better things to worry about. Is your understanding clear on this?”
“Yes . . . I—”
“That is good.” Richard withdrew a few steps and waited.
It took only a little time for the duke to regain himself, and when he did his first action was to rise and fill
his tankard again, growling like a bad-tempered bear. He shot a belligerent glare at Richard. “Well? Why do
you tarry? You’ve leave to go, take it!”
Richard pressed his hand to his brow, and the ache there lessened. The beguilement had been difficult,
but worth it. Relief washed over him, and he recalled the other reason why he’d come. “Then I  give  you
my farewell, Lord Montague.”
The  old  man  sneered.  For  all  his  lapse  bending  to  Richard’s  will,  he  was  well  recovered  back  to  his
original foul humor. “Keep your farewell. I want it not, and will be glad to see you gone.”
Richard blinked once at this brusque dismissal. What did I hope  for?  A fond  embrace?  A fallen  tear?
Pushing away the old and futile hurt, he bowed  deeply  and  backed  a  pace  or  two  toward  the  main  door
before turning.
“Bad riddance to thee!” Montague threw after him. “You should never have been born.”
How often had he heard that one? Never again, God ’a mercy. He kept going.
“In all of your miserable life,  you’ve  brought  me  nothing  but  grief  from  the  very  beginning,”  the  duke
continued, his voice rising. “I curse the day you were conceived and the day you came forth.” It  was  his
favorite torment, though he usually took more time to work up to it. His drunkenness must have altered the
pattern. “The day you took my wife from me!”
The  effect  of  this  all-too-familiar  attack  on  Richard  was  immediate  and  impossible  to  hide  behind  his
usual wall of silence and nonreaction. He knew where the duke was leading and how -impossible he was to
stop.
“Better  if  you  had  died  instead,  you  murdering—you  were  the  one  that  did  it.  You  killed  your  own
mother!”
No! I did not kill her! I did not! I did not! His steps faltered as the old agony seized him once more.
“Killed her, I say. Ripped her from the inside and left her screaming with her blood pouring out.”
In all the years that he’d been lashed by the tale, Richard had held himself in check. He’d endured every
kind of variation, delivered by every kind of utterance from whispered baiting to blistering shrieks, time and
time again, knowing that any objection, denial, or rage to the contrary would only make it worse. As a child,
he’d  seek  solitude  and  weep  out  his  grief;  as  a  man,  he’d  swallow  back  the  anger  to  release  it  on  the
practice field with fighting, or get drunk.
But now . . .
For want of a sword, his hand sought the dagger on his belt. In that moment he wanted nothing else but
to stop the tearing rasp of the old man’s voice. A quick strike, slide the blade through his throat and watch
the blood spurt . . .
He felt the heat sear his face and with it came blinding, unquench-able fury born of the helpless anguish
he kept within his soul. Always he’d been able to hold it back—but it was . . . was different now.
“Your fault—”
Far, far different.
“You damned—”
His corner teeth . . . budding . . . 
“—murdering—”
Richard  came  to  a  stop,  bewildered  by  his  body’s  unexpected  response  to  the  torment.  A  hot  breath
seemed to touch his brow, clouding his vision. The torches burned steadily, but the golden cast of their light
appeared to be tainted with crimson. He closed his eyes tight, knowing that they’d gone red as hellfire, and
lowered his head, giving in to a shudder as he fought what was happening inside.
“—coward!”
He  raised  his  hands,  palms  out  as  though  to  push  the  words  away,  and  placed  all  his  thought  upon

mastering himself. I will not let him win. Not after all this time.
“Your fault!”
I will be the strong one, not he. But it was so hard. So many, many years of blame to carry, to struggle
against. It had ever and always been the one fight he could not win. 
Then  clear  within  his  mind  he  heard  Sabra’s  voice,  full  of  love  and  comfort.  Ah,  the  poor  man.  He
grieves for her still. He loved her so.
And  suddenly  Richard’s  hot  rage  cooled.  He  felt  a  stillness  take  hold  of  his  pounding  heart,  gently
slowing it. Holding his breath, he listened for her to speak again, but no more  came.  What  had  been  said
was all; it would have to be enough. Was, indeed,  enough.  He  was  in  control  of  himself  again  and  very,
very calm.
He’d always believed the old man’s anger over his wife’s death had been about being deprived of one of
his prized possessions. It never occurred to Richard that his father could have  loved  a  woman,  might  still
love her. If he felt about her as I feel about Sabra . . . He shook his head at the idea, finding it a difficult
thing to take in, then turned and looked at Montague, trying to see him afresh.
But nothing about him seemed different. The duke stood hunched forward, a hand on  the  table  to  hold
himself steady, his bloated face flushed and mouth set. “Well, boy?” he demanded, once more insisting on
an answer to the impossible.
He is the same; it is I who am changed.
“Well?”
Richard shook his head as comprehension seeped into him.  “I  thought  you  the  greatest  in  all  the  land.
You were a noble warrior, strong and valiant—and you  were my father. I’d have done  anything  to  show
my love for you. I tried everything I  could  think  of  to  prove  it,  yet  nothing  worked.  Whatever  I  did  was
never enough.”
The old man snarled as he poured more ale, yet his disdain meant nothing to Richard. Not anymore.
“I have ever been loyal. I fought and bled and killed for you. I have been a fine and  faithful  son.  That
you could never see this makes your loss of me all the greater.”
The duke peered at him more keenly now. This was verging on criticism. This was verging on revolt.
“I have seen my father change over the years. I have seen his nobility vanish, his strength turn to cruelty,
his valor become bitter self-interest.”
The tankard crashed to the floor, spraying ale.
“I’ve watched him degenerate into the drunken old man who totters before me now. You are  pathetic,
and the worst of it is that you know it not.”
The  duke’s  face  went  purple.  His  whole  body  quivered,  and  he  worked  his  mouth  until  white  spittle
flecked his lips.
He looks like to die, and in truth, I care not.
Montague gave a half-choked bellow and lurched blindly forward, fists swinging. Richard put his arms up
to ward them off, but one blow landed full in his face, bloodying his nose.  A  second  followed,  but  with  a
speed born of his changing, a speed impossible for a mortal man, Richard caught the massive fist in midair,
stopping it dead. He pulled the old man close and, staring eye-to-eye with him, tightened his grip, and began
to squeeze . . . hard. He could clearly hear the sound of muscles tearing and bones snapping. The old man’s
face paled in an instant to a sickly gray, and a grunt of pain escaped him. He tried to pull free. Richard held
on. For one of eternity’s long, silent seconds the two stayed exactly as they were, father and  son  striving
for control.
“Yield, Montague,” he whispered.
“To . . . hell . . . with you.” Montague’s gray flesh faded to white; his knees  began  to  crumble.  Breath
hissing, he struggled to stay afoot, pressing to throw off Richard’s balance. Richard held firm, until he felt a
sudden shifting between them. Montague’s eyes gleamed with unholy delight as his free arm made a short,
forceful movement.
Richard thought he’d only been struck somewhat more bruis-ingly than before until the burning started.
He  looked  down  and  saw  the  duke  had  drawn  his  dagger  and  put  it  to  use.  It  was  buried  to  the  hilt  in
Richard’s leg, just  below  its  join  to  his  body.  The  blade  had  cut  deep,  severing  the  flow  from  his  heart.
Blood pumped from him like a river.
Its warmth soaked his clothes, then the pain set upon him in earnest, and he fell. He found the floor with
a  jolt,  twisting  awkwardly  to  avoid  jarring  the  dagger.  The  soot-black  ceiling  spun  once  and  seemed  to
swoop down toward him, blotting out the world. He didn’t care.  Despite all  the  beatings,  humiliations,  the
thousand daily censures, he’d not foreseen this, not really.
He dares. God in heaven, he dares. He would kill his own son!

Pressing his hands hard against the wound, Richard managed to slow the bleeding. It was bad.  On  the
battlefield he’d seen men die in but a few swift moments from such piercings, their life gushing  out  to  be
soaked up by the cold earth. He’d felt such a death once in a vision Sabra had given him. A hard lesson it
was and frightening in its reality of pain.
But the agony of his father’s act transcended that of the knife in his flesh, and for a time all he could do
was lie unmoving as this last betrayal tore him to the soul.
He dimly saw Montague tower over him, wheezing and holding his injured hand . . . but grinning. He was
actually grinning down at his dying son. 
Sabra, did you see this, too? Why did you not warn me?
Unless a warning was not needed. He was changed. Stronger. The natural way of things held no sway
over him, now.
Nor did his father, it seemed. 
So that was it.
I’ll not grant you this wish, old man.
Richard’s fingers gingerly grasped the hilt of the dagger. He hissed at the touch, but held fast. There was
no way to prepare himself; hesitation would make it worse, so he simply carried through and pulled as fast
as he could.
The shock of it dragged a cry from him even as he dragged the blade clear. More blood flowed, but for
naught but an instant before the cut sealed itself up. The burn flared and blazed, then gradually diminished.
After a few  moments  it  ceased  altogether,  and  he  breathed  normally  again,  marveling  at  the  miraculous
healing he knew must be taking place. Sabra had told  him  such  things  would  be  quick.  Not  pleasant,  but
quick. 
He waited it out, staring up at Montague, who had not budged. Indeed, he was taking  vast  amusement
from Richard’s seeming futile efforts to save himself. 
He dares to laugh.
Richard’s reaction surged up from his  deepest  being:  a  rage  powered  by  strength  such  as  he’d  never
known before, a rage he’d never allowed himself to express. Rage at the lifetime of  mistreatment  and  of
blame for something not his fault. He rolled and got his hands under him and pushed the floor away, found
his feet, and stood.
The blunt astonishment for this was plain on Montague, his surprise so consuming that he did not move
even  as  Richard  closed  on  him.  Richard  wrenched  him  around  and  slammed  him  upon  the  great  table,
bending him backwards with both hands fastened around his throat.
He knew his eyes were red and his teeth were out, but Richard cared not. All that mattered was the fact
that his trembling hands could free him from all the tyranny by snapping Montague’s neck as easily as a dry
summer twig. He wanted to; he had the power and the will to do so. 
Montague gagged and clawed, his heels drumming against the flags. He was helpless, probably  for  the
first time in his life. Panic limned his eyes, and his tongue bulged as he fought to draw air.
Richard squeezed all the more. How little effort it would take to finish things. But within him the  beast
hungered. He had a better use for the old man . . .
He clawed at the duke’s tunic, ripping the stained wool away to bare his throat. The old man cried out as
Richard bit down through the thick folds of skin to reach the nectar within.
Your blood is already in me, Father, but you will render more.
Montague did not struggle, perhaps too far gone from being choked.
Richard drank deeply, replacing that which had been taken, relishing the bitter taste of the man’s horror. 
You wanted  a death,  dear  Father,  then  I shall deliver it to you.
He  would  smother  that  grating  voice  forever  and  for  him  it  would  be  forever.  He’d  have  his
freedom—true freedom—once and for all from the past, from a lifetime of misery.
He pulled away to look at Montague, at the face he’d tried so hard not to hate. His father’s head lolled
weakly away, lips slack, eyes staring.
Richard encircled that fat bleeding neck with his hands, savoring the satisfaction it would bring, the vast,
singing joy.
Forever. Think on it!
A dozen times over he set himself to finish things. But each time he refrained, kept himself from taking
that last terrible step, delighting in the anticipation for its own sake.
He hovered on the edge for a hundred heartbeats.
Think on it.
For good or ill, this death above all others would be with him for the rest of his life. What a long journey it

would be to -always carry such a burden. Light for now, but how heavy in a year, a hundred years hence,
or a thousand? 
Then he came to know he could not, would not be able  to  bear  it.  Strong  as  he  was,  he  was  not  that
strong.
He eased his grip. You won’t win this way, either, old man.
But the rage still lived and needed expression. He roared, a great, angry, monstrous sound torn from the
maddened beast within that reverberated through the chamber, blasting everything else to utter silence. He
hauled Montague up from the table and, with a mere flick of his hands, hurled him into  his  great  chair  so
hard that both nearly crashed to the floor.
The duke roused himself but made not a sound, as much from his awe of Richard as from  his  injuries.
He trembled in his chair, gasping and rubbing his throat. Richard thought that now the old man finally looked
different, smaller . . . no, not that, not smaller; it was something else.
Montague was afraid.
Yes, it was fear that Richard perceived in those once-hard eyes—cold, naked fear. He’d gone his whole
life waiting to see that look but until this moment had never before  realized  it.  And  with  realization  came
revelation.
He is a rock, but I am a river. And the river shall triumph -always,  for  a river cannot  be pushed,
and does not wear away. The heavens shall feed me, renew me forever, and I will be here  long  after
he is gone and forgotten.
Sweet calm returned to his soul in a soothing rush. Richard was master of himself once more. His teeth
were  normal  again,  his  eyes  their  usual  disturbing  wintry  blue.  He  looked  at  his  father  and  understood
suddenly just how close he’d come. How very, very close . . . 
So that had been the choice.
He shook his head and gave a small laugh. No wonder Sabra had said nothing of what was to happen.
How could she? In matters  of  life  and  death  Richard  had  to  follow  his  own  -conscience—and  know  he
would have to live with the results of his actions, for good or ill, always.
“You will never see me again, old man,” he said.
Not a murmur from Montague.
“It will be best for all concerned.”
Richard  turned  to  leave.  This  time  he  made  it  to  the  entry  door  before  pausing.  There  was  one  last
matter requiring his attention.
With preternatural speed he darted toward the arras. He could hear a swift heartbeat now and scent the
terror there. Thrusting an arm behind the heavy tapestry he hauled Dear Brother blinking into the light. He
squawked as Richard hoisted him off his feet and slammed him against the wall, holding him there with one
arm under his chin. Sweating profusely, Ambert began to whimper. There was a new smell in the heavy air
of the room. What was it? Ah, yes, Ambert had wet himself.
Richard leaned close and purred a sympathetic noise. “What ails thee, Dear Brother?”
When Ambert made no reply,  Richard  glanced  once  over  his  shoulder  at  Montague,  then  back  again.
“Disappointed I didn’t kill him for you?”
Ambert’s face told all, confirming what Richard already knew.
“Oh, but you are indeed your father’s son.”
Richard stepped away, but instead of merely releasing Ambert, he  thrust  him  hard  across  the  room  to
land in a heap at the foot of the great chair. As this new truth  dawned  for  him,  their  father’s  malevolent
glare suddenly returned, now directed down at his utterly appalled firstborn.
What comes next is not something I want to see, thought Richard, turning away. It was not likely to be
agreeable.
With a short, mirthless laugh, Richard left them to it.
The moonlight was bright outside the castle, bright enough to cast a clear shadow before him as Richard
walked. Innumerable stars speckled the heavens, and his breath clouded in the cold spring air. As he neared
the campsite at the foot  of  the  castle’s  west  wall,  he  observed  that  Sabra’s  pavilion  and  the  other  tents
were gone, struck and loaded onto heavy wagons by her people. He approved of the haste; there was no
reason to linger. Soon he would join them on their trek to the coast and thence to Britain, to assume a new
name and start his new life.
Richard paused for a moment to breathe deep of the night air and take in the beauty of the setting. The
moon  was  still  high,  its  light  dusting  the  stone  towers  with  silver.  Except  for  the  usual  sounds  of  night
everything was silent about him, as though the land itself slept. Not all those who walked it rested, though.

In the dark shadow of the castle he saw Sabra astride her horse, holding the reins of another, waiting  for
him. Without his new powers he would never have been able to find her.
Were that true, then she would have found me.
Yet he did not go to her, but stood awhile beneath the trees. 
She’d been right about saying good-bye. Any parting, whether for an hour or a lifetime, made a change
within, and few were aware of the fact. He was glad he’d gone, but at what price?
As he stood hugging the shadows of what had been his only home, the cold hand of staved-off  sorrow
clawed its way up his body and gripped his throat, shaking him. 
It  shook  him  with  sudden  sharp  memories  of  the  childhood  he’d  survived  and  gave  him  a  clear
knowledge  of  what  his  childhood  might  have  been  like  had  his  mother  lived—and  the  unbridgeable  gulf
between the two. 
It shook him with the realization of what he had done to his father and what he had wanted to do. 
How very, very close . . .
And though he’d not given in to the temptation, he still felt pain. All the lost and lonely years piled upon
his shoulders. His knees buckled, and he slumped to the damp earth, head bowed low. How he wanted the
pain to stop.
“My love?” Sabra now stood beside him. He’d not heard her approach. “Richard?”
I don’t want her to see this.
Then  he  felt  her  hand  caressing  the  side  of  his  face;  her  gentle  touch  of  compassion  and  kindness
shattered his reserve as nothing else could, and he began to weep. Not an easy thing, his first sobs hurt like
that dagger. He’d not allowed himself such utterance since childhood. Sabra held him, saying nothing. The
worst of it eventually passed, and he regained a measure of composure, but the pain still gripped him.
He glanced up at Sabra. She voiced no question, but the -desire for an explanation was in her expression.
“I have killed my father,” he finally whispered.
She was silent for a few moments, carefully taking in the red stains and tears on his clothing. “How can
this be? You fought, but I know he still lives.”
“You know well. I—I . . . did things.” Richard wiped his face roughly with the back of his sleeve. From
his lips it came away with traces of the blood he’d taken. “The duke lives, yet my -father is  dead.  In  my
heart I have killed him.”
She shivered once, as though feeling his anguish.
“The man I bade farewell to is no longer my father; he is dead. For that loss I must grieve.”
Sabra lifted his chin with her fingertips to make him look at her. Her face shone in  the  moonlight.  Her
eyes were full of love. “You had to go to him, my Richard, it had to be done.”
“Perhaps so.”
“I have the Sight, and it showed me what was needed before you could leave. You may not know it, but
tonight was a great triumph, for you have freed yourself from  a  lifelong  yoke,  and  you  have  done  it,  not
your new powers, not I. This was your greatest victory.” She pressed her palm against his chest, over his
beating heart, then kissed his forehead.
She  was  right.  He  was  free.  The  word  rang  through  his  very  being  like  a  great  bell.  Yet  with  the
exultation a deep sadness lay heavy on him.
“It will pass, my love,” she said, responding to the words of his soul. “It will pass.”
He stood, and for a long time Richard held her tight within his arms, soaking in her warmth and strength,
taking it for his own. Another kiss, this time returning it to her own forehead. Holding her hand, he led the
way back to the wall where the horses were ground-tethered. Lying at their feet were two great hounds.
“Who are they?” she asked in wonder. “They have no fear of us.”
“Old friends  of  mine,”  he  said,  suddenly  pleased.  “The  white  one  is  Merlin  and  the  brindle  is  Prince.
They must have followed me. Good lads, come here and meet your new mistress.”
The dogs bounded over, sniffing cautiously. Sabra won them to her in a matter of seconds. “Amusing it is
that one of them is named Merlin,” she said.
“Why is that?”
“I’ll tell you as we ride.”
He boosted her up on her horse, mounted his own, and with the dogs trailing along, they set off down the
castle’s  wide  hill toward  the  west  and  their  future.  They  carefully  forded  a  shallow  place  in  the  lake,
following the road as it climbed the steep slope of  another  hill on  the  other  side.  The  chill  breeze  ruffled
Richard’s hair as they reached its crest, and he stopped. He knew this spot well. It was his favorite view of
the castle, and he’d seen it in every manner in every season over the years.  With  torchlights  peeping  out
through the narrow windows, the cold stones would be perfectly reflected in the calm water along with the

farmlands and outbuildings around it.
Though she was already well ahead of him  he  heard  Sabra’s  voice  floating  back  in  the  still  air.  “One
thing more, my Richard, and I tell you this so that you may one day cast your sadness away and be happy.
You will never have the childhood you wanted, you can only have the childhood you had.”
Her simple words echoed many times through his mind, and regrettably he knew that they were true. 
Nothing would change what had been.
But . . . he could make sure that it did not ruin what was to be.
He spurred his mount to catch her. 
And he did not look back.
Chapter Two
Toronto, Canada, the Present
The warm fingers of sleep held him tight and did their best  not  to  let  him  go,  but  in  the  end  they  slipped
away, and his eyes fluttered open in the quiet darkness of his room. For a second or two, he didn’t  know
quite where he was, for  his  last  dream  had  been  comfortable,  serene,  and  not  of  this  place  or  time.  He
blinked sluggishly and wondered what exactly it was that had stirred him from slumber. A drowsy glance at
the  glowing  green  numerals  of  his  clock  radio  told  him  that  it  was  not  the  alarm.  What  then?  He  was
normally a deep sleeper, even at night, and this unknown interruption irked him. Damn it, but he’d put head
to pillow not more than twenty minutes ago. Then, distant in the house, he heard it again.
As he fought to full wakefulness, Richard Dun reached for the bedside lamp and flicked  it  on,  wincing
against  its  soft  golden  luminescence.  The  dim  light  demolished  the  gloom  of  his  bedroom  and  seeped
through the half-open door into the hallway beyond. The noise that had disturbed him came from out there
somewhere. He couldn’t quite place  it  and  knew  that  he  should  be  able  to,  that  for  some  reason  it  was
important. 
It was not the  sound  of  an  intruder  who  had  somehow  -gotten  past  the  house  security.  Even  without
clamor  Richard  would  have  sensed  such  a  person  long  before  he  heard  him.  This  disturbance  was
mechanical and muted, as if coming from far away. Definitely  not  a  fire  or  burglar  alarm,  but  something
very similar and just as urgent. Then with a cold swoop of dismay he -realized exactly what it was, and was
suddenly quite wide awake and moving.
The  sound  repeated  as  though  in  reproach  for  his  tardiness.  He  arose  quickly,  pulling  a  long  blue
bathrobe over his naked body, tying the belt loose around his waist as he hurried from his bedroom, padding
silently along the hall. Down the stairs he rushed toward his office and his computer. It was from there the
sound originated.
He didn’t bother with lights this time for he could see well enough without and was now fully alert. The
pale glow of the computer screen spilled out like a beacon to guide him, pulsing gently in the  gloom.  That
was another disturbing thing. It shouldn’t have been pulsing; it should have been on the screen saver. The
sound  grew  in  intensity  as  he  approached  and,  rounding  the  corner  of  the  doorway,  hit  him  with  its  full
force. It wasn’t really loud, simply insistent and impossible to ignore, like the cry of a baby. Then  he  saw
the screen, and it confirmed what he already knew. His stomach turned to ice.
The screen was blank save for one thing, a letter, flashing on and off, the letter S.
Richard dropped heavily into the leather office chair and cut the sound. It was Stephanie, an emergency

e-mail. This was the private alarm system he’d set up just for her, her cry for help to use when everything
else failed. In all the years since he’d arranged the program, she’d never had cause to employ it.  In  fact,
she had laughed when he’d explained it to her, chiding him for being such a worrier, then gently listened and
promised  that  if  she  was  ever  in  trouble  she  would  use  it.  She’d  understood  the  deep  caring  behind  his
worry.
“But I’ll never need it,” she said lightly, so full of sweet innocence that she honestly believed herself.
He knew too much of life and she not enough, but he did not gainsay her, not on this of all days. Not for
the world would he hurt her more than he’d done already.
And she kissed him chastely on the cheek, and they went back inside to her wedding reception,  she  to
her new husband, he to his own gut-wrenching sadness. Yet another that he had loved and lost, that he’d
had to give up because of his nature and fate. Immortality did indeed have its harsh price.
Richard closed his eyes and sank his head into his hands from the photographically clear recollection. He
thought that he’d forgotten the pain of her loss, that he’d grown beyond wanting her so much and that his
heart was all healed. Wrong.
But this was no time for self-pity or sad reflection.  Stephanie  using  this  method  of  contact  meant  that
something was awfully, terribly amiss. She had all his phone numbers, and could get  in  touch  with  him  at
any  time  no  matter  where  he  might  be  on  the  globe.  Why  had  she  not  simply  called?  She  would
have—unless she feared a line tap at her end. That was entirely possible.
Richard punched in the access  code to tell the computer to begin the complex retrieval of the message.
He  chafed  at  the  brief  wait;  then  it  was  on  the  screen,  a  scattering  of  random-seeming  numbers  and
symbols. He hit one last command key, and the mess instantly deciphered itself into readable words.
Richard,  something  is  wrong.  It’s  lots  of  little  things—gates  left  open,  mail  coming  late,  and
there’s  been  a  lot  of  static  and  clicks  on  the  phone.  Luis  says  to  ignore  them  but  I  think  it’s
Alejandro. I don’t know what to do. I’m afraid. Can you help us? S.
He read it twice, his mouth going dry. For Stephanie, always cool-headed and so self-possessed, this was
close to gibbering panic. Stephanie, Luis, Alejandro, how those names brought the memories crowding back
upon him. Such memories. He rubbed his eyes reflexively and entered a simple response to the plea.
Of course. On my way ASAP. Hold on. R.
How in hell had Alejandro found them? Richard had set their new lives up using every  trick  he’d  ever
learned and a few he’d invented himself. A vast expense, but  worth  it  where  Stephanie  and  the  children
were concerned. 
Richard checked the miniature clock face at the bottom corner of the screen. It read six minutes short of
four a.m., confirming the temporary futility of his reply. Nothing was flying at this hour,  nor  would  be  for
several more. By the time he woke people up and arranged for a charter, the commercial flights would be
running.  Would  Stephanie  know  that?  She  must,  but  it  was  nearly  three  in  her  area,  and  he  knew  how
worry and lack of rest could erode common sense and feed one’s fears in the darkest hours of night.  He
could picture her hovering by the glow of her own computer screen, biting her lip, waiting for his answer to
come. 
She’d have it now. His turn to wait for her to respond.
Two minutes crawled by. He gave in to impatience and hammered out another message.
Tell me more, he sent.
Another minute. Then: Take too long. I don’t want Luis to know I’ve asked for your help.
Well,  that  explained  her  desire  for  secrecy.  Her  husband  Luis,  despite  all  civilized  protests  to  the
contrary, must still possess a lingering apprehension about Richard. Understandable. It would take  a  most
remarkable  man  indeed  not  to  be  jealous  of  his  wife’s  one-time  lover.  After  the  marriage  Richard  had
certainly never given Luis cause to doubt Stephanie’s faithfulness, nor had she. She took monogamy  very
seriously indeed, but some men were born insecure. Stephanie was aware  of it and reluctant to stir things
up, especially now if Alejandro was back.
Get to a public phone and call me. Richard demanded, craving more details.
I don’t dare leave the house. Don’t call here, either. Think the lines are tapped. Just hurry. 
Will be on the first flight in if I have  to bump the pilot himself. I’ll be there in the morning.  Noon
latest.
Nonono. Come to house at NIGHT!
Hurry, but wait???
Make it look like one of your visits. I’m sure we’re being watched. Safer for all.
Tell me more, he repeated. 
The reply was quick in coming. She sent only one frustrating line:

Tomrow nite Luiis awake havve too go
He frowned at the haste the misspelled words implied. Why was she afraid of keeping this cry for help
secret from her own spouse? Was it to protect herself from his reproach or spare Luis’s ego? Probably a
combination of the two. It was an old, old dance.
Richard had seen a thousand and more variations of such -tensions between couples in as many years,
taking all  forms,  -ranging  from  mild  annoyance  to  violent  murder,  inspired  by  inse-curity  or  obsession  or
both, resulting in infinite degrees of soul--destruction. It was love’s dark side, having transmuted from initial
-delight with one’s partner into a  form  of  mutual  slavery,  something  Sabra  had  wisely  banished  between
herself and Richard from their very first night together. She’d  apparently  been  less  successful  with  Luis.
Why in God’s name did people let themselves get caught in so intimate a trap? And choose to stay? Fear of
loneliness, perhaps, but there were worse fates than being alone. Most of the time, he guessed, they didn’t
know any other way to live, couldn’t even imagine it.
-But Stephanie had always been so strong within  herself  and  independent.  That  was  one  of  the  many
things he’d loved about her. However motivated she might be to spare Luis’s feelings, for her to be snared
the same as so many others angered and saddened Richard. How could she let herself change? How could
Luis do that to anyone he professed to love?
Richard  made  himself  break  off  his  speculation.  What’s  done  was  done.  Much  as  chivalry  and
preference  inspired  him  to  take  Stephanie’s  part,  he  did  not  know  all  the  facts.  He  was,  in  the  end,  an
outsider to their marriage and would ever be so. Basing such imputations toward her husband  on  a  single
line of words only revealed to Richard how deep his own feelings still ran for her.
Stephanie was  long  married  to  another  and  gone.  He  could  be  a  good  friend  to  her  now,  but  nothing
more. Sabra’s words -often came  back  to  him  over  the  years,  her  tender  warning  against  becoming  too
attached to another’s swift-passing life.
But dammit, time and again, he just couldn’t help himself.
Stephanie . . . Luis . . . Alejandro.
And himself.
It was all Bourland’s fault.
There had been an embassy party some dozen years before. Richard  was  recently  arrived  in  Toronto,
complete with a new life background and in need of VIP contacts to establish his security business in the
right levels. Such a gathering was  the  perfect  means  to  do  so,  otherwise  it  was  the  last  place  he  would
willingly  take  himself.  His  height,  crown  of  blond  hair,  and  good  looks  made  him  memorable,  and  there
might still be some aging political codgers around from the last time he’d opted for a moderately high-profile
position. If he was spotted, then he could always pass himself off as his own son or grandson. It wouldn’t
be the first time, but it was often difficult keeping his stories (and generations) straight.
One of his past connections in Britain had recommended him to Philip Bourland, who held a nondescript
civil service post in the Canadian government. Out of habit Richard had researched him prior to their first
meeting,  turning  up  a  long,  if  somewhat  bland  career—that  did  not  precisely  fit  the  man.  He  found
Bourland’s  drawling  speech  pattern  and  lazy  demeanor  were  at  odds  with  his  sharp  blue  eyes,  and  the
expensive, hand-tailored suit on his back certainly did not jibe with what should have been a humble salary.
After  a  few  minutes  of  hypnotic  questioning—which  Bourland  never  later  remembered—Richard
confirmed his suspicions. Bourland was rather more than a simple civil servant when it came to his range of
government duties. He’d  created  a  unique  niche  for  himself  within  the  various  hierarchies,  and  over  the
course of time he proved to be an exceedingly valuable contact indeed.
But these were still the early days yet. A slight nudge of a suggestion and Richard secured an immediate
liking between them. That would probably have happened anyway; they were similar enough in attitude and
goals to assure it. Long after his initial suggestion wore off Richard became aware  of a trust and a deeply
felt  kinship  he  felt  for  Bourland  that  surprised  him,  though  he  made  no  mention  of  it.  It  was  the  way
Bourland  reminded  him  of  certain  knights  whom  he’d  served  with  in  the  past.  Bourland  was  honest,
responsible, and deeply committed to ideals beyond his own personal ambitions. A rare combination in any
age. Definitely a man to be cultivated.
Bourland  proved  to  be  most  cooperative  and  useful  from  the  start,  coming  up  with  the  idea  of  their
attending the embassy party himself and offering to extend his invitation to cover Richard.
“I’m not sure it’s my sort of function,” Richard hedged. “I’m trying to set  up  as  a  security  consultant.
Low visibility is preferable for someone like me.”
“There’ll be hundreds of people there far  more  concerned  with  you  noticing  them  than  the  other  way
around. What’s one more man in a tuxedo?”

He had a point there.
“Besides,” Bourland drawled on, “while they’re all jockeying to get next to the politicians, I’ll  introduce
you to the people who really run things around here.”
That decided it. “Then I’ll be glad to come, thank you.”
“Bring a date if you like.”
Richard flashed a regretful smile. “I haven’t been in town long enough to make any friends.”
“We’ll  cure  that  tonight,  then.  If  she  likes  you,  you  can  borrow  my  secretary  for  a  dance  or  two.
Normally I’d be taking my daughter, but she’s studying for a law exam or something, so Stephanie fills  in
for her at social functions. They’re both good girls.”
Richard took that last little tidbit to mean Bourland’s secretary was hands off. Fine with him, he had to
concentrate on work, anyway. 
He arrived on time, found his name had indeed been included on the guest list, and drifted into the crowd,
artfully avoiding offers of champagne and hors d’oeuvres. His practiced eye picked out the security people
as  a  matter  of  course  before  Bourland  found  him  and  began  introducing  him  around.  From  that  point
Richard was all affable business, shaking hands and committing a dozen or more names and their attendant
jobs to memory for later recall and use. He projected the polished charm and confidence necessary to such
encounters  and  made  sure  (with  a  subtle  hypnotic  nudge  here  and  there)  that  the  people  he  met  would
remember him as well—with a very positive cast to the memory.
Throughout the evening Richard had purposely avoided sitting at Bourland’s table so as to skip the whole
awkward business about not eating and drinking. Several young women congregated there, and one of them
broke away to join them now on the edge of an area set aside for dancing, lightly taking  Bourland’s  arm.
He did the honors and introduced his secretary.
“Assistant really,” he said, presenting her to Richard. “More. God knows how I’d manage without her.
She’s an absolute gem.”
Stephanie Andersson held out her hand for Richard to shake, but he took it gently and kissed it instead,
adding a gallant little  bow  that  put  him  very  close  to  her.  She  didn’t  flinch  or  go  self-conscious  at  his
courtly  manner,  as  many  women  in  the  New  World  were  wont  to  do,  and  merely  smiled,
gracious as royalty.
“A pleasure, Mr. Dun,” she said in a honey-smooth voice.
Richard did not reply. He was far too busy drinking her in with his eyes.  She  was  a  vision.  Her  milky
skin and black hair, cropped close like a latter-day Mia Farrow, were most striking when matched with the
palest blue eyes that he had ever seen. Her ancestors had come from Iceland, he later learned.
Her hands were long and slender, the nails short and perfectly manicured. She wore a light silver sheath
of a dress and clearly very little else beneath it except for a spectacular figure. He noted almost in passing
her lack of jewelry, and knew instinctively that she was well aware  she needed none. A vein pulsed gently
in her throat.
“I have a distinct feeling that I’m rather  superfluous  here.”  Bourland’s  voice  cut  through  the  uncanny
silence that had established itself between them in the midst of the party noise.
Richard became aware  that he was still holding her hand near his mouth,  and  disconcerted,  released  it
and straightened.
“Let me know if you need a ride home,” Bourland said to her in a dry tone.
“I will,” she murmured. She continued to smile at Richard.
Bourland was a perceptive man. He shot Richard a piercing look, one brow slightly raised. The message
was clear: Make  her cry and  I’ll murder you.  He then kissed her briefly on the cheek and  disappeared
into the swirl of people, leaving them alone. 
Richard made a slight motion toward Bourland’s retreating back. “Are you and he—?”
Stephanie  shook  her  head,  her  smile  turning  rueful.  She’d  obvi-ously  fielded  this  question  many  times
before. “No, nothing like that. We’re close; my late mother and his late wife  were  good  friends,  and  I’m
best friends with his daughter. He’s more of a father or an uncle to me than anything else.”
“Ah.” Now, that was excellent news.
“And he’s usually rather more protective.”
“Indeed?”
“He  always  warns  me  about  the  predators  who  work  these  parties  looking  for  a  tasty  morsel  like
myself.”
Richard pursed his lips, then puffed out a single soft laugh. How very, very apt. “Well, perhaps he trusts
me to be a gentleman with you.”
Her gaze flicked over him, appraising and approving. “I certainly hope not.”

“Ah,” he said again, which seemed to be more than enough for the moment. 
“Do  you  dance?”  she  asked.  The  music,  geared  toward  the  preferences  of  a  mature  crowd,  was
balanced somewhere between slow big band and jazz. It had enough of a beat to attract couples onto the
floor. 
“I’ve picked up a few steps in my misspent youth,” he modestly admitted.
“Show me,” she said. From anyone else it  would  have  been  an  order,  but  from  her  it  was  a  guileless
request that only a fool would refuse, and Richard was no fool.
He recalled the time he once told Oscar Wilde about dancing being a vertical expression of a horizontal
desire.  Never  before  had  he  felt  so  right  about  that  particular  observation  as  he  swept  the  beautiful
Stephanie into his arms. She followed his lead as though they’d rehearsed for years.
And the rest of the night passed for him in that wonderful magical lightness that is the start of falling in
love. 
Stephanie had not needed a ride home. Not from Bourland, anyway.
They  dated  for  months,  but  despite  the  warm  intimacies  of  bed,  intense  mutual  affection,  and—for
Richard—occasionally feeding from her, nothing permanent was ever established between  them.  That,  of
course, was an impossibility.
Stephanie remained unaware of Richard’s true nature; he made sure of that. It was for the best for them
both. Over the course of centuries he’d had many lengthy affairs with exceptional women, though none of
them could ever approach the wholeness of bonding he shared with Sabra.  Whether  it  was  mentioned  or
not, most of those women sensed or knew he wasn’t entirely free. The ones who wanted more from him he
gently discouraged by means of  hypnosis,  seeing  to  it  that  they  always  parted  as  friends.  In  Stephanie’s
case, even for her, he could make no exception no matter how much his heart ached.
She’d wanted marriage and children, neither of which Richard could provide. Even with hypnotic help to
ease things, the blunt fact of it hurt her deeply, and their relationship entered a long cooling stage. Though
he would have liked continuing things for decades, her biological clock was  running,  so  he  finally  stepped
back. It did not take her long to meet another man at another embassy party.
Thus did Luis Trujillo enter her life. Bourland made the introductions then, as  well.  A  CEO  in  a  major
coffee  exporting  business,  Luis  was  charming  and  intelligent,  tall,  with  dashing  good  looks  and  gracious
humor. He fell for Stephanie in that hard and heavy way that only a Latin can, courting her with tender and
wholehearted attention. Talk of marriage was almost immediately in the air.
Richard  made  it  his  personal  business  to  check  Luis’s  background  and  found  it  disgustingly  clean.
Colombian  by  birth,  he  made  his  permanent  home  in  Toronto.  His  years  at  Harvard  getting  a  business
degree had solidified his connections in the international community through its own “old boy network.” He
came from a good family that eschewed the easy profits of drugs for a more honorable and safer trade. He
was wealthy, but not ostentatious about it, well-liked by his peers, and even his ex-girlfriends had kind things
to say of him. Though none would  recall  being  questioned  on  such  intimate  matters,  Richard  ascertained
from them that Luis’s sexual habits were healthy, his attitude toward his lovers considerate and gentle.
It would be an excellent match if Stephanie decided to accept his suit.
Damnation.
She gave Richard a final chance. She came to him in one last achingly unhappy night, waiting, wanting
for him to ask the question, and he had once more simply not asked it. Instead, they made love slowly, with
infinite  care  and  sadness,  each  knowing  that  it  was  the  last  time,  and  each  wanting  to  remember  it,
remember it forever. She kissed him in the morning, and held him tight, pressing her lithe body against him. 
Still he said nothing. 
Tears silently flowing, she left. Instead of a question, she had gotten an answer.
Richard, relegated now to the role of friend, eventually heard through Bourland all the painful details as
Stephanie allowed herself to wholly fall in love with Luis. The wedding date was announced shortly after,
and Richard had truly been happy for her, though he also carried regret heavy in his heart.
He’d tried to warm to Luis, but found it difficult, putting it down to understandable jealousy for still loving
Stephanie  himself.  For  her  sake  he  put  on  a  convincing  show  of  cordiality  and  managed  to  attend  the
wedding  with  good  grace.  Why,  he  hardly  felt  a  twinge  when  Bourland,  standing  in  for  her  long-dead
parents, gave her away. 
As always, things became easier with the passage of time, espe-cially after  the  birth  of  her  first  child,
Michael, a close eight months after the wedding. To some, he’d arrived with unseemly haste; to Stephanie
he was a greatly  longed-for  joy.  Much  to  Richard’s  delight,  he  was  named  as  the  boy’s  godfather.  The
christening photo of him holding the baby had a central place on his work desk. Two years later, he  once
more stood in the church as godfather to her twin girls, Elena and Seraphina, and another photo adorned his

desk.  He  couldn’t  have  been  happier  or  more  proud  than  if  he’d  been  their  father  himself.  Stephanie
documented  their  childhood  with  hundreds  of  pictures,  always  sending  duplicates  to  Richard  along  with
plenty of stories.
The good days were short-lived, though. Three years into the marriage, in a messy and highly publicized
sting operation, Luis’s export  business  was  revealed  to  be  little  more  than  a  cover  for  another  far  more
lucrative one. Within the bags of coffee beans that arrived  regularly  from  his  home  country  was  another
cargo, that white mistress of energy and despair, cocaine. 
Luis seemed relieved to be caught and quickly turned Queen’s evidence, hoping for sanctuary in Canada.
His  story  was  that  he  was  little  more  than  an  unwilling  pawn  paid  to  look  the  other  way  on  certain
shipments. The true kingpin of the operation, the real drug lord, was his brother, Alejandro.
Left with a small fish instead of the big one, the Queen’s prosecutor wanted nothing to do with Luis, no
matter how eager he was to save his skin. He was richly cooperative and helped to shut down or seriously
damage a dozen other drug operations, but couldn’t convince the authorities to provide him with  sufficient
protection.  Death  threats  from  the  raging  Alejandro  came  regularly  by  phone  and  mail.  In  desperation,
Stephanie had called Richard, begging him to do something, anything to protect them all.
He was furious with Luis, of course, but even more so with himself for not discovering the truth earlier.
Had he been  more  thorough  in  that  background  check,  he  could  have  spared  Steph-anie  from  making  a
hideous mistake. Too late now. Her chosen lot was to stand by her husband, for she did still love him. With
three small children and a spouse powerless to shield them, -Richard could no more refuse her than stop his
own breathing.
He did not merely pull strings, he hauled them until his hands bled, calling in and  promising  favors  with
reckless abandon. Once the prosecutors had squeezed  every  last  drop  of  information  possible  from  Luis,
they  agreed  to  release  him  into  Richard’s  custody.  Bourland  had  also  brought  his  silent  but  massive
influence to bear, and between the two of them they managed to make the whole family disappear.
At his own expense Richard set up their quiet transplantation to Texas. New names, new backgrounds,
new location, new jobs, their past was utterly buried.
Or so they had all thought.
Richard now stared intently  at  the  screen  as  it  scrolled  with  information  long  forgotten  on  the  Trujillo
case. What had he missed? How could this breach have happened? He racked his brains for any detail that
he  had  overlooked.  He’d  missed  nothing.  They  had  been  perfectly  hidden,  perfectly  safe,  and  yet,
somehow,  Alejandro  had  found  them.  Over  the  years  he  had  patiently  searched  and  searched  from  the
safety of his Colombian fortress, and finally . . . 
In other witness protection programs it was often the witness himself who gave away his location to the
hunters by reverting to old habits and preferences. Some had  even  been  foolish  enough  in  their  enforced
isolation to openly contact old friends and family. Though Luis may have been easily intimidated by brother
Ale-jandro into his crimes, he wasn’t a stupid man. He’d been warned again and again what to avoid. He
liked French cooking, but switched to Italian restaurants. He was a great soccer fan, but would only attend
basketball games. The same rules applied to Stephanie. She had a passion for ice skating, but abandoned it
for horseback riding. Her love of rock concerts was restricted to watching them at home on cable. They’d
both been more than careful, not just for themselves, but for the sake of their children.
Could Bourland have possibly slipped up? Certainly not in an intentional way, for Stephanie was a second
daughter to him, but perhaps in some passive sense. Alejandro was determined enough to make an example
of his brother and capable of arranging the most astronomical of bribes in the right places.  All  he  needed
was one person able to get to the crucial records of his case.  But Philip Bourland had carefully obliterated
everything concerning the relo-cation. Only he and Richard knew the  details;  nothing  was  on  paper  or  in
any computer.
Then it came to him in a cold white light of sickening realization.
There would be phone records of the few and far between long distance calls.
And mail.
Alejandro had no need to search the rest of the world for his brother; he had only to watch Richard and
Bourland. The postal service would have been the easiest to crack. Even without a return on an envelope
all he had to do was have someone check  all  the  cancellation  stampings  and  note  their  origin.  He  would
have them all traced. Phone company records could be gotten to by any  moderately  talented  hacker,  and
Alejandro could afford to buy the best. It would  take  him  a  long  time,  for  he  couldn’t  keep  at  it  steadily
without being spotted. And then there was the lengthy, ongoing task of sifting out anything useful from the
irregular accumulation of data,  but  he  was  a  patient  man.  He  would  have  been  at  it  for  all  these  years,
looking for patterns, comparing Richard’s records to Bourland’s and eventually finding what he wanted. A

little on-site investigation in Texas, and he’d have an exact address fast enough.
The most insignificant of details could have led Alejandro to his goal. As resignation seeped in down to
the bone, Richard saw the truth of it,  and  his  heart  sank  with  the  knowledge  that  he’d  once  more  failed
Stephanie. He’d let sentiment get the better of his judgment. He should have severed all ties to her. Harsh
for everyone, but safer, much safer.
Their cover was blown, and he had to move fast.
Richard snapped out of his reverie and glanced at the clock on his computer screen. Nearly an hour had
passed. It was still early, but he was close to the margin of actually being able to do something constructive
concerning transportation. The problem with the rest of the diurnal world was its inability  to  fit  itself  with
any sort of convenience to his own personal timetable. 
He made one call and informed the voicemail of his travel agent that he would urgently need to leave for
Dallas as soon as a flight—any flight—became available. He left his cell phone number, then settled in front
of his computer screen. First he wrote an e-mail to  Deborah  Heinrich,  his  secretary,  apprising  her  of  his
sudden trip and lack of a solid return time. He hazarded that he might be away for at least a week. She was
used to such disappearances by her employer and would reschedule appointments accordingly.
Then he copied all the files, both official and otherwise, concerning  Alejandro,  dropping  the  disk  into  a
lead-lined pouch that went into his briefcase. Leaving the computer pulsing gently, -silently in the gathering
dawn, he locked the case  and went to his  bedroom  to  pack  what  few  things  he  would  want  for  his  trip.
Long practice meant that he inevitably took little: a change of clothing, shaving kit, passport, a walletful of
credit cards, and some loose American cash. If the trip proved a long one, he could always buy whatever
else he needed.
Once showered and dressed, he wound his way down to  the  Jaguar  E-Type  slumbering  in  his  garage,
opened the trunk and deposited the briefcase, carelessly flicking his overnight bag in on top of it. 
His mouth twitched as he slammed the lid shut. 
Oh, for an early flight.
The trip to Pearson Airport was thankfully uneventful. For once, there was no construction to delay the
flow  of  dawn  traffic  through  which  the  E-Type  Jag  moved  with  catlike  ease,  slipping  past  the  lowlier
vehicles, heading away from the rising sun. It promised to be a hot and brilliant day, and even through the
dark  tinted  windows  of  his  car,  Richard  felt  his  skin  prickle  in  protest  at  the  coming  light.  Had  he
remembered sun block? Yes, there it was, reassuringly in his coat pocket as always. How easeful it would
be to go back to the days when he’d fully shielded himself with armor before departing on a quest. It may
have been like wearing an oven, but there was nothing  to  match  metal  and  leather  for  stopping  a  deadly
sunburn.
His cell phone came to sudden life, warbling insistently. He flipped it open, cradling it to his ear. A voice
on the other end of the line identified itself as belonging to Sasha with Ulysses Travel. For a brief second,
his mind raced until he registered her face in his imaginings. She was a pretty young thing, tousle-haired and
wide  of  smile,  with  freckles.  How  he  loved  her  freckles.  He  might  have  been  interested  in  her,  as  she
certainly was in him, but something always stopped him from pursuit. For an instant he  wondered  what  it
could have been, and dismissed the thought. He had enough on his mind without pondering the intricacies of
his  admittedly  flexible  conscience.  Sasha’s  voice  purred  in  his  ear,  turning  her  bald  facts  into  a  lush
seduction, not unlike listening to Marilyn Monroe give a weather report.
“The first available flight is  at  seven  twenty-five  from  terminal  three  and  gets  you  into  Dallas  at  nine
fifty-one. The best they have is business class.”
“No first?”
“Doesn’t exist on this one. It’s Canadian.”
Richard scowled, his eyes following the graceful curve of  the  road  as  he  left  the  Q.E.W.  and  headed
north on 427.
“And the price will be pretty steep for such short notice,” she added.
“Just put it on my account as usual and book me in.”
A pause at her end. He thought he could hear the swift clicking of her keyboard as she worked. “It’s set
up. You can claim your ticket at the counter.”
“Well done, thanks.”
Her voice murmured back to him, loaded with what he was sure she thought was subtle innuendo, “My
pleasure, Mr. Dun. Whatever you want.”
He smiled as he slid the E-Type out of the center lane to pass a gently rusting Camaro, and flipped the
phone  shut.  Why  was  it  that  each  succeeding  generation  thought  that  it  was  the  one  that  had  first

discovered sex? If only they knew. His long existence at vampiric unlife had taught  him  many  things,  but
most of all it taught him that in the whole of the world, there was nothing new.
He  pushed  the  accelerator  to  the  floor,  feeling  his  heart  leap  at  the  pure  power  he  controlled.  What
wonderful cars these were. A quarter century gone and he’d still not tired of the model. He surged past the
other  traffic,  safe  in  the  knowledge  that  no  speed  cop  would  be  able  to  give  him  a  ticket,  one  of  the
advantages of his hypnotic ability, and was soon at the required terminal. He parked in his usual  reserved
space, and took out the scant baggage he’d packed. Then he locked the door, activated the alarm, and was
gone.
The land throbbed in the heat. Not a breath of wind stirred the air. The sun glared down from the noon
sky, daring anything to move, and nothing took up the challenge. The song of cicadas rasped  loud  in  pure
concert.
Richard was surprised that he wasn’t burning. Clearly, the combination of a long overcoat, fifty-plus sun
block,  sunglasses,  and  a  wide-brimmed  Stetson  worked  well  for  him.  Sweat  prickled  on  his  upper  lip,
though, and ran down salty into his mouth. He should have been blistering by now. Best not to push things.
He’d be of no help to Stephanie if he let himself get careless in the open furnace of a Texas summer.
He had difficulty  making  out  the  lines  of  her  vast  low  house  in  the  heat  shimmer.  Determined  to  get
under its shade, Richard started toward the building, moving silently, as only he knew how. Dust spiraled up
from  his  boots  in  tiny  talcum  gusts  as  he  stepped  carefully  between  rocks  and  clumps  of  cactus  until
reaching the white edge of the gravel driveway. He caught a single flash of movement as a lizard scurried
frantically under a stone, then heard the solitary scream of a turkey buzzard circling impossibly high in the
pale blue above.
Richard had watched for a long time before breaking cover, satisfied that the whole area was clear of all
intruders except for himself. It seemed safe enough to announce his presence. He  stepped  carefully  onto
the back porch, grateful for the relief of the sheltering overhang that ran around the whole of the house. He
knocked at the flimsy screen door, making quite a racket as it banged in place, and waited.
No one answered. The inner door beyond the screen remained unopened. The knob would not turn in his
hand.
The window shutters, once a proud deep shade of blue, now faded to the same color as the  sky,  were
tightly  closed,  blocking  any  view  within.  Not  unexpected  if  Stephanie  anticipated  trouble.  He  tried  one
gingerly. It was locked from the inside. He did not attempt to force it, as he easily could, but moved instead
around to the front of the building and its large, ornately carved door. 
That was a new addition since his last visit. Its quasi-medieval style didn’t match with the informality of
the rest of the place, but it did look sturdy. He had seen one like it somewhere else, in some other time he
could not immediately recall. The memory—or lack of it—bothered him. He tried the heavy iron handle, but
found it, too, was sensibly locked. 
“Stephanie?”  He  knocked  firmly  enough  to  be  heard  through  the  thick  oak.  His  heart  beat  fast  with
impatience to see her again. Perhaps she was no longer his, but he couldn’t help his feelings or his anxiety
for her. He needed to know that she was all right.
The cicadas turned up the volume, thwarting his effort to listen for sounds within the house. The damned
things were  everywhere,  surrounding  him,  screaming  in  their  frenzy  of  noise.  But  screaming  what?  The
buzzings rose and fell with annoying irregularity, a language he did not know and could never learn.
Against the aged blue paint of the door he noticed a streak of bright red rust running down from one of
the bolts that held the great hinges in place. Once aware  of it, he saw another, and another.  Instead  of  a
long dried trickle, the rust trails were still fresh and liquid, as though from a recent rain. But it couldn’t have
rained here for weeks. Entranced by the anomaly, he watched the red threads dance their way down  the
furrowed wood. Amazing that even here, in this arid heat, iron rusted so.
The trickles thickened, grew darker and more substantial in their flow.
That was wrong . . . very wrong. 
The longer he stared the worse it got, until a steady stream of red welled forth. It made a viscous pool
near his boots, and he stepped backward to avoid it.
Oh, no.
Now thin red streaks ran from the cracks between the boards of the door, which had begun to shudder.
He sensed some great force pressing against it, trying to break free. The stout wood beams, fused together
by metal and age, were actually bending outward like so much rubber.
No.
As they bent, more streaks appeared and more rust flowed forth. Only it wasn’t rust, he could see that

now.
He could smell it. 
All but taste it.
Dear Goddess, no!
The door bellied out to the breaking point, and the buzz-saw rasp of the cicadas sliced into his head, and
the red streams ran swift, gathering on the planks of the porch in gleaming lakes that blazed in the sun like
fire. He went suddenly weak from the unbearable heat and  fell  to  his  knees,  one  hand  out  to  keep  from
dropping flat.  He  clutched  his  free  arm  against  his  heaving  stomach  in  a  vain  attempt  to  still  the  abrupt
cramp there.
The closeness of the flow filled all his sight. It covered his supporting hand; the dark stains crept up his
sleeve and soaked through to his skin. He made himself straighten and brought his trembling fingers to his
lips.
Despite the pain, he felt his eyes flush red with vampiric lust, his manhood going hard, pushing urgently
against his clothes; his corner teeth were fully extended. The rich scent around him teased and tormented
his hunger, awakening his beast.
No!
Then the thick boards of the door groaned and abruptly split into kindling that shot past him with deadly
force. A great, warm wave crashed into him and over him, sweeping him back. He thrashed for balance.
His mouth was full of the stuff, and he roared, raising his hands as though to catch more as a second surge
burst forth from the house like a sea tide. It overbore him, and he fell splashing as  it  swept  him  away.  It
was miles deep now, the undertow trying to pull him under.
The cicadas screamed, and the buzzard shrieked high overhead as the scarlet sea drowned him, and he
tasted it, how he tasted it.
It was blood . . . 
And it was good. 
Chapter Three
Richard awoke with a heart-hammering start as his flight was called in the business lounge. Sweat slicked
his face. He could smell his own cold fear and looked around quickly to see if anyone had noticed. Clearly
no one had. The click of computers and the low voices of last-minute calls to the office or home hummed
through the air. The normal humans surrounding him had no time to spare from their own private crises for
a solitary traveler having a restless nap in his chair.
He moved hurriedly out of the patch of sunlight that had crept up on him unawares. His body was geared
for  sleeping  late  into  the  day,  so  giving  in  to  the  needs  of  interrupted  rest  was  understandable,  but  the
dream . . . Whatever was waiting for him in Texas had him thoroughly alarmed—or maybe it was just the
prospect of another hated flight. He’d see it through, of course, to get to Stephanie, but that didn’t mean he
had to like it.
Still  shaky,  he  picked  up  his  carry-ons  and  made  his  way  to  a  rest  room.  The  face  that  glared
apprehensively back at him from the mirror was even paler than usual. He  splashed  water  on  the  sweat,
and  washed  his  hands  carefully,  illogically  checking  his  cuffs  for  stains.  Damn,  but  he  could  still  almost
smell the blood.
A dream, my lad, and nothing more, he told himself. He did not possess Sabra’s Gift of Sight, and was

therefore mercifully spared glimpses of the future—or futures—but oftimes hideous dreams did plague him.
Anxieties  welling  up  from  his  subconscious,  Freud  had  once  told  him.  Richard  took  them  seriously  as
warnings. He’d seen too much not to, but how frustrating it could be when unable to carry out immediate
action against them. That was yet hours away when the sun was gone.
He dried off with a paper towel that felt like fine emery -paper, snagged his bags, and left for the long
nervous walk through that awful tunnel to the waiting plane.
He approached the yawning door of the winged beast, and a pretty attendant checked his boarding pass.
She must have assumed from his demeanor that he’d never flown before, and also could not read, for she
slowly enunciated the information that he was two rows down on the left.
Richard gave her a wan smile and moved to his seat. He stowed his meager  baggage  in  the  overhead
bin, and slumped wearily next to the window. If  anything  could  be  considered  fortunate  in  his  situation  it
was the seating, since it gave him some control over the light coming in. When allowed to do so, he would
pull the plastic shade down. In the meantime, he settled back to try, yet again, to relax and let these highly
trained people do what they were so highly trained to do.
The plane, filled with happy, stressed, sleepy, and/or oblivious travelers, taxied to its allotted takeoff point,
and  Richard  found  himself  gripped  by  the  too-familiar  heart-racing  panic.  His  -rational  mind  could
understand its source, after all; the horrors of that decades-old air disaster he’d survived were still with him.
Should it happen again he knew he would probably not be killed, no matter what might happen to the rest of
his poor flightmates, yet the terror remained, threatening to overwhelm him. He pushed the memory away,
breathing deeply, and reminded himself that the pilot didn’t want to crash any more than the rest of them.
As if to gainsay his thoughts, a surge of accelerating power pushed him back in his seat and, obedient to
his fear, Richard counted quietly up to sixty. It was an excruciating mantra, but seemed to help. Once past
that magic number all would be well for him—or as close as he could get to well given the circumstances.
How he hated, truly hated flying.
A  sudden  loss  of  height  wrenched  his  guts,  waking  Richard  from  an  unexpected  second  sleep.  He
swallowed back his unease and grimaced. He’d been like a soldier in a foxhole, napping while under  fire.
The plane was at last on the descent to the Dallas/Fort Worth Metroplex and near the end of this particular
piece of torture. This time he’d been spared further bad dreams—or at least from remembering them—but
he still felt like a crumpled newspaper ready for the dustbin.
The  pretty  attendant  marched  along  the  center  aisle,  stopped  opposite  Richard,  leaned  across  with  a
smile,  and  lifted  the  window  shade.  He  flinched  visibly  as  the  southern  sun  crashed  into  his  part  of  the
cabin. She noticed his discomfort, and apologetically -explained.
“FAA regulations.”
Richard nodded grimly and shifted to the vacant aisle seat next to him, out of the sun’s direct glare. Then
the plane banked steeply for its final approach. Far too steeply, he thought, gripping  the  armrests.  Soon  it
would all be over, and he’d be safe in the confines of the arrivals area, picking up his rental car and driving
to his place at New Karnak.
The plane tires squealed as their stillness was rudely disrupted by the rushing tarmac, and reverse thrust
pushed Richard forward. The plane slowed quickly and taxied to its terminal slot. He glanced at his watch
and saw they were slightly ahead of schedule; it was a quarter before ten in the morning in this time zone.
He  stayed  in  his  seat,  deliberately  not  joining  the  crush  of  tourists  and  native  Texans  streaming  off  the
plane. Those not in business suits were in the practical local uniform of  light  cotton  shirts  and  shorts.  He
wrapped up in an unseasonable full-length drover’s coat, with gloves and a broad-brimmed Stetson. It was
one of the many things that he liked about Texas. Even in midsummer such an outfit raised not an eyebrow.
 
As  he  stepped  into  the  bright  space  of  the  terminal,  the  first  pangs  of  hunger  inconveniently  hit  him.
Damn it, but he’d not fed since before yesterday. In the rush of the morning, and his worry about Stephanie
and the trip, such a mundane thing had slipped his mind. Now that  the  tension  of  the  flight  was  over,  his
body  demanded  replenishment  for  all  that  expended  energy.  A  pity  he  couldn’t  have  brought  a  plastic
packet of blood with him, but it made passing through customs  more  complicated  than  necessary,  despite
hypnotic help.
He’d just have to endure until he could arrange things with his usual local supplier. The insistent, gnawing
feeling was yet only the thin end  of  the  wedge,  merely  a  gentle  warning  of  more  distress  to  come  if  he
delayed too long. Out of habit, he cast about for a likely prospect to feed from. There were dozens of them
strolling past, but privacy was at a premium at such a busy airport. Better to keep moving toward a surety
than take a risk. He could last until then. Probably.

Phoning  from  the  plane,  he’d  arranged  to  rent  a  large  luxury  sedan,  specifying  tinted  windows  and
efficient air conditioning. Apparently such conveniences were beyond the resources of the hire firm. What
he got was a cramped compact, with crystal-clear windows and a questionable cooling system. The air was
rather lukewarm at first and smelled of stale cigars and mildew. After a few moments the flow got colder,
but he sensed a subtle internal struggle going on in the unit’s mechanical innards.
As he took the northbound exit from the airport, his tongue absently explored his teeth. He could feel the
insistent budding of his canines and tried to push them back. The famished beast within him would take no
rest until fed. He swung into an open lane and  pressed  down  on  the  gas  pedal.  A  speeding  ticket  would
again be no problem; unsatisfied hunger would. He’d have to get to his supply stop soon. 
When the blast of air coming from the dashboard vents was equal in temperature to that outside, Richard
gave up and opened all four windows. It was going to be one of those interminable, hot Texas days when
the sun tried its hardest never to set, and an  all-pervading  tropical  humidity  drenched  wearer  and  clothes
alike. He would achieve no artificial respite  from  it  and  vowed  to  strike  the  rental  firm’s  name  from  his
electronic travel planner and to hell with their air miles bonus. 
The hot wind booming through his open windows died as the morning rush traffic thickened, slowing his
pace. Sweat trickled from under his hat, and ran down his cheek and neck, turning the once crisp collar of
his shirt into an uncomfortable damp noose. 
Welcome to Texas, he thought glumly. And his empty belly gave a sharp twist that made him hunch over,
gasping. Damn, he had less of a margin than anticipated, maybe half an hour before the cramp became a
constant agony. Perhaps not even that much as the heat steadily sucked moisture from  his  body.  Not  for
the first time did he regret he couldn’t drink water for replenishment the same as everyone else.
The brilliant, shadowless light wasn’t helping either.
He was facing east with the new sun streaming in full force, savagely pricking his skin even through the
fresh layer of sun block. This particular road was notorious for delays, and he fretted that he didn’t know
enough about local geography to risk taking an off-ramp to a less traveled corridor toward his goal. He was
stuck sitting in the linear parking lot that locals jokingly called a freeway, his patience wearing dangerously
thin.
The start-stop-start pattern was slow enough for him to study a one-page area map that had come with
his rental packet.  He  determined  the  Luna  Road  exit  would  get  him  to  Belt  Line  which  would  lead  him
eventually into Addison. There would be lots of signal lights on that route, but he preferred  them  over  his
present stagnation. If he stayed on past Stemmons  he’d  be  mired  in  the  worst  of  it  for  God  knows  how
long.
The Luna exit was sensibly wide and almost clear. He shot away from the rest of the herd and cut north
across the overpass. The roads were still crowded, but at least he was  moving.  Not  good  enough  for  his
beast, though. It stirred and rumbled with increasing impatience.
The last few miles stretched long until he hit Addison’s restaurant row. He was in familiar territory now.
The corporate offices of Arhyn-Hill Oil (which he owned) were very close, located in the  infamous  New
Karnak complex. He could just see the distinctive top of its  ten-story  structure  gleaming  bright  under  the
heat-bleached sky.
New Karnak sounded far better than it actually was. It began as the dream of a young entrepreneur in
the  heady  days  of  the  development-happy  eighties.  He  wanted  a  haven  in  the  big  city,  an  oasis  of
refinement  and  quiet  only  minutes  north  of  the  hurly-burly  rush  of  central  Dallas.  Not  being  an  actual
resident of the area, he was rather innocent of the realities of local sensibilities and traffic patterns.
It had gone downhill from there. The entrepreneur in question had a surplus of inherited money and  an
ill-researched fascination with ancient Egypt, which explained the oddness of the structure that he managed
to build. The whole glass-and-steel edifice was shaped like a pyramid, the interior replete with thick stone
columns,  larger-than-life-size  statues  of  non-existent  pharaohs,  and  gobbledygook  hieroglyphics  he’d
designed himself adorning the inward-slanting walls. There was a formal garden in a cavernous four-story
courtyard,  dedicated  to  and  occupied  by  the  household  gods  of  old,  and  finally,  brightly  painted  friezes
depicting Cleopatra and Tutankhamen frolicking together in gay abandon. Historical accuracy played a very
small role in the decor. It was as tacky as Texas could get. 
Richard loved it at first sight. 
On a business trip to the area in search of a good location for Arhyn-Hill Oil to open a Dallas branch, the
monstrosity was pointed out to him as a joke. Its pink-tinted sides gleamed pathe-tic in the setting sun, the
ugly duckling of the city’s northern skyline. Alas, the underground parking garage was empty of  cars,  the
windows dark and deserted, for the money had run out long before the lower floor offices and luxury flats
were rented. Those who could afford to live there generally had better taste and a desire for the prestige of

private homes or condos since high-rise living was something of a foreign intrusion into the mind-set of the
space-loving natives. That, and a minute miscalculation in the hastily excavated foundation had given New
Karnak a decidedly slanted view on life. The courtyard swimming pool was a foot deeper at one end than
the indicated number painted on the surrounding tile walls.
After  some  discreet  investigation,  Richard  discovered  he’d  found  the  makings  of  a  bargain.  A  white
elephant perhaps, but with some coaxing, it could be made to work. He saw to it that the thing was brought
up to safety code, added a few architectural refinements for his own convenience, then Arhyn-Hill Oil took
up residence on the lower business floors.
Instead of downplaying the bad taste, he purposely exploited it, appealing to a younger, more adventurous
crowd of tenants.  The  word  “eclectic”  was  often  used  in  brochures  and  advertising.  Those  with  artistic
pretensions, real or imagined, were morbidly delighted, and if the decor inspired groans instead of gasps  it
mattered not to Richard so long as the rents were timely paid.
The vast apartment he kept for his occasional visits was  at  the  peak  of  the  pyramid,  described  as  the
Pharaoh Suite in the selling literature. Not a single outer wall was straight or quite true to angle, but he had
a view through the slanted glass of the downtown core that was to die for. And most  important,  with  the
security of a private keyed elevator leading straight from garage to penthouse, it  was  quiet  and  secluded.
No one ever asked anyone’s business, especially his. In fact, in all the years that he had owned this unique
pied-à-terre, the only person he’d ever spoken to in the residence part of the building was the night security
guard, who dozed most of the time in the main lobby. But New Karnak had another distinct advantage for
-Richard, one not immediately obvious to the regular human -observer, yet highly necessary to him. It was
very close to his blood supply.
Restaurant row indeed.
His stomach gave another awful twisting. He clutched the steering wheel and fought the cramp, nearly
running the compact up on the curb. Behind him an annoyed commuter struck a warning beep on his horn.
Panting, Richard snarled an ugly reply and only just managed to center himself back in the lane.
Not long now, he promised his beast, trying not to sound desperate. Just a little more time. 
Damn, but that last one felt like a knife. He could take more of the same since he had no choice in the
matter, but preferred to shorten the torture. He hit the gas, sighting the line that marked Midway Road, his
exit. If once he made that . . . but he drew up hard on the bumper of the car ahead and was forced to slam
on the brakes yet again.
His head felt swollen and blood pounded sluggishly behind his eyes. Next would come the tunnel vision,
and he’d have to work to concentrate on accomplishing simple things, like walking and opening doors. The
point where he lost all self-control and could be in danger of attacking some innocent was yet hours off. He
hoped.  He’d  done  exactly  that  not  so  very  long  ago,  and  though  his  victim  hadn’t  been  at  all  innocent,
Richard never wanted to repeat the experience. The problem plaguing him then had been dealt with, but he
did not want to push things.
The light ahead changed, and one by one the lines moved forward. The car in front, coughing a cloud of
stinking exhaust, reluctantly crawled for a few yards, then stopped. Exactly across the exit lane. 
One foot. If the other car  just  went  forward  one  more  foot  Richard  would  have  enough  clearance  to
squeeze past and onto Midway.
He touched his horn and got only another thick puff of blue exhaust. He raised his hand to hit a longer
blast, then had to double over as the knife dug into his guts with a vengeance. A thin cry tried to trickle out
from  his  clenched  teeth.  He  refused  to  give  his  beast  the  satisfaction.  His  sight  blurred,  and  he  made
himself focus on something outside himself in a futile effort at distraction.
The vehicle blocking his exit was of a seventies vintage, and from its size clearly guzzled gas at  a  rate
well  beyond  the  -national  average.  Richard  could  see  the  back  of  the  driver’s  head  through  the  rear
window, and it occurred to him that the driver too probably guzzled well beyond the national average. His
head was a large round ball which connected, seemingly without the benefit of a neck, to massive sloping
shoulders.  Richard  could  only  assume  the  rest.  He  fumbled  with  a  shaking  hand  to  sound  his  horn,  and
without turning, the driver of the offending -vehicle raised his left arm out of his window, middle finger well
-extended.
In  any  other  circumstance,  the  whole  thing  would  have  been  amusing,  but  not  now.  Richard  felt  the
pressing need for blood mounting by the second, and the intransigence of this worthy product of steak and
potatoes simply enraged him. He was swimming in his own sweat, feeling the acid bite of the sun, and once
more his corner teeth budded uncontrollably. They would not retreat.
Cramp. His beast biting him from the inside out.
Desperate, he pressed the horn again, but the driver was -unmoved by the sound, and sat a good dozen

feet back from the vehicle in front, clearly in no mood to move and let Richard pass.
Then Richard was out of his car, pain replaced by a scalding wrath that was well  beyond  the  limits  of
reason and safety. A warning against the danger sounded loud within, but he furiously ignored it. He knew
what he looked like striding the few short paces between his car and that of the man ahead. He knew that
his eyes were red, that his teeth were fully extended, as surely as he knew that the fat man in the car was
going to satiate his agonizing hunger, and to hell with the consequences. 
As though through a red mist he saw his hand stretching out to take  the  door  handle,  to  rip  it  from  its
hinges. 
Then the car was not there.
Richard blinked against the mist, trying to draw breath in the thick, hot air. Where had . . . ?
Without  a  backward  glance  the  car  and  the  man  in  it  had  simply  moved  forward  as  the  traffic  had
moved. He was gone, unaware of his close brush with death.
Richard stood befuddled for a searing moment in the hot Texas sun, slowly becoming aware  of other car
horns, now directed at him. He trembled from the rush of unused adrenaline and careless action. God, what
had he been thinking? He hadn’t—that was the problem. He was closer to losing it than he’d estimated.
He walked hastily back to the fragile shelter of his own car and got in. Even the warm breeze from the
ineffective air -conditioning was a blessed relief. He was back again, in control of -himself. His teeth were
normal, and his eyes sparked blue in the morning light. But for how long? He turned quickly  off  the  main
highway, discovered that the traffic here was mercifully thin, and sped onward toward his sanctuary.
Less than five minutes after his encounter with unreasoning Middle America, Richard stepped from the
hire car into the welcoming darkness  of  New  Karnak’s  underground  parking  garage.  He  grabbed  up  his
briefcase and overnight bag from the passenger seat. Half walking and half running, he crossed the patched
concrete to the elevator. Inside, he inserted his private security card in the required slot in the control panel,
punched “P” for penthouse, and lurched suddenly, sickeningly upward. Were this a  normal  visit  he  would
have stopped at the lobby to chat with the day security team and announce his presence to  the  company,
but  just  now  he  had  no  time  to  spare.  The  hunger  that  had  momentarily  retreated  was  back  with  a
vengeance. He needed blood, and he needed it now.
The elevator doors opened directly onto his living  room.  -Richard  stepped  out,  and  almost  immediately
they hissed shut behind him. The whole apartment was dark and sweetly cool. It had cost him quite a penny
to install the automatic metal blinds and the special high efficiency air conditioning unit, and at this moment,
he would willingly have paid double. Such soothing relief was truly beyond price.
Without  pausing  to  savor  the  sensations,  he  stripped  hat,  gloves,  and  overcoat  as  he  crossed  to  the
kitchen, leaving them where they fell. He was sure he had some blood safe in the fridge, but couldn’t  for
the life of him remember how much. He opened the door, squinting against the tiny interior light. There was
a single bag left. It would do. He tore the top open and sluiced the contents down his aching and parched
throat. It was way past its expire date. The taste was stale, nearly  dead,  but  sufficient  to  ease  his  angry
beast for a couple of hours. Ample time to arrange a fresh supply.
He leaned against a counter in the clean white kitchen and let the stuff flood through him. The pounding
ache finally cleared from his head and with a frown he  considered  the  incident  that  had  almost  occurred
with  the  stubborn  driver.  Was  that  what  they  were  now  calling  “road  rage”?  More  like  road  disaster.
Certainly the heat and stress had taken its physical toll on his reserves, but they couldn’t account for such a
hideous lapse in control. 
He’d  not  been  like  this  since  that  incident  a  few  months  back  when  his  beast  had  seized  charge  of
him—with fatal results to  a  would-be  killer.  Richard  still  shied  away  from  thinking  about  it.  Perhaps  the
healing  he’d  later  gone  through  had  restored  his  command  over  his  beast,  but  the  margin  for  error  was
much more narrow than before. He could no longer rely on past experience to measure his present limits.
More caution was clearly required.
And more blood.
After squeezing the last barely drinkable drop from the bag, he called his supplier, ordering what would
be needed for the next few days. It would be ready when he arrived, the doctor told him. There. One less
thing to worry about.
Face washed and with a fresh layer of  sun  block  in  place,  he  dressed  again  in  his  protective  western
garments and strode -toward the elevator. He punched the button for the parking -garage, the doors sighed
shut, and down he went like a damned soul to hell.
The Med-Mission Clinic sat happily and  busily  in  a  block  of  decrepit  single-story,  cream-colored  brick
constructions. The building, indeed the whole area, was well past  its  brief  1950s  heyday.  What  had  been

built as an example of the best of post-war business, full of hope against an atomic future, had fallen far in
its relatively short life. The aging process had been quick, and no one with the patience or money had tried
to alleviate it. The end result was rotting wood, graffiti-covered brickwork, windows that would never open
again, and hopelessness, a deep unending hopelessness that was echoed in the people of  the  area,  people
who had been left behind the times along with their neighborhood. 
Those not in the thrall of drugs and crime were certainly good people and proud, but were all crushed by
the  heavy  hand  of  poverty  and  need.  The  trickle-down  effect,  so  popular  with  economists  and  distant
politicians alike, had certainly not trickled down to this urban war  zone.  Here,  the  wealth  of  the  few  had
absolutely no effect on the many.
And here, in a valiant one-man battle against the forces of ignorance, fought Dr. Samuel Ross George:
Samuel for the diarist whom his mother had studied at University, and Ross because she had read Macbeth
during  the  later  stages  of  her  pregnancy  and  had  fallen  in  love  with  the  name.  To  his  friends—and  he
considered  all  and  any  of  the  people  who  walked  through  the  door  of  the  Med-Mission  Clinic  as  his
friends—he was just Dr. Sam.
Richard  Dun  met  him  quite  by  accident—though  Sam  later  insisted  that  there  was  no  such  thing  as
accident or coincidence—one dangerously chill winter evening some ten years ago. 
A cold night in Texas sounded strange to anyone except the natives who took a perverse pride in  their
weather  extremes.  Richard  had  been  in  Dallas  leading  a  corporate  seminar  for  the  newly  installed
Arhyn-Hill  Oil  called  “Personal  Security  in  the  Workplace  (The  Ongoing  Threat)”—whoever  made  up
these names?—and was out late searching for food. The area was -exactly the sort he’d just advised the
attendees to avoid whenever possible, but it had seemed perfect for the type of young woman who served
him well in these instances.
The midnight hunting had not been at all good, for anyone he might have found of interest had long made
their money earlier and left to escape the sub-zero wind. The few sad souls left still plying their trade were
addicts or drunks, whom Richard strove to avoid. They had enough problems in life without having someone
draining away their weak, tainted blood.
Richard  was  ready  to  give  up  and  try  the  more  risky  prey  that  frequented  the  numerous  bars.  He
preferred to avoid the entanglements inherent in such places. A newcomer was always subject to study by
the regulars, and since he was often better dressed, it made him a tempting target for mugging. Countless
times  before,  he’d  encountered  the  very  old  game  of  the  woman  sent  to  distract  him  while  her  male
accomplice(s) tried to sneak up behind, weapon(s) at ready. He’d grown bored with it centuries ago.
As  he  turned  back  toward  his  car,  an  altercation  across  the  otherwise  deserted  street  caught  his
attention. A lumpy collection of old clothes, barely identifiable as an ancient wino, was huddled in the recess
of  a  doorway.  Another,  much  younger  black  man  spoke  earnestly  to  him,  his  hand  out.  The  gist  of  the
conversation that came to Richard’s keen ears was that the night was too bitter and the wino should come
along to a shelter. He was -either too drunk or uncaring to respond much beyond a muffled grunt.
The young Samaritan was involved in trying to persuade the wino from his folly  and  did  not  notice  the
approach of a decrepit  van.  It  stopped  short,  headlights  beating  suddenly  on  the  hapless  pair.  The  doors
opened as a number of even younger men emerged. They weren’t nearly as drunk as the wino and spoiling
for a good time if one could judge anything by their predatory laughter.
Richard knew better than to wait for the gangers to make the first move. The speed of his action  took
them all by surprise. He was across the street in an instant, screaming a truly blood-curdling war cry he’d
once learned from the Sioux. It had the same -effect on the teenagers that it had had on the 7th Cavalry.
Some froze with wide-eyed shock, others tried to fight.
Tried.
Of the latter, two were left bleeding and unconscious, and the rest wisely accepted that discretion  was
indeed the better part of valor and departed the scene as speedily as they could manage. Their van nearly
toppled over in the driver’s haste to achieve the  next  corner.  Lest  the  cursing,  frustrated  brigands  return
with help, Richard scooped both wino and the astonished young man up and, resisting the temptation to sup
on the freely flowing red stuff of the vanquished, left the battlefield.
As Richard followed directions and drove them all to a charity shelter to drop off the still oblivious wino,
the  rescued  Samaritan  stumbled  out  with  his  thanks  and  introduced  himself.  Richard  was  prepared  to
dismiss the  incident  and  resume  his  hunt,  but  during  the  course  of  the  conversation  learned  that  Samuel
Ross George was a doctor. 
Ever  on  the  alert  for  a  practical  opportunity,  Richard  simply  smiled,  murmured  encouragement,  and
listened as Dr. Sam poured out his story.
To the despair of his middle-class family,  he’d  eschewed  the  profits  of  a  more  mundane  practice  and

labored  long  with  the  unfashionable  poor.  He  had  an  idealistic  desire  to  help  those  whom  he  called  his
fellow pilgrims, but lacked the means to do anything on a large scale. His tiny practice with  its  third-hand
equipment was  barely  enough  to  keep  up  his  insurance  payments,  much  less  pay  off  his  medical  school
loans.
To  his  delight,  Richard  found  the  good  doctor  was  deeply  susceptible  to  hypnotic  suggestion,  and
arranging  a  supply  of  whole  blood  for  a  very  special  patient  was  no  problem.  Subtly  made  aware  of
Richard’s special needs, Dr. Sam became a provider of precious nourishment,  beginning  that  night.  More
than that, he became a trusted friend.
Aware that genuine saints were a rare occurrence and often needed conservancy, Richard  soon  made
true the doctor’s dream of a free clinic, generously funding it through Arhyn-Hill. In the decade to follow it
grew and flourished. Everyone in the area benefited, and when visiting, Richard was spared  from  making
time-consuming, post-midnight jaunts in search of food.
Richard parked the rental outside the Med-Mission and stepped out.  Though  it  was  painfully  bathed  in
broad daylight, the street did not inspire confidence. Several young men, who apparently had nothing better
to do, were already checking out the car.
Quickly scanning the  neighborhood,  Richard  saw  exactly  the  fellow  he  needed  no  more  than  ten  feet
away, lounging against an alley dumpster, taking the brutal sun, seemingly oblivious to the rest of the world,
hard eyes missing nothing behind his pale tinted Ray Bans. There were other youths in the area also on the
watch, but this one’s attitude marked him as their leader.
“Nice wheels, man.”
This somewhat ominous comment greeted Richard as he neared the studiously relaxed teenager. He was
anywhere between fifteen and twenty, with the life experience of a veteran mercenary. He moved not at
all. Only the ragged antics of a toothpick held loosely between his teeth gave any sign  of  life  within.  The
young man had  obviously  spent  much  time  perfecting  his  toothpick  repertoire  as  the  slim  piece  of  wood
danced from side to side in his mouth. It reminded Richard uncomfortably of a miniature wooden stake. In
fact,  he’d  once  seen  one  packaged  as  a  portable  vampire  slaying  kit.  Someone  had  thought  it  amusing.
Strange humor, that.
“I need a favor,” said Richard.
“I’m all out of favors. Cowboy.”
What an observant young fellow to have noticed the clothes. “Then I need a service.”
The kid merely stared, the unquestioned ruler of his turf, -beholden to none, awaiting the  next  move  of
this presumptuous intruder.
Such games always irritated Richard, but he knew if he didn’t play it exact and to the rules, there would
be little left of his car when he came out of Dr. Sam’s. He wanted to avoid further irri-tation.
“I’m willing to pay you,” he added.
By some wonderful contraction  of  face  muscles,  the  sunglasses  lowered  themselves,  and  a  wary  eye
peered at Richard over their tops.
“What you want?” Such disdainful suspicion in so few words.
“They are nice wheels,” he said agreeably, nodding in the general direction of his transport. “I want them
to stay that way. I want the whole car to stay that way. You’re the man here, so I come to you.”
The teeth snapped  the  toothpick  clean,  and  the  boy  spat  it  out  to  join  a  scattering  of  similarly  broken
fellows on the sidewalk. He straightened, stretching catlike, right hand resting on  the  pocket  of  his  baggy
jeans. The pocket sagged with the weight of something heavy. Perhaps a knife, but more likely a gun. With
a gesture he’d most certainly seen in the  movies,  he  slowly  removed  his  sunglasses,  the  better  to  fix  his
adversary with an intimidating glare.
It was all too easy. One look and immediately Richard had him in his power.
“Watch the car,” he told the youth in a mild tone after a moment of stare-down. “Your life depends on
it.”
Mesmerized, the boy repeated the instructions and the warning. The rental would be safer now than in a
police garage. Hell, Richard could have the kid wash and wax the thing if he ordered it. But there was no
time for such satisfying frivolities. The sunlight was prickling, burning hot against his body even shrouded as
he was, and he needed fresh blood. Damn, he really did.
As he pushed through the clinic doors, all conversation in the waiting room stopped and every eye, young
and old alike, took him in. It was absurdly like an old cowboy movie. A stranger was in town, and the locals
could smell it. Certainly he was dressed for the part. 
The receptionist, pretty and starched, was alerted by the silence and looked up from  her  glass-shielded
alcove. Moving toward her through the parting  waves  of  suffering  humanity,  Richard  smiled,  all  warmth,

and swept off his Stetson. Being inside was a relief, even in  the  crowded  confines  of  Dr.  Sam’s  waiting
room. The air conditioning was very efficient.
“Hello, Helen.” 
Remembering her name was easy. There it was on the badge pinned to her very attractive bosom: Helen
Mesquita.  For  a  moment,  puzzlement  showed  in  her  face,  but  was  soon  replaced  by  happy  recognition.
She’d been there long enough to understand that Richard was some sort of special patron of the clinic. She
touched a few spikes of the short, dark hair that kissed the top of one ear, an unconscious primping gesture.
“Mr. Dun. How lovely to see you. It’s been so long. Dr. Sam  said  you’d  called.”  Helen,  along  with  a
bright team of nurses and other assistants, kept the unworldly Dr. Sam’s endeavor running smoothly amid
the chaos of the street and demands of bureaucracy.
She stood, absently brushing the front of her uniform, and hit the door buzzer release, allowing  Richard
access  to the inner areas  of the clinic. He’d made sure  about  installing  a  good  security  system  since  the
pharmaceuticals on the premises were a constant temptation to thieves and addicts.
He followed her, appreciative of the view as she led him down the narrow  white  hall  to  Sam’s  office.
She didn’t have to, he knew the way but chose not to object. Once more he felt the stirring that he always
got whenever he saw an attractive young woman like Helen Mesquita, and once more pushed his  desires
(and hunger) to the back of his mind. However delectable the staff might be, they were strictly off limits.
He wanted to keep things simple, which did not include impromptu feeding trysts in the examination rooms.
Nothing wrong with looking, though, he thought.
Helen opened the office door and held it for him. He had  to  turn  sideways  to  get  past,  and  even  then
brushed against her gently. A familiar fragrance wafted to him from the pulse point on her throat,  and  he
paused in the doorway, still in light contact with her.
“Freesia,” he said, amiably gazing down into her enormous brown eyes.
“I beg your pardon?”
“Your perfume. It’s Freesia. One of my favorites. Natural and . . . pure.”
Did  she  actually  flutter  those  lovely  eyelashes?  Certainly  his  lingering  attention  had  her  heart  beating
hard and fast. “Why, thank you. It probably is. I never look at what I put on. I’m lucky I don’t just smell of
ether and rubbing alcohol.”
She  smiled  up  at  him,  backing  free  in  the  narrow  space,  but  sliding  against  his  body—deliberately,
Richard knew—to return the way she came. Richard’s gaze followed her hungrily.
No complications, old lad, he firmly told himself. Not without a degree of regret. She looked to be very
tasty, indeed.
“Richard, good to see you!”
Dr. Sam emerged from one of the examining rooms farther along the hall, a  delighted  grin  on  his  dark
face and arms outstretched in greeting. He was slight in build, but wiry in strength. He  gripped  Richard’s
hand for a solid shake then a brief, back-slapping embrace.
“How are you?” he demanded. “This isn’t the time of year for your usual visit. What’s going on?”  He
ushered Richard into his office and shut the door.
“Nothing special, just some business that needs looking into.”
“Not this place, I hope.”
“Of  course  not,  I  trust  your  accountant.”  After  all,  Richard  had  picked  her  himself.  “I’m  in  need  of
supplies, no more than that.”
“Got  you  covered.  This  should  do  for  you.”  Sam  went  to  a  small  refrigerator  and  opened  it  wide  to
display the contents. 
Richard eyed the pile of flat plastic bags filled with precious life within. His mouth was suddenly dry and
his speech came out as a whisper. “It will, indeed. If you don’t mind very much I’d like to . . .”
Sam instantly understood and handed over one of the pint bags. All other aspects of the doctor’s life and
work were his own,  but  where  Richard  was  concerned,  he’d  been  carefully  primed  and  programmed  to
accept and ignore certain things. Watching his patron drinking down a pint of human blood and thinking it to
be perfectly normal was one of them. For all the reaction he displayed Richard might have been imbibing a
can of soda. 
He drained it away in a mere few seconds, hardly regarding the taste. It was better than what he’d had
earlier,  fresher,  more  nourishing.  Though  it  could  never  satisfy  as  fully  as  taking  directly  from  a  vein  it
would keep him alive and safe to be around. He allowed himself one small ecstatic shudder as his starved
beast finally rolled over and went to sleep. 
Until the next time.
“You’re  looking  well,  as  ever,”  said  Dr.  Sam,  dropping  into  a  worn  chair  behind  his  cluttered  desk.

Richard took a chair before it. Sated for now, and with the rest of the day to wait, he could indulge himself
in a brief visit.
“You, too.” Though Richard noticed a few curls of gray making a beachhead in the hair around Sam’s
temples. They stood out against the deep chocolate color of  his  skin.  How  old  was  he  anyway?  Richard
always thought of him as a very young man. “How are things going?”
“Busy. I’m trying to entice a few more doctors into helping out with the load, but they don’t care for the
pay. Helen’s looking into finding some community support—”
“I’m  not  here  to  talk  about  the  money.  Arhyn-Hill  will  give  you  whatever  funds  you  need  to  hire
whomever you wish, you know that. I want to know how things are going for you.”
Sam shrugged as though thinking about himself was not an -especially  important  activity  to  him.  In  his
case it was likely to be true. “I’m all right. I take my vitamins and wrap up in the winter.”
Still no wedding ring on his finger. Richard harbored a hope that Sam would marry an  equally  nice  girl
and make lots of little Sams and Samanthas to spread some of his goodness and cheer in the world. “Are
you happy?”
Sam blinked, evidently surprised, but did not say anything right away. The nature of the query and their
friendship required something more than a casual answer.
“Are you?” asked Richard after a moment to give the man time to think.
In reply Sam gestured at the office. Its walls were decorated with laminated  anatomy  charts  and  grim
public  service  posters  bearing  warnings  against  drug  abuse,  sexually  transmitted  diseases,  and  domestic
violence. “I’m trying to keep people alive who have to sleep on the floor because some neighborhood bozos
think they’re hell on wheels with their guns. I’ve got an eleven-year-old girl whose uncle got her pregnant
with twins, and her mother  says  it’s  a  righteous  judgment  from  God  if  the  delivery  kills  her.  One  of  my
patients died last week from the heat because she was afraid of not affording her electric bill if she ran her
fan, and three others came in to find out their test for HIV was positive. I’m operating an improbability in
the midst of insanity, Richard, and the sad fact of it is that, yes, I am happy.”
This time Richard could not bring himself to speak for a while. Nothing would have been appropriate. He
finally rolled up the empty blood bag and dropped it in a waste basket. “How is that possible?”
“Because I know what this place would be like if I  wasn’t  here,  doing  what  I’m  doing.”  Anyone  else
would have sounded to be in love with his own ego, but not Sam. He simply stated facts. 
“It would be worse,” said Richard.
“Yes. A hellhole with no ladder out. I’ve made some things better, thanks to you, and I’d like to cure all
of it, but I know that will never happen. There’s just too much of the bad stuff and not enough of me. But
what I can do is try to ease one disaster at a time and hope it goes out from there.”
“You sound like you’ve had some successes.”
“A few. At least I got that little girl out of her abusive environment and had the uncle arrested. The rest
of the family’s trying to talk sense into the mother. It’s not much, but that’s what keeps me going.”
“You know if you need anything, you’ve only to call. Collect.”
Sam flashed a single, short grin. “Well, since the subject has come up . . .”
In less than five minutes, Richard agreed to the  purchase  of  a  quantity  of  new  medical  equipment,  an
upgrading of the clinic’s computer system, and some special filters designed to  trap  a  particularly  virulent
bacteria that had been found in the Dallas water system. Its chief prey were AIDS victims and anyone else
with an impaired immune system. Dr. Sam wanted the filters installed in the homes of his high-risk patients.
“As many as you want,” said Richard. “Have Helen fax it in and get things started. You can have  the
first shipment by the end of the week.”
“You’re a saint,” said Dr. Sam.
“I don’t think so.” And Richard refrained from telling the doctor to look in a  mirror.  It  wasn’t  that  the
man simply did good works, he really was good in himself, and Richard liked to bask in the glow surrounding
him.  He’d  have  to  ask  Sabra  to  come  down  from  her  near-hermitage  in  Vancouver  and  meet  the  man
sometime. She’d like him.
Richard  left  the  clinic  slightly  humbled  as  always  whenever  he  had  contact  with  Sam.  He  freed  his
untouched, utterly scratch-free rental from the tender concern of the young hoodlum, told him to forget their
encounter, then drove back to New Karnak. Very easy. On the passenger seat lay a heavy opaque plastic
bag that held a disposable ice pack and three pints of pure sustenance. He’d have to get them refrigerated
quickly before the damned heat coagulated the lot to undrinkability.
He swung onto the Dallas tollway and headed for home as fast as the afternoon traffic allowed. The sun
now shone nearly directly overhead. His face itched and reddened, yet still that blazing sign of passing time
gladdened him. It would soon be night, and he’d be able to leave to see Stephanie. With the easing of  his

desperate hunger, the worry for her reasserted itself and now took a turn at twisting his guts.
What had happened with her today? And what was she doing now? 
Chapter Four
The sun hung blood red just above the horizon  for  a  impossibly  long  age,  as  if  time  itself  had  stopped  to
admire its breathtaking beauty. Then slowly, hesitantly, as if trying the water of a bath that she knew would
be just a little too hot, the vast orb slid behind the  edge  of  the  earth,  winked  one  last  good-bye,  and  was
gone.
It was 8:45 according to the dimly glowing clock in the dash of the car. Richard, much relieved physically
and mentally from the burden of day, was at last heading north in the still-bright twilight on the final leg of
his journey. Faithfully adhering to Stephanie’s instruction, he would arrive at her house in the usual manner
of past visits, about twenty minutes after sunset, which was how long it took  him  to  get  there  from  New
Karnak.
He’d spent the endless-seeming hours alternately healing from his initial journey and restlessly pacing the
penthouse in between bouts of research at his computer. The first thing he checked was the e-mail, but no
new message awaited him from Stephanie. Disappointing, that. And  worry-making.  Next  he  scoured  any
and all sources available to him for a location on Alejandro Trujillo. The latest unsecured intel had it that he
was still in Colombia. No surprises there, also no real confirmation. He would certainly want to stay away
from any country that had arrest warrants out for him, but it was not beyond possibility that he could be in
the States to personally see to his brother’s disposal.
Richard had never been overly impressed with monitoring operations on the drug lords, anyway. A return
to some sort of old-fashioned method of reprisal might be more preferable and practical. If it was indeed a
war on drugs, then would it not be in one’s best interest to try to  knock  out  the  generals  of  the  opposing
side? The cartels had no restraints when it came to brutally removing their enemies, after all.
Not  my  problem,  thought  Richard,  though  in  his  own  small  area  of  focus  he  planned  to  be  most
conclusive.  If  Alejandro  ever  came  within  his  reach  he  would  take  some  sort  of  swift—and  quite
final—action against him.  A  threat  to  Luis  was  a  threat  to  Stephanie  and  her  children.  To  protect  them
Richard could and would cheerfully rip Alejandro to shreds.
But he fervently hoped this call from her would only be a false alarm.
He’d resisted the impulse to openly announce his presence to Arhyn-Hill Oil. He owned it, but preferred
to  turn  the  actual  running  of  the  business  over  to  the  specialists.  Occasionally  he  would  come  down  to
check on things and remind his CEOs of his existence, but that always stirred things up. Luis worked there
and if he was being watched, then it was better for him that Richard continue with  a  low  profile.  On  the
other hand, were this a regular visit, he would always phone Luis, letting him know he was in town. If only
Stephanie had provided more information on how best to proceed.
Someone in building security did notice that the penthouse flat was in use, and sent a man up to check. A
few  hypnotic  moments  with  the  fellow  were  enough  to  assure  Richard  a  continuance  of  uninterrupted
privacy. By the time he took the elevator down to the garage, all but the live-in tenants had gone home, so
his evening departure went as unmarked as his arrival.
There’d been  improvements  made  on  the  old  county  highway  since  his  last  sojourn.  It  was  now  four
lanes and boasted stoplights at the infrequent intersections. For now they only blinked a cautionary yellow,
but that looked to be short-lived. -Developers were encroaching on once empty fields, and would soon turn

farm and grazing land into clusters of apartment complexes the same as those that covered the more urban
areas like fungus. When he’d first hidden  Stephanie  and  her  family  here,  the  area  had  been  wonderfully
isolated, the land little changed from the days of the earliest European explorers. In another year it would be
covered with concrete, strip malls, and petrol stations.
But all was empty in the descending darkness for the time being, and now and then his  headlights  only
picked out a startled rabbit darting for cover. He sped by a fearful mess in the center of the road that had
once been an armadillo. Odd how one never actually saw the creatures scuttling across to meet with their
violent end, only their remains long after the fact. He held his  breath  until  the  brief  fog  of  decay  cleared
from the car.
He slowed for a turn onto a narrow and much older side road and followed it  for  a  mile,  then  made  a
final turn-off to a deeply rutted dirt track. The rental bumped badly from side to side, suspension creaking
and complaining, tires throwing up huge clouds of pale dust in the darkness. Fifty yards in, amid a wild stand
of mesquite, he was obliged to get out to open a gate, drive through, and shut  it  again.  Was  this  the  gate
Stephanie had -referred to in her first message? Perhaps one of the children had strayed from  the  house,
left it open, and chose not to confess the crime. Michael was  a  likely  suspect,  being  the  oldest  and  most
adventuresome, but Elena and Seraphina were more than capable of egging each other on to great feats of
mischief.
He hoped that was all there was to it, just a series of coincidences misinterpreted.
But his dream . . . that damned dream had left him paranoid. When it came to such matters it was better
to listen to such nagging fears than dismiss them outright. He would take a little extra time and check things
thoroughly before going up to knock on the front door.
The road climbed a slight hill within the property, and Richard pulled to a stop just before topping its flat
crest,  killed  the  lights  and  motor,  and  got  out.  He  finally  divested  himself  of  his  drover’s  coat,  hat,  and
leather gloves, stowing them on the -passenger seat. It felt like he’d shed a too heavy and much too  tight
skin. By contrast the stagnant leftover heat of the day -almost seemed chill. Everything was silent save the
incessant hum and chirp of the insects, and the air was gently scented with sage, soothing and caressing to
his senses. He did not relax, though. Except for being dark, it was still disturbingly like his dream.
Clinging to the edge of the thorny trees, he followed the line of the track down the other side of the hill.
Really, it was  hardly  high  enough  to  be  dignified  with  such  a  label,  but  it  did  serve  as  a  physical  buffer
between the house and the outside world. One last turning and he caught sight of the satellite structures: a
low  barn  with  its  corrugated  metal  roof  and  attached  corral,  the  pump  house,  the  propane  tank.  In  the
backyard on lovingly transplanted grass stood a clothesline and a scattering of brightly colored toys, a swing
set, a battered plastic play fort and this year’s splashing pool.
Quiet. As it should be.
He made a wide stealthy circle of the entire yard, senses alert for the  least  sight,  the  softest  sound  of
intruders, and was greatly relieved when nothing out of the ordinary presented itself. The horses dozing in
the  corral  canted  their  ears  in  his  direction,  but  didn’t  bother  to  stir.  Having  the  space  to  indulge  her
childhood passion, Stephanie had acquired a tiny herd of her own and even dabbled in breeding. She’d sent
him many pictures of the children at play on  their  pony.  He  couldn’t  see  it  offhand  and  guessed  it  to  be
stabled in the barn away from its larger quarter-horse cousins.
A few lights were on in the house down below; it looked normal and peaceful. The sight inspired a flood
of memories from that first evening when he’d brought Stephanie here. He’d had every window shining a
warm yellow welcome for her arrival.
It had been a long trip from Toronto. They’d traveled for five days, taking a very roundabout route and
twice changing vehicles. On the last leg, they’d driven to Kansas, left the cars completely and flown in to
D/FW on a charter. Richard had a van waiting for them at the airport and hustled the whole family inside.
Luis was worried, the children were fussy and confused, but Stephanie was calm, rising above the clamor
with her serenity. Richard understood it to mean that no matter what the circumstances she trusted him to
take care of them all. She soothed the girls and talked Richard into a stop for some fast food. That got even
Michael settled, putting them in a better mood for moving into a house they’d never before seen.
Richard was fairly confident they would like the place. The outside looked rough, being built completely
of logs that glowed golden in the moonlight, the chinking between them yellow-gray with age. It appeared
somewhat  forbidding  in  its  sturdiness,  but  the  interior  was  a  gem.  He’d  seen  to  it  himself  by  hiring  a
decorator  and  letting  her  have  her  way  with  updating  things.  Stephanie  would  have  been  grateful  for  a
dirt-floored hovel so long as her family was safe, but it pleased him more than he cared to admit to be able
to escort her to a modern Aladdin’s cave. If she had to spend the rest of her life in hiding, at least it would
be in comfortable surroundings.

Tired from the trip, she moved slowly, and he helped her down from the van as Luis, carrying the twins,
walked with young Michael toward the house. Stephanie paused and smiled breathtakingly at Richard, and
for a moment he wondered if she was pregnant again, for he thought how true it was that a woman looked
even more beautiful in the full bloom of childbearing. And his heart broke a little more. It did not matter her
condition, he would always see her in such radiance. He held her hand just a little too long as she steadied
herself and smoothed her dress. She only smiled gently at him again, squeezed his fingers, and turned away.
Luis was watching from the freshly painted blue door of the house.
Once inside Stephanie had been like a little girl at Christmas, going from room to room, gasping in delight
at  the  rough-hewn  wood  and  heavy  low  ceilings,  and  laughing  out  loud  at  the  apparen-tly  antiquated
plumbing.  The  place  had  been  built  in  the  hip  seventies  by  an  oil  baron  wishing  to  appease  his  young
back-to-nature, flower-child wife, hence the log cabin look in a landscape where large trees were an oddity.
He’d imported the lot from out  of  state,  added  many  additional  rooms  and  filled  them  with  faux  Spanish
fixtures and shag carpeting. The decorator had thankfully removed those shards of bad taste, but left intact
the huge fireplace in the main living room, made of fieldstone and artistically crooked. She’d  replaced  the
hideous  avocado  kitchen  with  faux  antique  fixtures,  including  a  large  glowering  range,  black  and  dully
gleaming, but using propane instead of wood fuel.
Stephanie took joy in everything, allocating rooms as she went, Michael running ahead to call her on  to
fresh discoveries. She busied herself settling Elena and Seraphina in their new nursery.
That left Richard in the company of Luis. Neither man had avoided or ignored the other for the duration
of the journey, both giving and getting courtesy. It had still been uncomfortable, but they’d made the best of
things. Richard could respect the man’s effort, and found himself unbending a bit. 
It had to do with his intimate familiarity with the dynamics of temptation and threat. As both qualities had
been amply manifested in and expressed by dear brother Alejandro, Luis’s mistake of giving in to him was
understandable. He’d committed a crime, but wasn’t a criminal at heart, only weak. And frightened. 
Would  I  have  done  differently  were  our  positions  reversed?  Richard  wasn’t  sure.  It  had  been
centuries since he’d humbled himself for the last time before the long departed Ambert.
Luis seemed distracted and stood alone before the cold fireplace, hands in his pockets, looking bleak and
lost. He had committed that most grievous of sins in the drug community: he had gone straight, and worse,
had  tried  to  make  amends  by  supplying  the  authorities  with  valuable  information.  The  cartels  had  bled
steadily as a result. The men who were after him were not to be trifled with, especially Alejandro.  When
Luis started to inform against his brother, Alejandro’s  reaction  had  been  predictable  and  unwisely  public.
He’d openly sworn—from the safety of his Colombian fortress—that he would kill Luis like  a  dog,  and  a
contract had been issued. The largest in cartel history, word had it. No wonder Luis stood closed off from
his family and simply stared, dark eyes seeing nothing.
“It will be all right,” Richard told him, hoping he was not lying. 
“You think so?” There was justified doubt in his question.
“So far as it is  in  my  power  to  make  things  safe.  Bourland’s  people  had  us  well  covered  in  Toronto.
Anyone watching your old house will think you’re still there.”
Luis gave an expressive shrug, shaking his head. “Alejandro is no fool and he does  not  hire  fools,  only
uses them. Like me. They will find out I’m gone soon enough.”
“You did the right thing, Luis.”
“So everyone tells me, but if I’d kept quiet—”
“You’d be in jail.”
“Or safe in Colombia.”
“And in thrall to Alejandro for the rest of your life.”
“You think this is any different?”
“Oh, yes. Very different.”
“How?”
“Because here you can look your wife and children in the eyes without shame.”
That made Luis pause. He even managed a small, fleeting smile in acknowledgment of the point, but still
had practical worries to voice. “Alejandro is not one to give up. He always had to win even when we were
little. He would not stop playing a game until he’d won.”
“That may be so, but he has no pieces now with which to play. You have very effectively vanished.”
Luis gave a soft snort. “What a good  mood  he  will  be  in  then.  He  will  never  cease  looking  until  he’s
found us.”
“Do  you  think  if  you  spoke  with  him  he’d  change  his  mind?  Sometimes  a  face-to-face  talk  can
change—”

Now Luis barked out a soft laugh. “You are too much the optimist, friend Richard. Where I come from
this is a matter of honor and blood. It is no concern that  what  Alejandro  does  breaks  the  law,  but  it  is  a
great concern that I have broken faith with him. I betrayed my own brother to ruin. He deserves it, but in
his world I am the one who is the traitor.”
“Then it’s best to be removed from such a world. Would you wish your  children  to  learn  such  twisted
rules?”
Luis shook his head and paced slowly across the room, taking it in, perhaps, for the first time. He stopped
by a large wraparound sofa  that  faced  an  equally  large  entertainment  center.  It  was  not  unlike  the  way
Stephanie had arranged things back in her Canada home. Richard had an eye for detail and even managed
to provide video tapes of their favorite films and a few CDs and books in the hope their familiarity  would
ease the shock of moving, of leaving nearly everything behind. To judge by the squeals now coming  from
the children’s playroom, Michael  had  discovered  the  cache  of  toys  and  storybooks  scattered  there.  Like
many other items in the house everything was new, still in their plastic wrappings, but Richard didn’t think
the  child  would  mind.  Michael  always  took  such  savage  joy  tearing  into  presents  it  seemed  a  shame  to
deprive him of it.
“Daddydaddydaddy!”  The  boy  rushed  screaming  into  the  room,  his  arms  full  of  treasure.  He  held  a
stuffed elephant nearly his own size, tripped and fell on it. The plush beast broke his fall,  and  he  was  too
excited to remember to cry at the sudden tumble. He struggled to his feet holding the animal high trying to
show it off to his father.
Luis looked to instantly wake out of his glum mood and gave his undivided attention to his little son. He
exclaimed over the toy and tried to coax Michael into correctly pronouncing the word “elephant.” The child
had inherited his mother’s blue eyes but not her dark hair. His pale blond cap had come  from  her  Nordic
forebears,  the  trait  having  skipped  a  generation  with  her.  Elena  and  Seraphina  were  the  same.  The
childrens’ skin had just the faintest dusky hue from their father’s side. It would tan dark beneath the Texas
sun. When the infant girls became young women they would be even more stunning than Stephanie.
God, they were all so tiny, yet growing so fast. Richard took in  the  moment  from  far  across  the  room
feeling both joy and the harsh stab  of  relentless  sorrow.  Sabra  had  warned  him  against  attachments,  but
how could  he  avoid  them?  It  was  his  lot  to  look  on  their  ephemeral  lives  and  know  that  in  a  few  short
decades they would be grown up, grown old, and die. How wonderful it was to see the beginnings, and how
heartbreaking to watch the long, agonizing decline. Out of necessity to his own sanity he’d learned to push
such dismal anticipations away and live as best he  could  in  the  present,  but  sometimes  that  was  damned
difficult. It was only thin comfort to him that however temporary their  time  was  on  earth  he  could  try  to
make it happy for them.
Michael galloped away again, and as quickly returned, this time  holding  high  a  red  plastic  airplane  and
making appropriate buzzing noises. He’d been highly impressed with the flight from Kansas, his great blue
eyes taking in every detail. He was bright for his age and had a talent for charming people, confiding to his
father he would fly planes when he grew up. A week earlier he’d wanted to be a soccer champion.
He looked up at Luis and asked, “Is it Christmas? Can I keep the toys?”
Luis automatically corrected the  boy’s  grammar  and  confirmed  everything  was  his  to  keep.  This  was
greeted with a piping cheer, then he rushed off to find his mother. The room seemed smaller after his noisy
exodus. Luis stared after him in the abrupt silence, his face somber, his eyes unblinking like the dead.
“The children will be all right, too,” said Richard, guessing Luis’s thoughts.
He looked up sharply. His mouth twitched in a grimace. “I can hope for that . . . and thank you for this.”
He raised one hand to indicate the house. “But I know you would not do all this for me alone.”
“Probably not,” Richard admitted.
“And thus by default I am in a debt to you I cannot hope to repay. I have nothing.”
Richard shook his head. Time to give his own reassurance to this man who did not seem  to  remember
the priceless worth of what remained to him. “You have Stephanie. And you always will.”
Another sharp look from Luis. At last a tiny  spark  of  life  -returned  to  his  dark  eyes.  What  was  that?
Resentment or triumph? Both? He was certainly entitled. And he yet held some lingering jealousy  toward
Richard. He could be civilized and pretend other-wise, but couldn’t altogether hide it.
But you  were the one  to walk  away  with  Stephanie.  If  only  you  would  realize  that.  Even  if  you
were gone, she’d still not have me.
Richard sighed and this time did not try to conceal his own sorrow. “Luis, you possess everything that I
can never hope to have: a wonderful wife who loves  you  dearly  and  three  sweet,  beautiful  children  who
adore their father. If you want to pay me back, then make them as happy  as  possible.  Give  to  them  that
which I cannot and never will be able to give myself.”

Then Luis dropped his gaze, and that was the end of the matter.
That evening they’d had a minor celebration,  Stephanie  readily  making  use  of  the  supplies  in  her  new
kitchen. Richard could not imbibe or ingest with the rest, but played with Michael, distracting him from the
adult tensions he must have sensed, but was  -unable  to  understand.  The  boy  was  especially  receptive  to
such  things,  and  picked  up  on  the  underlying  brittleness  to  the  general  cheer  as  his  parents’  future  was
discussed over his head.
In a few days Luis would begin his new job  at  Arhyn-Hill  Oil—working  under  another,  quite  different
last name in an executive position that Richard had arranged for him. Whether it was coffee or oil, business
was  business,  and  Luis  would  soon  be  immersed  into  his  new  duties  and  earning  a  guilt-free  living.
Stephanie eventually planned to work there as well when she thought the girls were old enough to face the
rigors of daycare with a minimum of trauma.
The party did not last long. They were all tired. Stephanie insisted that Richard  make  use  of  the  guest
room,  and  he  gave  in  for  just  the  one  night.  All  was  quiet,  or  nearly  so.  Awake  and  listening  to  the
unfamiliar sounds of the country he became aware of other, equally primal sounds coming from the master
bedroom  far  down  the  hall.  Weary  as  they  undoubtedly  were,  Luis  had  summoned  enough  energy  to
reaffirm his husband’s claim over Stephanie.
Richard  had  rolled  over  in  his  own  bed,  crammed  a  pillow  against  his  ear,  and  bitterly  regretted  his
decision to stay.
How  sharp  the  memories  were  in  their  pain  and  pleasure  -despite  the  intervening  years.  Time  was
supposed to cure things like that. For Richard it generally did—when he could bring himself to let things go.
He’d not been able to do that with Stephanie.
The house itself sat indifferently defiant, built to outlast man and the elements,  its  heavy  outline  picked
out by the security lights that Luis had installed himself. The huddled  outbuildings  were  silent,  deserted  in
the night. Scanning the scene minutely, Richard spotted nothing out of the ordinary, and concentrating with
his unnaturally acute hearing, could detect nothing wrong. Most reassuring.
He pressed flat against the wall of the barn, hidden by the deep shadows cast by the  lights  around  the
house. The horses dozed contentedly, and mice scurried  on  their  busy  way.  Again  he  listened  and  heard
nothing untoward from the surrounding area. If any humans were about, he’d have found them by now. He
turned his attention full upon the house.
The glow of a light peeped out between wooden shutters in what was the master bedroom, and now that
he was closer, he could pick out the thin wailing strains of a steel guitar across the night air. Stephanie must
have  gone  completely  native.  She’d  not  expressed  much  interest  in  country  music  when  they’d  been
-together.
Satisfied that it was safe to approach, he quit his concealment and went back to retrieve the car. If he
just  walked  up  to  the  house  now  and  banged  on  the  door  it  might  startle  them  unnecessarily,  especially
Stephanie. It would be better for her no-doubt-strained nerves that she first hear the sound of his approach.
She’d insisted that he come as though it were one of his normal visits, and now that he’d scouted things, he
saw no reason not to comply with her wish.
He pulled up some yards away, close to the carport where her new minivan was parked. Luis’s  sedan
was missing, indicating he wasn’t yet home. Perhaps he’d stopped on some after-work errand. He’d not be
far behind in his own arrival, then.  Richard  hoped  this  wouldn’t  create  complications  for  Stephanie  later.
Luis would put on a show of welcome, as he always did, but he’d not be too pleased to see the ex-boyfriend
in his house, or to hear the reason why. He might resent her calling for help without first discussing it. Or
asking permission.
Richard cared nothing for that thought and shoved it away. 
He strolled onto the porch, boots noisy against the wood. He half expected the door to be pulled open by
Stephanie before he had the chance to knock, but it remained shut. Its once proud blue was quite faded by
the unremitting sun, its iron hinges rusted and brown. No blood flowed from them or from the cracks in the
wood, he noted with much relief. Damn that dream, anyway.
The music changed, grew louder. It was Willie Nelson crooning out “The Healing Hands of Time.” How
appropriate.  Having  been  at  the  receiving  end  of  heartbreak  on  many,  many  occasions  in  his  long  life,
Richard had a vivid understanding and appreciation for the themes of country music. Odd that he could hear
it so clearly, though.
Then he noticed that the front door was open. There was a half-inch gap between it and the frame. He
felt the cool breath of the central air conditioning escaping into the outside heat.
Mouth dry and fully alert to any waiting ambush, he gave the iron handle on the door a push. His heart
sank as the great slab of wood creaked gently open. The entry was but dimly lighted and apparently empty.

Several  possibilities  ran  through  his  mind,  one  of  which  being  that  the  family  had  left  in  haste  and
forgotten to secure things. A foolish idea, but he preferred to grasp at such  fragile  straws  than  anticipate
anything worse.
Well, if anyone was inside ready to spring upon him, they’d have long heard him by now. No need to be
stealthy at this point.
“Stephanie?”
That damn dream again.  He’d called to her in  just  that  manner,  loud  enough  for  the  whole  house  to
hear. The hair on the back of his neck stood on end from the memory.
“Luis? Michael?” There, that broke the pattern.
When no reply came, he moved fast—at the kind of unnatural speed only he could attain. In less than an
eye  blink  he  was  inside,  back  pressed  against  a  wall,  every  nerve  alert,  every  sense  straining  for
information.
Nothing. Only the faint hum of the air conditioning and Willie Nelson with a lush string accompaniment.
Wait, now . . . there was a scent hanging in the entry air. Very faint, with an artificial, chemical quality.
Innocuous,  but  out  of  place.  He  couldn’t  quite  identify  it.  He  didn’t  dismiss  it  so  much  as  register  the
puzzlement and put it aside for the moment.
He  moved  farther  into  the  house,  leaving  the  front  door  wide.  The  living  room  was  lighted  up,  but
deserted, as was the hall connecting it to the dining and kitchen areas.  The music came from the back  of
the place.
Another  smell  abruptly  intruded  upon  him.  This  one  much  stronger,  very  identifiable  and  entirely
alarming. Propane gas. He moved  toward  the  kitchen,  taking  a  deep  breath  before  going  in.  The  deadly
smothering stink was so strong that even in the hall he almost gagged. He entered, careful not to  flick  on
the overhead light. He picked out the stove controls in the dimness. They were all on high, the  pilot  lights
blown out.
He cut everything off fast and eased open the back door to allow in fresh air, looking out. Nothing to see,
but instinct  told  him  that  someone  was  probably  out  there  watching  from  cover.  Whoever  had  done  the
mischief couldn’t be far away. The valves hadn’t been open for more than a few minutes or else Richard
would have detected the explosive  poison  when  first  he  came  in.  Perhaps  the  intruder  had  gone  out  the
back the moment Richard stepped onto the front porch.
Was that the trap? For him  to  rush  in  here,  turn  on  the  light,  and  let  the  electrical  spark  do  the  rest?
Possibly, but it was too sloppy, too uncertain.
And there was that other smell . . . 
The propane could have  been  meant  to  cover  it,  to  keep  him  from  noticing.  No  normal  human  would
have picked it up, though. A feint, then, a minor distraction to get him stirred up and off balance.
“Stephanie? Where are you?”
He  remembered  the  glow  from  the  master  bedroom’s  window  and  quit  the  kitchen,  moving  fast  and
silent over the carpeted floor. Just because he couldn’t sense anyone else there didn’t mean that the house
had to be empty. If they kept very, very quiet . . . 
Willie’s voice grew stronger, as did that almost-familiar odor.
The  only  light  breaking  the  interior  gloom  was  a  narrow  streak  showing  out  from  the  bottom  of  the
bedroom door. All the other doors opening onto the hall—the children’s rooms, the bath, an office—gaped
onto darkness.
Trap, he thought,  his  hand  resting  on  the  doorknob.  Who  was  on  the  other  side?  One  of  Alejandro’s
hired assassins, waiting with a shotgun at ready? If so, then he was in for a hellish surprise.
Richard turned the knob. It moved freely. No hindering obstructions. What if opening the door triggered
a booby trap of some sort? A bomb?
That smell . . . more concentrated now. It was an unlikely combination, reminiscent of new  car  interior
and petrol, and its source was here.
As was another, intermingled with the first, but instantly familiar to him.
Blood.
Panic flared in his chest. He fought it down. Made himself go slow. Made himself listen. He should be
able to hear the breathing, the very heartbeat of anyone in the room beyond.
Nothing. That damned music interfered, masked it all.
Sweat coated him, the slick discomfort of his own fear. If it was only his safety at risk he’d already be
inside, but what if the threat was also to Stephanie?
He had to look in, to take that chance with her life.
He slowly pushed the door open, tensed and ready to spring, to fight, ready for anything except the sight

greeting him.
They lay in bed together, Stephanie and her twin daughters, fully clothed, yet apparently asleep.
Too still, much too still for that, his mind whispered.
For it was the cold sleep of death holding them, and its freezing grasp closed hard upon his heart, holding
him as surely as if he’d been struck dead himself. He was stunned beyond thought, beyond action; all that
remained was sickening perception.
The bullet holes were unseemly neat in the  smooth  skin  of  the  twins’  foreheads,  at  least  on  the  entry
side. He didn’t need to see the exits to know of the hideous damage there.
Their throats had also been cut. Blood was everywhere. It matted their fair hair, soaked the pillows, and
dripped down  onto  the  floor  where  it  puddled  on  the  hardwood.  The  slaughterhouse  stink  of  it  filled  the
room.
Stephanie’s eyes were open and stared at him dully. She had two bullet wounds, one in her stomach, the
other squarely over her heart. They weren’t enough for her killer; he’d taken care to cut her throat, too.
Then her face blurred as tears filled Richard’s vision. A keening cry escaped him, echoing through  the
emptiness of the house, and Willie’s words mocked him from the sound system.
I’ll get over you by clinging to the healing hands of time.
He tried to step toward them, hand out as though to offer help, to give comfort, an automatic gesture and
quite useless. 
He tried to step toward them, but his legs gave way, dumping him in an unceremonious heap on the floor.
He couldn’t move, couldn’t see for the tears. A great sob racked his body, unstoppable. 
No time. No time for this!
He fought the tidal rush of anguish and rage, raising up, trying to make his limbs  work.  He  could  have
lain there forever weeping, but that smell of new plastic and petrol, now redolent of death, pierced his grief
like a dagger, and he suddenly understood the true danger all around him.
It was Semtex. Plastic explosive.
No time to look for the bomb. It could detonate any second. They’d been watching for him, waiting for
him to find the -bodies—
He had to run. 
Terror overthrew the grief for a  few  precious  seconds.  Just  long  enough  for  him  to  gather  himself  to
crash through the shuttered window. But a stray thought stopped him.
Michael. Where’s Michael? 
His body was not with theirs.
If there was any chance of the boy being alive, Richard  would  not  leave  no  matter  what  the  risk.  He
stared wildly about, then staggered to the closet, the bath. 
Empty. Only blood. Blood everywhere.
At vampire speed Richard shot from the room, tore through the house. First Michael’s room. Then  the
rest.  He  ripped  open  doors,  threw  over  beds,  calling  the  boy’s  name  in  a  strangled  voice  he  did  not
recognize.
Nothing. Not one sign of the child.  Richard  ran  through  the  rest  of  the  house  in  a  frenzy  of  fear  and
doubt.
He tried the kitchen, searching all the cupboards, the pantry. Nothing.
Only the coat closet in the hall remained. He rushed toward it. 
The front door was still open. Beyond lay the safety of night, of clear space to run.
Closet. A fleeting look. Empty. Whether that was good or bad . . . 
Door. 
He made it as far as the threshold.
The universe exploded into flames  and  dropped  away  from  him.  Some  terrible  force  seized  his  whole
body, lifting him effortlessly. The noise was too great to hear, only feel as it pulsed through him like a vast
train. He was flying, limbs fluttering, helpless as a rag doll. He tumbled end over end before slamming into
the packed earth.
The  impact  struck  the  breath  from  him.  He  was  dimly  aware  of  things  hurtling  past,  like  bullets  but
larger. Great chunks of the house flew around him. He cowered, hands on his head. Futile shields.
Run!
But he couldn’t coordinate enough for that.
Nor was he fast enough.
The whole front wall, somehow holding together in spite of the destruction, bellied outward. He had  an
awful vision of red flames licking through the expanding cracks between the huge logs, and then they were

falling onto him, and they were all on fire.
Chapter Five
Amid searing light, he was in darkness.
And pain. So much that the shadows in his mind drew back enough to allow in consciousness . . . 
. . . realization . . . 
. . . and horror.
Everything  around  him  was  in  flames.  They  crackled  and  roared  in  obscene  greed,  flames  that  must
surely consume him if he did not quickly do something.
The darkness that had fallen upon him withdrew as swiftly as it had come, and Richard became aware
that he could not move. He tried to turn and see what held him. The effort made his whole body scream,
and the blackness at the edge of his vision crept close once more.
He lay facedown on bare earth. He could see his arms. They were bloodied but free. Something pinned
his legs. He pushed at the ground, ignoring the agony, and tried once more to turn. Succeeded.
Where the old house had been was now a rumbling, roaring bonfire. Thick rivers of smoke, blacker than
the night sky, spiraled high to blot out the stars. The heat hammered against his exposed skin, worse  than
the sun.
The great logs had been thrown around like matchsticks by the unholy blast. Some lay in jumbled heaps
of devilish architecture, others stood upright embedded in the ground like giant nails. 
And one huge timber lay across his legs. And it was on fire. He smelled burning flesh and knew it was
his own.
He scrabbled at the earth beneath him, digging, clawing frantically for freedom. His hands tore and bled
from the sharp stones; he lost several fingernails, ripped from the root. This was what an animal felt as it
chewed off one of its own limbs to escape a trap. He dug faster, then twisted his body back and forth -until
at last something gave way. 
The heat grew unbearable as the tinder-dry log  that  held  him  burned  more  rapidly,  but  at  last  his  legs
were  coming  clear.  At  least  one  of  them  must  have  been  broken,  yet  still  he  pushed  and  pulled  for  his
freedom. Then suddenly he slid out from under the log, dragging himself from the fiery trap.
But flames licked insidiously up his legs; he slapped them out with bare and  bleeding  hands.  Unable  to
walk, he clawed his way over the baking earth, until the stinging smoke was not so hot in his straining lungs,
then collapsed.
He could do nothing for what seemed a very long time. His world had become hell, and  he  one  of  the
damned souls in eternal torment.
Keeping still, he  tried  to  take  stock  of  his  injuries.  Something  was  embedded  in  his  back  like  a  knife,
whether wood or iron he knew not. He could feel  the  wet  trail  of  his  own  blood  running  down  from  the
wound. One of his legs was broken, as he had surmised, the thigh bone jutting out through his flesh, ghastly
white in the light from the burning wreckage. He was gouged raw with shrapnel and splinters. Hearing was
impossible; blood trickled from his ears, from his shattered eardrums. And he was badly burned. The lower
front of his broken leg was black and charred, and his reddened hands sprouted ugly white blisters.
Never had Richard known such a wounding, not even in the plane crash. Had he been any closer to the
blast or been a normal human, he’d be dead. He could yet die. That he still breathed was hopeful,  but  he
needed time to heal.

And fresh blood. Lots of it.
But from where? This place was truly isolated. He doubted that  the  explosion,  massive  as  it  was,  had
been noticed by any other than the small animals in the surrounding fields.
The horses.
He could not hear them, but saw their panicked milling in the nearby corral. Distance from the house and
the barn’s tin roof had spared them from the blast and fire.
Animal blood was not good for him. Sabra had warned him from the very first of the dangers of drinking
it, of it being much the same peril as seawater to a parched human, but in a desperate situation it would do.
The wretched stuff would keep him alive and give him some strength, though it would not be pleasant.
But before he could even think of doing anything else, whatever was impaled in his back would have to
come out. It was worse than his leg and still bleeding freely. 
He reached gingerly around and felt behind him. His burned fingers touched  something  hard  projecting
from  a  low  angle  -between  his  ribs,  but  he  couldn’t  tell  what  it  was.  Slowly,  agonizingly,  he  inched  the
missile from his flesh. It had punctured a lung; he felt rather than heard  the  bubbling  hiss  of  escaping  air
with each breath. Black mist whirled about him, threatening to engulf him. He had to pause between each
effort, recover, then brace for the next. The only thing worse  than  pulling  it  out  was  leaving  the  damned
thing in. A fit of coughing seized him. He spat blood and kept working.
He had no idea how long the removal took, only that it  was  a  long  time,  and  that  every  moment  was
agony. Finally, with a desperate exertion, it slipped free. Richard caved flat  with  a  groan  and  stayed  that
way for a while.
When the black mist cleared somewhat he  dragged  the  artifact  around  to  see.  It  was  one  of  the  iron
hinges that had held the front door of the house in place, half a yard in length.  A  third  of  it  was  covered
with his blood.
He let it drop in the dust. Or rather mud. The ground where he lay was soaked crimson.
He tried to get up and failed. His broken leg. He’d have to set it  before  the  healing  could  begin  or  be
crippled  for  the  rest  of  his  life.  He  turned  over  and  lightly  touched  the  end  of  the  broken  bone,  and
immediately arched back, again in agony, biting off his cry. That was no good. It would have to be  quick,
this straightening of the bone. He’d have to gather every atom of will and force himself through the ordeal.
Icy sweat stung his eyes, and he realized that his arms were shaking.
Dear Goddess, give me strength.
Unable to walk or even crawl, he dragged himself once more, covering the infinite distance to the corral
and one of its fence posts. Panting and chilled with encroaching shock, he hooked the heel of his useless leg
against the post, positioned his good foot over the instep, and made ready to push. 
Don’t let me pass out before it’s over.
He moved quickly, before he could think too much about it. He pushed hard, stretching the break apart,
and then reached down and shoved the bone back into the flesh of his leg, so that the two ends were level
with each other. They ground back into place and held. 
He  could  not  hear  himself,  but  knew  that  he  screamed  throughout  the  whole  procedure,  an  animal’s
scream that cut through the roar of the fire, the scream of a wolf caught in a cruel steel trap. Then he fell
back, gasping and soaked with sweat, white with shock, hardly able to move. 
But move he must.
Richard was pitifully weak; he’d never been so feeble and sick, and every moment’s delay stripped more
strength and blood from his body. All he wanted was rest, just to close his eyes and sleep, to get away from
the dreadful pain that racked his existence. Yet if he slept now in this enervated state he might never wake
again. Then the rising sun would surely finish him off.
He used the fence to pull himself up. Had to lean on it. The black mist hovered close, drifting across his
eyes. He dared not give in to it.
But he was so tired. So hurt . . . 
He clung to the wood, praying for the temptation to pass.
Blackness and rest. A few moments of it would help. He could be healing while—
No. To give in was to lose all.
He limped one step, two, and nearly fell. He held to the fence like a drowning man. 
Just a little more strength, I beg you.
Two more steps was all he could manage. 
Someone  would  find  him  like  this  in  the  morning,  arms  draped  over  the  crosspiece,  head  down,  legs
sagging. The sun would complete the job begun by the fire.
No . . . please . . . help me . . . 

Then he felt it. The surging return of a sometime enemy, sometime friend.
Dazed  and  unsteady,  yet  overpowering,  relentless  in  its  hunger,  it  pushed  back  the  blackness  with  a
defiant snarl.
His beast was awake.
Thus it was his red-eyed master that made him raise up and struggle on along the fence line to the gate,
to the horses. He had to feed from them or die; it was as simple as that, and the thing inside him would not
permit him to stop.
At last, after what seemed an age, he made it to the gate of the corral, and reached over to release the
latch. The horses, -already panicked by the explosion  and  fire  did  not  need  the  threat  of  his  presence  to
seek  escape.  The  instant  there  was  an  opening  one  of  them  took  it,  and  the  rest  followed.  He  lunged
forward to grasp a halter, but their stampede knocked him and the gate away from their flight.
He swung helpless, tears of frustration sheeting his eyes as he tried to hold on. His head throbbed with
insidious pain, his -vision swam. The darkness at the edge of his mind grew, threatening to overcome even
the blood of Annwyn’s Hounds. He swayed against the fence, fighting the oncoming faint.
Then through the numbness in his ears, he made out a sound. It seemed very distant, as though coming to
him muffled by many layers of padded cloth. There was a thumping  and  stamping  from  within  the  stable
and the high-pitched squeal of a frightened animal. Using the fence to keep weight off his bad leg, he edged
his way into the smoke-filled building, peering into the dim depths. It was the pony,  yet  secure  in  its  stall,
lovingly cared for with plaited mane and neatly trimmed tail, but clearly  filled  with  fear.  Foam  flecked  its
mouth, and sweat darkened its neck and flanks.
Richard hobbled and hopped to it as best he could, but getting close was difficult. The animal kicked out
sporadically against the side of the stall. The whites of its eyes showed, and it would not be still. Richard’s
presence did nothing to help, for as it sensed his opening of the low door behind it, the animal plunged and
bucked against its restraints. 
Grasping the side of the  stall  for  support,  Richard  eased  around  until  at  last  he  could  take  the  pony’s
halter in hand and look the animal in the eye. Summoning his dwindling strength, he willed  it  to  calmness.
Most,  if  not  all,  creatures  were  telepathic  in  one  way  or  another  and  could  be  influenced  by  him  if  he
worked at it. Quiet thoughts, soothing words could overcome the most basic instincts. In moments the pony
stopped  fighting  and  came  forward,  nuzzling  his  head  against  him.  They  might  have  been  in  some
wildflower meadow on a cool summer evening—that was the picture Richard had tried to project. The pony
stretched out its neck, resting its head on Richard’s shoulder, and he held it as if in a lover’s embrace. Then
as gently as he could so as not to disturb the fragile bond he’d made, Richard sank to the stable floor. 
He spoke softly, patting the animal to keep it motionless. The veins in its neck were too deep within the
flesh for him to reach, so he sought those running just beneath the skin on one leg. The hide was tough as
he cut into it, but the bounty would be great. 
He buried his fangs deep . . . and fed.
The taste was strange, thick, almost metallic. He dimly remembered that he’d fed so before in  another
wild and desperate time long ago. When was that? What had happened to him then?  No  matter.  Nothing
mattered except the restoration of his life.
The blood welled its way into his mouth, and he drank, greedy and starved, holding on desperately to the
pony as the first wave of inner warmth crashed through him. He felt a sweet lightness take him, whether
from the ecstasy of feeding or because of his wounds, he  knew  not.  Pounding  through  his  body  was  the
thump of the creature’s heart, and he felt his own strengthen as it struggled to match the rhythm, to catch
that life. 
A glow such as he’d not known since his youth in the sun heated his belly like the most potent wine. It
spread out to his limbs; there was a delicious heat gathered at the break in his leg, and a lovely cool tingling
at his burns.
The healing. Praise the Goddess and the beast within.
He drank—more than he could have safely taken from a -human, but the animal could spare it.
He drank—long and deeply, more than was needed to achieve recovery.
He drank—until the thick blood seemed to go solid in his throat.
And he could not bring himself to tear away.
Not until the dizziness set in and became too much. He choked on his next swallow. His grip loosened,
and he fell away coughing, blood bubbling from his nose and mouth as he did, his face a mask of red. 
For the briefest time, he could do nothing. He lay helpless in the straw, his head lolling on one  outflung
arm, feeling the animal’s strong life-force coursing through his veins. He found his eyes irresistibly drawn to
a small pool of blood on a bare patch of flooring directly below his face.  It had dribbled from his lips, and

seemed  to  be  taking  on  the  most  fascinating  and  hypnotic  shapes,  starting  as  a  head  in  profile.  Then  it
became three, one large and two small. Then it became a gun, held in a large hand. 
How curious it all was. Richard moved a little so as to get a better angle on the picture, when it abruptly
changed and became a gaping mouth, screaming. He could hear the screaming. It was Stephanie.
He thrashed himself upright, trying to find her. 
The floor. The scream came from that gaping mouth on the floor.
With an immense effort of will, he wrenched his gaze away, and forced himself to ignore the sound until
it faded. When it was gone, he looked down at the blood again and found there was no shape in it at all; it
was simply a few drops of spilled redness, and he rubbed that away with one swipe of his hand.
The animal blood was healing him, but at a price.
The pony was recovered from his thrall now, and beginning to stir about once more. Richard reached up
and loosened the halter rope. The animal backed away from him and  wheeled  eagerly  toward  the  barn’s
open door.
“I thank you, good friend,” he whispered as it went skittering out into the safety of the night.
He rested just long enough to decide he could try standing. He had to get to his car before things got any
worse. If he could make it  home,  there  was  fresh  human  blood  there,  enough  to  flush  this  lesser  nectar
from his system.
Surprisingly, his feet held him, but only just. He could not put weight on his leg, but at least it did not blind
him with pain each time he moved. On the way out he grabbed up a discarded garden hoe and used it as a
cane. 
Limping to the open door, he saw that the  flames  were  dimmer  now.  The  full  force  of  the  blaze  was
past, and with its passing the smoking destruction became brutally clear. 
Of the house, there was simply nothing left but unidentifiable black lumps and thin remnants of the inside
walls amid shards of the collapsed roof. The fieldstone chimney still stood, defiantly pointing skyward, and
water  jetted  up  from  a  ruptured  pipe  somewhere.  Incongruously,  the  stove  stood  where  it  always  had,
seemingly unscathed, its door open as if expecting a meal to cook. The staunch old house was burned to a
complete  ruin.  Flakes  of  charred  paper  flew  about  haphazardly  like  obscene  snow  in  the  updraft  of  the
leftover  heat.  The  master  bedroom  and  its  ephemeral  contents  were  gone,  the  three  bodies  buried  in  a
mountain of rubble from the blast.
A wave of nausea passed over him. He’d seen death too many times before to allow himself to react to
it in such a manner even under these circumstances. It had to be the alien blood doing this to him,  setting
him to an uncontrollable shuddering. He had to get back to  his  car,  to  New  Karnak  so  he  could  feed  on
human blood and fully heal. Then, by all that was  holy,  by  the  sacred  groves  of  Avalon,  by  the  Goddess
herself, he would find who was responsible. He would avenge those deaths, and his  vengeance  would  be
beyond terrible. 
He staggered toward his car, lurching like a drunkard. The animal blood was having a bad effect on him
mentally, even as it restored him physically. His vision swam, and he saw all manner of strange,  distorted
things. Shadows leapt out at him, assuming impish shapes before dissolving to  nothing.  Sounds  ebbed  and
flowed in his ears. Voices rang and mumbled with dire warnings in a language he couldn’t quite understand.
Then his legs abruptly gave way, and the ground floated up gracefully to meet him. Sweat sprang out on his
forehead like spring rain. He lay shaking, his fingers scratching impotently at the hard earth, teeth clenched
tight so as not to bite his tongue.
It will pass, it must pass.
He felt so tired. His body ached everywhere, and his knitting wounds screamed at him angrily. He tried
to shout back at them, but couldn’t seem to draw in enough breath. He rolled  onto  his  back  and  saw  the
moon, quite new, smiling down at him. Then all at once, it wasn’t the moon, but the pale, pock-marked face
of his long-dead father Montague grinning at him through broken and discolored teeth. And his voice came
clear across the night air.
“What ails thee, Richard? Disappointed you didn’t kill me -after all?”
That awful night so long, so very long ago, came back to him in haunting detail. He could see it all,  his
father’s face and his brother’s distorted with hatred for him and with fear of him. He felt the sharpness of
his  father’s  dagger  once  more  and  heard  his  laugh,  and  tears  from  the  betrayal  sprang  again  fresh  to
Richard’s eyes. But as suddenly as it had come, the vision whipped away, and he knew that the pain was
not some long ago wound, but the healing at work, his life renewing itself, the miracle of Sabra’s dark gift.
With a grunt, he  rolled  over  onto  his  knees,  and  pushed  himself  upright.  Where  had  that  damned  hoe
gotten to? His leg hurt like hell, and now fresh new pain intruded from one of his burned hands. 
He  could  see  them  clearly  in  the  pitiless  moonlight.  Charred  skin  hung  down  in  papery  shreds,  and

several nails were  missing,  but  beneath  was  the  bright  redness  of  new  growth.  Then  he  saw  something
else. The whole surface of his left hand seemed to be moving, alive. It was covered with what seemed like
millions of furiously moving black dots. Ants. Fire ants. He remembered Stephanie speaking often of them.
Yet another South American import doomed to create suffering and misery. They were tiny, voracious and
mean,  with  a  bite  out  of  all  proportion  to  their  size.  He  looked  down  at  where  he’d  fallen,  and  saw  a
bowling-ball-size mound, its top crushed  by  his  hand.  Streams  of  the  angry  insects  poured  out,  each  one
bent on avenging the destruction of their home.
He desperately tried to brush them off, but they seemed to be sticking to him,  and  all  he  succeeded  in
doing was transferring them to his other hand where the rabid biting  began  anew.  Hard  red  bumps  were
already evident where the poison had gone in. The pain from them was intense, and Richard groaned aloud
at this new suffering. He’d have to wash them off somehow.
He looked around at the destruction, then spied the pump house. It had been out of range of the blast and
stood  untouched.  He’d  shown  it  to  Stephanie,  explaining  that  it  had  been  the  core  of  the  original  water
supply for some  long  vanished  homesteader.  Within  was  a  large  iron  hand  pump,  set  imperiously  on  the
wooden cover of a deep  well,  with  a  single  iron  pipe  disappearing  into  the  depths  below.  It  squeaked  in
seeming irritation as he proudly showed her that it still worked. At one time it had stood in the open, as its
rusted state attested, until someone had sensibly built  a  shed  around  it  and  the  mechanized  pump  for  the
well.  Richard  suggested  that  the  old  one  be  removed  and  the  well  closed  up  for  good,  but  Stephanie
resisted, insisting on keeping it exactly as it was.
“You never know when we might need it.”
She picked up a rock, and moving a slat of the well’s wood cap aside, dropped it into the darkness. They
waited a very long time for the splash, and when it came it was from a long way below them.
“No children in here,” he pronounced.
Then she quickly hugged him in the sun-streaked darkness, and kissed his ear.
“Thank you, Richard, for everything. Thank you.”
The memory had stopped him in his tracks with its vividness, all his pain relegated to no importance by
the vision. A lump, hard as coal and twice as black, pushed up into his throat and his breath suddenly came
in sobbing gasps.
Why? Why?
The ants brought him back to the present with their incessant biting, and quick as he could, he limped to
the pump house. The latch was placed high on  the  door,  well  out  of  reach  of  small  hands.  He  hit  it  and
stumbled in.
It was cool inside, the iron of the pump cold against his hand. For a second he leaned forward and rested
his cheek against the metal, thanking the Goddess for its soothing touch, then hastened to work it.
The thing still squeaked, but the water gushed out strongly, rust-colored at first, then clear. He  washed
the  ants  away,  then  leaned  forward  and  put  his  head  under  the  icy  flow.  The  cold  was  -intense,  a
deep-within-the-earth cold, and he nearly pulled away. It was very close to being free-running water.
The uncontrollable shaking took hold of him once again, and he had to stop. He could no longer see. Hot
tears streamed down his face as he thought of Stephanie and sobs racked him deep. There was too much
pain. His heart would surely break from it. Then his pain gained expression, and he cried all his grief to the
mocking moon, the uncaring stillness, the laughing stars.
Your fault, Richard d’Orleans, they told him. You cannot die, so others must. Your fault.
They were right. He’d caused his mother’s death, and countless others since. And  now  Stephanie  and
the  girls.  Probably  Luis  and  Michael,  too.  They  hadn’t  been  in  the  house,  but  must  have  been  caught
elsewhere  and  likely  killed  first.  Luis  had  done  -unsavory  things  in  his  past,  but  he  would  never  leave
Stephanie in danger if he knew of it. He did love her and his children.
The whole family was gone, and it was all Richard’s fault.  He’d  done  something  wrong,  missed  some
telling detail, made some simple mistake, and she’d died as a result. She that he had loved . . . did still love.
More blood on his already encrusted hands.
The tears drained his remaining strength, and he slumped against the rough wood side of the shed. Again,
nausea took hold of him, and he bent double as  though  cramping  from  hunger.  The  walls  swam  outward
away from him, losing their form and substance, then snapped back into place again. He could hear voices,
angry, scared. Stephanie’s, pleading it seemed, begging, then -becoming a scream. He could hear a man’s
low rumble and children crying. Richard shook his head trying to clear them out. It was all in his mind, an
illusion. None of it was real. It was the damned animal blood giving him this waking nightmare.
Then the pain returned. His fingers had swollen to twice their normal size and throbbed  horribly.  Small
dents marked where his nails were growing back, but the ache was as bad as having  them  torn  out,  was

worse in a way, since he wasn’t distracted this time. 
The broken leg was mending; he could feel the two pieces of bone literally knitting together with a kind
of deep internal itch. He held his hands clear of himself and marked their slow progress back to normalcy.
The burns had been washed away with the ants; the new skin felt too tight, but that would pass.
All he  wanted  to  do  was  sleep,  to  hide  in  that  blessed  darkness  from  all  that  had  happened  in  the
last . . . how long? He had no idea. It seemed like an eternity and a split second all at once. He had to rest
and seriously considered  the  possibility  of  giving  in  to  the  need.  He  was  safe  from  the  sun  in  here,  and
would  likely  remain  unconscious  through  the  day.  By  then  the  blood  would  have  done  its  healing  and
worked through him. At sunset he could hurry home and replenish himself—
No  good.  Sooner  or  later  someone  would  notice  the  smoke  in  the  morning  sky  and  call  the  fire
department. They were justifiably paranoid about wildfires down here. The last thing he wanted was to be
noticed by the local authorities.
But he could rest for a few hours. Just a little while would help immeasurably.
As he thought through the possibilities, his gaze fell upon a pile of rags in one corner of the shed. There
was something odd about them, about their shape . . . 
Then his muzzy senses cleared for a second, and in a cold moment of realization  he  knew  he  was  not
alone. He could feel another presence in here with him. Despite the pain of his wounds, despite his awful
reaction to the animal blood, he was suddenly poised and alert, ready for anything. He listened, straining to
the utmost to catch the slightest sound. Then it all broke down and the black mists rolled in once more over
his mind. His vision blurred; his senses wandered. 
He groaned in frustration. He was trying  too  hard.  The  more  effort  he  put  into  it,  the  more  quickly  it
evaded him. This was no hallucination, but something real and vitally important.
Just let it come.
He waited and stared until the pile of rags gradually assumed a recognizable shape. A human shape. A
child. 
It was Michael. He was alive.
The boy was hunched across from Richard in the corner, his face turned to the wall, his arms over his
head. He made no sound and did not move, yet Richard could now hear the reassuring  flutter  of  his  little
heart and his soft breathing.
“Michael . . . ?”
There was no reply. The boy did not stir.
Hurts forgotten,  Richard  eased  himself  to  his  knees  and  tried  again.  “Michael . . . it’s  Uncle  Richard.
Remember? Uncle Richard.”
Still no response. Richard crawled toward him slowly. For a terrible moment he doubted his senses, the
boy  was  so  still.  Had  the  damned  animal  blood  done  this  too,  blurred  his  perception  into  hoping  for  the
impossible, played another trick on him? But it was not so. Now that he was close, it was clear that Michael
was indeed real.
Relief nearly made him fall down again. It did make him sob, but he fought that back.
“Everything’s all right, Michael. It’s Uncle Richard. No one can hurt you now.”
Richard reached out and put his  hand  on  the  boy’s  shoulder,  then  pulled  him  close.  The  boy  twitched
beneath the touch. Then in an instant he was up and fighting, twisting and turning in blind terror, whimpering
incoherently. Such was his sudden fear-filled strength that he nearly got away. Richard held him as gently
as he could, not feeling the kicks and blows, the scratches, as the terrified child fought for his  life  against
some monstrous  enemy.  Then  as  suddenly  as  the  fighting  had  started,  it  stopped,  and  the  little  body  fell
slack  against  him,  shaking  in  reaction.  Richard  held  him  tight,  rocking,  stroking  the  sweat-tangled
white-blond hair.
Dear Goddess, what had the boy witnessed that had done this to him?
“It’s all right now, Michael. Nothing  can  hurt  you  now.  Nothing  can  hurt  you  now.  It’s  all  right.”  He
crooned the mantra over and over again.
Slowly,  ever  so  slowly,  the  shaking  subsided,  the  ragged  breathing  calmed.  There  were  no  sobs  of
release yet; Richard would have felt them. Michael made no sound at all. Richard relaxed his hold, and the
boy fell back, his head supported by Richard’s arm. Then Richard saw his eyes, and his blood ran cold at
the sight.  They  were  bright  shining  blue—and  quite  empty.  They  were  like  the  eyes  of  a  corpse,  blank,
staring, dead, but in a living body.
Ah, Michael, what did you see?
He had to get them away as soon as possible. The boy needed help. He was deep in shock at the very
least, and for all that he was, Richard was no doctor. Then yet another wave  of  reaction  hit  him,  and  he

sank  down  groaning,  stomach  cramped,  vision  blurred.  Michael  lay  in  his  arms  like  a  stone,  motionless,
heavy. Darkness crept in at the edges of Richard’s sight, and he fought it for the boy’s sake and his own. 
He heard cruel laughter, as though someone outside knew the futility of his  efforts.  It  sounded  like  his
long-perished father.
Then Montague himself appeared in the doorway, not in his dotage as Richard had last seen him, but as a
fit young man in his prime. He was tall as a tree, wearing battle armor, and holding a sword.
“What ails thee, boy?” he demanded.
“Go hence,” Richard told him in a tongue he’d not spoken in centuries. His tone was astonishingly normal
and tinged with annoyance. “You are not real. Leave us in peace.”
“I’ll leave  thee  dead,  coward,”  the  apparition  replied.  “  ’Tis  the  only  peace  left  to  thee.”  Montague’s
sword flashed high, somehow unencumbered by the confines of the shed, and swung down decisively.
In  spite  of  himself  Richard  flinched  in  reaction  and  thought  the  child  in  his  arms  did  the  same.
Montague’s  ghostly  blade  cut  harmlessly  through  Richard’s  body,  leaving  behind  only  cold  trails.  Mere
illusion, but for all that still damned unpleasant to simply sit and endure. “Get thee hence!  I’ll  give  you  no
more sport. Thou art dead, gone to dust, and forgot by all.” 
Montague paused, laughing. “Not all. Here do I live and always will.” He bent and pressed one mailed
finger firmly on the -exact center of Richard’s forehead. 
Dear Goddess, I felt that!
Then Montague melted away to nothing, only his laughter lingering behind.
Sickened, Richard rubbed  the  spot  where  he’d  been  touched.  He  could  still  feel  the  pressure  of  hard
metal links scratching against his flesh in the exact spot where Elena and Seraphina had been—
Leave. Leave now, while you can.
He wanted to, more than anything, but his body was not -cooperating. It was as though his father’s touch
had sucked away all his remaining strength. Richard needed rest, but had  no  -desire to surrender
again  to  his  subconscious  at  this  particular  -moment.  Who  knew  what  other  monsters  might  be
lurking there? 
I’ll just stay awake and keep watch, then. He’d done that often enough through countless other nights.
Michael’s eyes were closed now, and his head lay against Richard’s  chest.  How  comforting  it  was  to
simply hold him, to feel his intense little life warm against his own. So young he was, so vulnerable.
Despite his resolve Richard’s lids grew heavier with every passing second, until his valiant fight was lost,
and sleep swept over him, irresistible as  a  riptide  at  full  moon,  and  carried  him  away.  His  head  drooped
forward to rest on the boy’s, his breathing slowed and became regular, and his pain was finally, mercifully
drowned by slumber.
Then came the nightmares. 
Colors, sounds, merged and divided. The borders of his reality were torn down, mixed up in some hellish
brew and thrown back up again, haphazard, all wrong. 
Shapes flew by like carrion birds, close enough  that  the  breeze  from  their  passing  ruffled  his  hair,  yet
never touched him. He grabbed at them, but his hands returned empty. One came directly at him, not a bird
but some . . . thing . . . grinning, and Richard threw his arms up instinctively to protect himself, only to feel
whatever it was pass all around him, through him, cold and laughing, like Montague with his sword.
Richard stood alone in some vast emptiness, buffeted by an  unforgiving  hot  wind.  He  spread  his  arms
wide and tried to face into it, but it kept shifting direction. Then slowly, like a  wheel  stopping  its  spin,  the
whirling colors and shapes began to settle and coalesce into something recognizable. Richard found himself
in a house, familiar to him, but not his own. 
It  was  the  log  house,  the  house  that  was  now  destroyed.  Fully  restored  in  his  dream,  but  there  was
something not quite right in his perception of it. The ceiling seemed unnaturally high, the rooms longer and
wider. Everything was so much larger than it should be.
He lay on his bed. He knew it was his though he’d never slept in it. There  were  posters  on  the  walls,
movie posters. Whatever actor it was that had last played Batman glared seriously at him from one, and a
blonde supermodel unnervingly like a young Brigitte Bardot simpered at him from another. He  sat  up  and
looked  around.  Clothes  were  scattered  everywhere,  and  toys.  Mommy  had  told  him  to  clean  things  up
before he could play, but the lure of his brand new Spiderman comic was too much for him. He could sneak
a  few  minutes  and  break  off  the  instant  he  heard  her  coming  down  the  hall  and  pretend  to  have  been
cleaning all along. She’d never know. He smiled to himself and settled in to read.
Then voices cut through his stolen pleasure. One belonged to his mother; he couldn’t make out the other.
She sounded scared, her tone high and cracked with strain. He’d never heard her sound like that before, not
even when she argued with Daddy. She was shouting something, and it scared him. He had to find out what

was happening, what was wrong.
He rounded a corner in the huge hall, hugging close to the wall, cautious of being seen. The voices were
coming from Mommy’s bedroom. His sisters were there too; he could hear them crying, but it was not their
usual kind of fussing. They were afraid, so much so that it made his chest hurt hard, as though he wanted to
cry himself.
There was another corner. He could see golden light from the big bedroom spilling around it. He didn’t
want to go there. Something horrible was there. Then suddenly his mother’s words rang clear:
“No! For God’s sake! You can’t, not my babies, you can’t, you can’t—NOOO!”
She made an awful scream, and a balloon popped somewhere, scaring him, making him jump. It was a
big balloon, because it made a big noise, and the air rang with the sound. Now his sisters shrieked like little
animals, and two more balloons popped, the explosions echoing toward him. 
Then all the noise stopped, and no more followed.
He shivered in the hall. Confused, afraid. He tried to call out, but couldn’t make himself speak.
Who had blown up balloons? It wasn’t Christmas or  a  birthday.  There’d  be  trouble  for  bursting  them.
Daddy didn’t like that. He hated any kind of sudden, loud sounds.
It was too quiet, something awful had happened. He didn’t want to see it, but he had to. Maybe Mommy
needed help. He moved forward. Then he peered around the corner, and he could see. Mommy was sitting
in a  chair.  Her  head  was  down  on  her  chest.  Maybe  she  was  asleep.  She  must  have  spilled  something
because the front of her blouse was all stained . . . red. 
His heart raced and his breath came short. He knew the stain was blood. He’d seen blood before, lots of
it that time when he split his toe at day camp, and had to go to the hospital in an  ambulance,  and  bled  all
down the hall. But this was much more. This was real bad. This was much worse than any of that.
His  sisters  were  lying  on  the  floor  against  the  wall,  and  they  were  bleeding  too  from  spots  on  their
foreheads. Neither of them cried. But they always cried when they got hurt. Always. Now they just looked
asleep, like Mommy.
Tears slid silently down his face and he started to rock gently from foot to foot. Wetness gathered at his
crotch. What had happened to them and why? Was it still there? Would it come for him?
Then there was a gun. It was huge, black. It seemed to fill every space of the room, fill all of his world,
as it slowly turned to point at him. The hole at the end of the barrel threatened to swallow him.  Someone
was speaking, but he didn’t know who. All he could see was the gun; there was nothing else.
The  finger  on  the  trigger  tensed,  and  the  hammer  began  to  move.  He  could  see  it  clearly,  hear  the
mechanism start its -unholy journey.
“Adios to you too, you little bastard.”
He should run, shouldn’t he? Or maybe he should stay with Mommy. He tried to look at her but could not
tear his gaze from the gun.
The hammer slid farther back on its inevitable journey, and then plunged forward. There was flame and
a flash, the explosion  crashing  though  the  quiet,  bursting  through  his  ears,  sending  his  mind  spinning.  He
heard something fizz past him and thud into the wall behind. The gun had been jerked to one side at the last
instant. Mommy had pushed it away.
She was on her feet now, weakly struggling with the gun, and the man who held it was hitting her  and
swearing at her, and through all this her hoarse terrified voice pierced through his own fear.
“Run, Michael, run, run, runrunrun—!”
He ran for his life away from the scene. He barely heard the last balloon pop, cutting off  his  mother’s
shout. He tore through the house and out of the front door. 
Bright morning light greeted him, nearly blinded him. He just ran and ran. He  did  not  need  to  hear  the
man start after him to know he was there. 
He  ran  across  the  bare  front  yard  toward  the  beginnings  of  the  mesquite  scrub.  Their  fluffy-looking
green concealed an endless number of long thorns. He ducked low, darting beneath the branches. The big
man  could  not  easily  follow  him  here.  The  trees  closed  fast  behind  him  and  opened  wide  ahead  into
protecting darkness. He could hide there. 
He ran straight into it, into the long dark tunnel that stretched endlessly before him. 
He would be safe forever and ever if he could get to the end of the tunnel. He knew that. 
He would be safe if only he could reach its end . . . if only he could . . . 

Chapter Six
The tunnel was long, yet it seemed that he was finally coming to the end; he could see lights.  He  headed
directly for them, but  they  were  not  to  be  reached,  for  even  as  he  neared  they  swung  away  at  the  last
instant, and darkness closed around him again. Would he ever find the end of it? He began to despair when
more lights appeared in the distance. Again to his frustration, they swung away from  him,  but  this  time  a
strange wailing sound accompanied them. It rose and fell as it passed. 
Too much like a banshee, Richard thought, stirring with unease.
The blackness slowly brightened, though, and Richard realized that he was sitting in an enclosed space,
and there was something under his right foot that vibrated slightly. In  fact  everything  -vibrated  slightly  all
around him. If only he could see more in this damned murk. He bowed his head, rubbing the glue from his
eyes, and his world gave an unexpected lurch. He snapped up, all atten-tion, found he could see perfectly
well, and for a split second, panic seized him.
His car sped along, weaving gently from side to side, paying attention to neither the line down the middle
of the road nor its ragged shoulders. No wonder the lights swerved away from his approach. They’d been
other cars. Thank God he’d not caught any of them.
He grabbed hard at the steering wheel where his hands  rested,  and  brought  the  vehicle  under  control.
How in the name of all things had he gotten here? He could not remember. He must have  left  the  house
and been driving on autopilot for God knows how long—without bothering to turn on the headlights. It was a
wonder he hadn’t killed anyone.
Richard corrected the oversight and tried to get his bearings. He was still out in the country, and heading
toward a glow on the horizon that must be Dallas. The clock on the dash pulsed green numbers at him, but
he couldn’t wrap his mind around the time it showed, only that it was very late. Or very early. Hours must
have passed since his nightmare had begun. And he was apparently still in it.
He was sweating, and dizziness washed over him in waves, though the sea that tossed him was no longer
in full  storm.  Memories  came  and  went  willy-nilly,  refusing  to  stay  long  enough  for  sorting.  Finding  the
bodies, the explosion, he could remember those clearly enough, but other  details  were  muddy.  He’d  been
sick . . . no, badly injured—
As if in response to the thought a sudden cramp in his stomach doubled him over, and the car swerved in
violent reaction. He had to stop. 
He hit the brakes a good deal harder than he meant, and the vehicle came to rest with its front end on
the shoulder, its rear out on the road. No matter, it wasn’t a busy highway. Richard cut the motor, pushed
the door open, and staggered out into the night air. It cooled him, and he drank it down in great gulps like an
exhausted runner. He remembered now. The damned animal blood. The hallucinations and shadows. 
And . . . that vision.
He’d seen it all, seen how  the  murders  in  the  house  had  happened.  He  had  been  Michael,  been  right
inside his head, looking out through his eyes. Yet how could that be? Richard did not have the Sight. Sabra
had told him often enough that it was not part of his Gift.
“It is given by the Goddess at birth. Even before birth, and to a very few. She chooses who will see, not
I. And she does not give her reasons.” And she squeezed his hand like a parent with a disappointed child. 
He could feel her hand now, small, almost hidden in his grasp, warm and full of comfort. The feeling was
so strong he had to look to see that she was not truly there. He was sorry for that, longing for the solace of
her presence. She would know what to do, what to say to make things better, but she was miles away  in

her Vancouver wilderness.
The  vision  of  the  killings  disturbed  him  deeply,  not  for  what  it  was—he  had  expected  such  brutal
violence—but for the  fact  that  he’d  seen  it  at  all.  He  had  the  uncomfortable  knowledge  of  having  gone
someplace dangerous where he was not supposed to venture, like  a  child  swimming  in  a  lake  against  his
parent’s wishes. There were certain things that were of the Goddess and should not be tampered with, and
Richard had a chill feeling in his gut he’d somehow done exactly  that.  He’d  swum  deep  in  the  forbidden
lake, and looked up at the world above through its changing waters, and seen what he should not. A shiver
crept its slow way up his spine at the very thought. Damn the animal blood for taking him where he was not
meant to go. 
But it had shown him what Michael had seen, felt, and thought, which could be . . . Michael. Where was
he?
The car’s interior illuminated as Richard opened the rear driver’s door, and in the harsh light he could see
the boy was sitting safely belted in the back seat. He slid partway in for a better look at the child.
“Michael, it’s Uncle Richard. Can you hear me? Michael?”
No response. The silence rang deafeningly through the still night air. Those dead blue eyes gazed straight
ahead, quite unaware of him. Richard stroked the boy’s hair, whispering his name again. Still no response.
Little wonder, considering what he’d been through. The vision had been disturbing enough for Richard, but
poor Michael had witnessed the real thing. Richard would have to get him help. 
He eased out and closed the rear door, the abrupt darkness swallowing everything. No streetlamps this
far away from  town.  Usually  he  didn’t  mind  the  lack  of  artificial  lights,  but  craved  them  now.  Lights
meant that he wouldn’t feel so damned alone.
But before he could get inside to drive, the cramping nausea hit again, and Richard folded over with the
hurt, leaning desperately against the car, sweat breaking out in great drops on his brow and falling to mix in
tiny muddy puddles on the dry earth. His body ached in every pore, and his vision swam. God, but this was
too much. He’d have to look after himself before he could look after the boy. He still needed human blood
to dispel the last of the alien poison. He had to get back to New Karnak. Quickly.
After an age the pain eased, and Richard was able to stand upright and get in the car. It slipped easily
into drive, and he set the rental right on the pavement, heading south. Driving was a huge effort. At first he
thought  the  power  steering  was  out,  then  realized  it  was  simply  his  own  physical  weakness  that  made
holding the wheel such an exertion. 
He was healed for the most part, though. That was something to celebrate. The broken leg felt normal
again, and the angry red skin marking his burns had faded to a less alarming pink. Even  his  torn-out  nails
had grown back. The blood had done its miracle, but the aftermath was still playing a devil’s game with his
insides.
His hands trembled, and whenever a wave hit he leaned forward toward the windshield, unable to sit up
straight, resting his chin on the wheel. The car wandered alarmingly, and he found himself having to ease up
on the gas during bouts so as not to go off the road before he could correct things. He was doing no more
than twenty. At this rate it would take hours to get home.
He wiped sweat from his eyes. Tried to concentrate. He kept drifting in and out, always unaware of the
onset of the dark mist, and waking with alarm at its retreat. 
He wrenched the car over once more from the wrong side of the road. I should  stop, he  thought,  but
knew he could not. His sight blurred fitfully, and he shook his head in a feeble attempt to clear his  vision.
Then he noticed bright lights in the rearview mirror flashing red  to  blue,  red  to  blue,  and  gave  an  inward
groan. Why were they always there when you didn’t want them? He heard the siren wail a short, imperious
warning, and obedient to the law, he eased the car onto the shoulder and coasted to a halt. The police car
did the same, leaving its headlights on. Richard could just make out the vague form of the officer inside and
his heart gave a small leap. His initial dismay at the  intrusion  evaporated.  This  might  be  exactly  what  he
needed.
But  he  was  so  weak.  If  only  he  could  sleep.  The  steering  wheel  was  mercifully  cool  against  his
forehead. His eyes fell shut. 
He heard a car door slam and slow footsteps on the gravel of the shoulder. Then a flashlight beam shone
red through his lids. He rolled his head to one  side  and  squinted  out  the  open  window.  It  was  a  woman,
clipboard in one hand,  flashlight  in  the  other,  her  uniform  and  badge  proclaiming  her  to  be  a  member  of
Addison’s finest.
“Good morning, sir,” she said in an overly loud voice. The sort of voice  law  enforcement  professionals
always used to command attention. It did not jibe well with the polite words. “How are you doing?”
There was nothing to be gained trying to form a reply to that query. He was  doing  rather  badly,  thank

you very much; she should be able to see that for herself.
She shone the light around the interior and caught a good long look at Richard. He stank of smoke and
sweat.  His  clothes  were  mostly  torn  away  and  what  remained  was  either  scorched  or  covered  in  dried
blood. Her breath escaped in a non-professional hiss. “Jesus!”
Richard could see her silver name tag now against the dark blue of her shirt: Henebry.
“I’m just a little tired, officer . . .” Good God, what lunatic had answered for him just then? He could do
better than that.
“Sir? Sir, I’m going to ask you to get out of your car.”
Very well, ask away.
“Sir—I want you to get out of the car. Can you do that?”
I’d really rather not if you don’t mind.
“Come on. Get out right now.” Still speaking loud and  clear.  She  had  a  no-nonsense  quality  about  her
that in other circumstances, Richard was sure he would find appealing. But here and now it irritated the hell
out of him. It was probably the way she acted as though  he  were  slightly  deaf  and  somewhat  backward
mentally. Perhaps she thought he was drunk.
“Maybe I should rest here for a little while . . .”
“I  said  get  out  of  the  car,  sir,  and  I  mean  right  now.”  She  was  new.  Richard  could  tell  that  without
asking. There was an edge in her voice that gave  her  away,  that  and  a  bead  of  sweat  on  her  upper  lip.
“Come on, open the door.”
She  was  starting  to  grate  on  his  nerves,  ordering  him  about  so  politely,  but  he  could  also  be
teeth-grittingly  courteous.  Richard  attempted  what  he  hoped  would  pass  for  a  smile  of  compliance  and
pulled on the handle. It took some work to push the door open,  then  turn  and  get  his  legs  out.  He  finally
managed to boost clear, standing more or less upright facing her.
Officer Henebry was solid and fit in her uniform. He towered over her.
Henebry  backed  off  a  step,  still  holding  her  clipboard.  Her  other  hand  rested  on  the  big  semi-auto
strapped to her hip. Considering his appalling state he couldn’t blame her. “Are you all right? You want to
tell me what happened to you?” she asked, spacing the words.
Not in this lifetime I don’t.  Richard shook his head, gathering his  scattered  thoughts.  He  should  have
taken care of this by now. His usual time for dealing with traffic violations was less than a minute. Ah, but
this was no simple avoidance of a speeding ticket.
“Are you injured? What happened to you?” she demanded, shining her light on him. “Who’s the little boy
in the back seat?”
The reminder of Michael snapped him to full alertness. For the moment. How long would it last? Never
mind that, get to work.
“I want to see some identification. You got a driver’s license?”
“Yes, officer. It’s in my wallet.” He slowly reached toward his back pocket. Henebry, on guard, tensed.
Her grasp tightened on her gun, ready to pull it free.
Richard turned slightly, so she could see his every move, and took out his wallet using two  fingers.  He
could not fault her for her caution. Aside from domestic disputes, the most disagreeable calls cops generally
faced were investigating driving violations. Especially at night.
“Take  it  out  of  the  wallet,  please,”  she  told  him.  The  whole  situation  was  wearing  thin.  Could  this
downturn possibly be another unpleasant hallucination? He wasn’t  certain.  Better  to  play  along.  A  docile
attitude might reassure her somewhat. Things would work better for them both if she was relaxed. 
He  glanced  back  at  her  car  to  see  if  she  was  alone.  She  was.  Better  and  better.  Then  he  noticed
something that would put a decided crimp in things. The vehicle had a surveillance camera set in the grill.
The picture would likely  be  of  poor  quality,  but  enough  to  later  identify  him.  It  would  have  recorded  his
rental’s tags as well. The paranoia of the twentieth century was often defensible, but now it was just bloody
inconvenient.
He pulled his Canadian driving license clear and held it out to her. “Here it is, officer. I think you’ll find it
all in order.”
She was intent on taking it from him, but for a moment, for a very crucial moment, she looked him in the
eyes. 
All he had to do was smile. He summoned enough strength to make a profound impression.
The wrong kind, as it happened.
Her  service  semi-auto  appeared  almost  as  if  by  magic  in  her  hand.  It  was  a  Glock,  its  dark  plastic
surface  dully  reflecting  first  the  blue,  then  the  red  of  the  prowl  car’s  flashing  lights.  Henebry  pointed  it
steadily at him. Right between his eyes to be exact. He felt a sudden tightness in his chest as the memory

of  Michael’s  horrific  -vision  superimposed  itself  on  the  present  time.  Richard  had  to  fight  to  maintain
control, to keep himself from running away.
“Put your hands on your head!” 
Funny,  his  smile  was  usually  enough  to  win  anyone  over.  But  then  he  usually  wasn’t  clad  in  burned,
bloodstained rags and . . . oh. Oh, dear.
His corner teeth were out. No wonder she’d reacted  so  strongly.  His  beast  could  have  that  effect  on
people.
Henebry slapped the clipboard on the hood of his car, and shook out a pair of handcuffs. Richard was as
adventurous as the next man, but he didn’t think she had any intention of putting them to some sort of erotic
use. “Lean on the car. Place your hands on the roof and lean on them.”
“How can I do that and still have them on my head?” he inquired, annoyed again.
“Just turn around and put them flat on the  roof.”  She  said  it  with  a  sense  of  satisfaction,  almost  as  if
quoting from some obscure training test.
Richard grimly struggled to think of how to delay things. Once she got those cuffs  on  him  he’d  not  be
able to break free of them; he was too weak for that. Then he would be stuck in the endless quagmire of
officialdom.
“I’ve done nothing wrong, officer.” He was too weak for some things, but his beast gave  him  one  last
little reserve to draw from.
“Don’t argue with me; turn—”
He could yet move very fast.
She had no chance to finish. Between one eye blink and the next he snagged the gun from her grasp. He
caught her before she could react, swung her around, pressing her against the rental car with his body. She
recovered quickly, though, and started to struggle, but  abandoned  that  when  he  made  her  aware  the  gun
was pressed hard on  her  temple.  He  hated  doing  it,  but  it  was  a  necessary  compensation  for  his  feeble
state. It also commanded her undivided attention.
The scent of her sudden fear jumped at him. How tantalizing that was to his beast.
Control. Keep control.
“Now, Officer Henebry—” No, such an address was too awkward, too formal for what he had in mind.
“What’s your first name?”
She glared at him. Scared as she must be, she was also mad as hell.
He asked the same question again, this time using her gun for emphasis.
“Kath,” she spat out. “Kath Henebry.”
“That’s lovely. Suits you very well.”
“Listen, mister—”
“I think not. You must listen to me, Kath. What I have to say is very important; you need to hear every
word. Are you listening,  Kath  Henebry?”  He  looked  her  hard  in  the  eye.  An  uncom-fortable
silence  stretched  between  them  when  she  did  not  answer.  “Are you?” he asked, his tone  softer,
more seductive.
“I hear you.” She practically sighed out her reply. There was a definite blush on her face, but he wasn’t
sure if it was because of him or a product of her anger.
He continued to look hard at her, but spoke mild, soothing words, and  almost  imperceptibly  she  slipped
under his sway. Her eyes glazed slightly, and her breathing became even. Richard reached up and tucked a
stray lock of hair under her hat. That done, he stepped back, holding to the  car  to  keep  his  balance.  The
effort had taken a lot out of him. She remained in place, staring at the empty fields. Excellent. He held the
heavy firearm out to her.
“I want you to put the gun away and not move until I tell you to.”
The only sound was the smart snap of plastic against leather as she obeyed.  She  continued  to  stare,  a
wonderfully serene expres-sion on her face.
“Thank you.” He quickly checked on  Michael  who  was  as  he’d  left  him,  belted  in  the  back  seat,  still
unresponsive. Mindful or not of the world around him, he certainly did not need to see what was about to
happen.
Richard turned back to Officer Henebry and reestablished their connection. “Come around here with me,
Kath, there is something we have to do. It will not be unpleasant for either of us.”
He took her hand. It was very small in his, freshly manicured and warm. He lifted it in his and brushed
his lips against it. She smelled of roses, and he closed his eyes and breathed in deeply. Her veins lay pale
blue under the skin, and in the silence, he could hear her heart fluttering. 
The stimulus had its welcome effect. The sickness, the aches of his body, fled for the moment as deep in

his gut, his groin, he felt his need for her. It was more intense than usual. He would have to be careful and
take her now while what self-control he possessed was still in place. Gently, he led her around so that her
patrol car lay protectively between them and the road. This was a very open place, and he did not want to
be disturbed by any passing motorist. He glanced quickly both ways, but everything was clear.
Kath stood facing him, mouth slightly open, lips moist. She wore  lipstick,  and  Richard  idly  wondered  if
that was allowed on duty. He took off her hat. Her shining brown hair was curled up in a knot. How lovely
it would be to take it down and twine -between his fingers . . . 
Steady on.
“Roll up your sleeve.”
She obeyed.
“Now hold out your arm.”
This she did too, and Richard moved closer. He knew what he looked like at this moment, and was glad
she had no conscious perception of it. His eyes were red, wolflike, and his teeth long  and  razor  sharp.  A
low growl, pure animal, rose from him, and his beast impatiently stirred as Richard braced her against the
car.
He took her arm in his hand, and brought it up to his mouth. The scent of roses was heavy at the wrist,
then diminished as he moved along toward the elbow. His sense of smell was heightened, and the fragrance
almost brought water to his eyes, it seemed so potent. He slid his other arm around her waist, and despite
his best efforts at self-restraint, pressed himself roughly upon her, feeling the firm length of her body with
his. He ran his tongue slowly along her neck, tasting her, feeling the veins there throbbing so quickly. Ah, if
only he had more time and was not in such sore need. He would have to forgo this sweet contact in favor
of one less dangerous to her.
He bowed his head down, and bit into the soft skin on the inside of her elbow. His teeth cut through the
flesh easily, and the blood flowed strong into him, pulsing in time with her heartbeat. 
He sucked hungrily, hardening, pushing himself urgently against her. Her head fell back and, loosened in
the moment, her hair cascaded down. To Richard, it smelled of heaven. He caressed her, feeling the  fine
texture of her hair, the smoothness of her temple, her cheek. Her mouth opened as his fingers brushed over
her lips and a low moan escaped her.
He wanted this to go on and on as he had all those years ago with the servant in Sabra’s tent, that first
time. More than that, he wanted this woman, wanted to be inside her, to be one with her. Kath’s heart beat
faster—he could hear it—and her breath came in small gasps. Her breasts pushed hard against him, and he
could now smell her musk, heavy in the air with her own arousal.
He supped heavily and well on her strength, her sweetness, her very spirit. If he could not be in her, then
she must surely be in him. He felt the rush of her vitality flooding his own veins and welcomed it, reveled in
it.
But he had to stop. It would cost Kath her life if he did not. So he pulled back, reluctantly kissing away
the  remaining  traces  of  blood,  eyes  closed  as  he  savored  the  last  shreds  of  ecstasy.  He  could  feel  it
coursing through him, healing and reviving as it went. He had fed enough to last until he got home.
After a few moments he came back to himself. He lifted her face to his and kissed her long and deep.
Then, looking her in the eye, he told her what he always told his partners. She’d been to a blood donation
center and would feel a little light-headed for the next day or two. He always carried adhesive bandages in
his back pocket for just such occasions, and by some miracle they were yet clean in  their  wrappings.  He
taped them over the small puncture marks he’d left, rolled her sleeve down, and fastened the cuff.
“You will remember nothing of what has happened here,” he whispered in her ear.
“I will remember nothing,” she obligingly confirmed.
Then Richard leaned forward and whispered once more, getting rather detailed. Kath immediately went
to her patrol car, and in a very short time he had the highly incriminating surveillance tape in hand. Officer
Henebry would simply report that by some mistake the recorder had not been loaded prior to her patrol that
night.
“Your hat . . .” He gave it to her.
After a quick rearrangement of her  tumbled  hair,  she  replaced  her  visored  cap  squarely  on  her  head.
“Thank you.”
“It truly was a pleasure,” he replied, quite sincere.
She threw the car into gear and sped off, executing a smart U-turn and accelerating back in the direction
Richard  had  come  from.  As  she  passed,  she  waved,  and  Richard  heard  a  long  throaty  laugh  as  she
disappeared down the road. Yes, it had been an enjoyable experience for them both.
In the distance, her siren started its ominous howl. She would get to what was left of the house and start

the  whole  process  of  investigation.  She  wouldn’t  remember  how  she’d  gotten  there  or  why,  but  those
explanations were her problem, not his. He must be on his way. Her fresh blood had improved his state; the
dizziness and cramping had cleared, and his vision, though not steady, was better than it had been. But he
was still far from well.
He retrieved his wallet and license from where they’d fallen forgotten on the road shoulder. With some
chagrin he noticed her clipboard with its attached paperwork still on his hood. Yet -another mystery for the
good officer to ponder. Just as well for him to have the thing: she’d recorded his tag numbers. He tossed it
on the passenger seat with his drover’s coat and hat. There would likely be some record of them with the
dispatcher when Kath first called in her stop, but without the car tape and clipboard as support there was a
chance  the  minor  mystery  would  be  dismissed.  He’d  covered  that  as  well  while  filling  her  head  with
instructions. After all, so far as she was concerned, she’d never even seen him, and in less than an hour the
police would have far more important matters demanding their attention.
Once inside again he checked on Michael. His head drooped and his eyes were closed; he seemed to be
sleeping. Hopefully that was a good sign. There was no point disturbing him. Snapping his seat belt, Richard
started the car and pushed it into gear. The sooner home, the better. The last thing he  wanted  was  to  be
caught out in daylight.
He could sense the sun dragging itself toward the horizon, the sky changing from black to dark blue; the
night all but gone.
The  rest  of  the  journey  proved  uneventful,  and  he  was  glad  for  small  favors.  Driving  almost  lulled
Richard to sleep again, but he came fully awake in time to swoop under the amber lights marking Midway
Road. He hurried past gas stations, shopping centers, and light  industry,  past  a  restaurant  row  and  office
buildings toward the distinctive shape of New Karnak.
Engulfed in its welcoming shadow, he hastened into the underground parking lot. His space next  to  the
elevator was empty, as it should be, and he slipped in and  killed  the  motor.  The  silence  after  it  died  was
disconcerting after the long drive. He listened with all his preternatural ability to detect if there was anyone
else about at this too-early hour of the morning. He  preferred  not  to  have  witnesses  and  thankfully  none
were apparent.
Getting out, he opened the rear door and reached in. Michael did not wake, and Richard lifted him easily.
He’d forgotten how light  children  were.  Holding  the  boy  protectively  close,  he  kicked  the  door  shut  and
headed for the elevator.
The soft hum of its ascent was comforting, signifying the end of his journey. He leaned back against the
wall, tired to the bone, yearning for sleep. The car rode upward uninterrupted to his apartment, stopped with
its  customary  subtlety,  and  Richard  stepped  out.  The  doors  closed  behind  him,  the  car  automatically
plummeting back to the garage level. He carried the boy to the master bedroom in the back of the big flat.
Except for spare clothing and some framed photographs, he kept few items of  any  meaning  to  himself
here.  Having  been  professionally  decorated,  it  was  rather  like  a  luxury  hotel  suite  possessing  all  the
basics—and those being of the finest quality—but ultimately impersonal. Still, there was a soothing quality
to  such  surroundings.  Passing  a  mirrored  wall  on  the  way,  the  only  chaos  Richard  perceived  in  the
beautifully coordinated calm was himself and the ragged, dirty little boy in his arms. Scarecrows, the both of
them. He turned away, not liking what he glimpsed in his own face. 
In the master bedroom Richard turned down the coverlet and sheets with one sweep of his arm, and laid
Michael down. The boy did not wake, and his breathing continued normally. Oh, to know that kind of utterly
abandoned sleep again. Richard took off the child’s shoes and socks, and decided to wait a bit on the rest.
Except for some  minor  scratches  on  his  arms  and  legs—which  Richard  knew  had  come  from  the  flight
through the thorny mesquite scrub—he appeared physically unharmed. 
There was no measuring the depth of damage done to his mind and spirit, though.
Looking down at Michael’s sleeping form, the stresses of the night started to rush at Richard, demanding
attention, but he pushed them back. He was in no state to cope with  them  now.  He  bent  to  kiss  the  boy
lightly on the forehead and dragged the covers over him.
Straightening, Richard found the room swaying in a too-familiar manner. The strength  he’d  taken  from
Kath Henebry’s blood was nearly spent. He needed more. Thank the Goddess for the supply he’d obtained
from Dr. Sam, sitting cool in his refrigerator.
He drank down two entire  bags  before  he  felt  anywhere  near  to  normal  again.  Their  boost  gave  him
enough momentum to strip and stand under  a  scalding  shower.  He  put  it  on  maximum  pressure  until  the
supply in the water heater gave out, then stood dripping before the mirror in the bright light of the bathroom.
He again glimpsed the expression on  his  face,  this  time  able  to  confront  it,  to  stare  himself  down.  After
awhile, its corpselike aspect faded to the less alarming mundanity of simple  exhaustion.  He  took  stock  of

what remained.
The worst of his wounds had completely  closed  up,  though  the  scars  were  red  and  sore.  They  would
soon fade. They always did. Only those he’d achieved before his change remained, like the sword cut  on
his shoulder that had nearly killed him, and the one where his ring finger had been severed then restored.
The angry raised blisters left by the fire ants had subsided, and the aching pain in his body had eased, but
he was not fully -recovered. He wanted sleep, and could see no reason for putting it off. He would need all
his energy for what was to come. 
Wrapped  in  the  loose  ease  of  an  oversized  terry  robe,  he  made  a  quick  round  of  the  flat.  His  prime
concern was being sure the doors were secure and that the metal blinds over the windows were sealed shut
to  block  out  the  day.  He  lay  on  a  sofa  in  the  gentle  darkness  of  the  bedroom  so  as  to  be  close  should
Michael wake. 
Richard shut his eyes, waiting, hoping fatigue would allow him swift oblivion. Hoping he would be spared
further dreams. Further nightmares.
Somewhere in that strange place between waking and slumber  he  realized  that  the  worst  was  not  yet
over. Bourland would have to know. How would he tell him? 
The vision of Michael’s  experience  placed  the  time  of  their  deaths  in  the  early  morning.  Richard  had
been on the plane then. There was no way he could have arrived in time to prevent any of it.
Cold comfort, that. 
Icy cold.
Chapter Seven
Britain, the Beginning, Five Years Later
“King’s Champion indeed,” said Elaine, rousing from her doze. “I think you’ve ridden more oft for me.”
Richard  smiled  and  shifted  his  weight  from  her.  “And  you’ve  ridden  me  enough  to  be  the  Queen’s
Champion.”
She chuckled softly, moving so he could lie on his back  with  her  cradled  in  his  arms  across  his  chest.
Hers was a virgin’s narrow bed, but he had no complaint for the warm closeness of it. “The queen would
not be pleased to hear that,” she said. “All the court knows she loves you.”
“But no more than the court does itself,” he countered, well aware  of his own popularity. “I do not seek
her favor.”
“Yet she would give her heart to thee as easily as I have, as would the other maids and dames.”
“ ’Tis none of mine what they would do. Why speak of it?”
“Because, sweet Lancelot, it is my greatest pleasure to know that above all those others  I am  the  one
you chose to bed.”
In reply Richard brushed his lips against her temple, and kept the truth to himself  of  just  how  many  of
those ladies he’d bedded in the years since his arrival at court. He’d been discreet about his various liaisons,
so much so that many thought him more chaste than a  monk.  For  some  reason,  this  distinction  made  the
women all the more fascinated with him.
Elaine was as unaware of his many mistresses as they were of each other. A delicate juggling act, but
Richard managed it quite well, perhaps too well. Though a dear girl, Elaine possessed dreams for him of a
future with her he could never fulfill. Already she had been hinting about his speaking to her father for her

hand as though it was an inevitability. 
“In my memory,” he finally said, “it was you who chose me.”
“What matters so long as we are together?” She sighed with vast contentment, burrowing snugly against
him. “What matters so long as it lasts forever?”
That she spoke thus told him he would  have  to  soon  conclude  things  with  her.  He’d  heard  such  from
other girls when he walked in the sun, and with no small chagrin knew it would  be  so  with  future  lovers.
Why did some of them have to make a simple union so much more than it was?  Even when they professed
their under-standing that a tryst was to be no more than a satisfying of mutual desire,  they  would  change
their  minds  afterward.  Sabra  had  troubled  to  explain  all  the  reasons  to  him.  Several  times.  Still  he  was
mystified.  Sometimes  it  was  just  easier  to  simply  pay  for  a  woman’s  favors—and  the  blood  that  he
took—than to deal with the complexities of mutual seduction.
He would have  to  soon  supplant  his  will  over  Elaine’s  wishes  and  make  her  forget  about  their  stolen
nights together. Or at least persuade her from this dream of  marrying  him.  That  could  never  be,  and  the
sooner she accepted it, the better for them both.
Not tonight, though. They’d enjoyed each other thoroughly here in her chamber in her father’s keep; no
need to vitiate the current good feeling  with  base  practicalities.  Richard  had  gone  to  some  effort  to  gain
entry,  hoisting  himself  up  the  timbered  sides  of  the  building—his  vampire’s  strength  making  the  task
easy—to  climb  through  her  window.  Elaine  had  enthusiastically  welcomed  him  for  some  months  now,
prettily  delighting  in  their  secret  sport  as  though  she’d  never  known  its  like.  Well,  she’d  never  known
Richard’s like, that was a surety.
She slept still in a virgin’s bed, but had  probably  not  slept  as  a  virgin  since  her  first  moon  as  a  young
woman;  her  skills  in  love  were  too  certain  for  him  to  believe  her  claim  that  he  alone  had  received  her
maidenhead.  The  only  blood  he’d  seen  from  her  was  that  which  he’d  taken  from  her  veins  when  they
loved. As with the others he fed from, he was ever careful to remove that from their recollections. Other
memories and intents required more effort and care.
But still . . . Elaine was such a lovely girl, fair of face and with a lushness and grace of form as to stir a
statue to life. Even now he felt a decided stirring within from the thought alone . . . 
Enough.  He  would  soon  have  to  bring  this  intimacy  to  a  close  before  anyone  found  them  out.  Elaine
herself might let something slip—more  likely  on  purpose  than  by  accident—in  an  attempt  to  achieve  her
fantasy of marriage. Her father would be annoyed at her seeming deflowering by Lancelot, but not so much
as to deny himself the status of having the king’s rich champion for a son-in-law.
Elaine reached across to the little table by the bed. Richard thought she might thirst, but instead of taking
the wine cup, she picked up a small crockery jar.
“What’s this?” he asked as she settled back again.
Her bright eyes danced with mischief. “A love potion.”
“Oh, really?”
“Yes. An old wife at the tourney fair told me that no man could withstand its power.”
“And so you wish to test it on me?”
“Indeed. If it gives you no pleasure, then I will know her for a liar.”
“Am I to drink it then?”
“Only from my lips.” She sipped a little from the jar, then placed her mouth over his. On her tongue he
tasted honey and cloves and other rare flavors before she drew away. “Is it working? Are you in love with
me yet?”
There was no harm in playing along with her new game. He could always change things later. “I’m not
sure. Perhaps you must try again.”
Instead  of  kissing  him,  she  moved  farther  down  his  body.  “Yes,  perhaps  I  shall.”  He  watched  with
amused interest as she let fall a fat thread of her potion onto his manhood. She spread  the  stuff  with  her
fingers, enjoying his swift response to her touch. “The old wife told the truth it seems.”
“So far as it goes, yes.” He put no credence in love potions, only in Elaine’s presence and what she was
doing to him.
“Then  must  I  test  it  a  little  more.”  She  bent  her  head,  her  mouth  enclosing  him,  capturing  his  full
attention. He lay back with an appreciative sigh and gently stroked her hair, his heartbeat quickening as she
worked on him.
Some time later she paused to inspect her results. “Indeed, she told the truth. You do love me.”
For this night at least, sweet girl, he thought. He sat up and took the jar from her. She sat up in turn,
facing him, smiling. He smeared a few drops onto  each  of  her  breasts,  then  did  his  best  to  lick  and  kiss
them clean again, until she shivered and moaned in her need for him.

But he held off, knowing that some delays were better for the wait.
They passed the honey concoction back and forth, laughing, each hushing the other lest someone hear. It
would not do to have Elaine’s father or brothers bursting in upon them.
Richard cherished the taste of her, the salt essence beneath the honey. Her skin was cloud-smooth, her
least reaction to his questing fingers adding immeasurably to his own excitement. How precious it was, how
rare, and yet so brief.
These fragile children abide with us but a little while and then are gone.
Sabra’s words came to him even as he embraced Elaine. The girl in his arms would die and go to dust
while  he  lived  on.  He  faltered,  looking  long  at  her  young  face,  as  though  to  discern  if  death’s  shadow
already lay upon her.
“What is it, Lord du Lac?”
He shook his head. A thousand words or none were equally inadequate. It was not something she could
ever understand. “Time is so short,” he murmured. Short for thee, my pretty one.  He held her close, as if
to  keep  her  mortality  at  bay  by  his  will  alone.  Futile  gesture,  but  it  made  her  gasp  with  joyance  for  his
eagerness.
She will think her potion worked. Perhaps it has, for this night, for this hour.
When their want became near unbearable, they coupled once more. She wrapped her strong legs around
Richard, heels locked at the small of his back, her hips rocking hard against his. He kissed her mouth and
her eyes, his hands moving on her until the first shudder of her climax began to take her. 
Only then did he bite hard into the firm flesh of her throat.
She started to cry out, but he pressed his palm over her mouth, smothering the sound. Her breath came
fast and harsh as he supped, drawing out the red ecstasy of her life even as she took his seed from him. He
made it last for them both until she lay half swooning in his arms from sheer exhaustion. 
“None,” she whispered, her head lolling on his shoulder. 
“Mm?” He was fair exhausted himself,  but  not  for  long.  Eyes  shut,  he  savored  the  heat  of  her  blood
flowing within him, -renewing his strength.
“None pleasure me as do you,” she murmured. 
So far gone was she that she’d forgotten her claim that Richard was her first. He smiled and caressed
her thick hair, letting the moment be.
He  left  a  few  hours  before  dawn,  dropping  to  land  silent  in  the  dewy  turf  beneath  her  window,  then
looking round to make sure no one had seen. He wore no armor, nothing that would make a noise, but the
moon  was  high.  Its  silver  light  could  be  deceptive  to  normal  human  eyes,  but  would  serve  to  reveal  an
intruder; he kept to the shadows. To Richard it was like a sunny day, and he made use  of  his  advantage,
slipping across to the outer wall, his passage unnoticed by the sleepy sentry watching the gate. It was the
work  of  a  moment  to  take  the  man  from  behind  and  persuade  him  to  blind  obedience.  Blind  insofar  as
Richard’s presence was concerned. The guard would have no recollection of letting anyone out through the
small door set in the gate.
Richard  could  have  climbed  the  keep’s  curtain  wall  and  thence  to  the  dry  moat  below,  but  saw  no
necessity  for  the  extra  effort.  His  powers  to  influence  were  harmless  to  others  and  most  advantageous
when he was on the hunt. Though he could have more safely fed from any number of servant girls, he had
yet to tire of the sport of seducing—and being seduced by—their  mistresses.  Besides,  a  hasty  feeding  in
some dark corner of a hall with a giggling wench was not nearly as satisfying as a slow loving of a giggling
lady. Of course, there had been occasions when he took his time with the wenches as well. . . .
His horse still waited, ground-tied where he’d left it in a hollow just out of sight from the walls. The dogs,
Prince and Merlin, kept it company, better guards than the one he’d  just  influ-enced  to  let  him  out.  They
yawned hugely, shaking themselves awake for the lope home. He tightened the saddle girth and mounted,
kicking the horse to a canter. The clean night air cooled his face and  cleansed  his  spirit.  He  would  sleep
until the forenoon, then ready himself for the coming day’s tournament.
Light showed in his tent by the lake. Nothing remarkable in that; his people were accustomed to his night
rambles, but as he dismounted and gave the reins to a waiting servant, he saw he had company.
Sabra stood holding open the door flap, smiling, her dark  brown  hair  undone  and  hanging  freely  to  her
waist. How he loved to play with it.
Prince and Merlin bounded forward to welcome her, tails fiercely wagging.
“Such good boys,” she said,  petting  them  before  they  knocked  her  over  in  their  excitement.  “Did  you
care well for your master?”
“You’ve turned them into lap warmers,” said Richard affably, watching as his great and deadly hunters

fawned upon her like puppies.
Sabra laughed once and pulled him inside, their kiss of greeting long and warming. The dogs snorted and
stretched themselves on the tent’s carpeted floor to finish their naps.
“I thought you would yet be with the queen’s company,” he said.
“She decided to see the tourney after all, and the cortege -arrived an hour after dusk. She gave me leave
to depart. I was told you’d left before then.”
“I hungered.”
“Ah. Is it still Elaine, or has another caught your eye?”
“Elaine it is. Do you mind?”
Sabra shook her head, not as a reply, but to express fond patience. “Richard, you know well that I don’t.
There’s no need to ask.”
“It concerns me, so I will.”
She kissed away his concern. “You’ll want sleep. Come to bed.” She took his hand, leading him to the
broad spread of furs, pillows, and blankets he was accustomed to resting  on  during  the  day.  Much  wider
than a normal bed, he could fair sprawl on it, his big frame unencumbered by the limits of an ordinary pallet.
Some thought it a sinful excess on his part, having such an extrav-agance solely for the repose of his body,
but  he  ignored  them.  He  fought  hard  on  behalf  of  his  new  king;  it  was  only  his  just  due  to  have  a
comfortable place to recover himself.
Sabra put out the oil lamps and helped him undress, her hands lingering familiarly over  him.  He  caught
them, bringing them up to kiss.
“I’ve sorely missed you, my lady.” And he wanted her. Always.
“And I, you, but you’ve much to do on the morrow.”
Regrettably, she was right, but the weeks she’d been away  traveling  with  the  queen’s  party  had  been
weary to him for lack of her company. No matter whom he bedded, or how many, none could fill his heart
as Sabra did.
“Do you hunger?” he asked, slipping her loose robe  from  her  shoulders  and  drawing  her  onto  the  bed
with him. He pulled a coverlet over their nakedness, to protect them from the cool of the late spring night.
She nestled comfortably against him. “I’ve fed.”
“Who was it?”
She chuckled. “In truth, I know not. Some lad whose duty was to fetch water for the horses. On one of
his trips he took a little longer than usual to complete his errand, and he will not be able to say why.”
“Handsome?”
“Oh, yes, like a young god he was.”
“Do you love him?”
“No more than you love Elaine.”
He took the gentle point with good grace and kissed her brow. Once upon a time he’d have burned with
inner rage, but no more. This was how life was for them, and he’d dealt well with what had been his most
difficult  adjustment  to  it,  rooting  out  all  jealousy  over  Sabra  having  lovers  to  feed  from.  Certainly  she
showed none toward him for his conquests. They did have an unspoken rule, though; both took care to keep
out of each other’s way when on the hunt. It was one thing to speak of other partners, but quite another to
witness the seduction itself.
“What if they were like us?” he asked, staring up at the dim roof of his tent. “Able to live beyond their
years, ageless and young forever?”
“What of it?”
“Their lives are short, so we must not love them  too  strongly,  but  if  they  also  had  the  Goddess’s  Gift,
would it make a difference to us?”
“You know it would not.”
And she was right. He’d only wanted to hear her say it.
“Were you thinking to share blood with any of them?” There was concern in her tone. They had many
freedoms, but bestowing the Gift to anyone they pleased was not one of them. Sabra had made clear to him
that doing so was rare; the choosing came from the Goddess herself and no one else.
“No,” he quickly assured her. “Nothing like that.”
“Why then do you wonder such a thing about them?”
“Because the sadness of it came to me when I was with Elaine. One day she will die. They all will die.”
“Ah.” Sabra touched her lips to her fingers and placed her hand upon his heart. “Sweet Richard, in that
you are not alone.”
He took solace in her words and held her more closely.

She murmured and sighed, settling in, but a moment later raised herself on one elbow. “Richard . . . why
do you smell of honey?”
He burst forth with a low laugh. “Elaine tried a love potion on me.”
“Did she now? Are you enspelled to her, then?” Sabra gave him an arch look, eyes sparkling.
He grinned back. “Oh, yes. I’m quite certain of it.”
“How terrible for you. I shall have to break that spell sometime.”
“Now would be perfect, before it has a chance to grow in strength.” His  hand  stole  around  her  waist,
pulling her back.
“But the tourney . . . you should rest . . .”
“Damn the tourney. I can always sleep.” He rolled on top of her, pinning her arms. 
She struggled briefly against his play, laughing too much to effectively fight off his kisses. Soon she was
returning them. “You taste of honey,” she remarked. “All over. Just how did she use this potion?”
“You really want to know?”
“Oh, yes. Please acquaint me with—”
And so he did. At first he repeated the course he’d taken with Elaine, but Sabra’s reactions and wants
were different, and his desire for her urgent. He quickly  forgot  the  game,  so  caught  up  was  he  with  the
loving of her. 
“You speak of growing in strength,” she said, stroking him. “I had no idea the spell was so potent.”
“There’s more, much more,” he said, and showed her that as well. God, but he’d missed her. The others
were nothing, less than nothing, compared to her. He held Sabra like salvation itself, loving her until at last
they both lay spent and gasping from the effort of it.
“You seem to have overcome her magic,” she murmured sleepily.
“There is no magic for me but yours.”
“None?” She unknowingly echoed Elaine, but made a question, not a statement.
“Were they all changed to be as we are, not in a thousand times ten thousand women could I find  any
like to thee. All that is life to me is the world in your eyes.”
“Ah.”
“You are my heart, Sabra, my soul, and I love thee more with each breath I take.”
At this, Sabra made a small noise in her throat. An instant  later  he  felt  a  wetness  on  his  chest  where
she’d lain her head.
“Why do you weep?” he asked.
“For the happiness you give me, my Richard. No one can, has, or ever will move me as do thee. Your
love is the breath in my body.”
They clung tightly to one another in the darkness.
It was yet dark in the noontime, for the day of the tourney had but a feeble dawn. Gray clouds shrouded
the spring sun, and the air was damp and cool, but so far there had been no rain.
“Is that your doing?” Richard asked with a short nod to the ominous sky.
Sabra only smiled. 
“Some are taking it as a bad sign, that there will be death on the field ere nightfall.”
“ ’Tis only a little weather wizardry,” she explained. “This is an important tournament for you. It would
not do to have the King’s Champion blinded by too much light or fainting from sunburn.”
“I’d give you a proper thanks for the boon,” he glanced sideways at her, “but neither would it do for the
King’s Champion to be seen kissing one of his squires.”
She  erupted  into  giggles,  then  hastily  smothered  them,  schooling  her  face  to  sober  lines  as  befitted  a
humble servant. Her slim form was such that she could disguise herself in boy’s clothing and succeed with
the deception. For those seeing through it, she had other ways of making them forget their discovery. She
stood at Richard’s side, dressed in his colors, her coil of hair hidden -beneath a close-tied cap. Her delicate
features were overshadowed by a thick cowl. She held one of his swords at ready. Behind them, the other
servitors looked after the rest of the weapons. Before them lay the tourney field.
It was a wide span of acreage, surrounded on three sides by tilled fields, the fourth by a lake.  Elaine’s
father owned the  land  and  forbade  his  people  to  plant  on  it,  keeping  it  instead  solely  for  the  practice  of
warfare.  It  increased  his  reputation  to  have  so  many  famous  fighters  gathering  here,  all  with  the  king’s
blessing, of course.
The king had been effective in keeping the peace, wisely maintaining its preservation by seeing to it his
subjects knew how to fight. Though a force of armed men was a good hedge against outside enemies, more
often than not they would fall to warring with each other. The tournaments, however, provided the nobles

with a means to disburden themselves of tendencies to rowdiness. Here they had the opportunity to display
their courage at arms without laying waste to the countryside or one another.
There was profit to be had as well. Richard had ever taken advantage of it when he’d fought on behalf
of his father’s house.  Defeating  and  capturing  a  fighter  for  his  gear  or  ransom  was  the  custom,  and  an
accepted  method  of  enriching  one’s  purse.  But  some  of  the  noble  combatants  were  wealthy  enough  to
eschew the money altogether. Richard had not been one of them when in Normandy, but that was changed.
He  now  could  afford  to  be  generous  to  those  he  defeated.  Many  in  the  court  had  come  to  follow  his
example, treating their captives as esteemed guests who had fought with skill and  courage,  and  making  a
great show of returning the ransoms. It was a game of honor to some; to others it was survival.
To Richard it was practice and a way to judge the worth of a man. How an opponent conducted himself
on the field revealed much of his inner face.  Was he a thinker or did he let his passions rule? Did he plan
his moves or trust in luck? Did he fight for himself or let others take the brunt first before stepping in? All
this was useful to Richard, who might one day have to face any one of these men in earnest battle, whether
on the field or across the Round Table in a council session.
Here the squires would also test themselves, close observed by their elders for signs of cowardice. Until
they’d been through at least twenty such tourneys, most young men were not considered seasoned enough
for a real battle. Broken teeth, broken heads and bloodings were common, as was death, by accident or on
purpose if things got out of hand and tempers flared. No blunted or wooden weapons would be used in this
combat. This was true training for war.
Yet there was no dearth of participants; too much profit was to be had to discourage anyone.
“I count many more than a hundred men,” said Sabra. “Twice more than at the Michaelmas tourney.”
“The news traveled far about the prizes and the purse the king offers.”
“And about yourself, I’m sure. The bards have been kind in their praise of your battle skill.”
“The skill is there, but I’ve advantages to make a pass of arms unfair to any who would challenge me.
You saw to that, my lady.”
“You’ve more strength than any, but take care, for there will be those who will test you on it.”
“As I’ve always been tested. I will win out.”
She shot him a look of amused warning.
“I know.” No need for her to say aught, he understood well enough. One fault he’d always had difficulty
controlling was his damned overconfidence.
Richard watched as two sections in the field were roped off. Tall poles with long streamers proclaimed
neutral  ground,  where  the  wounded  or  captured  were  to  take  themselves  or  be  taken  if  they  were  too
injured to walk. Most of the time no one intentionally set out to kill or maim anyone here, but misadventures
took place more often than not. It was well to be prepared for the worst. Both healers and priests stood by,
ready to receive whichever came their way.
At last the field was cleared and a loud fanfare of horns and drums was struck, signaling the beginning of
the tourney. A cheer went up from the watching crowds surrounding the field as the fighters marched past
the pavilion where the king sat with his queen. Each man paused to have his name announced by one of the
heralds  and  to  bow  to  the  sovereigns.  The  tourney’s  host,  Pelles  Bernard—Elaine’s  father—sat  on  the
king’s right. The old warrior, grim of face, made a particular show of bowing once at Richard, picking him
out from all the others in the line for the honor. He was the King’s Champion after all, but it was an unusual
enough gesture to raise an eyebrow or two.
Returning the courtesy, Richard bowed back, furiously wondering if Elaine had  said  anything.  It  hardly
seemed likely for he’d cautioned her to silence before leaving and could trust the efficacy of his influence
upon her. Perhaps one of her serving maids had heard or guessed. Household gossip traveled faster than a
winter gale and could do more damage.
Bernard bowed again, this time to his youngest son Lavaine, who had placed  himself  just  a  few  paces
down from Richard.
This was bad. If Bernard reserved such a courtesy only to those within his own family . . . 
He did not bow to any of the other nobles.
Elaine sat with a group of ladies at the far end of  the  pavilion  and  did  not  meet  Richard’s  gaze  as  he
passed her. Pale as she was after his feeding, she still managed to raise a blush, showing two fiercely pink
spots high on her cheeks. She worked her sweet mouth, as though trying hard to suppress a smile.
The subtleties of their combined messages were clear enough to those  with  eyes  to  see.  Certainly  the
king and queen had noticed something of the byplay.
Damnation!
“What is it?” Sabra asked, whispering. She trudged next to  him  over  the  uneven  turf,  still  carrying  his

sword. She’d sensed his sudden discomfiture as though he’d spoken it aloud.
“There’s mischief afoot with Elaine. I think her father  is  planning  to  welcome  me  to  his  hearth  as  his
new son.”
Sabra made a choking sound and nearly stumbled.
“This is no time for jollity,” he snapped. “I’ve no wish to take the minx for a wife.”
But Sabra was too consumed to wholly check her mirth. She pulled her cowl well  forward  to  hide  her
face and for the most part kept her laughter internal, though she seemed like to burst from it.
Annoyed, Richard held his peace, until she returned to a fit state to speak, which took quite some while.
She was nearly recovered as they assumed their place on the far side of the field, waiting for the rest of the
men to make their bows to the king.
“What’s to be done?” he demanded.
“Nothing for now. For later, we shall both do much. If Bernard asks for a private word with you—and I
think he will—then you deal with him. I’ll find a way to get to Lavaine, then we can dice to decide who is to
speak to the girl.”
“This is no little sporting, Sabra,” he said, rankled at her -levity.
“I know, but we can make it such before the day is done if we hold ourselves strong.  Remember  who
you are and who I am. None may win against us if we so choose. Consider yourself lucky that Bernard did
not make a declaration of the bans here and now.”
“He’s  probably  waiting  to  see  if  I  live  through  the  contest,”  Richard  muttered.  “Elsewise  I  might  be
tempted to forfeit on purpose to avoid marriage.”
“Your pride would prevent that,” she said, but in a way so as to restore his good spirits. She pushed the
cowl back now that they had some distance between themselves  and  the  rest  of  the  field.  “Fight  as  you
always do, then—” But the rest went unsaid as she stared across to the pavilion.
“What is it?” He followed her gaze, trying to pick out what had so arrested her.  “Is  it  Bernard?  What
does he do?”
“Sweet Goddess,” she breathed. “Not here.” 
“Sabra?”
She swayed, dropping his sword and clutching at his arm for support. He caught her, his heart swooping
at her abrupt weakness.
“What is it? A vision?” Sometimes they were intense enough to collapse her, but those were rare. What
they signaled was always grievous.
“Aye, a vision . . . Oh, Richard, hold back, do not go forth -today.”
“Why? What do you see?”
She shook her head, fighting it. “Death. I see death.”
“For whom? Me?” But that was nigh impossible. He could get nothing more from her, though. Her eyes
had rolled up in their sockets and her body had gone rigid like some poor sufferer from the falling sickness.
The nearest of the men drew away and crossed themselves after an uneasy glance at the dark sky; others
came forward for a better look. Lavaine was one of them.
“How  fares  your  squire?”  he  asked,  half  curiosity,  half  concern.  At  least  he  did  not  seem  to  be  the
outraged kinsman looking to avenge his sister’s honor. Not just yet.
“ ’Tis nothing toward,” Richard replied, searching Sabra’s face for distress, but she was gone from this
world for the moment. “He has these fits when he gets overexcited. I expect he shall grow out of it once
his voice changes.”
“We’ve a healer if you wish one.” 
“I thank thee, but my people know how to care for him. I’ll take him away.”
“ ’Tis not a task for a noble. My squire will do that for you.” Lavaine’s was a broad strapping lad who
appeared strong enough to carry Richard himself.
“You honor me, but this is my charge. ’Twill be enough if he would guard my sword until my return.”
Lavaine nodded and signed to his squire to retrieve the blade. “We’ll wait for you.”
Richard thanked him, then swept Sabra up, carrying her with long swift strides toward his tent.  Before
he’d gone a quarter of the way, she began to wake and struggled a little.
“Be still,” he said. “Rest first.”
“No, I must tell you—”
“Yes,  but  only  where  none  may  hear.”  They’d  garnered  enough  attention.  If  word  got  out  that
Lancelot’s squire was subject to visions, the outcome would mean either sainthood or a public burning.
But she would not be put off and pointed. “Look to the line, Richard. See him!”
He looked. The nobles were nearly through with their march. Last in their number was a man who stood

to  be  more  than  Richard’s  match  in  height  and  span.  He  wore  familiar  colors,  so  familiar  that  Richard
stopped in his tracks from the shock of it.
“Dear God, he’s from Normandy—he’s the champion for d’Orleans.”
“More than that.”
“You don’t mean—” Richard now broke off, staring in near  disbelief  before  puffing  out  a  short,  bitter
laugh. “It is. He’s the  young  bastard  who  defeated  me,  the  very  one.  By  God,  but  he’s  come  up  in  the
world.”
“Take me from here,” Sabra pleaded. “Now.”
He shifted his attention to her and quickly finished the journey to the tent, setting her down on the bed.
Servants hovered close, but she banished them with a sharp gesture and a sharper word. This was  highly
unusual behavior on her part; Richard sat next to her as they hurried out.
“What ails thee?” he demanded, worried for her agitation. “What was your vision?”
She put a hand to her temple. “Why did she show me this now? Why not before?” Thus did Sabra refer
to the Goddess and her Gift of the Sight.
He held her other hand. “Just tell me. What is it  that  troubles  you?  What  did  the  Goddess  show  you?
Death? Death for whom?”
A  tear  spilled  down  her  cheek.  “For  him.  I  saw  a  glimpse  of  his  doom  that  day  five  years  past,  but
clearly now. Too clearly. His fate is set; nothing may change it.”
“Why does it affect you so? Men die. ’Tis the way of things.” He tried to say it in such a manner as to
give her comfort, but it had the opposite effect.
She slammed a fist ineffectually against the giving surface  of  the  bed,  snarling  frustration.  “Because  I
know now who he is!”
“Who, then?” Though bewildered, he kept himself patient with her.
“It cannot be changed—chance, fortune, and fate brought him here.”
“To meet his death?”
She nodded, swiping impatiently at her eyes as more tears streamed forth.
“What of it then? Am I to be the one to kill him?”
“No!” She all but shouted in his face.  “That you must not do!” She seized his sword arm, gripping hard
even through the mail with a strength to make him wince. “Richard, if you love me, promise you will not go
near him. Promise me you will raise no  weapon  to  him  even  if  it  costs  you  your  honor  and  place  at  the
king’s side.”
“It’s that important?”
“Yes!”
“Then I promise. Now tell me why.”
She eased her hold and wilted. “I have not the words. The Sight told me all  in  an  instant,  but  why  not
earlier? Why did she wait so long to show me?”
“Sabra . . .” His patience had limits.
She swung off the bed, pushing past him to go to the door of the tent. The servants lingering there hastily
scattered. He followed, looming over her as  she  looked  across  to  the  king’s  pavilion.  The  heavens  were
darker than before, clouds churning as if in response to Sabra’s turmoil. In the still air that preludes a storm
they heard the herald’s clear call as he presented the bastard to the crowd.
“Michel d’Orleans, champion of the house of Duke Montague d’Orleans of Normandy!” he shouted.
“My  father  yet  lives,”  Richard  murmured.  What  a  terrible  old  man  he  must  be  by  now.  He’d  not
thought of the ancient tyrant since leaving home.
But Sabra took no notice of his observation, her gaze fixed on the young man. “Look to him, Richard, and
remember your promise. I know not why she held this truth from us.”
“Can you speak it?”
Her shoulders drooped. “Aye, and the words burn my tongue. This Michel d’Orleans . . .”
He’d never seen her waver so. “Tell me. Sabra?”
“He’s—he is your son. Your bastard son, bred before your change.”
What? He gaped, staring across the field. “What . . . what say you?”
“You heard. And it is the truth.”
Hands  on  her  shoulders,  he  turned  her  to  face  him.  Her  expres-sion  told  all,  but  he  could  not  bring
himself to take it in. Blood pounded behind his eyes like a club.
“Richard—”
“No . . . oh,  it  cannot  be.  I’d  have  known.  That  day  in  Normandy,  seeing  him  then—when  we
fought—I’d have known .”

She puffed a little, hopeless laugh. “With all my gifts, only this moment did I realize it, only when I was
shown . . .” 
“This cannot be. I’d have felt something from him, seen my blood in him, and if not that, then his mother
would have sought me out while he was yet in her womb.”
“Perhaps. If she knew you to be the father. You had many women in your youth in the sun. ’Tis like that
they in turn had other lovers than yourself.”
“Yes, but . . .” Indeed, he’d enjoyed the company of dozens of wenches in those days. Any one of them
could have mothered a babe and not been able to name its father. “Know you his history? Who she might
have been?” Richard wanted—needed—to remember. Which, if any, of those girls had kept his seed and
made a child?
Sabra shook her head, helpless. “But you’ve only to look at him—his face and form tell all.”
Richard looked and saw his younger self mirrored there. Michel was now a strong young man of one and
twenty perhaps, with a proud carriage  beyond  his  rank,  and  those  eyes . . . like  chips  of  winter  blue  ice.
They stared over the short distance, meeting Richard’s gaze, challenging, arrogant.
Dear God. He caught hold of a tent pole to steady himself. “I’ve no words. No thoughts.” Only feelings,
a terrible roiling mix of them. “What am I to do?”
“Nothing.”
“But you said he’s to die this day?” He spoke less to Sabra than to himself, his voice so thin he did not
recognize it. “Why?”
She spread her hands, still helpless.
“Why tell me now? Is this some cruel joke?” He could scarce believe the Goddess would be so petty.
Sabra shut her eyes, as though to look inward for an answer. After a moment, she took a deep breath,
like a swimmer starved for air. “To spare you. The Goddess would spare you.”
“From what? From ever knowing I had an heir of my body?”
“From . . . from being the one who kills him.”
He released Sabra, falling back a step. “What mean you?”
“If you’d gone on the field in ignorance . . . There are two paths  for  him;  both  lead  to  death.  Richard,
one of them led to you. You would have been the one to kill him.”
“Where leads the other path? Name me that man!”
“I cannot—she denies it to me. This is his fate. I know not why it must be so; she has reasons beyond
our wisdom.”
“That shall not be.”
“It shall, Richard. There’s naught to be done to save him.”
“Fate be damned,” he snapped, and set off. Sabra cried his name—his real name—out once in anguish,
then he heard no more.
Michel d’Orleans squared himself as Richard approached. The young man’s expression was guarded yet
amused. “Come for a second trial at arms?” he asked, impolitely speaking first. He made no bow.
Richard stopped before him, searching this stranger’s face for signs of recognition. “Michel . . . do  you
know who I am?”
“I know who you were. You’ve made a good place  for  yourself  since  that  day  you  yielded  all  to  me.
Defeat served you well in the end.”
“But do you know me?”
He shrugged. “You are the King’s Champion here, by another name than your own. Many hold you  in
high esteem. I’m not one of them.”
Now was not the time to reveal his paternity. He would not be believed. “How came you here?”
“The duke sent me. When news of this tourney came to the keep, I asked his leave to champion him. He
granted it. He warned me that I might meet you again. He knows what you’ve been up to all these years.”
That was a surprise. “He cares what I do?”
“He cares to keep watch over his enemies, and he gave me enjoinment on what to do should we meet.”
“Which is . . . ?”
Michel smiled unpleasantly, hand straying to the sword on his hip. It had once been Richard’s own blade.
“You can answer that for yourself . . . old man.”
The jibe held  no  sting  for  him  now;  it  inspired  only  desperation.  “You  may  kill me  as  we  stand  here,
Michel, I care not, only please, listen to me.”
“What trickery is this?”
“None. I bear you no malice over that day, boy. The past is gone; the present is all, and you must listen
to  me . . .”  Richard  put  forth  his  will,  pouring  it  out  like  a  river.  “Hear  my  words . . .  and  obey  them,

Michel.”
Above them, thunder crackled threateningly. The Goddess was not pleased. Then damnation to her. He
could not stand idle.
“Obey  you?”  Michel  questioned,  fighting  off  his  influence.  “I  have  my  liege-lord.  You  are  nothing  to
me.”
“I am your way to life; hear me out!”
Michel glared at him, sullen. His face was flushed. There was wine on his breath. Had he had too much
to be susceptible?
Richard  focused  hard.  “There  is  a  seeress  here,  a  prophet.  All  that  she  says  comes  true.  The  king
himself will swear to it. She foretold that your path on this field goes straight to your death.”
That took him aback, but he quickly recovered. “You lie. You just don’t want to meet defeat again from
me.” 
“By Jesu’s wounds I am charged to keep you alive!”
Despite the force behind the words, Michel held to a stubborn face.
Dear  God,  he is my  son.  How  could  I  have  not  seen?  Richard  tried  a  different  tack.  “I  ask—ask
—that you simply not fight me this day, just this one day. In return, you will have all that is mine as  your
prize.” He gestured at his tent, far richer than the one Michel had originally taken from him. “Everything is
yours, horses, weapons, all, if you retire now. I will vouch for you and say you took sick. None will question
your honor or my word.”
His  gaze  strayed  to  the  tent,  but  Michel  caught  himself.  “You  mock  me.  I  owe  fealty  to  my  lord
Montague—this is some ruse to insult him and disgrace me.”
“Not a ruse! Run me through now if it will please you and Montague, only promise you will not fight this
day. Should you wish it we can make a test of arms later, but—”
Michel snorted.  “You’re  bewitched!  The  duke  warned  me  you’d  been  enspelled  into  madness  by  the
lady of the lake. Seeress! Sorceress more like. I’ll not be caught in her web—”
Enough was enough. He’d sworn to Sabra not to raise a weapon to Michel,  but  had  made  no  promise
concerning his fists. He clouted the younger man  solidly  on  the  jaw,  knocking  him  flat.  Michel  lay  like  a
stone and would stay that way for some time to come.
Their exchange was seen by many, and now the herald hurried over. Several others came with him.
“What  means  this,  Lord  Lancelot?”  He  was  highly  offended  at  such  a  gross  breach  of  conduct,  but
restrained himself before the King’s Champion.
“ ’Twas a private quarrel, nothing of import.”
“It is here, before this throng. What am I to say to the king?”
“Whatever you please. I’ll speak to him later on it.” Richard walked away quickly, leaving the man and
his foolish questions behind.
In the tent he found Sabra slumped on the bed, still in her squire’s clothing. She raised up when he came
in. Her eyes were red with spilled sorrow. “He did not hear you,” she stated.
His mouth twitched. “Yet I made him listen.”
“Richard . . .”
“No! Not one more word. I have obeyed the Goddess in all things, but not this. She asks too much.”
“There are destinies even she cannot command. This is one of them.”
“Who commands is nothing to me. The boy will be spared this day, I pledge my life on that.”
She went bone white. “Take care, Richard.” There was fear in her whisper. 
Thunder. A deafening roar and crack of it, that made them both flinch.
Richard looked up, as though to see the sky through the tent’s ceiling, as though to see the face of  the
Goddess herself. “Be angry with me as  you  will,”  he  shouted.  “Strike  me  down  if  you  must,  but  let  him
live.”
You don’t even know him.
The voice was unexpected. His heart faltered at the sound. It was in his head, like a whisper of doom. 
From Sabra’s stricken look, she’d also heard.
He mustered himself, bolstered by righteous anger. “I don’t have  to know him! What do you expect of
me? Did you think I would do less? If so, then you know me not at all!”
The thunder without rumbled, going on and on, yet no rain fell. Eventually, the noise faded. The air grew
thick and hard to breathe.
“Has she more to say?” he asked Sabra.
“I don’t know.”
“None of this is your fault,” he declared. “I hope she understands that.”

“Nor is it yours. You are who you are, Richard.”
“You may have to explain that to her. I must go now.”
“Godspeed,” she blurted, as he reached the tent flap.
He turned and came back, just long enough to frame her face with his hands, then kiss  her.  He  wiped
her tears away with his fingers, touching the salt wetness to his lips. “Here do I wear thy tokens, Lady du
Lac,” he said, then left.
He fought as one struck mad, as Lancelot had never been seen to fight before. 
Gone was consideration of his opponents’ moves, gone was planning; he fought recklessly, taking sword
blows like fly swats, beating down all who dared to test him. The crowds cheered him, but he heard them
not. One after another, he disarmed or knocked them unconscious or wounded the warriors in  his  frenzy.
The fallen were taken away to the safe areas cordoned off between the flags. He fought on.
He was dimly aware of Lavaine sometimes being at his side, sometimes at his back. Richard was neither
thankful for the alliance, nor against it; it was simply part of the day’s ordeal. All he wanted was to end the
melee quickly. If Michel recovered himself too soon . . . 
No,  he’d  taken  a  well-judged  knock.  Enough  to  keep  him  out,  but  not  permanently.  Richard  had  had
years to practice; he knew his craft.
“Here’s another charge for us,” huffed Lavaine.
Bors, Ector, and Lionel had formed a temporary alliance with nearly a dozen of their kinsmen, and were
making havoc against the lone fighters on the field.
“Shall we break them?” Lavaine asked, grinning. Despite the cool of the dark day, he streamed sweat.
His mail was rent from various cuts, his shield scarred from use, his helm battered. Blood crept down  his
neck where someone had shaved off a slice of his earlobe.
“Do what thou wilt,” said Richard, not caring.
His manner had no ill effect on the always cheerful Lavaine, who shouted challenge to the others. Bors
heard and raised his spear overhead in acknowledgment. He and his men would come when they’d seen to
their current task of clearance. Lavaine waited them out, resting while the others tired themselves.
“Soon,” he said, all anticipation.
Richard  used  the  pause  to  survey  activity  off  the  field;  this  included  Michel’s  tent.  Throughout  the
contest he’d kept such watch as he could manage in that direction. There was no  sign  of  movement  yet.
Good. If it held so until the hidden sun truly set . . . 
“That big Norman you felled is back,” said Lavaine, pointing in the opposite direction. 
Richard whirled. No!
Michel,  looking  fully  recovered,  had  armed  himself  and  was  in  the  process  of  hurrying  toward  them.
There was murder in his eye.
Richard stepped in front of Lavaine. “He’s mine. Touch him and I’ll kill you.”
Lavaine snorted, nettled by the threat, but gave way. “As you please. What is your quarrel with him?”
Richard made no answer, busy meeting Michel’s rush. The boy  was  better  than  before,  but  then  he’d
had five years to hone his talents. He ruthlessly pressed the least opening, but took care not to overextend
himself. Richard used his sword and shield to -deflect what came  to  him,  but  nothing  more.  This  puzzled
Michel, who dodged return strikes that never fell.
“Afraid,  old  man?”  he  taunted,  holding  his  arms  wide.  “Fight  me,  damn  you!  Let  me  take  back  my
honor!”
Richard held his sword blade downward, and slammed  it  against  Michel’s  shield.  The  force  staggered
him backward a few paces, but not off balance. He returned the attack, withholding nothing, roaring out his
fury. Still, Richard managed to  keep  clear  of  harm.  He  retreated  a  step,  as  though  beaten  back.  Michel
followed. Richard continued to retreat, not being obvious about it, but slowly drawing Michel away from the
main knot of fighters. Once they were clear, he’d step in and knock the boy out again.
He thought of surrendering to him, but then Michel would only rejoin the battle. No. He had to be taken
from it completely; then later, with cooler heads they could talk. Richard had no idea what  he  would  say,
but knew that he must—
With savage cries, Bors and his people bore down on them.
Lavaine, thrust aside in the rush, was trying to regain his ground while fending off Ector and two others.
He shouted at Richard for help even as he swung the flat of his blade against a man’s legs to trip him.
Richard had no mind for him. He lowered his head to get under Michel’s guard and butted him clear of
the charge, using his shield and sheer muscle. Michel grunted a curse and lost his footing, flying back to roll
down a slight rise. One of Bors men went after him, sword raised high.

Richard got between them just in time and with the edge of his shield hit the man’s helm hard enough to
break it. He dropped. Another Richard beat back using his sword in earnest, surprising the noble  with  his
energy. Bors intervened, his spear shaft taking  what  would  have  been  a  death  blow.  Richard’s  blade  bit
deep, cutting it halfway through, close to the spearhead.
“Retire, Lancelot!” he boomed. “Retire before you kill someone!”
Ignoring him, Richard wrested his sword free, making a stand before Michel. He took out one man after
another, not holding back, cracking bones, shattering shields, fighting to win no matter the cost to others.
Lavaine threw himself into the press, smashing his sword -pommel into a man’s helm to clear his way.
He shouted something at Richard, hurtling recklessly forward.
Richard half turned, just in time to see that Michel was up and coming  at  him.  He  led  with  his  sword,
about  to  run  it  through  Richard  from  the  back.  Richard  sidestepped  at  the  perfect  instant  to  avoid  it,
parrying it skyward. Michel’s arm shot up, then out of nowhere a blade caught him in that unprotected spot
beneath his arm, driving in deep. He made a brief low grunt of pain, then fell, blood spurting.
No!
A wordless shriek and Richard brought his blade down on the  other.  There  was  a  flash  as  the  metals
struck sparks like flint, then both shattered. He stared madly into the face of Lavaine.
“He was going to kill you!” he screamed at Richard. “The coward would have taken you from behind!”
Richard fell on him like death, hands closing on his neck, but the milling men around them kept him from
getting a solid grip. Then something struck Richard hard in his left side. He heard the scrape  and  felt  the
tear of links as whatever it was sheered through his chain coat. All the breath went out of him.  Suddenly
the cloudy sky was before him, the earth at his back. He smelled his own blood as it flowed out to soak the
turf.
“Lancelot is down!” yelled Bors somewhere above.
“See to the Norman,” Richard told him. “See to him, for God’s sake!”
“They’re coming. My lance slipped and caught you by chance, be still!”
Squires were racing in from the sides with litters to carry off the wounded. Most of the fighters paused
now, catching their wind, trying to make out just what had happened to cause the indestructible Lancelot to
fall. Richard hardly knew himself, only that the pain flared each time he tried to breathe. Looking down, he
saw Bors’s spearhead—the shaft fully broken off—sticking out from his side just below his ribs. More than
half of it was yet buried in his flesh. Impatiently, he clawed at it to draw it out.
“Don’t, man—you’ll bleed to death!” Bors made to stop him.
Richard struck him away and continued to pull. The effort dragged a scream from him. When had  this
last happened? That night in his father’s keep . . . only then it had  been  a  dagger  in  his  thigh.  He’d  lived
then, would live now.
The spearhead came clear, mostly. The top third of the tip was gone. He threw the head away and rolled
over to look at Michel.
He lay panting with pain, his d’Orleans colors stained through with his blood. No one was with him; all
were crowding round Richard. He crawled forward toward him, shrugging off help.
“See to him! Get a healer to staunch his wound! God’s death, leave me and see to him!”
Two of the squires went to Michel, moving him onto their litter, then lifting and bearing him away to the
cordoned-off ground. Only then would Richard allow himself to be  helped.  Lavaine.  It  was  Lavaine  who
came forward and hauled him up. Richard glared at him and got only noncomprehension in return. The man
still thought he’d saved his life. Rage was pointless. His  arm  around  Lavaine’s  shoulders,  they  staggered
after the bearers.
Dizziness seized him. His legs began to give way to the blood loss. His will alone kept him walking.
Michel sprawled flat on the grass, a healer on one side, a priest on the other.
Don’t do this, Goddess!
The squires had cut away Michel’s tunic, and were working to remove his chain shirt. They manhandled
him roughly, trying to pull it over his  head.  Lavaine  let  Richard  go,  and  he  fell  on  his  knees,  pushing  the
others away. He took hold of Michel’s shirt in both hands and ripped it in two as easily as if it’d been made
of thin cloth. The priest crossed himself; the others stared.
“Fire!” Richard snapped, tearing off the padded tunic beneath. “Bring a torch.”
One was put in his hand. He touched the blazing end of it to Michel’s gaping wound. The stink of burned
flesh and blood columned  up.  Michel  screamed  and  struggled  as  the  men  held  him  down.  Still  the  blood
poured out.
“Not enough,” said the healer. “You’ll burn his arm off and still not staunch it.”
“Wine, then.”

Someone gave him a skin. He sloshed a stream into the wound, then set that ablaze. Michel bucked and
shrieked under the hot blue flames. 
And still the blood poured out. The big vein had been cut through.
The  fire  dwindled,  died.  Richard  pressed  his  hand  into  the  wound,  to  halt  the  flow.  He  looked  at  the
healer. “Get your needle, sew this up.”
The man knew better than to argue, but his long face held no hope  for  this  patient.  He  went  to  work.
Michel had fallen into a daze, his eyes open and wandering, and he began to shiver. His skin was gray and
icy. Richard called for blankets.
“He must live,” he told the healer. “I had such a wound as near took my arm off and survived. You will
do that for him.”
“If it please God to grant me the skill, my lord,” he muttered back, working the needle and gut string like
a seamstress. “He’s Norman, as are you—a kinsman?”
Richard choked, his eyes blurring. “Yes . . . a kinsman.” 
The healer glanced quickly at him. “Someone see to Lord Lancelot—he’s like to faint.”
He felt gentle hands drawing him back, and he had not the strength to fight them. He was  laid  next  to
Michel. His overtunic was cut away, his  chain  shirt  and  the  padding  beneath  pushed  back  so  they  could
examine  his  wound.  It  was  open  and  seeped  steadily.  Strange,  it  should  have  closed  by  now,  the  pain
stopped, but—
Sabra’s face came into his view. She yet wore her squire’s guise. No weeping now, no time for it. “Lie
still,” she whispered.
“How is he?”
She shook her head, one hand palpating against his wound. “The  spearpoint  broke  off  inside  you.  You
won’t heal until it’s out.”
“Do what you must, then look after him.”
“Yes, I swear it.”
Reassured, Richard lay back. Sabra motioned for several men to come close. “Hold my lord fast.”
Lavaine sat on his legs, another half knelt on his chest, two more on his arms.  They  marveled,  though,
when  Richard  moved  not  a  muscle  as  Sabra  dug  into  his  side,  fingers  probing.  It  was  an  agony,  but
strangely distant; his heart and mind were elsewhere.
One of the men laughed. “Your squire will have a new name after this, Lord Lancelot. We shall call him
Thomas  after  the  one  who  doubted  our  Lord  Jesu’s  return  unless  he  could  put  his  hand  in  the  Holy
Wound.”
The others shushed him for blasphemy, but grinned at the joke.
Sabra  made  a  small  sound  of  triumph.  Slowly  she  worked  the  spearhead  free,  finally  holding  up  her
bloody prize: a wide triangle of metal the length of her palm. She tossed it away and swiftly lay a thick pad
of clean linen over the freshly bleeding gash.
Richard sighed out his relief. It would knit up now.
The men rose, foolishly asking after Richard’s health. He shook his head and looked across  to  Michel.
The boy looked back at him, his expression calm now, even  rested,  his  blue  eyes  free  of  pain  and  pride.
Richard spoke his name, but got no reply. It was then he saw that the only one in attendance was the priest,
who crossed himself one last time, then laid a cloth over Michel’s face.
Overhead, the thunder drummed throughout the heavens, and the black clouds finally broke. Silver sheets
of the long-withheld fall streamed down, drenching them. Richard’s hot tears mixed with the cold rain, and
he stretched forth his near hand, trying to take Michel’s, but couldn’t quite reach . . . 

Chapter Eight
He sat up fast with a sharp intake of air, heart thumping, his right hand crossing to his left hip as though to
draw a sword.
Old habits . . . 
He listened in the cool confines of the dark room. He heard only Michael’s soft breathing from the bed
and the distant hum of the air conditioning. 
What had awakened him? He concentrated and finally determined it had been nothing at all. He’d simply
slept enough, and it was time to face the day, or what was left of it. His watch told him it was almost noon.
It might have been midnight in this dim sanctuary.
He felt better. Getting up was not an effort. The aches in his body were gone, and he  sensed  his  final
restoration was -complete . . . at least on the physical level.
Michael was exactly where Richard had left him. The covers were kicked off, but he still slept deeply.
Maybe  too  deeply,  but  surely  it  would  help,  it  would  heal  him,  and  God  knew  Michael  needed  healing.
Richard replaced the bedspread, quietly chose fresh clothes, then left the boy alone, closing the door softly
behind him.
In the living room, Richard dressed slowly. It was time to deal with responsibilities and he had no spirit
for it. Going back to stand watch over the child in the easeful dark was more -preferable than facing reality.
He sat heavily at the desk, a bleak stare for the telephone as he  put  things  off  for  one  more  minute.  No
matter how much he wanted to avoid this, he couldn’t. Waiting would not make things better. He picked up
the  receiver  and,  since  it  was  Saturday,  punched  in  Bourland’s  home  number.  A  woman  answered,  the
live-in housekeeper, and at Richard’s request went to fetch her employer.
“Hallo?”
Bourland’s  voice  was  polite  yet  puzzled.  Richard  had  not  said  who  he  was,  and  few  people  had  this
particular number.
“Philip . . . it’s Richard.”
“Richard, how are you? It’s been months. What on earth have you been up to?” 
Such warmth in Bourland’s drawled greeting. Richard could not make himself respond. The words stuck
in his throat and an uncomfortable silence stretched over the lines.
“Hallo? Are you there? Is something wrong?”
Yes, my old friend, I’m about to put a knife in your heart and twist it.
“Richard?”
“I have very bad news, Philip. Please sit down.”
“What—”  Bourland  bit  off  the  rest.  Along  with  the  ominous  words,  he’d  have  picked  up  on  those
subtleties of tone that -indicate something truly serious had happened.
“I’m in Dallas.”
“What is it? Is Stephanie—”
“I’m sorry, Philip.” There was no way to make the news less brutal. Best just to say it, get it over with.
“Stephanie is dead, and so are Elena and Seraphina.”
A very small strangled sound came over the line, cut short. “What . . . what happened? An accident?”
“No. Not an accident. They were murdered.”
There  came  a  soft  exhalation  of  breath,  not  quite  a  word,  not  quite  a  sigh,  then  a  long  silence,  and
Richard could sense his friend bowing under the sudden burden.  He  heard  the  scrape  of  wood  against  a

bare floor. Bourland was sitting down. When he spoke, his voice was tight, stretched, hardly recognizable.
“Are you sure?”
“Yes.” Yes, I’m sure. Dear Goddess,  I’m sure.  I saw the blood,  the bullet holes,  the awful  gaping
smile of their slit throats. He shook his head sharply, disrupting the image.
“But they . . . they . . . oh, God.” Another long pause.
“Philip? I’m right here, Philip.”
His response was a whisper thick with tears and pain. “Sorry . . . I—I can’t. I’ll call you b—back.”
The  disconnecting  click  was  sharp,  abrupt.  Bourland  would  be  completely  devastated.  Stephanie  had
been like a second daughter to him. He had loved her in that hopeless, helpless way that older men do when
their own daughters have left the nest. He’d once confided his wish that Richard might marry her and give
him surrogate grandchildren to dandle on his knee in his old age. He had eventually gotten them,  but  now
that happiness was gone. Ripped away. 
Richard sat by the phone, waiting until Bourland’s first terrible rush of grief abated enough so he could
talk again. His own anguish hovered close; he willed it away.  Nothing  would  be  served  if  he  lost  control
now. A scant ten minutes passed when the sharp warble broke the silence. Richard picked up.
Bourland’s voice was steel. “Was it Alejandro?”
“Yes.”
“You saw him?”
“If I had he’d be dead.”
“What about Michael? And Luis?”
“I don’t know about Luis. Michael’s alive and safe here with me. He’s sleeping.”
“Thank God, thank the dear God for that. Are you all right?”
“I’m . . . coping.”
“What happened? Tell me everything.”
Richard poured out the whole story from the first alarm call on his computer to walking into the too, too
quiet house and finding the bodies. He gave the simple facts, carefully keeping out all emotional embroidery.
It was the only way he could get through it.
“There must have been devices set all through the place,” he said. “I smelled something odd under  the
propane, but didn’t identify it as Semtex until it was almost  too  late.  I  think  the  gas  was  on  to  cover  the
smell and add to the damage. There was nothing I could do for them, so I ran. I got clear just as it went up,
but  something  knocked  me  flat.  Must  have  been  flying  debris.  Didn’t  quite  pass  out,  but  I  couldn’t  do
anything for myself. It was like being drugged. Took hours before I was able to wake up enough to move.” 
“Hours? But the explosion must have drawn attention. Didn’t anyone call it in?”
“The property’s isolated, miles from everything, and the house is far from the road in a low spot in  the
land. That  would  muffle  the  blast  and  hide  the  flames.  The  smoke  would  have  blended  into  the  general
darkness.”
Bourland swore once. “Go on.”
“I don’t remember much. Just being thirsty. I crawled to the pump house for  water  and  that’s  when  I
found Michael. He must have been hiding there the whole time, scared out of his wits.”
“How is he?”
“Just some scratches and a bruise or two. He’s asleep.”
“You’re hedging. How is he?”
“In some kind of shock.”
“What do you mean?”
“He’s not said a word since I found him. I’m hoping all he needs is rest—”
“He needs a doctor.”
“I know a good one here; I’m taking him right over.”
“Do. Keep me informed.”
“Of course I will.”
“What about Luis? Where the hell is he?”
“I’ve no idea. His car . . .” He trailed off into silence, his mind working rapidly.
“What is it? Richard? Do you know something?”
“Luis’s car wasn’t there when I arrived.  Suppose  he  drove  in  after  it  was  over,  saw  what  happened,
then fled.”
“Without trying to find out  if  there  were  survivors?”  Contempt  seeped  into  Bourland’s  tone.  But  then
he’d not seen the total destruction wrought by the blast.
“It was very bad, Philip. One look and you’d know how hopeless.”

“But if he’d been there, then how did he miss spotting you?” 
“He  might  not  have  gotten  close  enough.  It  was  a  fearful  mess.  He  could  still  be  alive,  hiding
somewhere.” Richard’s thoughts churned with a new realization. “Look, by the condition of the—of things,
the murders took place in the morning. The killer had all day to set up the bombs. He was only waiting for
Luis  to  come  home  from  work  and  find  what  was  left.  That’s  the  sort  of  retribution  Alejandro  would
arrange. He would want Luis to see what he’d brought upon himself and his family for his betrayal.”
“Damn him.”
“When I got there the killer must have slipped out the back and hid, allowing me just enough time to find
the bodies—or rather he meant it to be Luis. We’re about the same build, and it was dark. He mistook me
for Luis, detonated the bomb, then left me for dead. It would certainly explain the perfect timing.”
“My God, then he really could still be alive.”
Yes, they might yet salvage something from the disaster. “There’s a chance of it.”
“What about the police down there?”
“Sorry?”
“What are they doing about this?”
“I’ve not spoken to them.”
“For God’s sake, why not?”
“Philip,  stop  and  think  about  it.  If  I  bring  them  in,  I  won’t  be  free  to  act  in  a  manner  I
deem . . . appropriate.” 
Bourland caught on instantly. “I understand. I’m taking the next flight out.”
“No, please, I need you exactly where you are.”
“But—”
“I need help. Your kind of help.”
A pause, as Bourland took in the implications. “Anything. Name it.”
“Information. I need free access to the databases of the CIA, FBI, DEA, Interpol, and anyone else you
can think of at the highest clearance you can manage. All the major law  enforcement  agencies,  the  local
police, too, the airlines, Immigration. Get me their access codes.”
There was a long silence at the other end of the phone. “I don’t know if I can.”
“Philip, for Stephanie’s sake you will. I must have them if I’m to find Alejandro.”
That shot hit home. “I’ll see what I can arrange . . . and -Richard?”
“Yes?”
“Alejandro or whoever did the killing for him may well know Michael is alive. That  child  is  in  extreme
danger.”
Richard’s gut lurched. Damnation, why hadn’t he thought of that? Of course the killer knew the boy had
gotten away. And would be looking for him. “He’s safe, and I will keep him that way. I’m going to be on
the move, so use my cell number. Just get me the information I need.”
“Soon.” Bourland hung up with no further comment. 
Richard sank back in his chair, his gaze hard on the closed bedroom door.
Ah, Michael. Poor Michael. What would become of him? His family dead or missing, the absolute loss
beyond his young comprehension, he might never wake from his withdrawal.
Across the room on a table Richard caught sight of a gold framed photo of his twin goddaughters. It was
one of the few personal items he kept here. Elena and Seraphina had been seven at the time and laughed at
the camera as they sat on their pony.
Oh, God, those poor girls.
And  suddenly  the  grief  welled  up  in  him  once  again.  In  a  desperate  stolen  way,  sweet  Elena  and
Seraphina had been his daughters, his innocent,  helpless  children.  It  was  mere  technicality  that  Luis  was
their  father.  Had  Richard  not  been  there  at  their  christenings,  holding  them  tenderly,  grinning  into  the
camera  with  a  parent’s  absurd  doting  pride?  He  always  remembered  their  birthday,  knew  every  tiny,
immensely important event of their young lives. Photographs his cherished Stephanie had taken were in his
wallet, creased with wear. 
And now some bastard had murdered them all.
Richard  had  seen  much  over  the  long  centuries  and  of  necessity  had  learned  to  maintain  a  certain
amount of emotional distance from those few and fragile souls that he loved. They died. He lived on. That
was the way of things. He had had to pull back time and time again to survive the years with any sort of
sanity intact. Yet now, with the events of the past twenty-four hours crowding upon him, he could not pull
back far enough for this.
His sight blurred, his breath shortened. Great heavy sobs -began to rack his  body,  and  he  did  not  fight

them. He let them take him, for this was the only way to deal with the grief. 
Try as he might, wish as he might, he would never be too old or too stony of heart not to weep.
Richard splashed cold water on his face, wishing he could as easily wash away the sorrow along with his
tears. The grieving was not over, he was fully aware of that, but he’d vented enough to be able to push it to
one side, allowing him to  focus  and  function.  He  would  give  himself  time  to  truly  mourn  only  after  he’d
caught Alejandro.
He padded to the bedroom to check on Michael and was surprised to see the child seated cross-legged in
front of the TV there. Michael stared, empty-eyed, at a dark screen, for it was not turned on.
Damn, damn, damn. He suppressed an inner groan, then got down on the floor to be in the boy’s line of
sight.
“Michael?”
No reaction.
“Michael, it’s Uncle Richard. Will you look at me?”
Nothing.
He  fought  back  a  twinge  of  panic.  The  boy  needed  and  would  get  professional  help.  Now.  Richard
donned his daylight coverings, gently gathered up Michael, and headed for the elevator.
Some thirty minutes later, child in arms, he bulled through the door of  the  Med-Mission  Clinic,  startling
the patients in the waiting room. Helen Mesquita buzzed him straight through the second door and pointed.
He’d  called  ahead  on  his  cell  phone  to  give  Dr.  Sam  some  warning,  sketching  out  what  was  required.
Richard found the examination room, and eased Michael down on the table there.
Helen came in, a clipboard in hand, dark eyes wide with -unvoiced questions. “Well, who  have  we  got
here?” she asked, -addressing Michael. His lack of response didn’t seem to bother her,  giving  Richard  to
understand that she’d been primed about what to expect.
“This is Michael, my godson,” Richard answered.
She wrote the name down on the form on the board. “Last name?”
“No paperwork for this one. Sam will confirm it.”
This was unheard of. She started to object, but after a few seconds of eye contact  Richard  persuaded
her to forget the matter. She put the form aside and turned to the child, smiling. “Hi, Michael, I’m glad to
meet you. My name is Helen. We’re just going to check you out and make sure everything’s running fine.
Is that okay with you?”
The boy’s eyes moved, downward. It was the first sign he’d given of being aware of anything.
She glanced at Richard, taking in the mixed emotions on his face. “Sure it is.”
Richard felt a hand on his arm and repressed an urge to flinch. It was Sam, only trying to push past. He
murmured requests to Helen, and the two of them proceeded to make a swift and effi-cient examination of
the boy.
“Who’s his pediatrician?” asked Sam. “You might want to -notify him.”
“I don’t know.”
Sam gave him a sharp look, head-to-toe. “Richard, you look like hell.”
“How’s the boy?”
“Dehydrated, some scratches, bruises, needs food, a bath, and clean clothes. How’d he get this way?”
“I’ll explain. Can you do all that here?”
“We can manage.”
Helen smiled at Michael. “Yes, we’re old friends now. I’ll look after him if you tell Ruth to keep holding
the fort out front for me.”
Sam saw to it, then took Richard back to his office. Sunlight blasted harsh through the window, warming
the place past the limits of the otherwise efficient air conditioning. Richard shut the blinds and dropped his
long frame into the same chair as before.
Sam perched on the edge of his desk. “So . . . what is going on? What happened to that boy? Why come
here instead of to an emergency room?”
“Because I can answer your questions; I wouldn’t have been able to answer theirs.”
“Don’t tell me you’ve kidnapped him.” Sam was only half -serious, the other half was plainly alarmed.
“No, nothing like that, but any official notice of the child could put him in danger.”
“Why is that? What’s happened to him?”
“Yesterday morning he saw his mother and sisters murdered. The killer is still loose and probably looking
for him.”
That stopped Sam’s questions for a very long minute. He shifted from the desk to his own chair, looking

at Richard the whole time. “I think you know what I’ll ask next, so please . . .” He gestured, palm up, for
more information.
Richard kept his story short, the barest of bare bones. It was the only way he could get through it again.
“My God,” Sam whispered. “I heard something on the radio when I drove in, but  I  never  thought . . .”
He  glanced  at  his  watch,  then  swiveled  his  chair  so  as  to  turn  on  a  small  black-and-white  portable  TV
jammed onto a crowded bookshelf.
The picture was fuzzy, but served. The images and sound marched their slow way through the credits of
a sports show and some ads, then the local carrier station news center broke in with the  day’s  headlines.
They gave a full thirty seconds to the mysterious explosion of a house in Addison. A helicopter view of the
area was shown as the narrator spoke of arson.
Richard made himself look at the near obliteration of the house, made small by the screen, but still naked
and awful in the daylight.
The TV voice continued, “ . . . and an inside source has revealed that some type of powerful explosive
was involved. Police, FBI, and BATF agents are searching the site for clues and bodies.”
And if I don’t come forward now and they discover I was there . . . 
But the likelihood of that was slim, very slim. Yes, the authorities would not be happy with him,  but  he
couldn’t  allow  himself  to  be  restrained  by  the  limits  of  the  law,  or  allow  Michael  to  be  taken  from  his
custody by well-meaning strangers who could get the boy killed for lack of security.
A commercial suddenly replaced the blackened wreckage on the screen.
Sam shut the thing off. “He was in that?”
“Not quite, but close.”
“And  the  murders . . . they  were  killed  just  to  make  an  example?”  Sam  shook  his  head.  “I  don’t
understand that kind of evil. I see it all the time, but his own brother? He would kill children?”
“Sam. Believe me, you don’t want to understand it. This is the  kind  of  corruption  found  in  gangrenous
limbs. Alejandro had his face rubbed in it when Luis turned on him, and he swore vengeance.”
Sam shook his head. “Damn, but I try most of the time to forget how awful the world really is.” 
“With your line of work? With what you do here?”
“I’ve got a selective memory. It helps me get through some of the bad days.” He sighed, frowning at his
desk. “Now what?”
“Now I go after the man behind it.”
“You? Why not the cops?”
Richard made no reply.
“Why? You’re going to talk to them about this, aren’t you?”
“The less you know, the better you’ll sleep.”
“Richard . . .”
“No. Anything I say about it will just upset you.”
“But you’re a security expert, not any sort of a sanctioned law officer. If you get in  trouble  with  them
what happens to Michael?”
“You don’t need to worry about it.” Richard held his gaze a moment, allowing his friend time to settle.
Dr. Sam relaxed infinitesimally; it was enough.
Richard continued. “Michael needs to drop out of sight for the present. As soon as you’re done treating
him, we’re going elsewhere to safer ground.”
Sam shook his head. “The kid’s not a car you can just bring in for a tune-up then drive out again. For the
kind of shock he’s had, he will need round-the-clock help. You should get him to a hospital, find a good child
psychologist—do you see where I’m going with this?”
“Yes, Sam, but I can’t. The people behind this are professional killers. Michael is a witness. If they find
him, they will murder him and anyone else with him. I’m taking a risk with your life bringing him here.”
“Then get him police protection.”
“No. I do not trust the police to be able to take care of him; there are too many ways his presence can
be leaked to the wrong ears. The man responsible has money enough to buy kings, much less anyone else.”
“Even when he murders children?”
Richard fixed him with a “what do you think?” look. “You said you don’t understand that sort of evil.”
“All right, I get the point, but just where do you plan to take him?”
Richard had no ready answer. He had some idea of calling on the local security man for Arhyn-Hill and
taking it from there.
“You can’t just leave the boy off at a day care center,” Sam argued. “Not in his condition. Any good one
would be the first to phone the authorities. Keep him here.”

“I can’t ask you to volunteer.”
“No, but I will anyway. It’s what I’m good at, remember? I’m Crusader Rabbit with a tongue depressor
instead of a lance.”
“You don’t know anything about dodging bullets.”
Sam snorted. “That wet-eared kid you rescued way back when has since picked up a few survival clues
by osmosis, though I’m open to suggestions.”
Richard hesitated, but no better option presented itself to him. And he could trust Sam and his staff to be
bribe-proof. “All right, but you absolutely have to keep him out of sight, smuggle him home in a laundry bag
if you must, but no one sees him.”
“I think we can manage. How long will this take?”
“Not sure, but I’ll be making arrangements to get him away from here in a day or so.” Richard wrote out
Bourland’s name and number. “This man is your emergency guardian angel, should you need one. He’s in
Toronto, but he has a long reach. I’ll see to it he knows who you are.”
“Emergency, okay. How much can I tell Helen? I’ll be needing her help.”
“As much as you deem necessary. Tell her the boy is a witness to a crime and needs to disappear. I had
my eyes  open  on  the  way  over;  I  don’t  think  I  was  followed,  but  the  killer  may  know  the  connection
between Arhyn-Hill Oil and this place and could come calling, just to be thorough.”
“You’re not exaggerating, are you?”
“Not one bit.  I  think  once  you’re  done  here  for  the  day  you  should  close  up  as  usual,  then  overnight
elsewhere.” Richard got his wallet out and peeled off half the bills in it, putting the stack of hundreds on the
desk.
Sam’s eyebrows jumped at the amount. “Come on, you don’t have to pay me—”
“Operating expenses . . . and for the extra blood I need. Is it . . . ?”
“Yeah, in the fridge.”
“Good. Have you a cell phone?”
“Helen has one. I have a pager.”
“I’ll want both numbers; you’ve still got mine?  It’s  for  emergencies  only,  though.  And  if  it’s  that  bad,
then you call Bourland, too.”
Sam had a short discussion with Helen, who had no objection to looking after Michael for the next few
days. Details were settled out, then Richard went to see the boy again.
With the dirt off, Michael was several shades lighter than -before, now dressed in a faded, but otherwise
clean shirt and shorts that were more or less his size, rubber beach thongs on his feet. Apparently the clinic
dealt  with  a  number  of  children  being  brought  in  possessing  only  the  clothes  on  their  backs  and  kept  a
donation bin for such emergencies. Another bin held toys. Med-Mission was a thorough place.
Richard pulled a low stool over to the examination table and sat before Michael. “You’re looking better.
How are you?”
The boy would only stare at the floor.
With one finger, Richard slowly tilted Michael’s head up so he could see his pale blue eyes. Empty eyes.
He focused hard,  trying  to  touch  the  mind  behind  them.  Helen  somberly  stood  close  to  one  side,  but  he
didn’t think she’d notice what he was attempting. “Michael, it’s all right. You’re safe. No one will hurt you
any more. You can speak now. You are safe.”
God, he was so young, much too young for such a burden.
As if in response to the thought, Michael’s chin crumpled a little.
“It’s all right . . .” Richard concentrated, hardly daring to breathe.  “I  know  what  happened,  but  you’re
safe.”
A tear seeped out and rolled down Michael’s cheek, dropping cold on Richard’s hand. With it, a feeling
of overwhelming sadness came over him—so strong that it was physical, like a blow; he felt ready to weep
anew himself.
“It’s all right,” he lied, fighting to keep his voice from cracking.
“Mommy.” One word from the boy, whispered so soft as to barely be heard. 
Helen shifted slightly in reaction.
“Yes, Michael, I know—”
“Mommy!”  This  time,  he  screamed  it.  He  pushed  violently  away  from  Richard  and  threw  himself  at
Helen, wailing uncontrollably. She caught and held him close like a baby, rocking him back and forth.
“He needs a little time,” she told Richard, tears trailing down her face in sympathy. “This is good, what’s
happened. He just needs a little time.”

He nodded, squeezed her shoulder, and backed off to where Sam stood in the doorway.
“Let’s give them some space,” said Sam, herding him out.
“I should be there for him.”
“You already have been, but he’s not ready for more. He’s probably regressed a bit. He’s a scared little
boy who only wants his mother, and Helen is a close enough substitute. Let him have that for now.”
Richard nodded acquiescence. Reluctantly. He could still hear Michael’s sobbing.
Sam gave him another once-over. “You won’t do him any good the state you’re in. You need rest—or at
least a time-out.”
But Richard’s phone warbled before he could reply. He fished it out. 
Bourland was on the other end. “Get a pen,” he said. “I’ve got some of those codes,  and  God  help  us
both if you lose them. Only their own agents are supposed to have these.”
It seemed best not to warn him about the cell phone. The risk was  small  that  anyone  was  listening  in;
besides,  agency  access  codes  were  always  being  changed.  Richard  found  pen  and  paper,  printing
everything out carefully on one of Sam’s prescription pads.
“That’s  for  the  FBI  and  DEA  only,”  said  Bourland.  “I  might  be  able  to  get  more  on  Monday,  but
everyone I know that I can trust to keep quiet is off for the weekend.”
“It’s a start. Thank you, Philip. Can you filter it in to someone the possibility that Alejandro may be in this
country? An alert sent out by the proper channels . . .”
“Already done, but it’ll be a matter of pure luck if he’s spotted. If he ever was in Texas, he’s probably
well gone by now.”
Too  true.  Alejandro  was  a  smart  man.  Not  the  sort  to  put  himself  at  risk,  according  to  his  brother.
Anyone else was fair game, though.
“What about Michael?” Bourland asked. “Have you—”
Richard filled him in on the boy’s condition and change in situation, giving Bourland names and numbers.
“Dr. George will look after him very well; he’s in first-rate hands, I promise.”
“I’m still coming down there. Monday.”
“But—”
“I can pull strings from anyplace with a phone. I need to be there . . . to make arrangements. For them.”
Poor Bourland. This was all he had left to give Stephanie, to take her and her daughters home for burial.
“Yes, very well. Stay with me at New Karnak. I’ve plenty of room. I’ll tell security to expect you and let
you in.”
“Won’t Alejandro know about your penthouse?”
“At this point I don’t know if he’s even aware  of  my  existence,  but  the  place  is  listed  as  a  corporate
expense  for  Arhyn-Hill,  and  access  is  extremely  limited.  It’s  safe.”  Safe  enough  for  me,  old  friend.
Perhaps not for Michael, but  that  worry  was  off  his  shoulders  for  the  time  being.  “Philip,  what  can  you
organize concerning Michael?”
“Organize?”
“I want to get  him  out  of  the  country.  He’ll  need  a  passport,  won’t  he?”  Richard’s  knowledge  about
international travel for children was hazy.
Bourland understood instantly. “Yes, I’ll get right on that. Excel-lent idea.”
They rang off. Richard folded the phone and tucked it away. He tore off several of the top sheets from
the pad and tucked those away as well, shrugging an apology to Sam for the misuse of office supplies.
“You’re not going to rest, are you?” asked Sam.
“Later. I’ve work to do.”
“Meaning you’ll be hunting this Alejandro?”
“Yes.”
“You going to kill him?”
Richard  thought  a  moment,  realizing  that  only  the  truth  would  serve  for  his  friend.  “Yes.  With  great
pleasure.”
Sam nodded, apparently expecting just that answer.  He  wasn’t  happy  with  it,  but  knew  better  than  to
argue. “They’ve got a saying in this neighborhood about that sort of thing.”
“Yes?”
“‘Have fun . . . but don’t get caught.’”

Chapter Nine
Richard slipped the bags of blood into the vegetable bin, slapped  the  refrigerator  door  shut,  then  shed  his
coat and black Stetson onto the kitchen table. He went straight to his computer in the living room, hitting the
power  buttons  to  wake  it  up,  going  through  the  technical  rituals  necessary  to  access  the  databases  he
needed. It seemed to take forever. As he waited for the information to appear, he considered an upgrade. It
used to be every year was enough, then every six months; advances were now  coming  so  fast  and  thick
these days it was impossible to keep up. He’d not been down here since last fall, more than sufficient time
for this machine to become antiquated, given his special requirements.
He thought about the mundane, rather than the fact that his last Dallas visit had little to do with company
business. He’d appeared  at  Stephanie’s  door  with  a  stack  of  pizza  boxes,  a  bottle  of  good  wine  for  the
adults, and some toys for . . . 
Damn.
He pushed the memory away. Hard. The touch of it on his heart was too cold and heavy to bear.
The DEA screen came up, asking for a password. He carefully entered the code Bourland had provided
and was gratified when it worked. After that,  it  was  only  a  matter  of  delving  into  what  they  had  on  the
Trujillo brothers. He traced Luis first just to see if  there  was  anything  new  on  him.  Their  interest  in  him
mostly stopped the  same  day  that  Richard  had  gotten  the  whole  family  to  disappear.  Good.  So  far  as  it
went.
Next, he concentrated on Alejandro, with mixed results. The latest report was three months old, placing
him firmly and unreachably in Colombia. He’d taken quite a financial setback when Luis turned on him, but
seemed  to  be  recovering.  In  the  gap  left  by  the  other  drug  lords’  arrests  and  confiscation  of  stock,
Alejandro  had  stepped  in,  taking  up  the  slack  and  raising  the  prices.  According  to  some  conservative
estimates, he was making as much now as before and looked to be expanding his  business  geometrically.
Such was the nature of demand and supply.
Much on Alejandro’s habits and methods of operation were in his file, though the greater part of it was
speculation. Some few bits were accurate. He usually had at least two bodyguards from home with him at
all times, hiring others on when he traveled. He liked  clubbing,  fancied  himself  a  ladies’  man,  and  was  a
lavish tipper.
He  would  not  have  personally  set  the  bombs;  that  was  for  hiring  out.  Alejandro  had  many  such
associates, mostly in Colombia, only a few in the States. Richard recognized some of the names, but  they
had to do with the actual business of transport and sale of product. What he wanted were the soldiers, the
ones willing to do the dirty work. If he could find just one of them, he could find Alejandro.
After a search, two prospects presented themselves: Nick Anton and Jordan  Keyes,  both  local.  Anton
was muscle, working as bodyguard, bouncer, or collection agent, whatever was needed for any given  job.
Alejandro was just one  of  his  many  employers.  Anton  had  been  questioned  several  times  in  regard  to  a
number of killings and  disappearances,  but  never  arrested—lack  of  direct  evidence.  His  juvenile  records
were sealed, but Richard hacked into them, turning up nothing  too  terribly  surprising.  It  would  have  been
odd if Anton had not come from a broken home and dropped out of school. He  was  bright,  though;  what
time  he’d  spent  in  jail  he’d  put  to  good  use  in  furthering  his  criminal  education  and  making  important
contacts. After turning twenty some dozen years ago,  he  managed  to  keep  himself,  if  not  out  of  trouble,
then at least out of jail for it. Anton was a thug, but a smart thug.
Jordan Keyes was quite a bit more interesting. He had no police record in the States or anywhere else in

the world so far as could be determined. He’d resided in the same house in Fort Worth for the last twenty
years, paid his taxes, his  modest  income  clearly  derived  from  solid  and  steady  investments.  He  traveled,
mostly  to  South  America,  ostensibly  as  a  tourist.  Whenever  he  visited  a  country,  someone  important
connected with the drug trade died. The victim was nearly always an enemy or rival of Alejandro Trujillo.
There had been about a hundred of them.
The method varied, sometimes a long gun, sometimes a bomb, sometimes close range with a small pistol
jammed into the victim’s spine. On several occasions, though, death was delivered by a crossbow bolt, the
razor-sharp point coated with curare. Even a graze would kill. Dramatic, but effective.
Keyes was suspected of being the hit man, or at the very least arranging the hits, but so far no one could
find anything even remotely resembling  evidence  that  could  be  used  against  him.  He  lived  alone,  had  no
expensive  vices.  His  past  was  wholly  innocuous  with  its  records  of  school  transcripts,  various  mundane
jobs, and promptly paid bills. But paper trails could be faked with the right know-how. The one photo of him,
taken  from  a  distance,  showed  a  bald  man  in  sunglasses,  bearing  a  superficial  resemblance  to  Vladimir
Lenin, average height, average weight and build, the sort who would blend invisibly into nearly any crowd in
the world. An excellent talent to have for such a profession. The report stressed the speculation that Keyes
was probably not his real name, but investigations into discovering his true identity had been futile.
Richard snorted. Wonderful. Another exotic assassin with a predilection for symbolism. Jordan conjured
up crossing over the famous river . . . and Keyes? Perhaps Keys of the Kingdom?
I’ll ask him when I see him, Richard thought, writing down the man’s address next to Anton’s. It was
his short  list  of  people  to  interview  and  probably  eliminate,  should  Keyes’s  slim  connection  to  Alejandro
prove solid. If so, then he would have been the one who made the bombs and murdered Stephanie and the
girls. Such skills were thankfully rare, but if he was the instrument to carry out Alejandro’s orders, he would
suffer for it.
Exiting the DEA’s database, Richard then tried the FBI. They had essentially the same information, just
different details. He saved what information he deemed relevant, then closed down. 
Now it was time for some on-site research. Richard took the elevator  to  the  ground  floor.  For  a  quiet
Saturday, there was plenty of activity in the vast lobby. Beyond a screening row  of  palm  trees  and  other
greenery, he heard the shrieks and splashings of children enjoying the indoor pool. The scent of food drifted
on the cooled air from a small eatery situated halfway between the residential and business  halves  of  the
complex. He glimpsed adults at ease on a scatter of tables before the pool, watching their kids.
As it should be and too often is not.
He turned away from them, swiping his special magnetic key through a slot, then pushing open the glass
door to the business side of New Karnak. He softly approached the large round reception kiosk there. One
security man was seated on duty, a lean young fellow, his long hair neatly tied off at the base of his neck. In
front of him was a stack of open college texts, but his attention was on the TV screens built into the desk
below counter level. One camera’s view took in the Egyptian-motif pool. In addition to children playing, the
area was also populated by lots of young ladies attempting to push the envelope of brevity with their choice
of bikini design.
“Yes, they do look very dangerous,” Richard remarked, coming up behind him.
The guard gave a slight start, then grinned. “Just doing my job. May I help you?”
Richard took out his Arhyn-Hill identification. “I’m Mr. Dun, and I’m down from Toronto for a few days
to check on things.”
“Mr. Dun? The Mr. Dun?” The fellow gave the ID a twice-over, then goggled, apparently well aware  of
Richard’s status as owner of the company. “Yes, sir. What can I do for you?”
“I need to be let into one of the offices, Mr.—ah—Ballard.” He read the name off the man’s pocket tag.
“Sure, I mean, yes, sir, and you can just call me Charles. Right this way. Which office?” He left his post,
coming around.
“First I want to see your sign-out roster.” He indicated a flat book lying open on the desk top. Ballard did
an about-face and grabbed it,  setting  it  before  him  like  a  gift.  Richard  flipped  the  page  back  to  Friday’s
date. All employees and visitors were required to sign themselves in and out. The template for each sheet
had spaces for names, times, and their reason for being in the building. The regular employees usually left
the latter blank. 
Among the scribbles in various hands  was  the  strong  signature  of  Luis  Marcelja,  the  name  he’d  lived
under all these years. He’d entered the building at 7:55, stayed in through his lunch, and departed at  5:17.
According to the previous log entries, this was his usual routine, give or take a few minutes.
So why hadn’t he gone straight home? Had he been ambushed on the way by Alejandro’s killers? And if
so, then why should the hit man have waited to blow up the house? Why even bother to set charges if the

main target was already dead?
Richard frowned, mulling over the possibilities, the most likely still being  that  the  hit  man  had  mistaken
him for Luis in the dark and followed through  with  his  orders.  If  Luis  had  come  home  earlier  he’d  have
died. If he returned after the blast, he’d have missed finding Richard.
Hell, I was probably unconscious in the pump house.
Richard shut the book. “Thank you. I need to see Mr. Marcelja’s office now.”
He knew the way, but let Ballard usher him along,  summoning  the  elevator  then  opening  doors  with  a
wave of his master key. He  flicked  on  the  lights  to  a  large,  luxuriously  furnished  chamber  on  the  fourth
floor. They were hardly needed; plenty of sun blasted its way through the  slanted  glass  of  the  outer  wall
despite its darkening glaze. Richard winced and sought out the  control  rod  for  the  blinds,  quickly  shutting
them.
“Sure heats a place,” commented Ballard. “He must roast up here in the afternoons.”
“You know Mr. Marcelja?”
“Just by sight. I’m usually signing in for my shift when he’s on his way out. I do nights and weekends.
Mostly he just says hello and bye, same as the rest.”
“Do you recall him signing out yesterday?”
“Sort of . . . yes, because he left later than the rest. Usually on a Friday everyone can’t wait to cut out
early and try beating the traffic. I remember saying he’d have a tough time driving home. He just nodded
and smiled like he always does, then went off to the employees’ garage entrance.”
“Anything odd about his manner?”
Ballard shook his head. He was clearly curious about being questioned, but held it in.
“How was he dressed?”
“Dark suit, I think. Dark tie. He had a laptop case, usually does.”
“Did you notice any strangers hanging about the place? Did any of your coworkers?”
“We get lots of strangers every day, but we don’t allow people to loiter. I’d have been told to look out for
anyone if that happened.”
“What about outside the building?”
“We make regular circuits—and we have the cameras. You want to look at the tapes?”
“Not just yet.” That would take hours, and probably be futile. Richard was hoping for a straw to grasp,
but wasn’t to the point of desperation just yet. 
He surveyed Luis’s office. It was decorated in Southwest style with big  comfortable  chairs,  landscape
prints on the walls; a huge ceramic jar with a three-foot round of glass over the mouth served as a  table.
The  credenza  behind  the  huge  desk  displayed  a  scatter  of  business  awards  and  trophies,  an  ambitiously
creeping ivy, and a large portrait-style photo of Luis with his family. Stephanie beamed happily from it, her
arms protectively around her children in a relaxed, informal pose.
Richard made his gaze skip over it, turning his focus on the desk, which Luis had left in a tidy state. The
top  was  clear  of  mess,  only  some  memos  lined  up  by  the  phone,  presumably  ready  for  his  attention  on
Monday. The computer was on, the monitor left running. A screen saver showed an underwater scene of
drifting tropical fish in vivid colors.
“Is Mr. Marcelja in some kind of trouble?” Ballard finally asked.
“He might be, but not with me. I’m just looking for him.”
“What, he’s missing?”
“I think so. You may have been the last person to see him.”
Ballard’s  expression  indicated  that  he  had  no  need  of  such  a  dubious  honor.  “Maybe  he  was  in  an
accident. Have you called the hospitals or the cops?”
“Not yet.” And for a very good reason. He didn’t want the calls traced back to his own line. By now the
authorities would have  identified  the  owners  of  the  destroyed  house  and  be  alert  to  anyone  asking  after
them. “Will you do that for me? The hospitals only for now.”
“What’ll I say?”
“Just that his supervisor is trying to find him, you don’t know why. You may keep my name out of it for
the time being. If you have any luck, let me know. I’ll be up here.”
“Yes, sir.” Ballard took himself and any further questions away.
Richard was unsure how many hospitals were in the area, but judged he had more than enough time to
go through Luis’s sanctum. He began with the computer. All the files were password protected, but there
were ways around those, the most obvious involving a search of the desk. On a  battered  notepad  shoved
far in the back center drawer he found a list of random letters and numbers, the top dozen crossed through.
He  typed  in  the  new  string  at  the  bottom.  The  computer  opened  up  like  a  flower.  He’d  have  been

suspicious over his ease of entry but for knowing Luis. The man was careful, but only up to a point. He’d
not taken Stephanie’s fears seriously. Had that cost them their lives?
Scowling, Richard tore through all the files in the hard drive, then one by one went through every disk he
could  find.  They  all  had  to  do  with  the  business,  and  Luis  was  a  good  businessman.  Even  without  the
necessity  of  disappearing  the  family,  Richard  might  well  have  hired  him.  All  the  work  was  up  to  date,
nothing neglected or out of place.
Next he tried the e-mail, which was somewhat more tricky when it came to passwords. Richard referred
to the string on the notepad and gained access by entering the last one backwards.
Interesting.
Except for some correspondence that arrived after five on Friday, the files were all empty. Most people
held on to old mail for one reason or another, but not Luis. His on-line address book was also clean. Had he
wiped that out or had someone done it for him? And if yes to either possibility, why?
Richard called up the undelete  function  and  tried  to  salvage  the  files  to  no  avail.  They’d  been  erased
beyond recovery. Damn.
The next search involved the office itself, inch by inch. The place was as clean  as  the  computer,  right
down to the emptied wastebasket. Richard thought it might be so and was  not  overly  frustrated  when  he
found exactly nothing. The only puzzle was the computer. A virus could account for the erasure, but more
likely Luis had done it himself. Had he a clue that something was wrong? If so, then why hadn’t he gone
home?
Richard attacked the keyboard and tapped out a note to Luis: Am in Dallas. Michael  is well and  safe.
Contact me. 
If Luis was alive and still had his laptop, he might check his mail. A long shot, certainly, but it never hurt
to be thorough.
Quitting the office, Richard went back to the lobby to see if young Ballard had made any progress. He
was seated in the kiosk, poring over the yellow pages, where he’d checked off a number of the listings.
“I called all the hospitals in the Metroplex,” he said. “None of the ER rooms had Luis Marcelja or a John
Doe of his description brought in since last night. Should I try the coroner’s?”
“Not yet.” Best to stave off official notice for as long as possible. 
“Sir, has he been kidnapped or something?”
“Why do you say that?”
“Well,  I  used  to  see  in  the  papers  about  oil  company  executives  getting  grabbed  by  South  American
terrorists. I thought maybe they’d migrated north.”
“The truth is I don’t know what’s happened to him. Yours is as plausible an idea as any I’ve come  up
with.”
“Or could he have embezzled from the company and be on the run?”
Richard smiled and shook his head. He came around the desk and took the second chair there to be eye
level  with  Ballard.  “I’m  going  to  fill  you  in  on  a  couple  things,  but  you  need  to  listen  to  me,  listen  very
carefully . . .”
The young man proved to be an excellent subject for hypnotic suggestion.
“The police or FBI or BATF will be turning up here sooner or later,” said Richard. “When they do you
will cooperate fully with them, but not bring my name into it. In fact, you’ve never even seen me. You can
refer them to Mr. Marcelja’s immediate supervisor instead, all right?”
“Yes, sir.”
“But if and when they turn  up,  you’re  to  let  me  know.  Leave  a  message  at  the  penthouse  extension;
here’s the number. If Mr. Marcelja comes in, you send him straight up there, no questions, then forget all
about it.”
Ballard, somewhat blank of eye, nodded.
That out of the way, Richard primed him to expect Bourland on Monday, leaving a note to that effect for
the weekday guard shift to find. Arhyn-Hill’s security did not normally have to deal with the residential side
of the complex, but an exception could certainly be made in the case of the company’s president.
As he left, Richard had to admit to himself, and not for the first or last time, that it was good to be at the
top of the food chain.
At  this  hour  of  the  afternoon  the  heat  of  the  day  was  in  full  force,  and  the  damned  compact’s  air
conditioning  had  yet  to  correct  itself.  Richard  sought  and  found  a  branch  of  the  rental  agency  and
exchanged the small disaster for something larger that functioned efficiently. He had some driving to do and
preferred to avoid bumping his head on the ceiling every time the road dipped. All the better as well to have

cold air blasting on him; it made up a little for the pitiless sun.
Despite the blocking lotion and hat, his face was quite red and sore by the time he reached Nick Anton’s
apartment in north Euless. Situated near the center of the Metroplex, it was an -excellent location for a man
with work calls in both Fort Worth and Dallas.
The apartments were respectable-looking, the grounds neat, but not expensively landscaped. The cars in
the lots indicated their owners to be average wage earners, with a few standouts at the high and low end of
the  market.  A  nearly  new  red  Corvette  nudged  close  to  a  rusted  and  decrepit  Nova,  the  two  vehicles
conjuring the image of an automotive Lady and the Tramp. What would their little ones be? In-line skates?
Richard peered about for the  block  numbers,  finally  locating  H-105.  The  corresponding  parking  slot
was  empty,  meaning  Anton  was  either  without  a  car—almost  unheard  of  in  Texas—or  gone  on  some
errand.
He levered out and strode quickly along a walkway. Anton had a ground floor flat by the  pool.  Only  a
few determined, sunburned teens were using it. The heat was too oppressive for anyone else. 
The  balcony  above  Anton’s  flat  made  a  shady  overhang  for  his  partially  enclosed  porch.  Richard
welcomed the relief, pushing open the iron gate, which shrieked protest. He paused. Anyone inside would
have heard it, a built-in alarm system, perfect in its innocent simplicity. Well, he’d not planned to sneak up
on the man, anyway.
He pressed the bell, but heard no noise of it within. He knocked, loudly. It was form only. He could get in
easily enough. The door had glass insets; it would require little effort to put his fist through one and unlock
the place.
“He’s gone for now, cowboy.”
A  woman’s  throaty  voice  drifted  down  to  him.  Richard  eased  out  enough  from  the  shelter  of  the
overhang to see the speaker. There was quite a lot  of  her  standing  on  the  balcony  above,  and  it  was  all
beautifully arranged under the cover of some very tight shorts and a halter top. From his low angle, her bare
legs seemed to go higher than Everest.
“Excuse me?” he said, forcing himself to look at her face.  Her eyes were hidden by sunglasses, and  a
huge mane of  blond  hair  balanced  precariously  above.  Several  tendrils  had  come  loose  and  clung  to  the
damp skin of her neck. She looked quite delicious.
“Nick’s gone to work,” she informed him.
“Oh. I was hoping to catch him before then. I thought he said he’d be here.”
“He says a lot of things. You a friend of his?”
“Not directly. Someone recommended him to me for a job.”
“What kinda job? A club?”
“Yes.”
“He might be too busy. He’s working a security gig with some guy, but the rest of the time he’s a regular
over at Bubba Rob’s. What kind of club?”
He smiled. “The kind he usually works at.”
She smiled back. “You looking for dancers?” She punctuated the question with a remarkable shifting of
her center of gravity, bending slowly at the hips to lean forward. The halter top proved to be a marvelous
marketing ploy, the ample goods within on tantalizing display. 
“Maybe.”
“I’d like to—um—put in an application.”
He reflected that Mae West would have been proud of the girl’s delivery of that line. “I’d be pleased to
accept it, but I’m in a bit of a hurry to find Nick. You said Bubba Rob’s?”
“Yeah.  He  might  not  be  there  until  later.  The  place  don’t  start  jumping  until  ten.  He  said  they  were
having some kinda party then.”
“They? Would that be his new boss?”
“I dunno; I guess. He works for a lotta different guys.”
“You’re good friends with Nick?”
She laughed, playing with a wisp of hair. “Not that good. Where can I get an application? I could fill it
out . . . right now.”
The girl has  a natural  aptitude  for  filling things  out, he thought. “If Nick gets the job I’ll  have  him
pass one on to you. I’m sure you’ll suit. You can carpool in together.”
She grinned. “Cowboy, you’re crazy! I like that.”
Not  much  point  in  searching  Anton’s  place.  The  girl’s  watchful  presence,  though  decorative,  was
inconvenient for any attempt at breaking and entering. He could adjust her memory to forget, but it wasn’t
worth the effort. He had the information he wanted. All he needed to do now was wait.

And find out where the hell Bubba Rob’s was located.
He retreated back to New Karnak, hiding from  the  furnace  blast  of  sun.  Texas  afternoons,  with  their
all-day buildup of heat, were near-intolerable to the natives, much more so  to  a  visitor  from  Toronto,  and
infinitely more so when he happened to be a vampire. Richard gladly shut himself in and stripped, soothing
his  flesh  with  a  tepid  shower.  He  ran  the  cold  faucet  only,  but  the  climate  was  such  that  even  the
groundwater was warm. How people survived here prior to air conditioning was a mystery to him.
His face was very red and itched, always a sign of sun damage. Much more and he’d have come out in
bloody blisters. He made an ice pack with a damp hand towel and pressed it to the worst spots, his cheeks,
nose, and chin, then phoned Sam. The receptionist, recognizing his voice, put him straight through.
“It’s me. How’s Michael?” he asked.
“Sleeping again. He’s in the back room with Helen watching.”
“Any sign of bad guys?”
“No more than usual for the neighborhood. Things are slowing down. I thought I’d close up and get us
out of here on time for a change.”
“Have you decided where to stay?”
“Helen has room at her place. And before you object I’ll follow her home and make sure no one follows
either of us. God, you’ve got me thinking like you, now.”
“It’s a good way to live longer.”
The doctor’s reply was muttered and not terribly edifying.
“Did you get Michael to eat anything?”
“Yes. He settled down a bit after you left, and Helen had some luck getting some fruit and peanut butter
into him. He drank some juice and water, so I didn’t have to do a drip on him.”
“That’s a good sign, isn’t it? His eating?”
“I’d say so. Give him some time, Richard. He won’t recover from this for a while, no matter how much
we want it.” After promising to call from Helen’s, Sam rang off.
Sam was right about recovery taking time, but unaware of a treatment  option  Richard  could  offer  that
was outside of modern medicine.
Sabra would be able to reach the boy’s mind . . . and heart.
She of all people could touch Michael’s damaged spirit and bring him real healing.
Where are you, my lady?
Richard  knew  she  would  be  well  aware  of  his  pain  and  turmoil.  As  far  away  as  she  was  in  her
Vancouver retreat, it would have lanced right through her, especially what had happened to  him  the  night
before. Her Sight would have disclosed the whole terrible ordeal  to  her  by  now.  It  was  an  awful  Gift  at
times, yet Richard could almost wish for it himself. Perhaps he then could have somehow saved them . . . 
No. He’d been down that road too many times before, and it always led to sorrow . . . or helpless rage.
He was in the here and now and must deal with things as they were, not as they should be. Learning that
aspect of life and fate and death had been his bitterest lesson.
To keep the past at bay, he flicked on the living room set and sought out CNN for distraction. He had a
feeling that the Addison explosion might be of  interest  to  them  and  was  not  disappointed.  It  was  the  top
story on their national report, containing the same helicopter views of the ruins he’d seen earlier. They had
more  details,  this  time  giving  the  name  of  the  home’s  owner,  Luis  Marcelja.  Amid  ground  views  of  the
house, they’d incorporated a shot of the body bags being carried out.
Richard made himself watch. And think.
The investigators would connect Luis with his job and be by Arhyn-Hill soon. If they took prints from his
office . . . well,  that  would  be  difficult.  Richard  had  wiped  down  everything  he’d  touched  while  there,
marring Luis’s by default. They might still turn up some latent prints, then run them through the system and
learn his real identity. If any of them were on the ball, they would know about brother Alejandro and have
their prime suspect. They’d put an alert out for him, for all the good it would do.
Had he been smart enough to stay out of the country for this? Richard hoped so. He would have the field
to himself, able to deliver hard justice without having to stumble over legitimate authorities. He’d have to go
to Colombia and track Alejandro down there: difficult, but absolutely possible.
Of course, much depended on the information Nick Anton would provide.
Bubba Rob’s Texas Nights was an upscale topless place, lots of lights in the parking lot, a huge sign with
more  lights,  a  marquee  to  announce  headliners,  and  plenty  of  grim-looking  muscle  roaming  the  area.  At
nine-thirty the lot was full and likely to stay that way. Richard parked half  a  block  down  in  an  annex  lot,

surprised that he didn’t have to pay for the privilege. He could have gotten valet service, but eschewed that
in favor of simplicity and a low profile.
With the sun gone, he was free of the encumbrances of his drover’s coat, gloves, and Stetson,  but  still
felt the heat as he strode toward the club. It was as though the concrete had absorbed it during the day so
as to vent throughout the muggy evening.
He’d dressed to blend: dark new jeans over his boots, a dark shirt, and bolo tie. Texas  chic,  though  he
had  a  sneaking  suspicion  he  looked  more  like  a  Jersey  tourist  than  a  native.  He  got  something  of  a
confirmation of this as he passed a couple of young women hanging about the front of the parking annex.
The dark-haired one flashed him a winning smile.
“Howdy, honey, you looking for some southern comfort?” she asked, her lazy drawl thick enough to cut.
Her blonde friend—so many blondes  down  here—smiled as  well,  waiting  for  an  answer.  Both  were
casually attired in tight, but not too revealing clothes and restrained makeup. The only obvious giveaway to
their profession  were  their  too-high  heels  and  oversized  handbags.  Fort  Worth  hookers  were  less  gaudy
than their Dallas sisters.
“Perhaps later,” he responded, and he meant it. The blood he had at home was fine for survival, but not
nearly as good as taking it fresh from a vein.
“We might not be here later, honey. Maybe you should stick around before the good times slip away.”
“I  could  say  the  same  thing.”  He  gave  them  one  of  his  charmer  smiles,  no  real  promise  implied,  but
sufficient to take any sting out of his refusal. “It’ll have to be later, though, sorry.”
“You just remember Gail,” she said as he walked on. “Like a tornado, but with an i.”
“I will.”
“And I’m Stormee, with two es,” added her friend, managing to drawl and sound breathless at the same
time.
What interesting weather they have here, he thought. And, lord, but he loved their accents.
He  reached  the  club’s  entry  without  additional  distracting  -delays,  paid  the  cover,  and  went  in  to  an
assault of lurid noise, light, and movement. A deep base drumbeat of recorded music provided a background
for  the  current  dancer  on  stage—yet  another  blonde—her  hair  swinging  free  as  she  went  through  her
routine. He spared her a scant second of attention, intent on getting his bearings first.
The layout of the place was fairly standard, but large. A long bar ran along the length of one wall, open
booths facing the center of the  room  took  up  another.  The  third  wall  accommodated  the  stage  area  and
runway, the fourth had doors leading to the rest rooms and business offices. The floor, crowded with filled
tables, had upper and lower levels so customers could enjoy a clear view of the performers. Hanging from
the  ceiling  was  a  Southwest  variation  of  a  mirror-encrusted  disco  ball,  this  one  shaped  like  a  saddle.
Vari-colored  spotlights  shot  sparks  off  it  as  it  slowly  -revolved.  Red  and  black  were  the  theme  colors
throughout, -accented with streamers of silver tinsel and  ribbons  meant  to  conceal  the  sound  system  and
other hardware. 
Damned little else was being concealed here.
Men pressed close to the stage, eyes upturned to a dancing fantasy of paradise. The dancer had several
bills tucked into her G-string and readily drifted over to any man looking to add to her collection. If she liked
him, he might be rewarded in turn with a brushing kiss, a smile, and some special dance gyrations just for
his  benefit.  The  men  here  weren’t  allowed  to  touch  back,  though,  which  made  this  club  rather  tame
compared to  other  such  establishments  Richard  had  seen  over  the  centuries.  The  intent  was  unchanged
through time, however, for here was the purest sort of relationship. It lasted exactly as long as the man had
money. Hopefully, both parties considered the trade of feminine attention for cash to be a fair and balanced
exchange. If not, then that was for the bouncers to sort out.
Richard found a place at the bar, paid too much for a beer he would never  drink,  and  began  a  careful
survey of the male -employees.  Nick  Anton,  from  the  statistics  in  his  description,  would  be  on  the  large
side. His file photo showed a full-faced man with jet black hair, a beard, and dead eyes. No shortage of that
type working here.
When a small table opened up, he took  it,  having  another  ploy  in  mind.  Girls  circulated  over  the  floor,
some doing lap dances, others sitting to chat with the customers, the unspoken objective being to get them
to buy more drinks. Richard ended up with a lady who seemed intent on doing both.
She was a slender, well-muscled redhead, her hair falling straight to her waist. Her lithe body was clad in
a  spectacular,  red  belly  dancer’s  costume  trimmed  with  gold  fringe,  jangling  coins,  and  bells.  Wisps  of
transparent red fabric accented rather than hid her figure.
“I’m Vashti of the Flaming Tresses,” she said, by way of introduction.
“You are indeed.” Had she claimed to be the Empress of Russia he’d have wholeheartedly agreed with

her.
“Would you like me to dance for you, or would you prefer another drink?”
“Both would be delightful,” he said with a nod of encouragement.
She shot him a wicked smile and caught the beat of the speaker music with her  hips.  They  seemed  to
function quite separately from her torso. Not just a girl in a costume, she knew her art and lavished a full
minute of it on him, more than enough to leave him dry in the mouth and craving more. Men  at  the  other
tables looked on, grinning, her presence enough to take attention away from the D-cup on the runway.
Richard obligingly tipped her with a large enough bill to compel her to linger for that drink. She ordered
an iced tea. Overpriced, of course. He stuck with his untouched beer.
“You’re very good,” he said.
“Thank you.”
“You’ve too much talent for this place.”
She shrugged. “Maybe, but the Renaissance Faires don’t pay as well. The local ones are through for the
season anyway.”
“You usually perform at those?”
“Sometimes, but it gets so hot, and I burn easily.” She pushed away a lock of russet hair, tilting her head
so as to better expose her milk-white neck with its dusting of freckles. “See?”
“Indeed.” God, but it was almost as though she knew exactly what to do to arouse him. 
“Yes, a nice dark club is the best place for me.” She fastened her gaze on him, oddly familiar in its force.
“You new in town?” 
“Not really. Trying to find someone who works here.”
“Anyone I know?”
“One of the bouncers, Nick Anton. He’s a big fellow.”
“They usually are. Yeah, we got a couple of Nicks here.”
“This one has black hair, maybe a beard.”
She pulled back, eyes narrowing. “You a cop?”
He laughed. “No. Just a businessman.”
“Then maybe you should talk to the manager.”
His turn to fasten his gaze on her. “I prefer your company. Is Nick here tonight?”
Vashti caught her breath, rocking back slightly. “Wha . . .”
He repeated the question, stepping up the pressure. 
“I . . . I . . .” She shook her head sharply, fighting it. “Hey, who the hell are you?” 
That was unexpected. She should have been under by now. Instead she glared right back at  him,  eyes
blazing and guarded. He found he could not get through to her again.  Not  drunk,  could  she  be  on  drugs?
They would make her resistant to—
“Listen, I don’t want any trouble from you,” she stated, her voice low. An ordinary man wouldn’t have
been able to hear her above the blast of music. “Let’s  just  be  a  couple  of  ships  passing  in  the  night  and
leave it at that—no collisions. No complications. Okay?”
So that was it. “Yes, absolutely. I apologize for the presumption.”
She gave him a long look, apparently sizing him up. “Accepted.”
“Thank you.”
It was enough to mollify her. “It’s an easy enough mistake to make. Doing that stuff with  them  is  one
thing, but not your own kind. If it makes you feel better, I didn’t know about you either.”
He  grinned.  Encounters  with  other  vampires  were  rare.  He  wondered  what  breed  she  might  be.
Probably not of his blood, else he might have sensed a kinship. “You were trying for me?”
“Sure, why not? Big healthy guy like you could spare a bit of the fresh for little old me.”
Feeling flattered, he raised his undrunk beer. “To might-have-beens?”
She smirked and tapped her undrunk tea glass against his mug. They then set  both  containers  back  on
the table. “You weren’t trying for me, though, were you?” she asked.
“Regrettably, no. I really am looking for Nick Anton. Is he here?”
“Why do you want him?” 
“It’s about a job.”
“What kind of job?”
“You said you wanted to avoid collisions.”
She snorted. “Yeah, right. He’s here, but in the private party room in the back. They won’t let you in.”
“They?”
“One of the boys is on watch at the door. It’s invitation only. Lots of big spenders with grabby hands. I

was invited but didn’t like their energy. They look like Mob, but not as polite.”
“You could handle them.”
“Too much trouble. Besides, it’s harder when they’re drunk. You know that. I like it out here where the
house guys keep an eye on me, and I can pick and choose who I want to be with.”
By that she meant whom she chose to feed from. “Understandable. Where’s this party?”
“Take a left at the rest rooms, door at the end of the hall.”
“Thank you.” He made to stand, but she put a hand on his arm.
“Ladies first. It’ll look better, and it’s good for my ego.”
He liked her style. “No problem.”
“And  one  thing?  Be  careful  with  them.  They’re  dangerous.  Even  for  someone  like  you,  they’re
dangerous.”
“Someone like me?”
“Like us.”
“Throwing in with me against them?”
“Your energy tells me you’re a good guy. I like good guys.”
“I try.”
“You don’t discount that kind of stuff, do you? Auras and things?”
“Never. It’s a useful gift to have. Thank you for the warning. Professional courtesy?”
“Something like that. As one bloodsucker to another.” Vashti of the Flaming Tresses winked, flashed her
delightfully wicked smile—with just a hint of her retracted fangs showing—and gracefully rose, bangles and
bells  making  their  own  music  as  she  undulated  away.  Seconds  later  she  was  at  work  on  another  man,
presumably someone who could provide her with more than mere cash to keep her well nourished for the
evening.
Ships in the night, indeed. I wouldn’t mind docking at her port.
When the next dancer took her place on the runway, Richard quit his table, heading toward the rest room
area. Its arched opening led to a short hall containing better lighting, a phone, and a moderate respite from
the noise. At the end of the hall was a red door with Private painted on in silver. Before it stood a large slab
of a man with absolutely nothing better to do than watch the comings and goings of the patrons. He wore a
loose tan sport coat, warm for the weather, but excellent for hiding weapons. 
Though lacking in Vashti’s gift for reading an individual’s -energy, Richard could  tell  at  thirty  feet  that
the fellow would not be readily persuaded to allow in a party crasher.
Not by ordinary means, anyway.
Richard walked up as though he had a perfect right to be there. The man shifted slightly, the movement
reminiscent of a boulder settling itself more firmly in the earth. But all boulders could be budged—providing
one had the right sort of lever. 
Fortunately, the lighting was sufficient, and the man conscientious enough not to drink while on duty. A
moment of quiet talk and he obligingly held the door open to let Richard pass through.
“Forget you ever saw me,” Richard told  him,  by  way  of  a  -final  order,  getting  an  affirmative  grunt  in
reply.
He  stood  in  a  dim  antechamber.  Loud  music,  drunken  whoops,  and  laughter  beyond  another  arch
indicated that the party was in full swing. Richard stepped forward, using the cover of an artificial ficus tree
to delay notice of his presence. Through the silk leaves he saw a rousing orgy in the making. It  reminded
him of the goings on at the old Hellfire Club, but with fewer clothes to remove.
Booths lined three walls, the center of the floor given over to dancing. All the dancers were topless, and
several of them were clad only in high heels, some jewlery, and a smile. He wondered where they stowed
their tips. The men getting lap dances had seemingly  forgotten  the  no-touching  rule,  and  one  couple  who
had  slipped  under  a  table  was  in  desperate  need  of  a  hotel  room.  Though  more  than  enough  to  get  the
whole club closed down, apparently the money going to the management made the risk worth it.
Richard scanned each man’s face, looking for  Nick  Anton  among  the  crowd  of  thirty  or  forty.  In  the
bouncers  there  was  a  preponderance  of  shaved  heads,  tattoos,  goatees,  and  sloped  shoulders.  The  low
lighting wasn’t much of a hindrance, but it was erratic as it flashed in time to the music, making it hard to
focus. Figures writhed in the gloom, or sat transfixed by the dancing or by whatever booze or drug they’d
taken.  The  heavy  sweet  smell  of  pot  was  on  the  air,  along  with  that  of  regular  tobacco.  The  restless,
too-bright eyes of some indicated there was plenty of coke to be had as well.
All the better for him, there was less chance of any of the guests noticing . . . 
Time stopped. The hubbub of the party went still and faded. A frisson of pure shock struck him almost
as solidly as a fist. Richard blinked, but what he saw remained firmly in place. He  gaped,  disbelieving  his

luck, then with an internal lurch accepted it as a gift from a benevolent Goddess.
Right in the middle of the drunken and  drugged  mob,  like  a  king  carousing  with  his  sycophantic  court,
was Alejandro Trujillo.
Chapter Ten
Richard’s first instinct was to surge forward, grab him by the throat, and gut the bastard bare-handed. The
impulse, all fire and ice, roared over him. It felt good, but he could not give in to it, and made himself ride it
out until he could think again. 
Alejandro was unaware of his doom standing a scant few yards from him. He was grinning, enjoying a
joke from the naked girl seated next to him, a half-smoked cigar in one hand, his other on the girl’s  thigh.
His shirt was open, and the way things were proceeding it wouldn’t be long before his pants went the same
way. 
It’s a victory party. He’s celebrating their deaths. 
The sounds and movement of it abruptly resumed again in Richard’s perception. He stalked slowly into
the middle of it, heart pumping hard with pure rage. He went straight to the girl, gently touching her arm to
get her attention. She paused in her laughter to look up, saw his face, and blanched. He gestured for her to
leave. Not understanding the why of it, but clearly relieved to be excused, she boosted from her chair and
tottered off, amazingly quick on her six-inch heels.
Richard  took  her  seat.  Alejandro’s  expression  was  a  study  in  puzzled  fury  for  the  interruption.  He
brought himself under swift control.
“What do you want?” he asked. No need for the preamble of demanding this stranger identify himself;
any man making such an approach would always want something.
“Do you know who I am?” Richard asked in perfect Spanish.
Slightly  older  than  his  brother,  Alejandro  bore  a  sibling’s  likeness  to  Luis,  but  his  good  looks  were
dissipated,  his  expression  remote,  stony.  He  could  smile  and  laugh  as  heartily  as  the  next  man,  but  the
humor would never reach his shark’s eyes. They were hooded over now with supreme caution. He raised
his hand -lazily. The people nearest to them  drew  back  and  several  men  materialized  in  their  place.  The
brassy music continued, but the dancers faltered in their gyrations.
“I don’t think  it  matters  who  you  are,”  Alejandro  replied.  “You  do  not  belong  here.  I  will  ask  you  to
leave.”
“Not if you are a wise man.”
“Indeed?”
“A wise man knows the face of his enemy.”
“And how have I offended you to make you my enemy?”
“You breathe. That is offense enough.”
“I’m sorry you feel that way. You will be too, I expect. Very soon.”
“As will you. For Luis.”
That shot home. Alejandro’s eyes flickered. “I know many named Luis.”
“But only one you may call brother.”
“What is your business with me?”
Richard  made  no  immediate  answer,  putting  forth  his  concentration  to  snare  Alejandro’s  will  and
subjugate  it  to  his  own.  “I  want  you  to  listen  very  carefully.  What  I  say  is  important  to  you.  Your  life

depends on it.” 
Alejandro  had  had  drink,  quite  a  lot,  but  the  words,  the  soothing  tone  were  having  their  effect.  He
blinked, eyes just beginning to glaze.
“You must tell me where Luis is. That’s the most important thing in the world to you now.”
“I . . .”
“Yes,  you  know  where  he  is.  You  must  tell  me.”  Richard  felt  the  veins  in  his  temples  pulsing  as  he
pressed matters. “Where. Is. Luis?”
“He’s . . . he’s . . .” Alejandro wavered, fighting it.
“Where?”
“You—you’re the one who . . .”
Richard kept his voice even and low. Velvet persuasion. “Never mind that. Tell me where Luis is.”
His breath came harsh, sweat popped on his brow, but Alejandro could not pull away. He raised his arm,
weakly, like one drowning.
“Tell  me.”  Someone  slapped  a  hand  down  hard  on  Richard’s  shoulder.  He  continued  without  pause.
“You must tell me. You will tell me. Where is Luis?”
“No . . .”  Alejandro won his struggle, his head jerking to one side  as  though  to  avoid  being  struck.  He
nearly fell from his chair, but one of his men caught and steadied him. It was a general signal to the others
to do something.
They hauled Richard up and back. He recovered himself in an instant, but they were fast. More hands
grabbed his arms, fists pummeled his body. He shook off two men and felled two more.  Three  took  their
place, hampering each other, but eager to get in on the kill.
Something slammed against the side of his head. It was meant to be a fatal blow, but only slowed him.
He punched backward reflexively, his elbow connecting  with  a  skull  to  judge  by  the  bruising  impact  that
shot  up  his  arm.  A  gun  was  shoved  in  his  face.  He  batted  it  away,  breaking  bones,  and  tried  to  force
himself through to Alejandro, who was retreating toward the door, yelling orders.
Richard felt a terrible shock in his back, level with his right kidney; his legs suddenly gave out. The lot of
them toppled, their combined weight pinning him to the floor. He tried to shoulder his way from under the
pile, but could not. Then he couldn’t move at all. He lay dazed and inert, his mind tardily concluding some
minutes later that he’d suffered another strike to the head, this one decidedly effective. Somewhere above,
his enemies caught their breath and discussed what to do with him.
“Who is he?”
“Man, I need a doctor.”
“Gonna kill that mother—”
“What was that shit about Luis?”
“Goddamn fucker . . .”
“Man, I’m bleeding, gimme some help here . . .”
“. . . busted my arm.”
“Enough! Shut up!” Alejandro. Very much in charge. They subsided. “You—put that damn thing away.
You think they would not hear a shot?”
Richard was turned over. His eyes refused to focus properly. He winced against the spin  of  too-bright
lights  and  the  flesh-colored  blobs  that  were  people.  His  primary  sensations  had  to  do  with  lack  of  air,
bruisings, and an appalling burning in his back.
A blurred face came near, scowling. “It is you. I thought you were in— How in hell did you get here?”
“Who is he, boss?”
“Never mind.” Alejandro snapped. “Everyone out! The party’s over. Move! Now!”
A  general  shuffling  took  place,  accompanied  by  muttered  questions  or  grumbles  at  the  fun  cut  short.
Soon the room was cleared of all but a few of the crowd. Richard dimly recognized the oversized form of
Nick Anton among their number.
Alejandro nodded at him. “You and your men, get this bastard out of here.”
“What do you want us to do with him, sir?”
“What do you think? Get rid of him.”
“Permanently?”
“Of course. And make damned sure you do not leave a trail—of any kind. If this comes back to me you
are dead.”
“Yes, sir.” Anton was apparently unfazed by his employer’s threat. “What about the manager?”
“I will make it okay with him. You do this.”
Not one to waste time, Anton directed two of his people to see to Richard.  He  was  roughly  lifted  and

carried through a side exit. He registered the change from cool, smoke-filled air, to muggy outside air. Most
of his attention was on the bonfire in his back. He belatedly recognized the distinct pain of a knife wound. It
had gone deep. He’d be a little while recovering—if they gave him the chance. 
They won’t.
The  men  dropped  him  onto  the  hot,  gritty  concrete.  One  went  off  to  get  a  car.  Two  remained.
He’d  never  have  better  odds  and,  given  his  condition,  two  against  one  were  more  than
enough.
Anton bent close, one hand holding an odd-looking knife. The thing was half a yard long with a viciously
sharp Damascus blade, some sort of a custom job. He wiped the flat of it against Richard’s shirt to clean
the blood away, straightened, then apparently slipped it into his pants pocket. He must have removed or put
a hole in it to allow him access to whatever hidden sheath he had strapped to his leg.
Once the knife vanished, Richard abruptly came to  life,  seizing  Anton’s  ankles.  The  big  man  was  just
stepping away, and his forward momentum worked against him. He cursed and  tried  to  right  himself,  but
came crashing down, hands barely cushioning his fall. 
His friend had time to turn and react, aiming a kick at Richard’s face.  He caught it with his hands and
twisted hard, throwing him severely off balance. The man gave a hoarse yell of pain, not only for his jolting
hit to the ground, but for his greenstick fracture.
Anton  was  quick.  That  long  knife  magically  reappeared  in  his  hand,  and  he  made  his  thrust  just  as
Richard  was  getting  to  his  feet.  The  blade  caught  him  across  the  back  of  his  right  knee,  slicing  easily
through the tough denim to bite the flesh. He grunted as his leg caved. More fire  shot  through  him  as  he
dropped and rolled, trying to gain time.  Anton  followed  with  a  backswing,  but  Richard  dodged  it,  moving
awkwardly.
He pushed upright, but could place no weight on his  leg.  Anton  charged  in,  death  in  his  face;  Richard
dove under his guard, tackling him.  It  was  like  trying  to  bring  down  a  well-muscled  refrigerator.  He  just
barely  managed,  landing  on  top.  Seizing  his  slim  advantage,  he  smashed  a  fist  into  Anton’s  jaw  with  as
much force as he could summon. The man stopped fighting. Thank God.
The second one was too busy moaning over his injury to do anything. Good. Richard used the pause to
assess his own damage. A bad wound in his back, yes, but starting to ease.  His knee was far worse;  the
bastard had hamstrung him. He’d not felt anything like this since swords had gone out of fashion. Keeping
as immobile as possible, he put pressure on the vein to keep from bleeding to death  before  he  healed,  his
breath made short and shallow by the pain. He’d had worse, but it was still a bitch to get through.
The car was on its way. A third man inside, possibly more. Certainly well-armed.
Damnation. He was too vulnerable and weak for any chance of success against them. If he  called  for
help, the club bouncers patrolling the outside would either throw their lot in with Alejandro’s men or  bring
police, medics, and other unwanted complications. Richard despised the idea  of  retreat,  but  saw  no  other
alternative.
His bad leg dragging, he crawled toward the darkness edging the boundaries of the club and prayed the
hunters had no flashlights.
He found brief cover between two cars. It felt like the knife was yet cutting him with each jarring move,
but he kept going, not daring to stop. He got over a curb into a patch of dried-out scrubby grass littered with
empty beer cans and broken glass. A neglected lot between buildings. It stretched on for several yards, the
grass growing higher with distance, until interrupted by the thick posts  and  crosspieces  of  an  old  wooden
fence. He scrambled toward it, hearing activity behind him. The car had arrived. Men clustered about the
fallen.
They’d start casting about for him and would not easily give up. Alejandro had no tolerance for failure.
Richard made it to the fence. The crosspieces were  set  very  close  together,  making  it  almost  easy  to
climb, but they were shoulder-high. The landing on the other side was singularly unpleasant. He bit off a cry
and had to waste a precious moment before the agony released him enough to move again. To his dismay,
he  found  himself  trapped  in  a  small  enclosure.  A  cattle  pen.  From  the  look  of  age  and  neglect  on  the
weathered fencing, it’d not been used in decades, a relic from the city’s early years when beef on the hoof
was money in the bank and this area was a true stockyard, not a tourist trap.
Though decrepit, the enclosure was  yet  strong  enough  to  keep  him  in  place.  The  overgrown  patch  of
iron-hard ground within offered no concealment. He crept to the opposite side, not  wanting  another  climb
and drop, but found one of the lower slats was cracked across. He  broke  through,  gaining  another  dozen
feet of distance between himself and pursuit. 
The next pen was in even worse repair with part of one side gone. The  opening  led  to  a  narrow  alley
running  between  sections.  Here,  long  ago,  cowboys  could  drive  the  cattle  in  single  file  -toward  the

slaughterhouse.
“He went this way; Hub tol’ us—not over there!”
A man’s voice, unexpectedly close, froze Richard. He had the visual advantage  at  night,  but  it  was  of
little use when he couldn’t stand to see.
“Hub  also  tol’  us  Nick  nearly  chopped  his  leg  off,  so  no  way  could  he  climb  that,”  another  man
countered. “He’ll be along here, not in that mess.”
“Then you tell the boss.”
“No way.”
The first man clambered up to survey the area.  He had a flashlight. Richard rolled against the near side
of the fence, face into the dust, pale hands under him, hoping his dark clothes would blend with the general
gloom. He went absolutely still.
Was it fancy, or did he actually feel the beam of the light playing across him?
It danced and flickered along the fencing, making harsh shadows. Confusing ones, he hoped. He held his
breath, listening for the least sound of movement from the hunter. 
The man was thorough, his search lengthy. Richard’s time  sense  distorted  as  the  minutes  stretched  to
infinity. He forgot his pain in the waiting.
“Aw, hell.” The voice of defeat. The man jumped down—on his own side—and trudged off.
Richard sagged, sweating with relief, but remained in place. They might decide to swing back. At least
this forced respite offered him a chance to heal.
And thirst. He’d bled quite a lot from both wounds. He swallowed dry, his throat aching.
They kept at it for twenty minutes, twice coming his way. There  was  some  argument  about  searching
the pens. Most were reluctant to venture in. They paused, uncomfortably near, their voices carrying well in
the motionless air.
“Place’ll be fulla rats,” said one. “Or snakes.”
Now they tell me, Richard thought.
“Nah, they’s a lotta cats get dumped here; they eat the snakes,” came another.
“All they gotta do is miss one. Ain’t worth it to me to step on some rattler what got missed.”
“You gonna say that to the boss’s face?”
“Don’t matter to me; I ain’t gonna say it. Not worth it to do this.”
“Huh. Don’t like playing with the big boys?”
“Nope. Grabbing some ass inna titty bar is one thing, but chasing down some fucker who should be dead
is another. I saw Nick stick him. Where he got it, he shouldn’ta got up again, but he did, an’ he got away
after decking Nick and Hub. That ain’t anybody I wanna meet out here inna dark. What about the rest of
you? Think it over.”
They did. One by one, they departed. Richard thankfully marked their retreat as they crunched their way
over the trash in the lot.
The threat of rats and snakes aside, he decided to remain a while longer. The burning in his leg and back
was beginning to cool. It meant recovery, but was tedious. So bloody . . . damned . . . tedious . . . 
He jerked awake, disoriented and strangely cold. He peered at his watch. Past midnight. He’d been out
that long? Or that short? With the damage he’d suffered he could have lain unconscious until dawn.
With great caution, Richard slowly got up, using the fence to keep his balance as he tested his leg. It hurt
like hell, but he could walk—make that limp—on it. Shivering, he made his way along the alley until finding
a break in the pens that allowed him real escape. 
From the look of the buildings fronting the lot, he judged himself to be just a little south of the club. His
car would be close by, just off the main street.  All  he  had  to  do  was  avoid  drawing  attention.  Not  easy,
given the state of his bloodied and torn clothes.
God, but he was thirsty. 
The walk was not  amusing.  The  new-healed  tendons  were  stretched  tight  and  diabolically  sore.  Each
step over  the  uneven  ground  was  needed  physical  therapy  for  them,  but  it  was  much  too  soon  to  press
himself. And it was all his own fault.
Damn  it,  why  had  he  charged  in  like  that?  He  could  have  waited  for  a  better  moment  to  take  out
Alejandro. 
But  the  sight  of  that  bastard  laughing,  enjoying  himself,  positively  gloating  over  his  success  had  been
beyond endurance. -Richard accepted that he was far too emotionally involved for common sense to rule,
but that had been pure insanity.
And yet in reproachful retrospect, given the time to think, he knew he’d do the same thing again. Richard
would  not  have  been  Richard  if  he’d  stood  by,  stoically  marking  time  until  a  reasonable  opportunity

presented itself.
Had Alejandro not been so drunkenly resistant to hypnosis, the whole business would have ended  quite
differently.  He’d  been  sober  enough  to  eventually  recognize  Richard,  though.  Disturbing,  that.  Was  the
New Karnak sanctuary compromised? 
Alejandro would have been well aware  of Luis’s job at Arhyn-Hill, but Richard kept a very low profile
there. Some of the employees had heard of him, but his name wasn’t listed on any company directory. One
of the reasons he’d chosen the job for Luis was its lack of an obvious connection.
Ingrained caution dictated that he not underestimate Alejandro’s resources. 
A desire to conclude things dictated that he turn this possible breach in his defenses to his advantage.
All I need do is go home and wait for him to find me.
Not the best of strategies. But then he was hardly at his best right now. Later—he would plan something
out later.
The  pavement  resumed  behind  the  buildings,  beginning  with  an  access  drive  for  delivery  trucks,  the
lighting  sparse.  He  hobbled  across  to  an  alley  that  led  to  the  brighter  areas  of  the  main  street  and  the
parking annex. The eateries were closed or closing, the shops dark, only the bars showed  activity.  And  a
police car was parked right in his path opposite the alley mouth. They’d see him going to his car, and at the
moment he certainly looked to be a highly suspicious character.
He paused well back in the narrow space between aged buildings. Hidden by shadows, he leaned against
the indifferent red brick, wearily wishing the officers would take themselves elsewhere before he collapsed.
Then he came abruptly alert, sensing another presence nearby. Just a few paces ahead he made out the
form of a petite woman pressed into a doorway set in the opposite wall. She was also keeping a wary eye
on the patrol car, shifting uneasily on her too-high heels, waiting for it to leave.
Well,  well.  If  it  wasn’t  Gail  like-a-tornado-but-spelled-with-an-i.  Her  blonde  friend  Stormee  was
nowhere  in  sight.  Perhaps  busy  with  a  customer.  Gail  was  losing  business  with  the  cops  in  the  way.
Perhaps he could amend that.
“Hallo, Gail,” he called in a soft low tone, hoping she wouldn’t run away. “Remember me?”
She gave a violent start, whipping around to peer into the general darkness. “Who’s that?”
“It’s all right. We met earlier. Stormee was with you.”
This reassured her. Slightly. “An’ who’re you?”
“Just a lonely man looking for some southern comfort.” He noticed she had a small object ready in one
hand. Pepper spray. In her line of work a girl couldn’t be too careful.
“Why you hiding?” she demanded.
“I got into a scuffle tonight, and those policemen might wonder why my clothes are in a less than pristine
state. I’d just as soon avoid official notice, if you know what I mean.”
She chuckled once, relaxing somewhat. “I sure do, honey. You said you were lonely?”
“Exceedingly so. You may recall that I was too busy earlier.”
With a quick look over her shoulder at the car, she cautiously stepped across to him. “You got some time
now?”
“Oh, absolutely. Do you think we could come to some mutually advantageous arrangement?”
“Depends what you want, honey.” Gail gave him a hard look, for all the good it did her  in  these  dense
shadows. “An’ I’ll tell you first off I use protection no matter what you want. You don’t like that, then too
bad.”
“Not at all. I quite approve.”
A big smile. “Then we should get along just fine.”
“This is hardly the place, though.”
“Yeah. If one of those cops decides to take a leak, it could get embarrassing. Come over this way.” Gail
took his arm. He tried to disguise his limp, but she noticed anyway. “You hurt?”
“Not much. You should see the other fellow.”
A short laugh. “You men. Get a drink, have a fight, get laid.”
He had to agree. In his fifteen hundred years’ observation of human nature, nothing much had changed
about  that  particular  male  ritual.  He  planned  to  shortly  modify  the  ordering  of  the  pattern  for  himself,
though.
“Jeez—are you all right?” Her voice rose with alarm.
They’d come to a  place  with  light,  the  outer  nimbus  being  sufficient  to  reveal  his  severely  disheveled
condition to her. She gaped exactly one second at the dirt and blood and turned to run.
He caught her just in time, lifting and hauling her back. 
“Lemme go!” Her voice was climbing to a full-blown shriek. Before she could vent it, he clapped a hand

over her mouth and pressed her to the building to minimize her struggles. He did not want to do it this way,
but had no other choice.
She brought up the pepper spray. He was expecting that and took it from her.
“Just hold still,” he whispered, trying to catch her gaze.
Her  eyes  were  wild  and  staring,  flushed  with  fear  and  anger.  She  fought  as  best  she  could,  kicking,
clawing, screaming under the pressure of his hand. Very little noise of it came out.
“Gail, it’s all right, I’m not going to hurt you.”
She’d heard that one before, to judge by her frenzied reaction, and  why  not?  Didn’t  killers  and  rapists
always make such empty promises to their victims?
He had to get her attention, to put a quick end to her terror. Toward that goal, he gave her a good shake,
not so much as to snap her neck, but enough so she’d know that he was very much in charge. With her feet
dangling a foot off the ground it was easy for her to take the point. “Be still,” he ordered in a no-nonsense
tone.
He got an anguished look from her. 
Eye contact. All he needed. 
He focused the whole of his will upon her. “Hush now and listen to me. I won’t hurt you. Listen to me,
Gail . . .”
Fear could be almost as potent as alcohol as  an  impediment  to  hypnosis.  She  had  strong  resistance  to
suggestion, and did not readily accept his soothing  persuasion.  Some  of  them  were  like  that,  especially  if
they were on guard to start with, so he never forced the issue if he could help it. Much better for them both
that he take what he needed from a willing woman, much simpler, much easier on his battered conscience.
He kept at her, counting each moment that she did not try to bolt as a victory, until at long last she went
under and truly relaxed. Her desperate fight forgotten, she stood quietly—waiting and oh, so willing. Thank
the Goddess for large favors.
His velvet soft words to Gail now had the effect of foreplay. He caught the gradual change in her scent,
heard the quickening of her breath. He would never tire of it, never. She soon lifted her face to him as she
would to a lover, wearing a smile of pure trust, eager, with demands of her own. 
Southern comfort, indeed.
Some crates had been left stacked by a delivery  entrance.  He  sat  on  one  to  rest  his  leg,  drawing  her
toward him. 
Richard hungered, but took time to kiss her ardently, his hands roaming her body, not restraining it. She
responded in kind with an expert’s skill, her touch making him hard with need. He lifted her easily onto his
lap. She giggled, wrapping her legs around him, pressing her hips and breasts close.
His corner teeth budded. He wanted her, wanted to  strip  the  clothes  from  her  well-muscled  body  and
thoroughly lose himself  in  her.  She  offered  love  and  solace  and  release  from  his  cares  and  griefs.  Only
momentarily, though. It was ever thus with all of them.
Damnation.
He’d have liked nothing better than to be able to properly take her, to really make love with her. But this
was not the time or place. He had to hurry, to feed his  hunger  rather  than  his  desire.  Not  fair,  but  often
what  he  had  to  settle  for  when  circumstances  were  unfavorable.  In  instances  like  this,  the  lady  always
came out ahead of him in pleasure.
But not too far  ahead, he thought, nuzzling the taut skin of her throat. He bit  down,  holding  her  tight.
She made a long, gasping cry at this, then another as the first rush of blood left her. He drew strongly on its
healing fire, so different from  the  burn  of  injury.  The  red  heat  instantly  relieved  his  countless  aches  and
bruisings. It was miraculous stuff. His wretched hunger fled; his torn flesh painlessly renewed.
Gail murmured  something,  arching  strongly  against  him.  For  a  second  he  thought  she’d  resumed  her
struggles,  then  realized  she  was  climaxing.  Her  whole  body  shuddered  in  reaction.  It  was  quite  lovely,
holding her as he was, feeling what was happening to her, knowing he’d brought it about. He drank deeply,
drank until she finally wilted with exhaustion. 
He pulled away, the small wounds he’d made still bleeding a little. He kissed them clean until they closed,
then  inspected  her  face.  Her  eyes  were  half  shut,  drowsy.  She  would  sleep  very  well  tonight.  Perhaps
she’d  feel  light-headed  for  a  day  or  two,  but  nothing  more  serious  than  that.  Good.  He’d  promised  he
wouldn’t hurt her and preferred to keep his word. 
As for those very visible marks on her sweet neck . . . well, the blood donation story would not suit. This
time the blame must be placed on insect bites. The ruse went over rather better in Toronto, for even Texas
mosquitoes were no match to their -Canadian cousins when it came to size and sheer viciousness.
Richard primed Gail with that  unlikely  explanation  after  wiping  the  reality  of  their  encounter  from  her

conscious memory. He substituted a more mundane one in its stead, then raided his  wallet.  Knowing  that
she  might  not  be  recuperated  enough  to  work  the  following  night,  he  was  generous,  covering  whatever
earnings she’d lose, and putting an extra hundred on top. He felt badly for having scared her so much at the
beginning.
No trace of fear from her now as they strolled back to the alley. They were able to continue on to the
sidewalk, for the patrol car was gone.
“You  look  me  up  again  sometime  soon,  honey,”  she  drawled  as  he  crossed  the  street.  His  limp  was
nearly gone. “That’s Gail—like a tornado . . .”
“But with an i,” he finished amiably. “I won’t forget.”
Richard went back to the club.
He was in no presentable state to be allowed inside, but did not plan a direct approach. He parked in a
handicap space, killed the motor, but left the headlights on, blinking them several times. This was sufficient
to catch the attention of one of the door bouncers, who sauntered over. He came close, bending to peer in
the open driver’s window.
“Can I help you?” he asked.
“I hope so,” said Richard. “I’m having a problem with my contacts.”
“Oh, yeah?”
He vaguely gestured toward his face. “I think one them slipped down but I can’t feel anything. The light
here is really bad.”
“Why don’t you put your dome on?”
Richard gave a self-effacing laugh. “It’s a rental, I can’t find the damn control.”
“Might be on the steering wheel.”
“Really?”
He leaned closer to point. “Try that one.”
The dome came on, bright enough to work with. Richard caught the man’s attention. “Would you look at
my eye? Maybe you can see the lens. It’s rather hard for me.”
The man looked. After a long, still minute, Richard had him. He instructed him to find the manager and
bring him out.
“Tell him it has to do with the large private party that left earlier. He should understand.”
“Okay.” The bouncer departed, pushing past his fellows at the door, obviously on an errand with no time
to waste.
Richard watched and waited, refusing to allow his hopes to rise.
Presently, a dark-haired man in an  open-neck  white  polo  with  the  club’s  name  stitched  on  the  pocket
emerged. The bouncer pointed out Richard’s car to him. He came around to the driver’s side, too.
“Yes, sir?” He possessed the grim, tired expression of one who expects the worst of people and usually
gets it.
“You’re the manager who dealt with the host of the private party?”  He  did  not  think  Alejandro  would
have used his real name.
“Yes, sir. I’m Mr. Forestieri. I spoke to Mr. Gonzalas earlier. Is there a problem?”
“No. Mr. Gonzalas wanted to arrange another party, perhaps for next week.”
“We may be booked. Why don’t you come to my office? The schedule’s there.”
“No need to trouble yourself, if you’ll just listen to me very closely . . .”
Forestieri proved to be a bit less of a challenge than the bouncer. It took only half a minute to hook him.
He obligingly got in on the passenger side. Richard had many questions. Unfortunately, the answer to them
all was “no.” Forestieri only knew Trujillo as Gonzalas, had no address or  number  for  him;  the  party  had
been paid for in cash. Lots of it.
“Who made the arrangements?” Richard asked, exasperated in spite of himself. He’d known this foray
would probably not have a payoff. “You had to have talked to someone.”
“Nick Anton set it up for him.”
“When?”
“Last week.”
That far back? Alejandro had been quite confident of success, then. “Anton was the only go-between?”
“He came in with the deposit for the room and  entertainment.  He’s  done  that  before  for  this  guy  and
others.”  Forestieri,  once  started,  had  no  trouble  imparting  information;  the  problem  was  finding  anything
useable in it.
“How often has Gonzalas been here?”

“Couple times a year.”
“Where do you think he gets his money?”
“Oh, he’s in drugs, anybody can see that.”
“It doesn’t bother you?”
“Money’s money. He don’t deal on the premises.”
No, just  shares  in the bounty  and  bribes  you  to not notice,  he thought, the sights and smells  of  the
private room still fresh in his memory. “Where’s Nick Anton tonight?”
“I dunno. Maybe with Gonzalas. The guy likes to have plenty of muscle around him. It’s a status thing.”
“Who would know where to find Gonzalas?”
“I  dunno.”  Forestieri  stared  at  the  dashboard,  indifferent.  His  clothing  stank  of  cigarette  smoke  and
sweat.
“Someone here must.”
“I dunno.”
Richard held his temper in check. “Then you  will  go  out  and  ask.  Talk  to  every  girl  who  was  at  that
party; talk to anyone who had anything to do with it or Anton. I have to know where Gonzalas is. Go.”
Forestieri  left,  beginning  his  questions  with  the  men  at  the  door.  One  and  all  shook  their  heads  or
shrugged. He went inside. -Richard cut his lights and ran the air to clear out the stink. After  that,  he  had
nothing more to do but stare at the club entry for the next hour.
Forestieri returned. What he imparted was a collection of conflicting stories of where Gonzalas might be
staying.  The  guesses  ranged  from  a  prim  bed-and-breakfast  in  Weatherford  to  several  swank  hotels  in
Dallas,  to  a  private  mansion  at  an  unspecified  location.  There  wasn’t  even  that  much  speculation  about
Anton, as he didn’t talk to fellow workers about his jobs outside the club. Little wonder.
Richard gave Forestieri his cell phone number. “When you next see Anton, Gonzalas, or anyone in that
group or find out where they are, you will call me, no matter what the time. You will not  speak  of  me  to
them or anyone else. Is that clear?”
The reply to that, of course, was “yes.” It made a change, at least.
Nick  Anton’s  Euless  apartment  was  dark  at  this  late  hour.  -Richard  moved  quietly,  eschewing  the
squawking gate, climbing over the porch wall instead. His instinct told him the place would be empty, but he
had to be thorough.
His leg all mended, he landed lightly, crept to the door, and pressed his ear to its glass panel. His shadow
would show against the closed blinds on the other side, but at this point he didn’t care.  He’d welcome the
chance to engage Anton in a short, violent conversation. That would be extremely satisfying.
The door had a deadbolt as well as a regular lock in the knob. Richard’s burgling tools were at home, and
he didn’t fancy the noise of breaking glass as an announcement of his presence to the other tenants.
Perhaps the would-be dancer in the flat upstairs might have a key to Anton’s place. She seemed to know
more about his doings than his coworkers.
She was also, alas, popular. Not at home to Richard’s knock. Either working or on a date. Or both.
He gave up this trail for the time being. Anton probably wouldn’t be back for hours, if at all.  He  could
even still be out cold from the fight.
Cheering thought.
Richard  headed  east,  swooping  into  his  slot  in  New  Karnak’s  parking  garage  just  after  two-thirty.
Weariness  enveloped  him  the  closer  he  got  to  his  refuge.  When  the  elevator  doors  slid  open,  he  was
mentally prepared to go straight to bed.
Two messages were on his machine. 
Bourland  had  phoned  some  six  hours  earlier  to  give  his  flight  number  and  when  he’d  be  arriving  on
Monday. He’d sorted out the details for Michael’s travel as well. The boy would go back with  him  when
the time came. 
“There’s one other thing,” he added. “I’ll be telling the police I’m  Stephanie’s  uncle.  If  they  think  I’m
next  of  kin,  it  will  make  the  process  easier—and  yes,  I’ll  have  papers  to  prove  that  if  -necessary.  My
coming in will draw police attention to me and thus to you. I’ll stop at your place, but it’ll be better if I take
a -hotel room before I contact them. Call me if you’ve any news.”
Considerate  of  him  to  be  so  cautious.  Richard  wondered  what  explanation  Bourland  would  give  to
account for his knowledge of the murder victims ahead of  anyone  else.  The  media  had  not  released  any
names yet, pending  notification  of  family.  Not  to  worry,  the  man  was  wily  and  charming  as  a  cat;  he’d
smooth things over.
Dr. Sam left the second message. He announced that he and Helen had arrived safe at her home, gave

the address and number and said that Michael’s condition was unchanged.
“If he doesn’t start to snap out of it tomorrow, I’m going to hunt down a specialist. That’s not a threat,
it’s a necessity, so get used to the idea.”
Sam was an easy subject for suggestion, but surprisingly forceful about getting his own way when it was
important to him. It always had to do with the care of his patients.
Very well, so be it.
Richard stripped on  his  way  to  the  shower,  once  more  carefully  trashing  his  ruined  clothes.  Damn  it.
He’d liked those jeans.
When he emerged, the night scrubbed from his once-bruised body if not from his spirit, he stopped cold,
halted by an eerie, insistent sound. It was like a baby’s cry, meant to get attention.
The awful déjà vu stole the blood from his face and strength from his limbs.
His computer was flashing the letter S. It had the same program as the one in his Toronto home.
Stephanie? 
No. Utterly impossible, though an instant of hope had split through him like lightning. More likely this was
an emergency call from another friend in desperate need.
He groaned inwardly,  approaching  the  computer  as  though  it  were  a  bomb,  and  tapped  in  the  access
code.
The message that came through floored him.
This is Luis. Phone me. Please.
Chapter Eleven
He called the number, a local one. It rang only once before -being picked up. Silence on the other end.
“Luis?”
“Richard?”
“Yes, it’s me. Where are you?”
“Thank God. Oh, thank God.”
He got the impression of Luis crumpling with profound relief. “Where are you?”
“He got them. He got them all.”
“I know. Where are you?”
But  Luis  was  unable  to  answer,  choking  into  tears.  He  was  not  that  weak  of  a  man,  but  this  was
probably  the  first  time  he’d  been  able  to  speak  to  anyone.  A  severe  reaction  was  only  to  be  expected.
Richard waited him out, quelling his impatience before it turned into anger.
“I—I’m sorry,” Luis finally whispered. “I just—just . . .”
“It’s all right. Tell me where you are. I’ll come fetch you.”
“What?”
“I’m in Dallas. I know what’s happened. Where are you?”
Luis stumbled out an address and general directions to a roadside motel near Plano.
“I’ll be there in thirty. Get ready to leave.”
He got a meek, tired reply in the affirmative. 
Richard dressed fast and shot down to his car, then pushed and repeatedly exceeded the speed limit. He
pulled  into  the  motel’s  lot  five  minutes  early.  The  place  was  an  ugly,  no-frills  model,  its  two  stories
overlooking only the freeway. It was a cut above a fleabag, but a very narrow slice. Richard drove slowly

now, the window open. 
A man broke away from where he’d been hiding next to a bank of soft drink machines, rushing over. He
was in a rumpled dark suit, tie gone, clutching a leather laptop bag to his chest like a life preserver. He went
straight to the passenger side and ducked inside. Richard gunned them away.
Luis sank down in  the  seat,  his  eyes  shut.  His  face  was  flushed  and  sweating;  he’d  been  drinking  to
judge by his breath. Quite a lot, apparently.
“Have you been there all this time?” Richard asked.
“Mm?”
“How long were you at that motel?”
“Since this afternoon.”
“Where before that?”
“My car. I drove around. I didn’t know what to do. My car’s back there . . .”
“Leave it; you need to disappear.”
A bitter laugh. “That does not work so well. God, Stephanie tried to tell me something was wrong.”
And you  didn’t listen. But voicing reproach would help neither of them now. “Tell me what happened
when you left work Friday.”
“Friday?”
“You didn’t go straight home after work. Where were you?”
“I had an appointment. I was looking at a horse for Stephanie. Her birthday present. The man and I got
to talking; we had some beers. I called home to let her know I’d be late, left a message. I thought she’d just
taken the kids out for pizza. When I phoned later, I got a recording that said the line was out of service. So
I left. When I got there . . . it was gone, they were gone.”
Luis spoke like a robot, dead-toned, dead-faced, then broke down, trying to stifle his  sobs.  He  couldn’t
speak, struggled to master himself. Finally he opened the laptop case and pulled out a nearly empty bottle of
brandy and drained the last inch from it.
Richard understood the feeling. He’d want to get drunk, too. “Then what did you do?”
“I don’t remember much. I drove. I don’t know where. I drove for hours, was afraid to stop. Spent the
night  in  the  car  at  some  truck  station  south  of  the  city.  Heard  the  news  report  on  the  radio.  It  felt  like
everyone was looking at me. I kept seeing Alejandro’s face.  My own brother. I never really believed he’d
do it, maybe kill me but not my woman, not my children.” He was out of liquor, but tried to take a pull from
the bottle anyway. He didn’t seem to notice it was empty.
“Then what did you do?”
“Drove some more. I was tired. The motel looked okay. They took cash in advance, and I used a false
name.”
“Why didn’t you call the police?”
“Alejandro. He’d have people looking for me to do just that. He knows how to buy people; he can buy
anything he wants, even death. No place is safe from him. You said we’d  be  safe.  How  did  he  find  us?
Where the hell were you? Did you tell him?”
That  would  be  the  booze,  grief,  and  anger  doing  the  shouting.  Richard  waited  until  the  momentum
faltered. “Don’t be foolish, of course not.”
“That bastard. I will kill him. Somehow, I will kill him for this, for everything.”
“Do you know where he is?”
“If I did, I would not  be  here.”  Luis  slumped  even  lower  and  went  silent.  He  remained  so  until  New
Karnak came into view, then sat up, full of alarm. “We can’t go here! He will know this is where I work.
This is where he will look for me!”
“He won’t find you, I promise.”
“No! Let me out! He will have people watching this place!”
“Then don’t let them see you. You’ll be safe once we’re inside. Get below the window line.”
“You’re crazy.”
“Luis, please do what I say.”
Luis responded less to Richard’s soft order and more to the fact that he had no choice in the matter. He
cursed and grumbled and slouched low, remaining that way even after Richard parked and got out. He held
the elevator door.
“All right—now.” 
Luis scrambled over, head down as though dodging a bullet. “This place is not safe. It can’t be.”
“Alejandro will be looking for you to return to your office, not my flat. He doesn’t know about me.” Not
the truth, but Luis didn’t need to hear everything just yet. He did need reassurance and another drink. He

wasn’t  thinking  straight,  and  the  sooner  he  got  thoroughly  numbed  into  sleep  the  better.  By  morning  he
might be useful.
In the harsh light of the elevator he looked worse than bad: two-day beard stubble, the whites showing all
around his red-rimmed eyes, the air of defeat. Rest would help, but not cure him.
The door hummed open, and they stepped into the penthouse. It was as Richard had left it: no intruders
lurked in the corners. Richard went to the bar and cracked open a fresh bottle of brandy from the store of
assorted bottles in the cabinet. He always kept a supply for guests. He poured a triple and handed it to Luis,
who took it without comment and drank.
He’d  never  been  up  here  before.  He  looked  around  incuriously  until  spying  the  framed  photo  of  his
daughters on the desk. Then he turned away. “I’m sorry.”
“For what?”
“You hurt, too. I forgot that.”
Richard motioned at the couch. “Sit down. I’ve some good news for you.”
He didn’t sit so much as back into it, then drop. “Good news? How?”
“Michael is alive.”
“Michael . . . ?” Luis shook his head. “What? But how? The place was leveled.”
“I found him hiding in the pump house. Just a few bruises. He’s safe with a doctor now, getting first-rate
care.”
Unlooked-for hope flooded Luis’s face, replacing disbelief. “Where? What doctor? Take me to him!”
“In the morning.”
“No! Now! I must see him!” He dropped his glass and boosted up, trying  to  cross  to  the  elevator,  but
was too unsteady on his feet. He bumped into a table,  nearly  sending  it  and  himself  over.  He  caught  his
balance just in time and stood swaying.
“Luis, he will be asleep; waking him up will only frighten him.”
“He needs his father; he won’t be frightened of me.”
“That won’t be a good idea just now.” Not in your condition, my friend.
“What do you mean?”
“He was very traumatized. I think he saw  everything  that  happened,  and  it  put  him  into  some  kind  of
shock. He’s not been able to talk—”
“Then I must go to him.”
“In the morning, first thing.”
“But—”
“Look at yourself. Charging in the way you are now will -upset him even more. He needs to know that
his father is calm and in control of himself. When adults can’t control their emotions, it frightens  children.
His world has been turned inside out; because of that you have to be strong for him.”
“I can be calm.” There was an edge in his tone.
“You’ll be more convincing after you’ve slept. Clean up and get some rest. You’ve  both  been  through
hell. Show him it’s possible to survive.”
Luis framed his head with his hands, pressing hard on his temples. “How is it possible? Everything was
fine yesterday. And now . . .”
Richard understood that all too well. He’d seen it far too -often. “One hour at a time, then one day at a
time, no more.”
“I don’t know if I can stand it.”
“You will. For Michael you will.”
“Yes.” But his voice was dead. “Did he say anything to you at all?”
“No. He’s cried a little, but he doesn’t speak. The doctor will  be  finding  him  a  specialist  if  he  doesn’t
wake out of it soon. He’ll need special care no matter what.”
Luis took a step forward, seemed to think better of it and sank into an armchair. “And you found him? How
did you come to be there?”
“I got an e-mail SOS from Stephanie early Friday morning. Like the one you sent me tonight.”
“Yes,  she  taught  me  how  to  do  that  when  we  moved  here.  Made  me  memorize  the  code.  For
emergency. I didn’t think to use it until tonight when I saw the motel had an access. I didn’t know you were
already here.”
“I flew straight down.” He’d not known that Stephanie had confided the code to Luis. Until now it had
been his own private gift to her. For all the good it had done. “Just what disturbed  her  enough  to  call  for
help?”
He spread his hands. “Little things. The stable door was open one morning. I thought one of the kids did

it. There were two hikers in the fields once. She said they hung about all day as though watching the house.
That bothered me a bit, but only because I thought they might be burglars, so I just said to take extra care
about the locking up. We each had a pistol in case of trouble. I was not worried. I wish I’d listened to her.”
And I, too. “She told me to come to the house after dark as usual, but by then it was too late.”
“How too late?”
“They . . . were gone by then. I arrived hours too late.”
Luis looked steadily at him. “What did you see? Tell me.”
“They’d been shot. It was quick. They could not have suffered. They likely never knew what hit them.”
“Stephanie . . . was she . . . ?”
Richard instantly interpreted the unfinished question. “No. No one touched her.”
“A  small  mercy  from  a  man  who  knows  none.  An  oversight,  I’m  sure.  The  news  said  it  was  an
explosion, but you saw them.”
“I was in the house, yes. I looked for you and Michael, then I smelled the Semtex. It went up just as I
got out.” Best to keep the truth short and the rest unsaid. Richard wished his own memory could be revised
or at least softened.
“A wonder that you are alive.”
“And you as well. I believe Alejandro’s hit man was watching from cover and  was  waiting  for  you  to
come home. He mistook me for you and set the place off.”
“My God.”
“But I got clear, and he totally missed Michael. Alejandro is not all-powerful.”
Luis shook his head, not ready to believe that.
“Tell me—why did you erase all the e-mails on your office computer?”
“What?” The subject shift confused him. He had to hear the question again. “You were in my office?”
“I was trying to find you. I noticed those files were deleted. Why?”
“I always delete everything at the end of a day. It means I’ve dealt with all the work. I don’t leave until
I’ve cleared it out.”
“Your address book was clean, too.”
“That I did later—at a coffee house.”
“They had a phone line for that?”
“A public computer.”
“At a coffee house?”
Luis shrugged. “It is a modern age. The young people go to such places.  I was afraid Alejandro might
somehow find the addresses, make trouble for the people, so I deleted that to be safe.”
In the midst of his grief,  Luis’s  survival  skills  had  tardily  kicked  in.  There  was  hope  for  his  recovery,
after all.
“Richard—have you spoken to the police?”
“Not yet.”
“Why not?”
“I don’t want them to know about me.”
“They need to know who to look for. You can tell them.”
“That’s already happening. Philip Bourland is helping.”
“God, I forgot about him. I must call him. I should have called him before now.”
“After you’ve slept. He’s made arrangements to get Michael to Canada. He can do the same for you.
We’ll make sure Alejandro never finds you.”
“How?”
“Because he will be dead.”
Luis almost smiled. “Again—how?”
“I’ll find a way.”
“You  are  a  clever  man,  Richard,  but  even  you  do  not  have  the  resources  to  cut  down  someone  like
Alejandro. Many have tried.”
“If there is a chance to kill him would you have me pass it up?”
“No, of course not. But I could wish to be the  one  to  do  it.  He  is  not  my  brother.  He  is  less  than  an
animal. I would blot him out and pray God he burns in hell forever.”
“Amen to that.”
Luis’s head drooped suddenly. Between the drink and the  glut  of  emotional  stress,  he  was  overdue  to
collapse. 
“Come on, you need to sleep.” Richard stood.

“But this place is not safe.”
“You won’t be staying here.”
“Where, then?”
Richard went to the desk and drew out another magnetic key from one of the drawers. “I’ve a special
retreat within the building. It’s not fancy, but you won’t be bothered there; no one else knows about it.”
Mystified,  Luis  slowly  followed  Richard  into  the  elevator.  He  swiped  the  key  through  the  slot  and
pressed the penthouse button five times. They went down one floor. The doors opened again to darkness.
The air was circulated by the building’s climate  system,  but  had  that  stillness  peculiar  to  lack  of
occupancy.  Richard flicked on the lights. It was a small room, fitted  out  like  a  studio  apartment,  with  a
folding sofa bed and kitchenette. The two other doors, he explained, went to the bath and the one-way fire
exit. From the slanted window there was a view of the Dallas skyline in the distance through the half-closed
blinds.
Richard drew the heavy drapes. “You’ll be fine here for the night. If you need anything, come upstairs
for it. I’m afraid there’s no food here—”
“It’s all right. I’m not hungry. What is this?”
“A bolt-hole I arranged some time ago. Access is only through the elevator. You can leave, if you must,
through the fire exit, but you can’t get back in again that way.”
“Why do you even have it?”
“Why not? In my line of business I never know what might happen. It seemed a good idea to have a safe
haven, so I had this place fitted in while the building was being  refurbished.  None  of  the  tenants  know  it
exists. It’s sound-proofed so you won’t hear each other.”
Luis almost smiled again. “This is wonderful. Quite brilliant.”
“It serves.” 
Richard  showed  him  the  sequence  again  on  the  elevator  button,  opened  up  the  bed,  and  wished  him
good-night.
“But should you not stay here as well? To be safe?” Luis asked.
“I’ve work yet to do. Come up in the morning. We’ll go see Michael then.”
“God bless you, Richard,” he blurted, just as the elevator door slid shut.
Past four in the morning and there was no sleep in him.
This must be what coffee does to people.
Luis’s appearance had stripped away all Richard’s fatigue for the time being. There was hope  for  him
that Michael would respond to his father’s presence. They would find out tomorrow.
In the meantime, Richard knew he’d only pace restlessly and be  quite  useless  here.  He  had  to  be  out
doing something, and one unfinished errand readily presented itself.
Along with the usual hammer, pliers, and screwdrivers, he had a collection of unorthodox tools in one of
the kitchen drawers. In  a  thick  plastic  carry-case  was  a  fine  selection  of  lock  picks;  in  another,  a  glass
cutter, tape, and some very sticky putty. Most burglars these days just kicked in the door to grab what they
wanted; Richard had more subtle skills.
Traffic was thin on his drive back to Euless. That would change in a very short time. He did not relish
the prospect of facing the bright dawn on the return trip, pocketing more sun block against it. He’d lost his
Stetson during the fight at the bar and had rummaged in his closet for a replacement. All he found was  a
black baseball-style hat with “Black Hat Productions” stitched on the front in black thread. A forgotten gift
from  a  friend.  It  would  have  to  do  when  the  time  came,  and  would  likely  make  better  cover.  Half  the
casually dressed men in the state wore such hats.
Nick Anton’s complex was not stirring yet as Richard pulled in and parked, though lights showed in flats
belonging  to  early  risers  and  insomniacs.  He  crossed  the  lot  to  the  walkway,  eyes  and  ears  alert  for
observers. There were none as he again slipped over the wall onto Anton’s porch.
The place was well shadowed and he very quiet as he worked on the locks. The doorknob one was no
problem, but the dead bolt took longer, snicking loudly as it reluctantly surrendered. For a man in his line of
work, Anton should have had better quality stuff.
Richard listened hard before entering, mindful that the place might be unexpectedly occupied. It was with
both relief and chagrin that he determined it to be empty. He  expected  that,  but  had  Anton  been  there  it
would have simplified his  task.  A  few  direct  questions  were  much  better  than  an  hour’s  search  through
someone else’s life.
He made sure the blinds were shut—there were no curtains—then flicked on a light. Anton had all the
basics, but with an expensive, oversized TV and VCR. A large collection of action  movies  and  porn  was

piled hodgepodge into a bookcase that had never  seen  a  book.  His  reading  matter  was  limited  to  picture
magazines, their subjects consistent with his taste in films, and scattered throughout the small flat. Richard’s
initial scrutiny confirmed to him that the man lived like a pig and this foray would take time.
He began with the wildly untidy mess surrounding the kitchen phone, home to business papers and bills.
There  was  no  address  book,  but  lots  of  business  cards,  old  and  new,  matchbook  covers,
cocktail  napkins,  anything  that  would  take  a  scribble.  Many  were  not  readily  identifiable,
consisting mostly of phone numbers and first names, usually of women. The business cards were almost as
obscure, the matchbooks coming from various clubs and bars. The more important ones were attached  to
the wall by thumbtacks, or slid in between the wall and corner molding of a cabinet. Among them was one
for Bubba Rob’s Texas Nights.
There was a thick notepad with more numbers and reminders to buy foods and household items. Richard
tore  off  the  top  sheet,  then  confiscated  many  of  the  business  cards,  taking  most  of  the  top  layer.  An
inconvenience, perhaps, to Mr. Anton, but Richard did not think the man would live long enough to discover
his home invasion.
Not if I get hold of him for five minutes.
The answering machine blinked patiently. Richard found a pen, ready to take down anything useful.
Three  of  the  messages  were  from  women,  two  from  men.  The  ladies  had  only  personal  matters,  it
seemed, and  did  not  leave  numbers.  One  man  was  obviously  a  bill collector,  the  other  was  rather  more
oblique.
“I saw the news. You may tell our employer that I wish to cordially sever relations with him, so don’t call
me again.”
No self-identification, no number. He spoke clearly, with precise diction, but possessing a trace of local
accent, clearly expecting Anton to know him. Richard listened again to memorize the voice. The answering
machine had a caller ID trace attached, but nothing came up for this particular message. The  man  at  the
other end either phoned from a public booth or had countermeasures in place. 
His statement  was  cryptic,  but  given  Richard’s  unique  viewpoint,  a  possible  meaning  presented  itself.
The “news” might mean the excessive media coverage of the Addison explosion. If so, then the “employer”
could be  Alejandro.  The  man  was  taking  a  chance  quitting  him.  Severance  benefits  tended  to  be  rather
violent and final in certain types of work.
A  second  go-through  turned  up  nothing  more  of  interest.  The  mine  was  exhausted,  but  he  counted
himself  slightly  ahead  for  these  few  vague  leads,  which  he  would  soon  look  into  on  the  computer.
Tomorrow, after reuniting father with son, he could investigate Jordan Keyes. Richard hoped he’d prove to
be a better source of information on Alejandro, else he’d have to  camp  out  in  Anton’s  grubby  apartment
against his return.
?????????????
Dawn was just starting to become a real annoyance. He’d forgotten his sunglasses  and  was  half  blind
from the glare as he drove  to  cover  under  New  Karnak.  He  squinted  and  tried  to  rub  away  the  pulsing
afterimages from his vision. No good.  He  needed  darkness  and  rest.  A  few  hours  of  both  could  be  had
before Luis woke up.
Richard tapped the elevator control more from memory than sight, thought about making a quick check
on Luis, then dismissed it. No sense in startling him awake, if he was even capable  of  waking.  He’d  had
enough booze to knock him out for a goodly time.
The door hummed open; out of habit, he listened, mindful of the threat of Alejandro  tracking  him  here.
His eyes began to rapidly adjust to the gloom.
He went alert. He’d not shut the lights off before leaving.
The likely thing was Luis had returned, looking for food or more brandy or for Richard and  had  turned
them off. Likely, but now was not the time to make assumptions.
He kept a gun in the bottom drawer of the desk, a Colt -revolver bought decades ago. It was still there,
loaded with wadcutters. The rounds would not easily penetrate the walls, being designed to create havoc on
flesh instead.
He pushed away the small voice that said he was being too paranoid. He could deal with feeling foolish
after he’d ascertained his caution was for nothing.
He sniffed the air, catching a slight difference from the usual  filtered  stuff  from  the  vents.  Booze  and
sweat. Traces left behind by Luis. He sniffed for Semtex, thankfully not detecting any.
Listening, he focused on the least little sound for a full two minutes before relaxing. If someone was in
the apartment, he’d have heard their heartbeat by now and most certainly their -breathing. 
Lights still off, he eased over to the guest room and made a quick turnaround of it, the bath, and closet,

then did the same for the kitchen. Last was his own bedroom. 
Should anyone be hiding, this would be the best place, but they’d not be able to see him in the dark. His
night vision was fully restored by now. He pushed the door open with his foot, all his senses forward.
The universe began to break down into separate little bits of data: the door’s slight resistance to his push,
a strangely familiar, but quite incongruous, click and thump . . . 
. . . something slamming violently into his chest. 
He staggered from the force of it, the breath knocked from him. He fell with a grunt, strings cut.
Fire in his chest. The horrific burst of it stunned him flat. He gasped for air. A  terrible  weight  pressed
him down, squeezing the life from him. 
His hands flapped frantically against something . . . in . . . him. Slender, like an arrow, but not as long. It
had  missed  his  heart,  but  only  just.  He  obeyed  his  first  instinct,  wrapping  feeble  fingers  around  it.  His
strength was going fast. He’d have but one try.
No breath to scream as he tore it free.
He lay inert, unable to move, waiting for the roaring aftershock to subside. He could just manage a little
air, keeping it slow, shallow. Any more and he might cough. He had enough pain without adding to it.
After a few awful moments he sensed a gradual fade in intensity as his body slowly healed.
Shot. But by what?
In the dimness of the room he made out the shape of a camera tripod. What was mounted on it explained
the familiar out-of-place—and out-of-time—sound: a crossbow.
What the hell . . . ?
He was recovered just enough to reach up and claw at the light switch, getting a clear look at the booby
trap. It was beautifully set—simple, but lethally effective. The tripod was a heavy model with extra weights
attached to the legs to add to its stability, allowing it to hold the crossbow firmly in place. A length of what
looked to be thin fishing line or piano wire ran from the crossbow to the inside doorknob. The door swinging
fully open pulled the no-doubt-sensitive trigger. Whoever set the trap could safely exit the room so long as
he didn’t open the door too wide.
It was fixed at the right level to take out a man of Richard’s height.
Jordan Keyes. His file had him linked with just such an exotic weapon.
Too bad for him and Alejandro that I survived.
Richard pushed himself up  with  an  effort.  It  felt  exactly  like  he’d  been  kicked  by  a  very  large  angry
horse. He’d been shot before by the damned things; depending on the bolt’s point they usually left a much
larger, bloodier wound. Not that this one was minor. There was quite a mess on the rug.
He opened his shirt and gingerly checked his chest. Blood there too, but no bleeding and . . . glass? He
brushed tiny shards of it from his skin. The wound was closed and tender, but not as painful as it still should
have been. It was less healing and more like numbness. 
He found the bolt. The tip was odd, with a sliver of broken glass where metal should be. He sniffed for
some trace of whatever liquid had been inside, but it was obscured by his own blood.
At least, I think I survived.
His head suddenly felt like it’d been stuffed with cotton, his limbs going heavy.
Poison. If the bolt doesn’t kill, the poison will.
He had to dilute it. Quick.
His legs barely responded. He shambled to the kitchen like a drunk, reeling against the walls for balance.
 
He dragged open the refrigerator door, his hands clumsy and trembling as he scrabbled in the vegetable
compartment for one of the blood bags.  He  tore  it  open,  slopping  some,  then  drank  it  straight  down.  He
reached  for  a  second  bag,  but  his  legs  gave  out.  Gravity  seemed  to  pound  him  into  the  floor.  His  arms
refused to move.
The only light came from the refrigerator;  the  door,  swinging  to  close  itself,  bumped  against  his  body.
Cold air flooded down on him.
The weight returned to his chest. 
Curare. He uses . . . 
The stuff had already attacked his voluntary muscles, now it was paralyzing the rest. Breathing became
more difficult. His heart throbbed painfully, struggling against—
Then he no longer drew any breath at all. 
His heart pulsed on for a few faltering beats.
He felt the exact instant when it ceased.
He lay inert, a live brain in a dead body, consumed with panic as it sent frantic  orders  to  unresponsive

flesh.
He couldn’t even blink his eyes. Nor move them. 
Strange black outlines edged his blurring field of view.
Then the universe simply shut down.
Chapter Twelve
The Beginning, Ten Years Later
Winter lay heavy on the land, like guilt on the head of a sinner. Snow covered all the great tor of the Isle of
Apples;  drifts  taller  than  a  tall  man  could  reach  buried  its  base.  The  surrounding  fens  had  frozen  solid;
anyone with a mind to do so could walk across dry-shod like the Children of Israel.
Nothing moved on this dim dawn, though. It was too cold for even the woodcutters to venture forth. The
sun  hardly  dared  to  show  itself  and  wrapped  up  in  clouds  even  as  the  shivering  folk  below  wrapped
themselves in blankets.
Richard drew away from the narrow window, pulling the shutter in and securing it. He let fall over the
opening the thick woolen flap that was meant to cut the draft. Cold air came in regardless. A large brazier
crackled with flames in the center of the round stone chamber where  his  servants  huddled.  Away  to  the
side were the horses, dozing on their feet, lending their warmth to the gathering. Until he got quite close to
their circle he could see his breath hang in the air. The fire made most of the light, though some of the pale
gray sky was visible through the smoke hole in the thatch above.
Several skins of wine had been passed around in an attempt to find another kind of warmth. The morning
meal had come and gone along with whatever work that had to be done. All were content to sleep the day
through until time for the evening prayers and meal and then sleep again.
As would I, if sleep would come to me. 
Of late, true rest was not an easy thing for Richard to achieve, yet weariness saturated him to his bones.
Even the blood he supped on failed to rouse him for long from his lethargy. He’d departed from the king’s
court after that last tourney, claiming he’d been called to retreat from the world  for  the  good  of  his  soul.
None had hindered him. Those with eyes to see had noticed the change in him. Some  rumored  it  was  du
Lac’s impossible love for the queen that made him leave. Others loyally maintained it was his dire wounding
that had caused his withdrawal from all court life. Though he’d recovered miraculously quick, they said he
still bled in his heart.
At first, he’d gone to the lands granted to him by the king for his service. There, Richard had a fine keep
of his own filled with rich furnishings, men, and weapons, the surrounding farms growing bounty enough to
support all. He stayed there, alone, shunning the company of his fellow lords.
Sabra had tried to console him.
But . . . he shunned even her.
And then she’d departed, and he was truly alone.
He left his private chambers only at night to stalk the  fields  and  forests  like  a  lost  ghost.  Any  hapless
wanderers who happened to see him, pale of face, grim in aspect, clad wholly in black, crossed themselves
and fled.
The  comforts  of  his  own  hall  brought  no  succor.  After  the  harvest  was  in,  stored,  and  allotted,  he

gathered a company of servants to see to his needs and took to wandering. He pitched his tent near a road
or in a fallow field, or sheltered in some abandoned villa left by the Romans, never staying in one place for
more than a few days. When his presence was noticed by the local lord, he would courteously decline the
offered hospitality and move on.
He thought the passage of time would lessen his pain, but contrariwise, it only seemed to increase.
For the Goddess had betrayed him.
His servants, long used to his habits, took little notice when he  went  to  bed  an  hour  after  dawn.  They
placed a smaller brazier of coals in the curtained-off area he claimed for his own and withdrew. One of the
girls was curled in the bed to warm it and await his pleasure.
Today it was Ghislaine, ripened now  to  a  comely  woman.  -Richard  climbed  in  next  to  her,  pulling  the
covers almost all the way over their heads. She burrowed against him, sighing with contentment. Her firm
flesh pleased him, a little, but he was not hungry, having supped the day before.
“Why do you smile?” he asked, once they’d settled.
“ ’Tis nothing, my lord.”
“I can see ’tis something and naught to do with me.”
“I mean no offense, my—”
“And none has been taken, unless you deny me your reason to smile.”
She hesitated, then yielded. “I’ve a small happiness of my own, I think. The next moon will tell  me  for
sure.”
“You’re with child again?”
“I think so, the Goddess willing.”
In the years from their first meeting she’d borne two  children,  both  of  whom  had  died.  “And  this  is  a
happy prospect to you?”
“Yes.”
“How so is it happy?”
“It just is, my lord.”
He could  see  none  of  it.  In  the  short  hours  that  he’d  known  fatherhood,  he’d  felt  only  shock,  regret,
agony, and grief. Since that time he’d felt little else but anger, which he held carefully in check. 
Why did Ghislaine not feel the same? Had not the Goddess taken her two babes before they’d lived even
a year? And now she longed for a third chance to add to her sorrows.
“Know you the father?”
She giggled briefly. “Of course I must know him, else I’d not be this way.”
He was in no mood for jest, but she did not notice, so diverted was she by her own thoughts. “If the babe
lives we may marry, if my lord permits.”
If it lives. So, she was aware of the possibility of loss. “And if the Goddess takes this child from you?”
“We may marry anyway. ’Tis not good to be alone. He’s a fine strong man. His get will also be strong,
I’m sure.”
How do they endure it? 
Richard had been in this changed life for only a  decade  and  already  felt  impossibly  removed  from  the
rest of humanity. To him, their lives seemed short and shallow as they toiled one day to the next, starving or
feasting, living and dying, accepting such as their lot with few complaints, for that was the  way  of  things,
and it would ever be so.
I will live on, they will die. But how they waste their little lives! Their world is so small, they’re  like
farm animals with speech. Can they not see themselves?
Ghislaine made bold to caress  him, smiling her woman’s smile.  “Does  my  lord  wish  to  be  pleasured?”
she whispered.
What he wished for was a lifting of the blackness from his heart. Even Ghislaine with her sweet body so
willingly given could not do that. All that stirred within him now was despair and impossible loneliness.
“Sleep, child,” he said. “Sleep and dream of heaven.”
If she was disappointed by his reply, she made no show of it, obediently lying down again. Perhaps she
expected some attention  from  him  later  to  make  up  for  it.  True,  he  could  go  through  the  forms  of  love,
mount and ride her to fulfillment, but would mock himself from beginning to end for his emptiness of spirit.
He lay still, holding her, until her breath lengthened into that of slumber. How he envied her that  kindly
rest. He’d not truly slept in months. He continued well in health; the blood he took kept him so. Would that
it could as easily heal his soul.
When he thought he could move without waking her, he slipped from the bed  and  dressed.  Gooseflesh

plucked  at  him,  but  he  hardly  felt  it.  I must  be  as  cold  within  as  the  world  is  without.  But  to  avoid
comment, he covered and cloaked himself,  then  quietly  left.  Though  it  was  odd  that  he  be  up  and  about
during  the  day,  his  drowsing  people  had  long  grown  used  to  their  lord’s  silences  and  night  rambles  and
hardly stirred as he passed them.
The knife-sharp air made short work of his heavy finery, cutting its way into any careless opening. Well,
a good walk would cure the chill and, he hoped, utterly tire him out.
It was hard going through the drifts. There were some paths trodden through this small village, though no
one had used them much in the last few days. Richard’s party had arrived just in time to shelter from the
coming snowstorm in a hospice the nearby church maintained for travelers. It was a relic from the Romans,
old now, but kept in repair. No one knew what they  had  used  it  for;  it  could  have  been  anything  from  a
temple for one of their gods to a granary.
The sun was well hidden, but the light still pained his sensitive eyes. He’d heard tales about how certain
wild men of the north knew how to keep  the  snow  glare  from  blinding  them.  They  had  a  secret  way  of
masking their faces, or was it just their eyes? No matter. Richard had nothing but his hood for protection. It
would have to be enough.
In the distance he spied the humped shape of a church on a rise and set out for it. The village  was  an
important one to have such a structure. That it was so close to the Goddess’s sacred tor  was  interesting.
The two faiths could work together if their believ-ers tried even a little, but there were zealots on both sides
that frequently prevented it, or so Sabra had said.
No. I’ve no wish to think of her today.
He did not wish it, but it happened. Often. Not an hour went by that she did not hover in his thoughts or
that her name came to his lips. Sometimes, when the black despair all but consumed him, he thought he’d
see her standing quietly in the deepest shadows, her beautiful face marred by that same sadness. Her arms
would be stretched toward him, as though longing to relieve his suffering.
Then would he turn away.
He  did  not  hold  Sabra  responsible  for  the  betrayal,  but  she  was  still  a  servant  to  the  Goddess.  Her
unquestioning faith was not something he could endure now that his own had been shattered.
But  what  has  led  me  here  to  the  Goddess’s  stronghold?  In  all  his  wanderings  his  steps  always
seemed  to  be  drawing  him  to  the  great  tor.  He  would  resist  and  take  another  path,  but  as  the  seasons
waxed and waned he would go south or east or west or north and eventually come within sight of  it  time
and again. 
Finally, this year, he gave in and came to the little village in its shadow. That was as far as he would go.
If the Goddess -really wanted him, then she could come the rest of the way herself.
But the days and nights passed with no sign from her. It  was  as  he’d  expected,  so  his  disappointment
was neither deep nor especially bitter. It simply was, like the weather.
The church was farther than he’d thought, until he realized it to be larger than he’d expected. Most were
small and made of wood, empty inside, with perhaps a simple table to  serve  as  an  altar.  This  one  looked
comparable to the grand one in his father’s keep, made of cut stone, built to last for centuries. As he  drew
closer, he saw some of the stones were not matched in color,  meaning  they’d  probably  been
taken  from  older,  unused  structures  and  thrown  together  where  needed.  Sure  enough,  he  saw  some
Roman lettering cut into one of them. Whatever word it had been was broken  off  in  the  middle  and  was
upside down.
The door was  of  stout  oak  and  fitted  well.  It  pulled  open  easily,  the  balance  indicating  the  hand  of  a
master carpenter. He went in and pulled it shut.
The church was very large, a full thirty paces from the door to the altar, and fifteen from side to side, the
thatched  ceiling  gracefully  high.  Two  long,  narrow  windows,  hardly  more  than  a  handspan  wide,  were
placed  on  either  side  of  the  altar.  At  this  time  of  year,  they  were  covered  over  with  oiled  parchment,
allowing in light, but keeping out the drafts.
On Sabbaths and feast days the building could hold a very large congregation indeed. Now it  held  only
Richard,  but  he’d  wanted  to  be  alone.  Though  his  servants  usually  kept  a  silent,  respectful  distance,  it
wasn’t the same as true solitude.
He slowly approached the altar, pushing his hood back. Above hung a very large cross, nearly mansize.
Cut into it was the crucified Christ, His tortured body twisted just so. The wood was stained nearly black,
so  that  one  had  to  come  quite  close  to  see  the  equally  black  figure  emerging  magically  from  the
background. His wounds had been  painted  red.  The  one  from  the  spear  thrust  bled  profusely.  Richard’s
hand stole toward his own long-healed wound, recalling the blasphemous jesting of the other lords  on  that
bleak day. Unlike the Christ, he had no scar to show for it, not to see, anyway.

He’d come here, seeking comfort from the faith he’d been born to, but the crucified man had nothing to
say to him.
Below was the altar table, bare now, but the sides were beautifully carved with scenes from the Bible.
He recognized Abraham offering his son Isaac up as sacrifice, knife in one hand, the other holding the boy
down, his face raised to heaven.
Richard backed away, suddenly sickened. Can I never escape?
He quickly turned to leave and was  brought  up  short,  colliding  with  a  stooped  old  man  who  had  been
directly behind him. With a surprised cry, the ancient toppled over and would have fallen hard to the flagged
floor had Richard not instinctively caught him.
“I’m sorry, old one,” he said, righting him. “I did not know you were here.”
The fellow chuckled at his obvious chagrin. “Nor did I, but I perceive that you must be gently raised to
show a poor stranger such courtesy.”
“ ’Tis nothing.”
“’Tis much in this harsh world, especially for me.”
Richard suddenly noticed the thick film that covered the old man’s eyes along with the long staff he held
to steady and guide his faltering steps. What he did not understand was why he’d not heard him.
“May I ask one more boon?” said the ancient. “Would you show me to the altar? I’m turned around.”
“Of course.” 
He took the old man’s arm and slowly led him over. The staff tapped noisily now, his sandal-shod  feet
shuffling. “Here it is.” He placed the man’s hand on the table.
“Ah, this is a comfort to me, to be able to tell myself the stories again.” His questing fingers ran along the
carvings like spiders. 
“I should think you’d know them well enough by now.”
The man smiled, something he did frequently to judge by the hundred  creases  in  his  leather-dark  face.
“Ah, but does one ever tire of dancing to a favorite song?”
Richard made no answer. 
“Who are you, good sir, that I may thank you?”
He could say Lancelot, but was weary of that fame. He wanted no distinction today. “I am Richard.”
“I thank thee, Richard of . . . ?”
“Just Richard.”
“Then I am just Joseph.”
He was a courteous man to take no title, place name, father’s name or trade, so as  to  be  no  better  or
worse  than  Richard  in  his  life  station.  His  apparel  was  ragged  and  humble,  his  white  hair  and  beard
untrimmed like that of a hermit, but fairly clean. Perhaps he was a holy man with this church. They wore
their vestments only when required by their duties. 
“Why are you out on such a bitter day as this, friend Richard?”
“My legs wanted stretching.”
He chuckled again. “Not by much, for I judge you to already be an uncommonly tall fellow.”
“So I’ve been told.”
“Come and sit with me a little while, would you? Perhaps you will tell me a tale of the road, and I will tell
you one of our village.” Joseph eased himself down, seating his creaking bones on the one shallow step that
led to the altar. He seemed very much at home and not likely to move.
Richard gave up all hope of reclaiming any solitude without seeming to be boorishly impolite. He sat on
the  step  as  well,  knees  near  his  chin,  arms  bridging  them,  hands  clasped.  “My  road  is  long  and  has  no
ending.”
“That is their nature, is it not? My village is small and has no  ending—in  its  own  way,  of  course.  It  is
very famous for this church, though. This is the first ever built  in  the  land,  did  you  know?  Many  pilgrims
come here to pray. Are you such a pilgrim?”
“No,  my  people  and  I  are  only  sheltering  in  the  hospice  until  the  snow  melts  enough  for  us  to  travel
again.”
“But you did come here to pray?”
“I may have.”
“May have?” he laughed. “I like thee, friend Richard. Few are so brave as to admit the truth, even here
in God’s house. Have you tried praying elsewhere?”
“Yes, my words go up, but my thoughts remain as in a grave. Heaven does not hear me.”
“That sometimes happens.”
The comment startled Richard. He expected a reproof that perhaps he’d not been listening well enough.

“It is an awful thing when heaven is silent to us. It’s happened to me many times.” He seemed strangely
cheerful about it.
“Indeed? What did you do?”
Joseph shrugged. “I just went on until God took notice and spoke in such a way as I could hear. There
were times when He was wickedly slow about it, but I always forgave Him.”
“You forgave God?”
“Oh, yes, all the time.” His seeming conceit was boundless. “Do you smile?”
“Yes.”  Richard  could  not  recall  when  last  that  had  happened.  “I  hope  you  don’t  let  others  hear  you
speak thus.”
“Pah! I care not. What can they do to me that God has not done already? If I can forgive Him, then I
can forgive them. What? Do you laugh?”
“Were this summer I’d say that the sun had touched your head.”
“I’ve had that as well. A good, long life I’ve had so far. I’m sure whatever comes next will be  just  as
interesting.”
Richard thought the man’s advanced years would preclude that.
“You  think  me  too  old?”  he  countered,  as  though  he’d  heard  the  thought  spoken.  “Fie  on  thee,  good
Richard. I’ve time left in me to do many things.”
“What would you do, then?”
“I’m not sure, there’s much to choose. I could walk the road like you and find out if it is truly  endless.
Think of the stories I would hear on the way! How the traveling poets would envy me!”
“Or you could stay and let them bring their stories to you.”
“True. Come, tell me your story.”
“All of mine are sad.”
“For one so young? How wretched.”
Richard had not thought of himself as being young for a very long time now. A decade had passed since
his change, and though he did not look any older he often felt quite aged. But seated next to him was a man
easily twice his years. Why did they not weigh him down?
“Tell me one anyway,” said Joseph. “Perhaps the sorrow of it will make me more content with my lot in
life.”
“I would not burden you so—might I ask a question instead? You seem to know much.”
Joseph, staring ahead and seeing naught, waved one hand, palm up. “Perhaps. Ask away.”
“I have heard from the holy men that no one may serve two masters, but what of serving both a master
and a mistress?”
“Are they of the same house?”
“I think so.”
“Then I would say yes, if  both  are  in  accord  with  each  other  for  your  welfare.  I’m  sure  you  already
knew that, though. Why did you ask?”
“Because my mistress betrayed me, and now I wonder if my master will do the same.”
“It’s been known to happen. How did she betray you?”
“She demanded too much of me and would not tell me why, so I left her service.”
“You must love her deeply to feel such pain.”
“I love her not now. I may even hate her. She gave me everything I desired, and much that was beyond
any of my dreams, but then . . . what she then did was most pitiless cruel. She allowed someone important
to me to die.”
“And there is a hole in your spirit from that.”
“Yes.”
Joseph turned as though to look at Richard, then gestured at the figure carved in the cross behind them.
“Did He not suffer a great betrayal—and forgive?”
“It was not my life sacrificed, but that of another. I could have borne it had I been in his place.”
“You seem to have dealt with that grief, just not with the betrayal.”
“Yes. I wanted to know why, and she had no answer for me. I was told she had no answer for herself
either.”
“So your faith in her died.”
“And I came here.”
“But He also gives you no answer, hm?”
“None that I can hear. If it must ever be so for me, then why should I live on?”
The old man nodded, thinking long. “I can speak for  myself  only.  My  future  is  as  veiled  to  me  as  my

sight, but I move forward, -because I do not know what is in my path. I may stumble off a cliff and break
all my bones, or I may happen upon a great treasure that will buy comfort to last me all my days. What I
cannot do is hold myself mired in place. You are mired, friend Richard.”
“I’ve a right to be.”
“For a while. But that you came here tells me even you know the while is past. You wish to break free.”
“I’ve wished it from the first! I wished it, prayed for it, -demanded, begged, shouted to the skies for  it.
Why has it not happened?”
“Because until now it was not the right time.”
Richard snorted, then sagged. An answer that was no answer.  Not  to  him,  anyway.  “I  thank  thee  for
listening, Joseph. You have been kind.”
“You think I’ve not helped you?” He laughed. “You will see, child.” With some effort,  Joseph  boosted
himself up. “Ah, but those flags are cold on my bones. I shall take myself  to  a  good  fire  now.  God  keep
thee, traveling Richard.”
“And you. Here—take this  token  to  remember  my  thanks.”  Richard  pulled  a  gold  ring  from  his
small finger and pressed it into Joseph’s hand. “It will buy you wood enough to warm thee.”
“An old man’s blessing on thee in turn do I give. Be of good cheer. The road has many twistings.” He
bowed his head once, turned, and shambled from the church. Richard could hear the tap of his staff on the
frozen ground for a time, then full winter silence fell. He was quite alone again, dwarfed by the emptiness
around him.
It is too easy for me to feel sorry for myself.
Compared to blind Joseph, he had all there was in the world.
Everything but blind faith?
To that he had to answer yes. And he still did not know what to do about it. Falling on his knees before
the  altar  would  seem  but  empty  posturing  now.  He  had  a  disturbing  feeling  that  he’d  somehow  moved
forward, all without noticing. Well, he would see if the road had a twisting  ahead  soon  enough,  when  the
snow melted.
He departed the church, pushing the door shut. The day was still dark, but he kept his hood well forward
and shrugged his sleeves down to cover his hands. Just because he could not see the sun did not  mean  it
wasn’t there to burn him.
He looked about for some sign of where Joseph had gone,  spying  footprints  in  the  snow,  leading  back
toward the hospice. They sometimes crossed the ones Richard had left. He wondered where the old man
had come from, for there were no other tracks. Perhaps he’d been sitting in a dim corner near the door all
along.
But such speculations left him about fifty paces from the church. On one side of the path stood a strong
young sapling, its straight trunk nearly his own height. The same height, in fact, as Joseph’s staff. 
He cast about for Joseph, but the old man’s steps halted here.
That the little tree had not been there earlier was strange enough, but what reduced  Richard  to  gaping
astonishment was the fact that it was thickly foliaged as though at the height of summer. The tender green
leaves seemed to glow against the virgin snow, bathed in a light from a hidden elsewhere.
He touched one, and found it to be real. He plucked it away and smelled the fresh sap.
And on this sunless day a glint of gold winked brightly at him from the green. At the base of one of the
slender limbs was his ring. It fit around the wood exactly; indeed, the bark was beginning to swell and grow
over it.
The leaves rustled in the wind like warming laughter, but a chill seized Richard, and he ran the rest of the
way back to the hospice.
He wanted to tell someone, but could think of none. There were many in his company, but servants all.
They would accept his story without demur. He’d not be able to discuss its meaning or ask questions. They
would only shrug and call him  blessed  and  continue  on  with  their  own  little  tasks.  Telling  even  Ghislaine
would not be right.
For  the  first  time  in  years  he  wanted  Sabra  with  him,  not  to  pour  out  his  bitterness,  but  to  share  his
wonder. She, of all those he knew, would absolutely understand. How he ached for her.
It was time to go home.
He pushed noisily into the hospice, drawing breath to tell them to get ready to decamp. They would obey
willingly enough once they knew their destination.
But he never gave the order. Standing but a few paces inside was the richly cloaked figure of a woman.
His heart stopped for an instant and a smile of true joy broke upon his lips.

Sabra?
She turned round, pushing back her scarf. His heart resumed its beat, but sank low. She was not Sabra,
only some noblewoman also stopping here to rest.
Richard quickly gathered his wits, pushed his hood back, and made a low bow. “Greetings, lady.”
She curtsied in turn. “Greetings to thee, Lord du Lac.”
Damnation, she knew him. He wanted  no  part  of  courtly  life  just  now.  He  had  much  to  do  and  think
about.
“I heard in the next village that you were traveling to here,” she said. “I am glad to see they were right,
for long have I searched for thee.”
He had no ready reply, puzzling over the familiarity of her voice and face. “And you have found me.” He
hoped she had not sought him out for some errand, for he would have to disappoint her.
Her  smile  faltered.  “You  do  not  remember  me?  It’s  not  been  too  long,  I  hope.  Recall  you  Elaine,
daughter of Lord Pelles Bernard?”
He managed to shut his gaping mouth, go forward, and bow over her hand. “Of course I do. I could not
see you well coming in from the light outside. How fare you, good maid?”
She laughed—and he’d have recognized that sound at least—and  touched  her  free  hand  to  his  cheek.
“Maid no longer, my lord.”
Of course, she’d have married after all this time. He saw something of the change in her, now that  he
knew to look. Her bearing was sedate, as befitted any dame past twenty.  Her  figure  was  more  lush  and
there was a maturity in her eyes only experience brings. “My congratulations, good lady.”
She retained her impish smile. “We are at cross purposes. Come without, I would speak with thee.”
Which meant no servant was to hear. He held the door for her. She swept out,  pulling  her  cloak  tight.
“Glad I’ll be when spring comes. This is the worst winter I’ve ever known.”
“What brings you out in it, then?”
“Something of import to you, I hope.”
“What? A message from the king?” That did not seem right. If the king wanted him, there  were  other
messengers to send.
“No, from me. I’ve been trying to find you for a very long time. You’ve wandered to and fro so quickly
that any missive I sent to you was lost or arrived too late. Only a week ago a minstrel come to sing for his
supper at our keep claimed to have seen you on the road heading this way, so we rode hard to catch you
up.”
“We?”
“My brother Lavaine is with me as escort and protector.”
“And your husband?”
“I have none.”
“Ah. So why have you sought me out? What message would you impart?”
“An important one. It is your own fault that it arrives so many years late.”
“I’m sorry—”
“Never mind that, Lord Lancelot. Come this way and you will know all.”
She had grown into quite the imperious lady, but then he recalled  she’d  been  as  sweetly  demanding  in
bed as well. He followed her to where her party had paused on the road. It was a small group, half a dozen
armed  squires,  their  horses,  and  a  supply  cart.  The  latter  puzzled  him,  for  if  they’d  wanted  speed,  they
should have had pack animals along. As he approached, he recognized Lavaine, who seemed no worse for
wear  for  the  intervening  years.  They  exchanged  greetings,  Lavaine  as  cheerful  as  ever,  -Richard  more
reserved. It had been an honest mistake on Lavaine’s part, but Richard found it damned hard to look on the
face of the man who had killed Michel.
“Does he—” began Lavaine.
“Hush, brother,” she said, waving him back. “And let me do it in my own way.”
“I shall be here.” The way he spoke, the statement would serve equally as reassurance or warning.
“What is this about?” Richard asked as Elaine drew him toward the supply cart.
“You are overdue to meet someone. I hope you will like him.” She was positively enjoying herself.
“Who?”
The cart was covered over with woolen blankets and furs. She lifted a protective hanging and held out
her arms, reaching in. When she drew back, she held a strapping child of four or five years, rosy-cheeked
from the cold, but smiling. She whispered something to him, and he squirmed to be set down, which she did.
 
He looked fearlessly up at Richard, then executed a miniature version of a courtly bow. “God keep you,

sir!”  he  piped.  “My  mother  told  me  to  say  that!”  Then  he  beamed,  laughed  at  his  own  cleverness,  and
threw his arms around his mother’s skirts. His hood got pushed awry at  this,  revealing  a  bright  crown  of
sun-gold hair.
“God keep you, young master,” he returned. “Elaine, what is this about?”
The imp had left her expression. She was most serious now. “I  wanted  you  to  meet  your  son  and  he,
you.”
“My son?” he said blankly.
“You’ve only to see his hair and eyes to know. He is yours and no one else’s.”
Richard looked, and did mark a certain surface resemblance, but no more than that. This land had many
blond,  blue-eyed  children.  He  released  a  great  sad  sigh,  bowing  his  head.  Just  when  he  thought  himself
beginning to break free of his sorrow and anger, the Goddess or Fate or whatever decided to heap another
cruelty upon him.
“You are not pleased,” Elaine said. She sounded as downcast as he felt. “I had hoped better from you.”
“No . . . you misunderstand.”
“Then explain.” She seemed to be bordering on anger as well.
It took him a moment to master himself, and another moment to find the words. All the while he knew
they would not be adequate. “You quite break my heart, Elaine.”
“How so?”
“Because if this beautiful boy were my son, I would have a happiness beyond all measure and love and
honor you forever.”
His raw sincerity took her aback, but her clouded brow did not clear. “You say he is not?”
“I know he is not.”
“But his face, his eyes—how can you deny him?”
“I wish to God it were otherwise, but I must be truthful with you. He cannot be my son. You had another
lover at the same time, did you not?”
She colored deep red to the roots of her hair. “And what of it? The boy looks like you. He is your get as
surely as the sun rises. I have no shame of him, why do you?”
“The only shame I’d have would be in lying to you. Were he my child I would shout it throughout all the
world. You’ve no idea how I wish I could do that.”
“Then why are you this way?” Tears choked Elaine’s rising voice, and the  boy  looked  anxiously  up  at
her, his own face crumpling in sympathy.
Richard extended some of his force of will upon her. “Calm  yourself.  I  will  tell  you,  but  you  must  not
upset him.”
The appeal to her mother’s protective instinct had more influence on her than his will. She broke off and
put her attention on the child. “There, now, all is well. Go find your uncle. Tell him to give you a ride on his
horse.”
This had an instant curative effect. The boy’s face came alight, and he tore away on chubby legs calling
shrilly for Lavaine.
“Lord Lancelot, what you say makes no sense. You want him but you deny him? Is that it?”
He came close and took her hand. “Elaine, listen to me and know the truth.”
“What truth? That my eyes and heart have deceived me all these years?”
“Yes.”
She shook her head, exasperated.
“Hear me out. Before I came to serve at court, before I met you, I suffered  a  fever  that  nearly  killed
me. I healed, but eventually came to realize that it  had  taken  the  fertility  from  my  seed,  burned  it  out  of
me.”
“How do you know?”
“I bedded many women then. None of them conceived from me afterwards. None.”
“It takes only one seed to make a baby.”
“And had I that seed I would have chosen you to keep it.” Easy words to say, and who knows  but  he
might have proved them true once upon some other time. Here and now, Elaine needed an illusion for the
sake of her pride.
“You give me that honor, at least,” she said. “I so wanted—believed—you to be his father.”
“Who was the other man? If I may ask?”
“It matters not. He was Grunaius. Lavaine’s squire.”
Her taste ran to large, muscular fellows, then. “Is he yet a squire?”
“He will always be so.  He  was  knocked  from  his  horse  in  battle  practice  that  summer  and  broke  his

neck. I wept for days for him and for losing you.”
“I’m sorry. Had I known . . .”
“It’s past.”
“How did you fare?”
“As well as may be. When the household noticed  my  belly  I  refused  to  name  the  father.  I  wanted  to
speak  to  you  first  and  said  as  much.  Lavaine  took  my  side  against  the  rest—we  were  always  close  as
children—and eventually I was left in peace. But even before the babe was delivered, there was talk that
you  had  known  me.  Afterward,  once  they  saw  the  child,  they  simply  accepted  it.  My  father  was  even
pleased.”
Yes, Pelles would be, but then he was a most practical man. Having even the bastard son  of  Lancelot
under his roof was quite a treasure, in both coin and prestige. “I’m sorry, lady.”
“And I said it’s past. But are you absolutely certain he’s not your son?”
“Upon his life and mine I wish he were.”
“But his looks? Grunaius was dark.”
Richard shrugged. “I know not. Sometimes one’s looks come from a grandsire—or great-granddam and
not the parents at all. But you are fair yourself.”
“Not that fair.” She sighed. “What am I to do? What are you  to do? I believe you, but no one else will.
They’ve lived with it too long.”
“We will find an answer in time. If it will ease things for you, then I’ll claim him to anyone who asks.”
“You would commit falsehood for me?”
“For all of us. My conscience will not be troubled.”
“Would you . . . think perhaps to . . . marry me?”
“I don’t know. What do you wish?”
“To give the boy a father. I’m not sure if I want to give -myself a husband. To hear the  other  women
talk, husbands are a terrible lot, always making more trouble than they’re worth.”
He laughed, for she spoke with weary honesty. “I’m sure the same could be said for wives.”
“But if we did marry, then I could not give more children to you,” she said.
“No. Yet there are children enough to be had in the world.”
“Fostering others? That’s not the same as having your own.”
“How so is it not? If God casts some poor babe into your care what matters who bore him?”
She’d clearly not considered that before. “There is more to you than I thought, du Lac.”
He nodded sheepish agreement. “More than I thought as well. You find me at a strange time, lady, but at
the right time, it seems.”
“Indeed?” She lifted her chin, expecting an explanation.
He did not want to share his story with her, though. Again, it would not be right. “Never mind. What is
the boy’s name?”
“Galahad.”
He had to close his mouth again. “You jest.”
“You don’t like it?”
“I confess it would not have been my first choice, but I’m sure I’ll grow used to it.”
“You will come back with us?”
“Yes, but what is it you wish me to do? Acknowledge him as my own or speak the truth?”
“I think . . . speak the truth to my family. Let the rest of the world believe what it likes.”
“So be it.” To seal the pact, he bent and kissed her cheek, which delighted her. Then they both  looked
toward Lavaine, who had placed little Galahad on his charger and was leading him around.
Beyond  them,  in  the  distance,  Richard  saw  the  flash  of  green  from  the  sapling  tree,  a  reminder  of
summer out-of-time—and something else was there.  He  shaded  his  eyes,  squinting.  Standing  next  to  the
tree was a small, lithe form in a russet cloak trimmed in gold. It raised one arm high. An achingly familiar
gesture.
His heart leapt. It was she, and no mistake.
As he stared, long-forgotten joy  flooded  him.  The  figure  lowered  her  arm,  turned,  and  trudged  up  the
gentle  rise  to  the  church.  She  would  wait  there.  He  had  much  to  do  right  now,  but  she  would  wait  for
him . . . as she’d done all along.

Chapter Thirteen
Dallas, Texas, the Present
The first breath was the hardest, like the first breath after being born. No one remembers that one, and it’s
just as well. It is a terrible struggle to inflate new lungs, to exchange the comfort of warm fluid for harsh,
cold air, screaming at the unfairness and pain.
Richard wanted to scream, but was too consumed with the effort of trying to take a second breath.
He couldn’t quite work out what was wrong beyond being paralyzed. His  mind  was  separate  from  his
inert body; he was a sleeper on the edge of waking, unable to move, and panicking at his helplessness. He
could only focus on the absolute necessity to move. If he could shift but a finger  it  would  break  the  spell
holding him, and he’d wake from the nightmare.
Alas, it didn’t work that way. He had to take a third breath.
Then a fourth.
Air shuddered reluctantly into  him  and  too  easily  departed.  In  between,  he  endured  the  terror  that  he
would stop altogether. That gave him impetus to try again.
Days later, it seemed, the process gradually became less of a fight. The panic receded.
After a month or so, he didn’t have to think about it at all, only drift and dream. They  were  sad,  those
dreams, and always fled from him when he tried to take hold of one to find out why.
He wanted to turn over in his sleep, to interrupt the mild frustration of the not-dreaming. Eventually, he
thrashed out with one arm, cracking his knuckles against something cold and hard. The floor.
It broke the spell.
He groaned, a clumsy, thick sound, his voice box responding sluggishly to express his discomfort. He was
sprawled  where  he’d  fallen  in  the  kitchen,  bathed  in  the  cold  downdraft  from  the  open  refrigerator.  Its
overworked motor hummed a loud complaint at the abuse.
Pulling himself together had a special meaning to him now as he strove  to  organize  each  limb  to  work
with the rest. Now he knew what it was like to be one of those puppets made of hollow balls with a single
string running through it. It would lie loose  and  disorganized  until  the  string  was  pulled  taut,  then  assume
shape and function. He was doubtful about being able to retie things back to normal. An order to his leg set
his arm to twitching. Trying to close his fist made his foot kick.
He gave up for a while and went back to breathing. At least he knew how to do that.
His second attempt met with more success, and he managed to peel himself from the floor. From there it
was just  a  matter  of  time  until  he  could  stand  and  flex  the  rest  of  the  numbness  from  his  muscles.  His
fingers felt like they were encased in gloves. When he slapped them against a counter corner, he  felt  the
impact, but not the sting.
And some people do this to themselves on purpose?
But he was past the curve. To speed things up, he drank more blood. 
That helped.
How had his would-be killer gotten in? There was state-of-the-art security on  the  doors,  but  for  every
measure,  a  good  home  invader  could  devise  a  countermeasure.  It  had  been  a  professional  job,  and
Alejandro could afford the best. Like, perhaps, Jordan Keyes.
Richard  checked  the  time.  It  was  nearly  three—in  the  afternoon.  Where  was  Luis?  He  should  have

come up here by now.
Richard retrieved his revolver from the bedroom floor and went to the elevator. He punched the button
five times and sweated through the short descent. The door opened to a deserted flat. Luis was quite gone,
along with his laptop case.
What the hell had happened?
On the return trip, Richard worked it out. Luis had wakened, come up to the penthouse, and  found  the
apparently lifeless body of his only ally. What he’d made of the  blood  bags  if  he’d  -noticed  them  did  not
bear thinking. He’d have fled, but where?
He’d want Michael, though. How to find him? Luis would have gone through Richard’s desk, of course,
hoping to find an address book with a listing for a doctor.
Richard  looked  there  for  signs  of  a  search  and  found  them.  Everything  had  been  hastily  tossed.  The
computer, when he tapped a key to  make  the  screen  saver  disappear,  had  been  subject  to  an  attempted
search, but Luis wouldn’t have had the luxury of a password to crack into the right file.
But . . . next to the computer were the prescription chits with the access  codes Bourland had provided.
One of them was gone. The codes would have been meaningless, but not the name, number, and address of
the clinic printed at the top of each sheet.
Luis would have called the clinic and gotten Dr. George’s home number from the answering machine.
That  was  a  relief,  but  only  for  an  instant.  Once  Luis  had  Michael  he’d  run  far  and  fast,  and  it  still
wouldn’t be enough for him to escape Alejandro. Richard immediately punched in Sam’s home number, but
got only his machine. Damn, should have tried the pager first.
He tried the pager, then called Helen’s cell phone.  No  answer.  A  recorded  message  cut  in  to  explain
why.  He  tried  information  for  her  home  phone,  but  the  machine  at  the  Mesquita  residence  was  just  as
unhelpful.
The clinic. A long shot, but what the hell. 
Miraculously,  a  live  human  voice  answered.  Instead  of  the  usual  business  greeting  announcing  the
clinic’s name, he got a shaky sounding “Hello.”
“Helen? Is that you? It’s Richard Dun.”
“Mr. Dun?” She seemed unconvinced.
“Yes. What’s going on? Has Michael’s father contacted you?”
“God,” she said, then there was a clatter. Her shout rang loud in the hollow distance. “Dr. Sam! Come
here! He’s all right! It’s Mr. Dun—he’s on the line!”
Another clatter, then Sam’s breathless voice. “Richard?”
“Yes, Sam. What’s happened?”
“You . . . we  thought . . . oh,  God.”  He  broke  off  as  his  voice  caught.  “We  thought . . . are  you  hurt
badly?”
“What?”
“You need to call 911 right away.”
Richard realized what misapprehension they were under, and regretted the fact  he  could  not  hypnotize
people over the phone to restore calm. It took him some minutes to convince Sam of his good health.
“But Luis said you were dead,” Sam insisted. “That you’d been shot.”
“He made a mistake. All I did was knock myself out when I ducked . . . oh, never mind. Luis took off. I
presume to see you to find Michael.”
“Yes, he tracked me down. I thought he might be a ringer and was careful to set up a meeting at a public
place. We met at one of the malls; he showed me his driver’s license and talked about what had happened.
He was in pretty bad shape, took me a while to settle him down, then I had to find Helen. It seemed best
for us all to meet here at the clinic.”
“How’s Michael?”
“He was the same.”
“Was?”
“Luis has him now.”
Damnation. I knew it. “You didn’t talk him out of it?”
“Of course I tried to, but the man was scared. He insisted on leaving. I insisted he stay. Then things got
out of hand.”
“How do you mean?”
“He just grabbed Michael and walked. I tried to stop him, but he . . . well, he sort of decked me.”
Richard sighed. It was understandable, but so bloody unnecessary. “Are you all right?”
“Just sore. Got me in the gut. Surprised the hell out of me more than anything.  By  the  time  I  got  mad

enough to get up, he was gone.”
“What kind of car was he in?” He feared Luis had taken the rental.
“A cab. Helen got the number.”
“Brilliant woman. Remind yourself to give her a raise. Tell her to phone the cab company and  find  out
where the driver dropped that fare, then get back to me.”
“What if they don’t give out that information?”
“Tell them it’s a medical emergency, that the boy needs insulin or something. I have to track Luis before
he completely disappears, so hurry.”
Sam rang off. Richard used the interval to clean up, selecting a blue industrial-style work shirt and drab
gray  trousers  from  his  closet.  He  matched  these  with  thick-soled  black  work  boots.  By  the  time  he’d
dressed, the phone trilled.
“I got it,” Sam said  proudly.  “Damn,  I  feel  like  a  TV  detective!  The  driver  took  them  to  the  Anatole
Galleria by the tollway, not too far from where you are. Said they went right in.”
Luis must have opted for the better security of an expensive place over that of another fleabag. “You did
very well, Sam. Want a chance for more?”
“What? Call the hotel?”
“Yes. They  probably  won’t  give  information  on  guests  over  the  line,  so  you  may  have  to  go  there  in
person. He’d have used a false name . . . but they tend to want to see ID  up  front,  though.  He  might  be
there under his real name . . . God, what a mess. Get the manager on your side; use the medical emergency
story. Describe Luis and just ask to be put through to his room, then sort him out about my condition.”
“Why don’t you go there?”
“I  have  to  track  down  the  person  who  decked  me.  I  think  he  may  be  my  strongest  lead  to  find
Alejandro.”
“But what if he decks you again?”
“It won’t happen.”
“But—” 
“Even if it does, you have Philip Bourland’s number.”
“God, I’d forgotten what with all the—”
“Just tell Luis to phone him. He’ll be flying into D/FW tomorrow morning. He’ll know how to deal with
everything.”
I hope.
The rental, happily, was still there and functioning, though before starting it, Richard went over the thing
looking for bombs. None present. Mr. Jordan Keyes must have been quite confident of his booby trap.
Richard put the crossbow and the bolt on the passenger  side.  If  things  came  down  to  it—and  he  was
certain they would—he planned to dispatch Keyes with his own device. It seemed only fitting.
The drive to the man’s house was a tedious one. There were no fast ways to get from Addison to west
Fort Worth in the late afternoon, even on a Sunday. Traffic was as dreary  here  as  in  any  overcongested
metropolitan area. An hour and a half later he was finally speeding along a clear patch of I-30, having spent
a quarter of it in an inexplicable stop-start jam on the long bridge that spanned  the  downtown  area.  He’d
have done better to brave a line of side street stoplights, but road construction had trapped him in. During
the long wait, stewing and burning in the sun, he grew thoroughly sick of staring at the backside of a dump
truck he’d gotten stuck behind.
By the time he reached the exit for Hulen he was in a fine mood to commit murder.
Keyes’s neighborhood was a mild surprise. As a hit man for Alejandro  Trujillo  and  others  like  him,  he
would  have  made  enough  to  buy  a  palace.  Instead,  he  resided  in  a  quiet,  well-tended  neighborhood  of
seriously unpretentious houses built during the fifties boom. Some had been added onto over the years, but
most were of the infamous shoe box design, cheap-looking and unfashionable to current tastes.
A few sun-tolerant teens glided noisily past on their in-line skates. No one  else  was  out.  This  was  the
hottest, most sweltering portion of the whole hellish day. Blinds and curtains were drawn shut, their owners
sensibly within watching their cable TV and drinking beer. Not a bad life at all.
Richard made a slow circuit of the meandering roads, fixing in mind the  various  exits  available  to  him.
The quickest led to the highway via a northbound back street. He marked that down as his primary escape
route, should he require one.
The  frame  house  he  wanted  was  on  a  corner  lot,  one  large  tree  shading  the  back  yard,  two  aged
cottonwoods deteriorating branch by branch in the front. It seemed rather vulnerable seated on a slight rise,
but from the windows the occupant had a fine view of the crossroads because the building was set on an

angle to them. This detail did not escape Richard’s notice. Nor did he miss the fact that a security camera
was neatly mounted under the eaves of the carport. Its viewing range took in much of the street.
He could admire the man’s paranoia.
It looked to be that Keyes was home. A battered black Escort with a cracked windshield rested patiently
in the carport. It had been new a good  decade  and  a  half  ago.  Amazing  that  the  thing  still  ran.  Perhaps
Keyes kept his real money invested elsewhere. That, or he was a tightwad. Good God, the front grill on the
little car was actually sporting duct tape to hold it in place.
I could have the wrong house.
Richard refused to consider that possibility just yet, and assumed  the  rest  of  the  working-man  persona
he’d opted to try. He fitted his black baseball cap forward on his head, then reached into the back seat for a
clipboard. It was the same one he’d taken from Officer Henebry, looking battered enough to sell the ruse.
He parked his car facing north toward the highway, tucked his revolver under his belt, and got out, pencil in
hand.
The heat. It wasn’t the humidity that killed, it was the heat, the god-damned bone-melting heat.
The asphalt street radiated it up to him in waves as he crossed and went boldly up Keyes’s driveway to
the front door. The blinds were shut fast here, but for the sake of any hidden camera he’d missed, Richard
looked at his watch, noting the time down on the clipboard, which concealed the presence of the gun.
Richard had a great respect for clipboards. Used the right way they could take a person anywhere. They
made you important, yet invisible. They were one of the  great  unsung  inventions  of  the  world,  like  paper
clips. A calm-faced man writing on one  was  a  universally  harmless  man,  at  the  most  an  annoyance,  but
never a threat.
The welcome mat had go away blazoned on it in bright red letters. Richard stepped up and tried the bell,
just  barely  hearing  an  electronic  version  of  the  chimes  of  Big  Ben  within.  No  one  answered.  After  a
reasonable interval—made short by the blistering sun—he knocked, the sound booming through  the  house
as he pounded on the sturdy metal door. He noticed the discreet sign of a commercial security firm shoved
into the baking grass of a  walkway  planter.  That  was  amusing.  It  was  a  company  -Richard  himself  had
founded back in the sixties. He still had a controlling interest in the stock. Nice to know that Keyes wanted
only the best.
One  of  the  blind  slats  twitched.  Richard  caught  the  movement  and  stood  up  straighter,  as  though
anticipating an answer. A little late, he wondered if Keyes had been provided with a photo or description of
his New Karnak target. Assume he has.
There  was  a  click  of  a  dead  bolt  being  drawn  back  and  the  door  opened  three  inches.  A  soothing,
air-conditioned draft hit him.
Then he hit the door.
He intended to smash it hard into whoever was behind, then take him down. Instead, all his force turned
into an overcalculation. The door crashed wide open with no  resistance  at  all,  bouncing  against  a  wall  to
come back at him. It struck his shoulder, throwing off his balance. Despite this, he kept to his feet, dropping
to a crouch, his revolver already in hand.
The room was dark. His eyes weren’t nearly well  enough  -adjusted  to  see,  but  he  sensed  a  presence
behind  and  to  his  right  and  whipped  around  to  meet  it.  At  the  same  time,  something  cracked  down
mercilessly hard on his wrist and he lost his gun. He grunted once, too busy to worry about pain, and struck
out with his leg in a back kick, connecting with a solid body. There was a crash as it fell.
Richard followed through, his eyes just picking out the shape of a man on  the  floor  scrambling  to  right
himself. In one hand was a baseball bat. He’d managed to retain hold of it. He made a short arcing swing
at Richard’s legs, but missed. Richard dove forward, landing on him before he could recover, driving out all
his  breath  with  a  well-placed  fist.  The  man  gasped  and  dropped  the  bat,  his  hand  open  and  palm  up  in
surrender.
“Okay! Enough!” he wheezed out. “Stop wrecking my house!”
“Jordan Keyes?”
“Who wants to know?”
Richard recognized the voice from Nick Anton’s answering machine. Interesting. “The man you tried to
kill last night. Me.”
“Oh, really? Good trick since I was home the whole evening. Who the hell are you?”
“All in good time.”
“No, right now, asshole. Get off me. Now.”
Richard felt a no-nonsense prodding in his left side. While distracted by the man’s flapping hand and the
discarded bat, he’d forgotten to check the other hand. It held a rather large gun. If it went off it would tear

a sizable hole laterally through his chest, taking out both lungs and his heart. That would hurt.
He decided to be cooperative for the moment and carefully removed himself. 
Keyes got to his feet first. “Face down, lie flat, arms out, spread your legs. Don’t think it over, just  do
it.”
Not one of my better days, Richard thought, obeying.
Keyes kicked the front door shut. “Start talking. Who are you?”
“My name is Dun, Richard Dun.”
“And why the hell are you here?”
“I’m looking for a mutual friend, Nick Anton.”
“Wrong. He’s no friend of mine.”
“A mutual enemy, then.”
“Wrong  again.  I’ve  nothing  against  him,  either.  One  more  bad  answer  and  you  win  the
fuck-you-and-the-horse-you-rode-in-on  prize,  and  I  can  promise  you  won’t  like  it.  Do  I  have  your
-attention?”
“Yes.”
“Good. Now what’s this about me trying to kill you last night?”
“Just what I said.”
“Trust me, if I’d been trying you wouldn’t be here. Who put you on to me?”
“You did.”
“You trying to make things hard on yourself?”
“Not at all. The weapon used was a crossbow, the tip on the bolt had a glass vial with curare in it.”
A brief silence from Keyes. “The hell you say.”
“Missed me, though.”
“Then that should tell you it wasn’t me. I don’t miss.”
As the man was in full charge of the situation, he had no logical  reason  to  lie.  Richard  did  not  always
trust in logic; however, his instinct told him something was decidedly odd here. “Look, I think we’ve some
talking to do.”
“That’s right. You stay there and talk.”
“Mr. Keyes, you are a professional and so am I. Given sufficient precautions on your part, I’d prefer to
be able to sit up and face you for this conversation.”
Keyes thought it over. “All right. Slowly. You will stay on the floor and sit on your hands.”
Fair enough. For him. More than fair enough for Richard once he made eye contact.
They’d not wrecked the house too much. A table and lamp were in pieces, and a big leather sofa askew.
They managed to miss a large entertainment center in the low, rectangular box of a room.
Standing by the shaded front picture window, Keyes had his back to what light did seep through. In his
thirties,  medium  in  height,  but  with  powerful  shoulders  under  an  innocuous  brown  polo  shirt,  he  held  a
Walther P-99 in one strangely delicate hand. His alert stance smacked of military training, though there was
no mention of it in his files. He matched the DEA’s grainy photo, a bald man with a well-shaped skull, his
fringe  of  remaining  hair  cut  very  short.  He  now  sported  a  precisely  trimmed  goatee;  close  up,  his
resemblance  to  Lenin  was  positively  uncanny,  but  without  the  facial  hair  he’d  have  been  Mr.
Invisible . . . except for the eyes. Richard recognized a fellow killer.
Keyes returned the study. “It’s an okay cover,” he  said,  with  a  nod  to  Richard’s  clothes.  “Except  for
your car being wrong, the hat the wrong color and the fact it’s Sunday, you might pass as a city worker to
anyone else.”
“I thought it worth the chance.”
“You had a fourth strike against you. I was expecting someone like you to show up.”
“Because you quit working for Alejandro?”
Keyes’s eyes sharpened. “You know an awful lot. Tell me where you heard that.”
“On Nick Anton’s answering machine. You’ve a distinctive voice.”
“And why was Nick letting you listen in?”
“He wasn’t there at the time. I broke into his place last night looking for him.”
“Keep going.”
Richard  smiled.  “I  think  we  may  have  a  common  enemy—Alejandro  Trujillo.  If  you  were  expecting
someone like me, then you know he doesn’t like it when people leave his employ without his blessing.”
“His retirement plan sucks. I figured if the news came through Nick it’d soften things. Maybe.”
“Nick was your go-between with Trujillo?”
“Sometimes.”

“I take it you didn’t like what he arranged in Addison?”
“What do you know about it?”
“Quite  a  lot . . .”  There.  Eye  contact.  And  Keyes  was  sober.  His  partial  silhouetting  by  the  window
made it hard for Richard to be sure if his focus was working, but the silence between them grew profound.
“Are you ready to listen to me, Mr. Keyes?”
“Yes.”
That was a relief. “I’m going to stand up now. You will remain still. Got that?”
“Yes.”
Richard stood  and  stretched  out  the  kinks,  rubbing  his  extremely  sore  wrist,  flexing  the  fingers.  He’d
taken a good crack there; it might have shattered the bones on another man. As it was, he’d have full use
of it within the hour. 
He found his revolver, shoving it back into his belt, then turned on Keyes. “You may put your pistol down
now.”
He set it on the window sill.
“Mr. Keyes, you will start cooperating with me. You trust me. I am your friend. You will always tell me
the truth. Is that clear?”
“Yes.” His killer eyes were dimmer now, his stance more relaxed.
“Excellent. Now tell me where Alejandro Trujillo is.”
“I don’t know.”
“Does Nick Anton know?”
“Maybe.”
“Where might I find him?”
“He’s got a place in Euless. Rest of the time he works at Bubba Rob’s.”
Shit. This was getting entirely too frustrating. “I want you to contact him again.”
“Okay.”
“You feel very comfortable talking to me; trust that feeling. Because of it you will do nothing to harm me
or cause harm to happen to me.”
“Okay.”
“Now, how did you get into my flat?”
“I didn’t.”
“Then who did?”
“I don’t know.”
That was it, the situation was now officially beyond  frustrating. Richard did not put his fist through one
of the walls. He was still healing. But damn it all to hell, he wanted  to. “All right, Keyes, let’s sit down and
have a heart-to-heart.”
Keyes’s expression changed in some subtle  way,  becoming  almost  good-natured.  “Sure  thing.  Want  a
beer?”
“Ah . . . no thank you.”
“I got some ice tea.” He left his spot by the window and went into a very small kitchen, Richard trailing
him.  Keyes  started  to  open  an  avocado-green  refrigerator  covered  with  magnet-pinned  photos  and  food
delivery ad cards, but froze, glaring. “Whisky! Soda! Goddamn it! Get out of there!”
Two gray-striped cats shot down from a counter where they’d been crouched over an open pizza  box.
They tore past Richard’s legs and vanished somewhere deeper into the house.
“I’m gonna kill those two one of these days,” Keyes muttered, checking on the pizza. “Okay, they didn’t
do any  permanent  damage.  I  should  have  shut  the  lid,  but  you  came  banging  on  my  door.  Want  some
supper?”
“No, thank you.”
“Damn stuff got cold.” He shifted two slices onto a plate and shoved it in a microwave. As soon as he
hit the cook button, a loud mournful  yowl  went  up,  like  a  soul  crying  from  hell.  He  inter-rupted  the  heat
cycle and looked behind the oven, which was at an angle in a corner, creating a triangle of space. “Monster,
what the hell are you doing there? Well, come on, babyness. Aw, poor Mr. Monster.”
The unhappy white and black cat he pulled out lived up to its name. It had a small head compared to the
rest of its body, which had to weigh at least twenty pounds. 
“You stupid cat, you trying to get irradiated? You’re already a mutant.” He held the  huge  feline  on  its
back, fingers digging into its vast expanse of stomach. The beast yowled again, a long, sad wail of protest.
“Shut up and get some loving.”  Monster  had  other  plans,  though,  successfully  struggled  free,  and  hit  the
floor. Suprisingly fast, he shot toward a cat door cut into a wall and, after a minor struggle, oozed through.

“He’s not much for visitors,” Keyes said. “Paranoid for some reason. You like cats?” 
“More or less. You certainly seem to.”
“I hate the little freeloading bastards, but they’re more important to me than most of the people I know.”
“How many do you have?”
“Enough to put me on everyone’s weird list.” He opened a cell phone sitting on a counter and started to
punch  in  a  number.  Richard  asked  for  an  explanation.  “I’m  calling  Nick,  like  you  wanted.  Change  your
mind?”
“Not at all.”
The other line buzzed a few times, then the answering machine kicked  on  with  a  basic  message.  “It’s
me,” said Keyes in a stern tone. “Something’s happened your boss will want to know about. Call me back
immediately. This is serious so don’t fart around.” He disconnected. “That should do it.”
Richard waited as the man heated his interrupted meal and opened a beer; then they went back  to  the
living room. Keyes put it on a foldout TV table, sat on the couch, and dug in. Richard found a chair opposite
for himself, using the respite to massage his wrist.
“Sorry about that.” Keyes said.
“Part of the job. I’d have done the same.”
“So who are you, Mr. Dun?”
“One of Alejandro’s targets.”
“And you think I was trying to hit the bull’s-eye? If they used a crossbow, I can understand you making
that mistake. A very select few are aware of what I do with them, but the truth is I never heard about you
until today.”
“You weren’t contacted to do a job here?”
“I didn’t say that.”
“What do you know about the Addison explosion, then?”
“Why do you want to know?”
Richard focused, giving him a slight nudge. “You first. Tell me everything.”
Keyes blinked awake. “About two weeks ago Nick called to say Trujillo wanted a job done. A pretty big
one, a business rival he wanted blown to kingdom come. I turned him down.”
“Why?”
“Too clumsy, too spectacular. Use a gun, then it’s only another murder for the cops. Use explosives and
you’ve got the Federales  and  all  their  cousins  on  your  ass.  There  are  simpler  ways  to  take  people  out.
Besides that nonsense, it was local. I never do any job like that locally, always out of the country.”
“Killing international drug lords for fun and profit?”
“Why not? Someone has to.” He washed down a gulp of pizza with beer. “And the pay is good.”
“Working for another drug lord?” Richard kept any and all judgment from his tone.
“If not me, then someone else. I’d rather the money come to me. I got a family to support.” A slender
black cat jumped onto the couch next to him, highly interested in the pizza. He pushed it off, growling. “Not
now, Dot. Go away.”
“You trust Trujillo?”
“Absolutely not. But I trust his agenda, which is to be the richest damn bastard down there by taking out
the competition. He might make it, too, or would have. Without me running errands for  him  he’s  going  to
find it a lot harder. He doesn’t have anyone else with my special skills that he can trust not to screw up. It’s
easy to find someone who can kill, but damn near impossible to find someone who’s smart about it.”
“Are you entirely out of work, then?”
“I never said that.” Keyes’s eyes almost twinkled. “There’s plenty to be had, you just have to be careful
who you work for.”
“Meaning if someone contracted you to kill Trujillo . . .”
“Anyone come up with the money for it, I’d take him out just as easy as the rest. Nothing personal, just
business. Since he’s in the business, he knows that that’s a possibility. So he’s always paid me more. Call it
insurance.”
“How did Trujillo react to your refusal?”
“He wasn’t happy, but I explained  my  reasons.  He  offered  me  a  hell  of  a  lot  of  money,  but  the  deal
smelled bad. I put that in his face, and said I wouldn’t be able to do other work for him if I got caught. The
forensic boys up here are pretty damn sharp. I might be able to get around them, but it isn’t worth the risk
for  me  to  try.  I  never  dirty  my  own  back  yard,  that’s  one  of  my  rules.  Trujillo  wasn’t  giving  me  much
information, either, just that I was to wire up a  house  and  set  things  off  at  a  certain  time,  and  that’s  all.
That’s what smelled to me. He’s always got more information than a library on who he wants  out  of  the

way, but not for this one. So I backed right off.”
“Did you sense he might put a hit out on you for that?”
“No,  it  was  just  business  as  usual.  He  didn’t  press  things.  I’m  more  valuable  to  him  for  those
out-of-country sanctions. I -figured he’d find someone else with less smarts for the job, and it turned out I
was right. Soon as I saw the news report I knew that was what he’d wanted me to do and why he’d been
so cute about not giving details. There was some  woman  and  a  couple  kids  in  there;  he  knew  I’d  never
have gone for it.”
“An assassin with principles?” 
“Call me old-fashioned, but killing women and kids  is  just  wrong.”  He  leaned  forward,  tapping  on  the
table with one finger, each tap emphasizing a word. “When you have a job  on, you go  in  like  a  surgeon
and  take  out  that  target.  Collateral  damage,  as  they  call  it,  is  just  being  stupid.”  He  sat  back,  face
consumed with disgust.
“Then you severed relations with him.”
“Business is run on trust, and he  screwed  up.”  Keyes  made  more  pizza  disappear.  “Now  you  tell  me
someone went after you with a crossbow? No way would I do anything as damn-fool as that up here. The
DEA is just looking for an excuse to turn me over and see what shakes out. I don’t know why they’re so
anal; I’m doing most of their work for them.”
“I may have an explanation.”
Swig of beer. “I’m listening.”
“Trujillo wants us both out of the way. He set up a crossbow booby trap to take me out. The idea being
when my body’s found the DEA traces the weapon to you. A very neat copycat frame to enrich your life.”
“But it missed, so you come looking for me. Either way, one or both of us is taken out of the picture, and
Trujillo gets a good laugh. Most neat. But how did you even know about me?”
“Computer search.”
He grimaced. “Damn things. I’ll have to retire before they lead  to  my  downfall—unless  that’s  already
happened?”
Richard gave no direct answer. He’d not yet made up his mind on what to do with the man. “Your name
and Anton’s came up in connection with Trujillo. You were on my short list of people to interview in order
to get to him.”
“Why are you interested in him?”
“The house explosion. It’s personal.”
“How so?”
Richard frowned. “The woman was a good friend of mine. Her little girls were my goddaughters.”
Keyes put his beer bottle down. “I’m sorry to hear that. Was he after you through them?”
“No.  The  woman’s  husband  is  Trujillo’s  brother,  Luis.  The  one  who  turned  evidence  on  him.  Their
deaths had to do with punishment, revenge, and to make an example to others.”
“I heard about that case. The brother dropped out of sight a few years back.”
“Yes. I’m the one who disappeared them all.”
“Because of the woman?”
“And the children. But Alejandro found them. You saw what he did. Now I wish to find him.”
“I don’t fault you for that. Not much you can do until Nick returns my call, though.”
“Then we’ll wait.” Richard’s cell phone trilled. “Excuse me.”
“It’s me,” said Dr. Sam.
“What news?”
“I couldn’t find them.”
“Damn,” he muttered. “What’s happened?”
“I don’t know. Helen and I drove to the hotel and talked to everyone from the manager to the maids. A
few people remembered seeing a man and little boy, but not where they went. I was  very  insistent  about
the need to find Michael, described them both a hundred times over, had the clerks check the guest roster
twice, even called a couple of likely prospects in their rooms. Nothing. Then Helen and I split up and went
to search the  Galleria  Mall  and  got  the  security  people  there  alerted  for  them.  When  that  didn’t  work  I
phoned the cab company again and asked if they had any pickup fares from the mall or the hotel. They had
their dispatch talk to all the drivers. Nothing again. That’s when I started calling the other cab companies.
Helen’s still in the manager’s office working on it, but it’s probably hopeless. Luis and Michael just walked
in and disappeared.”
“You were very thorough, Sam, not your fault.” In fact, he’d been outstandingly thorough. 
“Maybe he got a bus or hitchhiked . . .”

“Sam, it’s all right. Some things can’t be helped. When I’ve dealt with details at this end, I’ll see what I
can do. Chances are he will shortly contact that other friend of mine for help and we can sort it out then.”
Even  with  Keyes  hypnotically  persuaded  to  being  an  ally,  Richard  had  no  desire  to  mention  Bourland’s
name in front of him.
“I hope so,” Sam said unhappily.
“Perhaps you’d best go ahead and phone him first; let him know what’s going on so he doesn’t have to
take news of my untimely death seriously. I’ve told him who you are.”
Sam seemed to brighten. “Okay, I’ll get on that.”
“Good man.” He rang  off  and  hoped  Sam  talked  to  Bourland  before  Luis  did.  The  man  did  not  need
news of anyone else’s death unless it was Alejandro’s.
“Where’s that crossbow?” said Keyes, who had finished his beer and pizza during the interval. “I’d like
to go see it.”
Richard shifted mental gears. “No need. I brought it with me.”
One eyebrow quirked. “May I ask why?”
“I had an idea about using it on you. Poetic justice.”
Keyes looked at him awhile, lips  thin,  then  slowly  nodded.  “Fair  enough.  I’m  glad  you  decided  to  talk
first.”
“I’ll go fetch it.”
When he returned from the car, outré weapon in hand, Keyes had cleared away the TV table and was
stowing the pizza box in the fridge. Two more cats appeared; they were white and black like Mr. Monster,
but with longer fur. One of them yowed a plaintive question. 
“Oh, shut up, Spot. Your food’s right there.” Keyes pointed to a bank of filled food bowls in one corner,
and shoved the complaining cat in their general direction with his foot. The other, he swooped on and picked
up. It also yowed. “Aw, Le Feline Nikita, wanna make funny noises? Let’s make funny noises, babyness.”
He held the animal upside down, hand over its face, and indeed produced some strange squeakings from the
creature.
“Le Feline Nikita?” Richard asked doubtfully.
“From  my  favorite  movie.  That  little  chickadee  was  most  -doable.  She’s  the  reason  why  I  learned
French.”
“What about that TV show?”
“Now she is most tasty. Extremely doable.” He glanced at the crossbow Richard had in hand.
“Look familiar?” Richard watched the upside-down squeaking cat furiously batting at Keyes, who paid it
scant attention.
“Nope. That’s a commercial model—a good one—I wouldn’t mind having it, but I could never use it in
my work. I build my own.”
“You build your own?”
“Yeah, lemme show you. You’ll appreciate this.” He discarded the outraged cat, who landed on all fours,
shook itself, and began to clean as though nothing amiss had occurred. “Short attention span. I dated a girl
like that once. Good weekend, lousy week. C’mon this way.”
Keyes had a very small house, three small bedrooms, one bath, minimal furnishings, all  in  keeping  with
his character of living on modest investments. The forces of officialdom would have a difficult time finding
fault with him. 
“Where do you keep your real money?” Richard asked.
“Some place real safe. You wondering why I live like this when I could do better?”
“Yes. Why not?”
“I  like  the  neighborhood.  I  have  what  I  need,  which  is  a  place  where  I  can  just  come  in  and  relax.
Besides, it’d be a hell of a job trying to transplant this.” 
He went into a bedroom no more than nine by ten feet in  size.  It  held  only  a  chair,  work  desk  with  a
computer,  and  two  filled  bookshelves.  An  eight-foot-wide  closet  with  sliding  mirrored  doors  covered  the
length  of  one  wall:  big  storage  space  in  compensation  for  the  claustrophobic  dimensions.  He  slid  one
four-foot-wide door aside to reveal a rack holding some plastic-wrapped suits, which he also pushed out of
the  way.  On  the  floor  were  a  couple  of  suitcases  he  pulled  out.  He  activated  some  hidden  mechanism
behind the door jamb and a section of the closet floor popped like the hood of a car. He pulled it up.
“Interesting,” said Richard, looking down into darkness.
Keyes  hit  a  light  switch  just  inside  the  cavity.  The  sides  were  composed  of  the  house’s  cement
foundation for a foot or so, then opened up. “C’mon.” He made use of a metal ladder, quickly descending.
Richard followed, looking around, fascinated. He stood in a  very  efficient  low-ceilinged  workroom,  not

much more than ten by ten, but well-lit and fitted with a woodworking bench and plenty of outlets for  the
power tools hanging from the pegboard walls. The air was fresh, courtesy of fan-powered vents.
“You did all this yourself?”
“Yup. About ten years back I started. Took me awhile to chip through the foundation, then start hauling
out dirt and limestone. For a year or so this place looked like something out of The Great Escape. I filled
up dips  and  holes  in  the  lawn  with  the  extra  dirt,  used  the  rocks  to  decorate  the  backyard  and  build  a
barbeque. I tell you, doing it one bucket at a time sucks, but when I realized that I was too far along to stop.
Had to go to an acupuncturist to put my back right again, but it was worth it.”
“Why go to such trouble?”
“Why not? I got a hidden retreat that no cop’s ever going to find. Makes for one hell of a tornado shelter,
too. Couple of times me and the cats did a little duck and cover here. I hollowed out enough to give me the
work space I needed, but not so  much  as  to  undermine  the  house.  Poured  in  a  second  foundation  down
here, one cement bag at a time,  running  a  waterhose  from  the  bath  tub—that  was  a  mess.  Put  in  those
support braces to shore up the ceiling, then put in plywood walls and plastered them over so there wouldn’t
be any fresh earth smell coming into the house, and  started  hauling  stuff  down.  I  had  to  limit  the  size  to
things that would fit through the trap, brought the lumber down in pieces to make the bench and storage.” 
Keyes was clearly proud of his effort and accomplishment. This was likely the first time he’d ever had
the chance to show it off.
“Very impressive,” said Richard, and he was completely sincere. It was wonderful. He wanted one too.
“Thank you. None  of this is going anywhere, least of all me. Not until I’m damned good  and  ready.  If
Trujillo thinks he’s going to change that he’s made one hell of a mistake.”
“He’s made several. Why are we here?”
“So I can show you what I build.” Keyes then proceeded to give him a brief lecture on the construction
of crossbows. He was quite the artist. He had several different sizes, all with various ranges and functions,
all of them made to break apart into components. He took a number of small wooden pieces that seemed to
have nothing to do with each other, and assembled them together with a small screwdriver. The only metal
in it  was  a  few  brass  screws.  By  the  time  he’d  finished,  a  very  wicked  little  weapon  crouched  on  the
workbench, only needing a string and a bolt to complete it. It was quite different from the large metal model
Richard had brought in.
“I  always  use  wood,”  Keyes  explained.  “The  airport  X-ray  techs  always  see  it  as  being  part  of  my
suitcase, so they don’t make a fuss  and  pass  me  through.  Once  a  job  is  done  I  take  the  bow  apart  and
throw away the pieces.”
“Hence the need to come down here and make more.”
“Yeah, but it’s a lot of  trouble,  takes  time,  and  has  become  too  much  of  a  trademark  pointing  to  me.
Lately I’ve been thinking of switching over to blowguns for some jobs. Those are just hollow tubes, but you
have to really  practice  to  put  the  dart  where  you  want  it.  Hey,  check  this  out.”  He  flicked  on  a  closed
circuit TV. It had four views, two covering the street,  one  the  backyard,  the  last  the  front  porch.  “I  can
control the angle of the camera from here.”
“Got a night vision adapter?” asked Richard, highly interested. He loved tech toys as much as the next
man.
“Of course—and infrared backup.”
He was starting to like the fellow in spite of himself. He’d had a bellyful of dealing with exotic assassins
after his encounter with Charon some months back, but Keyes looked to be considerably more reasonable.
Keyes patted the set twice. “I got all the mod-cons. When I’m down here I don’t want to be completely
cut off from the world, so I ran in a phone line, cable radio. For some things I’m a gadget junkie. There’s a
lot of most bueno  stuff out there, so I have to  pick  and  choose—and  what  the  hell  have  we  here?”  He
tweaked one of the cameras onto a large car that had pulled  parallel  to  Richard’s  rental,  and  zoomed  in.
“We got us a big-ass ol’ Cadillac fulla drug muscle. Looks like I was right about Trujillo coming after me,
but I thought he’d send in just a couple of guys, not a fucking army.”
“How many?”
“Five—two in front, three in back.”
“That’s hardly an army.”
“Count the five in that other car and it is.” He shifted the view to the cross street, where sat a second
large car crowded with men.
“In a twisted way, it’s almost flattering. What do you think they’re carrying?”
“Probably full autos. Trujillo likes to pass out MP-5s like party favors, and his boys love to play  macho
man. This could get ugly fast—son of a bitch, look at that!” Keyes zoomed hard on the second car. One of

the faces in the back seat was . . . Alejandro Trujillo. “We got some serious shit here if the big boss wants
to catch the fun. Okay, that’s it. War is declared, but  I’ll  be  damned  if  I  let  those  assholes  shoot  up  my
neighborhood.”
Richard watched the car by the rental slowly cruise off. A moment later, the second car also moved out
of camera range. “I think they’re just checking things over first. They know you have a visitor, but are not
aware it’s me. As far as Alejandro is concerned, I’m dead. If I leave and make sure they see me, they’ll
follow.”
“Not all of them. One of those cars will stick around to find out if you killed me.”
“Then I suggest you get your Walther and prepare for them.”
“No  shit.”  Keyes  went  to  a  large  wall  cabinet.  Inside,  mounted  on  padded  prongs  hooked  into  more
pegboard,  was  an  assortment  of  firearms,  enough  to  start  and  likely  end  a  small  revolution.  On  a  shelf
below  were  quantities  of  ammunition  and  cleaning  supplies.  Keyes  caught  the  look  Richard  gave  him.
“Okay,  so  I  was  a  little  worried  about  the  Millennium  Bug.  I  had  these  on  hand  already.  Pick  out
something.”
“I’ve my revolver.”
“Only six shots and no reload that I’ve noticed. You want more than that against these goofballs. Unless
you got a problem with killing.”
“Hardly. All right, I’ll use the Glock then.”
Keyes snorted and gave it over along with three extra loaded ammo  magazines.  “I  thought  you’d  take
that one.”
“You don’t like them?”
“They’re okay.”
“Why have one, then?”
“For  guests,  of  course.  They  like  ’em,  but  the  Glock’s  never  felt  right  in  my  hand.  The  grip  on  my
Walther is set at just the right angle for me.”
“That’s the new James Bond gun, isn’t it?” Richard always enjoyed those movies.
“Right you are—but I had the idea first.”
“You don’t like James Bond?”
“Oh hell, I’m a big fan, I just found the gun first is all. Come on.” He  stuffed  more  mags  in  his  jeans
pockets, switched off the TV, and went up the ladder. He left the trapdoor open and shoved the suitcases
farther out of the way. “In case  we have to beat a quick retreat here,” he said, moving  toward  the  living
room.
“We may not have to.”
“Why is that?”
Richard peered out through the front blinds. The sun was still bright and would be for another two hours.
“They’re probably covering the street exits from this area in case  you should leave, but  my  guess  is  they
won’t actually come for you until well -after dark. They’re going to get bloody hot out there waiting.”
“That just breaks my heart.”
“Well, I’d rather not have them shooting up your neighborhood, either.”
“Oh, yeah? You got another option?”
“As a matter of fact,” said Richard, straightening, “I have a cunning plan. . . .”

Chapter Fourteen
Crossbow prominently propped on his shoulder, Richard practically strutted across to his car. The sun was
waning, but there was plenty of light. And heat. It prickled like fiery needles on the back of his neck.  He
could almost feel the blisters forming.
He endured it. 
He took his  time  putting  the  crossbow  into  the  back  seat,  apparently  having  a  bit  of  trouble  getting  it
through the door. Once  done,  he  gave  in  to  a  luxuriant  stretch,  the  mechanics  of  which  allowed  anyone
watching to get a damn good look at him. He took his hat off and ran a hand through his brush of blond hair
to clinch things.
Even  if  Alejandro’s  men  were  half  asleep,  they  couldn’t  help  but  notice  and  identify  him.  Alejandro
himself would be livid that his target had survived yet again.
Richard got in the rental, started it, and pulled out, heading for the near-direct exit to I-30. He’d put his
windows down to keep the interior from heating up too much. They were still down as he  drove  sedately
past a Cadillac parked close to the corner of a side street. He did not look over.
That was the hard part, the truly dangerous part. If they got impatient, or stupid, they could nail him here.
 
He held his breath, and he did not look.
Then he was past them. Safe for the moment. But would they take the bait?
When he turned onto the access  road that led to the highway, he  saw  the  brown  Caddie  distant  in  his
rearview mirror.
He smiled and hit  a  newly  programmed-in  speed  dial  on  his  cell  phone.  “I  got  mine  hooked,”  he  said
when Keyes answered. “What about you?”
“I’m still in the neighborhood, heading south. They’re behind me, but not too close.”
“Can you lose them?”
“In this area? No problemo.” He rang off.
Richard’s  job  was  to  buy  Keyes  time.  Not  a  difficult  thing  at  all  when  he  reached  the  downtown
overpass. Yet another traffic problem had turned the freeway into a single-lane parking lot. He didn’t mind
this delay, though; it served a good purpose. Besides, the sun was down. 
Once through the one-lane road-rage test zone, he phoned Keyes again. “How’s it going?”
“I lost them. Where are you?”
“Just passed an exit  for  a  Beach  Street.  Does  that  make  sense?”  There  were  no  beaches  anywhere
near this city so far as he knew.
“I’m a couple miles ahead of you coming up on the 820 inter-section. I’m going to take that north. You
stay on I-30 east -until Loop 12; you’re a tourist, they won’t expect you to know the shortcuts. That’ll buy
me more than a half-hour extra in case of delays at my end.”
“You sure your car will get you there in time?” He recalled that model of Escort as being underpowered
and remarkably fraught with troubles.
“You know what that guy in Star Wars did to his space ship?”
“Yes . . .”
“Well, I had about the same thing done to this little crate. It’s a lot better than it should be. I’ll get there
in time.”
Richard took him at his word and thought it a pity that they didn’t have some sort of  laser-type  blaster

guns to use on this expedition. Ah, well, give the inventors time. The evolution of weaponry he’d witnessed
over the centuries was quite -extraordinary. Perhaps in five or ten years  the  actual  technology  would  far
surpass film imagination. Not available to him now, but how satisfying it would be to cut Alejandro in half
the long way with a sword of white-hot burning light . . . 
No. It wouldn’t be all that satisfying.
That death was too bloody quick for him.
Richard made it easy on his  shadow,  holding  to  a  steady  speed,  not  passing  anyone  unless  they  were
really slow. The Cadillac’s lights were consistently in his mirrors, not too far back, but neither too close. He
was grateful  for  that.  It  meant  they’d  decided  not  to  shoot  the  hell  out  of  his  car  while  on  the  road.  A
drive-by at these speeds would probably be effective, but he’d survived two hit attempts; they would want
to make sure the third time was the charm.
This was the long way to north Dallas and thence to Addison, so he felt safe edging up to seventy when
traffic permitted. Keyes would still have his time window, and Richard would not appear to be in the least
aware of the tail. While he couldn’t assume the thugs to be stupid enough to utterly fall for the ruse, he only
needed to keep them guessing about it.
He hoped the men also had cell phones—they probably did—allowing them contact with the second car.
Ideally, they would link up at some point, their common goal being to turn Richard into tomorrow’s headline.
Eventually he reached the point where the Loop intersected with LBJ and took the eastbound lane. They
would  know  he  was  headed  for  New  Karnak  now.  He  had  to  slow  once  more  along  this  corridor,  but
expected that, changing lanes a few times just to make the shadows work to  keep  up.  He  was  positively
grinning on his final exit. There were now two big Caddies trailing him.
New Karnak was very much in sight, its glass walls  shimmering  with  reflections  of  the  full  moon.  He
sailed right past the great pyramid, heading north, wishing he could hear the commentary this was doubtless
causing behind him. Was he aware of the tail, or just looking for dinner on restaurant row?
But  he  passed  that  area  too,  speeding  up  as  traffic  suddenly  eased.  The  first  Caddie  allowed  him  to
lengthen his lead. Good, they’d figured it out.
The traffic and street lights thinned then stopped; he was now in the undeveloped areas, the memory of
his initial trip here coming sharply back to him, along with myriad regrets. He should have done a better job
of  hiding  them.  He  should  have  told  Stephanie  to  leave  the  moment  her  emergency  e-mail  had  come
through. He should have cut all contact with her, leaving no trace for Alejandro to pick up.
He should have killed the bastard to start with.
Richard  had  considered  it,  but  it  would  have  stirred  things  up  too  much  back  then.  He’d  not  been
prominent at all during the legal wranglings, but he had  been present. If Alejandro  had  suddenly  died,  his
underlings would have known where to place the blame and create murderous complications for all. At the
time it seemed simpler to just hurry Stephanie and the family out of the line of fire. That had worked. For a
while.
He hoped that the missing Luis had phoned Bourland by now and gotten some good news for a change. I
should call him as well. But not just yet.
He sailed by the spot where  he’d  encountered  the  delicious  Officer  Henebry,  and  marveled  that  he’d
driven so far in such a benumbed state. His dreams had been wretchedly vivid; it was amazing that he and
Michael had made it home in one piece. 
Phone. He answered.
“I found the place,” said Keyes. “If I got the directions right.”
“You took the fourth turn after the stop sign?”
“Yeah, and this road looks like  Verdun  on  a  bad  morning—oh,  there . . . okay.  Yeah,  I’m  at  the  right
place; the cops strung some crime scene tape right across the drive. It’s not visible from the main road.”
“Just as well, keeps the curious from looking in.”
“You just better damn-well hope the Federales didn’t leave a watchdog hanging around.”
“Not likely, but if so, I’ll deal with it.”
“I’m pulling off now to hide the car. How far out are you?”
“About ten minutes.”
“Cutting it fine, but I’ll manage.”
“I appreciate this, Mr. Keyes.”
“Hey, I’m in this for my own self-preservation.”
Rather  too  enthusiastically,  Richard  thought,  disconnecting.  For  a  man  who  never  dirtied  his  own
backyard, he showed remarkably little demur against going on a deadly snipe hunt for Alejandro. 

Keyes had the equipment for it. As they waited for the sun to set, he’d pulled an amazing collection of
combat gear from his hall closet. He had cammo fatigues in green, gray, and solid black, boots, matte black
body armor, hand-to-hand weapons . . . Richard hadn’t seen such stuff since he’d taken a tour of an SAS
training facility.
“If you’re worried about the DEA, why do you have all this?” he’d asked.
Keyes smirked as he shook out the black fatigues and started changing. “All of it is completely legal. I
got it from military surplus stores and catalogues.”
“But why have it if you don’t operate in the States?”
“To keep in practice. This is my paintball gear.”
“Paintball?” Richard noticed that the green cammos, though clean, had the remains of pink  paint  stains
here and there.
“Yeah, great game. I always win.”
No doubt.
Richard counted off the turnings, taking the fourth. He knew the area, but was starting to nerve up and
wanted no mistakes at this point. He put his high beams on, less for his benefit than for Keyes and the ones
following.
There were signs of traffic activity left along the drive. Tree branches had broken off where tall trucks
had bulled through.  Pale  dust  thrown  up  by  dozens  of  official  vehicles  now  coated  the  foliage  and  dead
grass. He came up  on  the  police  line  ribbon.  It  was  snapped,  the  two  ends  lying  listless  over  the  baked
ground where Keyes had earlier passed. Richard’s car would get the blame for that. 
He hoped. 
His  departure  from  the  tract  house,  closely  followed  by  Keyes . . .  they  would  wonder.  They  would
wonder if some devil’s deal had been struck between two men who should have  been  dead.  They  would
wonder where Keyes had gotten himself to, and now they might consider the possibility of a trap.
For Richard to come out here at such an hour would strike Alejandro as odd, but he’d also see it as an
opportunity. Richard’s hope was that Alejandro would weigh the odds of facing at most two isolated  men
armed  with  only  handguns,  against  ten.  If  Keyes  was  right  about  the  MP-5s,  Alejandro  might  feel  very
confident indeed, even if one of his foes was known to be an expert -assassin.
But would he risk going in himself?
Phone again. “Yes?”
“I saw you go by, but they’re hanging back,” said Keyes, who was now on watch at the entry road.
“How far?”
“They’re stalled at the turnoff. Corporate meeting. Looks like the memo is under discussion. I can’t see
past the window glare or I could try popping Trujillo. I don’t know which car he’s in. Damn, if I just had a
launcher and two grenades I could take them all out.”
“Give them a minute. Don’t let them spot you.”
“Huh. Fat chance of that. Damn city boys don’t have a clue.” His confidence was reassuring.
Richard kept on, topping the slight rise, dipping down again, the horrific wreckage now in view, stark in
the moonlight. -Absurdly, it looked smaller than he remembered. When he’d been struggling in the midst of
the disaster, it had loomed impossibly large to him. Where had the horses gotten to? Probably rounded  up
and  taken  away  by  some  livestock  control  service.  He’d  have  to  check  on  that.  He  couldn’t  allow
Stephanie’s beloved animals to be sold off or destroyed.
“Mission control, I think we have a go,” Keyes announced, suddenly cheerful.
“They’re coming in?”
“Looks it . . . yes, both of them. I’m on my way. Time to open a can of whump-ass and have ourselves a
party.”
Parking prominently in front of the ruins of the house, -Richard quickly stripped off his blue uniform shirt.
Beneath, he wore a lightweight black knit pullover, long sleeved, loose for Keyes, who had loaned it, almost
too tight on Richard. His gray pants were gaudy  in  comparison,  but  would  have  to  serve.  He  planned  to
keep his head down. Most of the time.
He left the car, the Glock in one pocket, spare clips in the other, the revolver in his belt.
The stink of burned wood was yet heavy in the air. Richard went to the debris, found a charcoaled stick
and  smeared  the  black  powder  over  his  face  and  hands.  The  full  moon  would  make  enough  light  to  be
useful to the hunters; he wanted to break up his profile.
Speaking of breaking up . . . 
He located a sizable piece of wood thrown from the house, a section of charred log almost four feet long,
as big around as  a  telephone  pole.  The  weight  was  nothing  to  him,  only  a  little  unwieldy.  He  was  more

interested in mass than grace, though, and tucked it under one arm like an overgrown football, then looked
for some likely cover.
He heard them coming. Saw the nimbus of their headlights.
He  dropped  flat  by  the  fence  next  to  the  barn.  Debris  was  all  around  him;  he  was  just  another
unidentifiable lump. Their -focus would be on his car. He’d left the lights on, aimed  at  the  ruin  as  though
he’d come here to scavenge for clues the police had missed. Crime scene tape ringed the area.
Before the first car topped the rise, the driver cut its lights and coasted the rest of  the  way,  coming  in
slowly. The second car did the same.
When the first was within thirty feet of him, Richard surged up and charged right at it, holding the log like
a latter-day battering ram. He could move preternaturally fast when necessary. 
The driver had no time to react. He also likely never knew what hit him when Richard slammed the log
directly into the windshield. It struck with terrible force, shattering the glass, breaking the wheel, smashing
the driver’s head to bloody pulp and taking out the man immediately behind him.
Richard didn’t pause to look back, but flashed toward the  second  vehicle,  which  was  just  beginning  to
brake. The driver’s side window was up. No matter. Richard put his fist through it. That hurt, but he hit the
man inside so hard on his temple as to cave in the bone and snap his neck.  Richard  grabbed  the  steering
wheel and ripped it from its column.
Someone fired shots, but missed wildly, the bullets tearing into the roof, not Richard . . . who was gone.
He darted behind the second Caddie—which rolled on to collide into the first—dropping to cover in the
mesquite brush a mere ten yards away. Both vehicles were disabled, cutting off retreat, and the odds were
now seven to two.
He phoned Keyes with the news.
“The hell you say,” he whispered, approving. “Were those your shots?”
“No. Knee-jerk reaction. He missed. I’m clear for the moment.”
“A three-round burst. I think I was  right  on  the  MP-5s.  They’re  gonna  burn  ammo  trying  to  find  you
now—they can afford to. See if you can spot how many and who’s got what.”
But  Richard  had  to  duck  as  men  erupted  from  the  cars,  firing  recklessly  into  the  brush.  They  were
cursing, screaming at each other, disorganized. The ghastly nature of his attack had had its effect on their
morale, all of it in his favor, providing he avoided getting hit.
They seemed to run out of ammunition at the same time, having quickly burned through their thirty-round
magazines. Richard, flat on his belly, picked his shot and dropped one, then rolled like hell to his right. His
Glock had no flash suppressor. Sure enough, one of them had a round left. The bullet cracked into the spot
where he’d been, kicking up earth and gravel. On all fours he backed away a few yards, then rose slightly
for a look.
A tinny voice in the cell phone asked if he was all right.
“Four down, six left. Three have heavy power. I’m a bit busy, can I call you back?” Without waiting for
an answer, he shut it off.
Of the six remaining thugs, two were still in the cars, the rest were starting to scatter out, yelling at each
other and randomly shooting into the night. One of them was having trouble reloading his gun. He couldn’t
get the long magazine to lock in.
His bad luck. Richard took him out, rising up briefly, sighting down his arm like a duelist, then dropping to
roll away. 
That got the rest started again. They swung in his direction, throwing three-round bursts as fast as they
could work the triggers, their aim random and wild. He  made  friends  with  the  earth  once  more,  deciding
that the fabric of his shirt was entirely too thick, as it kept him much too far above the ground. He winced
and  grunted—something  suddenly  burning  sharp  over  the  back  of  one  calf,  something  else  scorched  his
shoulder blade, gouging flesh. They were getting close. . . . 
Then from the second car he heard Alejandro screaming over the shots, calling for them  to  cease.  He
cursed them and told them to come back. They did—when they ran out of bullets.
Richard sagged, then checked his leg. Just a long scratch. His shoulder was about the same. He owed
Keyes a new shirt.
Right. Three gunmen left, Alejandro and another man in a wrecked car, not daring to get out, unable to
move.
One more gun fell. There was no sound of a shot, though. Keyes had gone to work, it seemed. This had
a  predictable  effect  on  the  others.  They’d  reloaded,  firing  in  Richard’s  direction  since  that  was  the  last
place a threat had come from, but he’d rolled again. He reached the pump house.
Keyes must have opted for a silencer. It would throw off his accuracy, but if he got in close enough, that

wouldn’t matter.
Another man dropped with a gasp and sigh. One left standing, two in the car.
Alejandro was shouting again. 
Shouting Richard’s name.
Shouting Michael’s name.
Shouting an utter impossibility.
“I have the boy!” he bellowed. “You stop or I’ll blow his head off!”
The last  man  stared  nervously  about  to  see  if  this  would  work.  It  was  Nick  Anton,  looking  grim  and
afraid.
“Come out in the open or Michael dies,” Alejandro continued. “This I promise. Come out or he dies!”
“Boss . . .” began Anton.
“Shutup!”
Ten seconds went by; no one moved.
“You think I don’t have him?”
Richard prayed he did not. To no avail. Alejandro thrust the child from the car. Anton grabbed him up,
holding  him  to  his  massive  chest  with  one  hand,  his  MP-5  in  the  other,  braced  on  his  hip  and  pointing
outward.
“Come out, Dun!” Alejandro ordered. “You and your friend come out now!” Alejandro lurched from the
cover of the car, the muzzle of his pistol against Michael’s head. The boy was awake, face expressionless
to the nightmare around him.
Richard groaned. Please Goddess, not again. Don’t take him again.
“Now! I’m counting to five! One, two . . .”
No choice. “All right! I’m over here! Don’t shoot!” 
Futile hope. Of course he would shoot. Any time he wanted. He owned Richard.
As soon as he rose from cover, Anton’s gun swung his way.
“Drop your gun, come forward,” Alejandro ordered.
He obeyed, furiously hoping Keyes would be smart about things and hold back.
“That’s it, come forward, you son of a bitch.”
He was full in the first car’s headlights. One corner of the car had plowed into the back of his rental, the
motor in gear and still running, a hideous mess behind the broken wheel. He could smell the fresh blood.
Alejandro glared at Richard. “How many lives you got anyway, you fucker? Bomb don’t get you, knife
don’t get you, goddamn fancy bow-and-goddamn-arrow don’t get you—how you gonna do with a bullet?”
He made no answer, his gaze on Michael. “Go ahead and finish it, Trujillo, but let the boy go.”
“I’ll finish it, but he ain’t gonna go.”
“He’s a child, he can’t hurt you. He’s your family. Your own blood.”
“Hah! He’s a son of a bitch and bastard, no blood of ours!”
This did not come from Alejandro . . . it was from Luis, who emerged from the back of the second car. 
Richard stared. Forgot how to breathe.
“You think I never knew?” Luis demanded, voice shrill. “You ever think that?”
The world lurched. Somehow Richard stayed on his feet. “What?”
“You goddamn bastard! I knew! I knew!”
A portion of the veil tore away. Not nearly enough. Behind the rest . . . Richard did not want to go there.
Luis stood shoulder-to-shoulder with Alejandro. They looked much alike, their unity of  face  and  stance
tearing away more veil.
“You worked with him,” said Richard. “You worked with each other.”
“He’s just getting it.” Alejandro laughed once. “We always did. When the bust came, we decided Luis
should play the poor victim of his big bad brother.”
“You arranged the betrayal?”
“It worked good. All the stuff he gave the cops knocked out a lotta my competition and kept him outta
jail. It worked real good. I make some noise so they think I’m hurting. Meantime, I’m cleaning up.”
“Luis? Your own family . . . ?” No, that wasn’t possible. Could not be.
Luis broke away, coming toward  him,  face  mottled,  ugly.  “Not  mine,  you  bastard!  Yours!  They  were
always yours!” He swung hard, fist cracking against Richard’s face.
He felt nothing. His heart banged painfully. No . . . it’s too grotesque.
“You  were  fucking  that  bitch  behind  my  back  every  chance  you  got, the  two  of  you  passing
off the bastards as mine. How stupid did you think I could be? Richard the big protector, the  big,
generous guardian angel, goddamn fucking  Uncle -Richard . . .”

Invective poured from Luis. He had years of it stored up. Bitter, vicious, obscene in its force, monstrous
in its concept. 
This can’t be. “No.” He shook his head. “Oh, God, no . . .”
Luis, the patient, kind, family man, loving husband, Luis the murdering butcher. In his mind Richard saw
once more through Michael’s eyes, saw the truth the boy had blocked out. The man who had cut them all
down and then turned his gun on . . . 
Adios to you too, you little bastard.
Not just profanity, but a statement of fact. As Luis mistakenly perceived it.
“No.”
“Oh, yeah. Time to finally pay, big man. Had to wait to set it up—”
“You were the one who called me down here, not Stephanie.”
“Yeah, I got the place all ready  for  you.  You  go  in,  find  them,  see  what  you  made  for  yourself,  then
boom!”
Only Richard had survived. He’d been the target all along. He shut his eyes.
“How’s it feel? You hate me? Hate yourself more—you made it happen. It’s  all  on  your  head!”  Luis
gut-punched him until Richard fell to his knees.
“You fool,” he whispered. “There’s no hell low enough for you.”
“You’ll be the one in hell, burning with that lying bitch.”
“She loved you! Don’t you get it?”
“Loved me? She fucked you, and passed off those—”
“Your children! Your daughters, your son! Not mine!”
“Goddamn liar—both of you lying for years. Who do they look like? They don’t look like me, and never
did, so  don’t  lie  anymore!  You  lie  again  and  I’ll  blow  the  little  shit’s  head  off,  you  hear  me?”  He  was
screaming, shrieking down at Richard, hitting, kicking, frenzied.
Richard lay on his side, tasting dust. He felt no physical pain. Only loss, boundless, abominable loss . . . 
Luis stood over him, chest heaving, insanity in his staring eyes. He backed off a step, then another, until
he was next to Alejandro again. “Gonna finish it now. Nick—gimme that knife of yours.”
“What for?”
“What you think?”
“We got no time for that; Keyes is out there still. Tell him, Mr. Trujillo. He’s got a bead on us all right
now, I know it. Only thing keeping him shut is this kid. He’s crazy about those damn cats, so this kid  will
hold him off. It’s our only way out.”
Alejandro nodded, looking into the darkness. He still held the gun to Michael’s head. “Mr.  Keyes?  We
know you are there. This is not a matter to do  with  you.  If  you  just  leave,  we  will  let  the  matter  that  is
between us drop. I will match your last earnings with me and put half again as much on top as a bonus if
you just walk away.”
Silence.
Richard slowly pushed himself up, listening for a sign. 
It came when Keyes called from somewhere to the side. “Double it, Trujillo! Double it and you leave me
the hell alone forever.”
“Deal! Want to shake on it?”
Keyes barked a short laugh. “The money’s in my account Monday or I will be the last man you see on
Tuesday. Got that?”
“Understood.”
“Then I’m outta here and good riddance.”
They all heard footsteps crackling in the dry brush, the snap of twigs. Then nothing.
Richard straightened, focusing on the trio by the car. He could reach Alejandro from here, but never be
in time. An instant—less—and he’d pull the trigger.
“Don’t,” said Richard. “Please, Trujillo, let the boy go. I spoke the truth. He’s your nephew.”
“You would say anything to save him.”
“You can always kill him later. Kill me now, but wait on the boy. Get a blood test done. You’ll see. You
want to take that chance?”
Alejandro looked hard at him, a tiny shade of doubt in his face.
“If there is the least possibility he is of your blood, give him that chance. For God’s sake, don’t make a
mistake on this.”
Luis had found a knife, taken from one of the dead. He stood behind and to the side of Alejandro. “I’ll
show you the mistake—his.” He started to raise it to the boy.

Anton scowled. “Hey now, lay off. It’s just a kid.”
“You want some too?”
“Luis! Wait! Just a minute.” Alejandro kept the gun in place. “We gotta think about this.”
“Okay, fine, you think. I’m gonna kill this fucker.” He started toward Richard.
Alejandro had no objections. “That I wanna see. You hold still for him,” he told Richard. “You don’t fight
him, and I might not shoot the boy.”
Richard thought  he  heard  a  soft  cough  almost  directly  behind  him.  He  thought  he  felt  something  zing
past.
At  the  same  time  Alejandro’s  head  rocked  back  half  an  inch.  He  dropped  straight  down.  It  was
instantaneous and almost soundless, only the collapse itself making noise.
Anton  stared.  Richard  followed  his  gaze.  The  back  of  Alejandro’s  neck  was  exploded  open,  an
unmistakable exit wound.
Anton’s jaw sagged in astonishment and alarm; he glanced up at Richard, accusing.  Then  the  big  man
collapsed as well, abruptly, in silence, as though by magic. His arms went slack, dropping both the gun and
the child, and down he went, Michael beneath him. The back of Anton’s neck . . . 
Luis. The last one standing. His attention was on Richard, but he’d heard enough to make him turn and
see and realize he was alone.
Michael galvanized to sudden life. Though still blank of face, he was squirming desperately to crawl free
of Anton’s dead weight. Luis closed on him, knife in hand.
Richard was up, rushing to get to them.
Luis grasped Michael’s golden hair, pulling the boy’s head back to cut his throat.
“Daddy!” The boy’s voice was thin with fear. “Daddy—don’t hurt them . . .”
“Adios to you too, you little—”
Richard tackled him from behind; the two of  them  went  rolling.  Luis  bellowed,  fighting  madly,  without
plan, just striking out. One of his strikes connected,  cutting  into  Richard’s  side.  He  grunted  and  hit  back,
catching the edge of a jaw. That slowed things. Richard made a second swing, more solid, and tipped it in
his favor for good. Luis was out cold.
Pushing  the  body  away,  Richard  took  the  knife  for  his  own.  He  shook  with  rage,  wanted  to  scream
himself, rail at the useless, blind stupidity of the man, but most of all he wanted to rip him wide open.
For that he needed no knife . . . his bare hands would do . . . 
“Daddy,” Michael was sobbing now. “Daddy . . . don’t.”
He looked at the child’s tear-and-dirt smeared face. Hesitating before those crystal blue eyes.
“Don’t . . .”
His heart cracked. He’s seen one parent die. I’ll be damned if that happens  again.  Doubly  damned
if I’m the one who does the -killing.
He crawled over, stretched forth his near hand to take Michael’s . . . and this time reached him.
Chapter Fifteen
He  gathered  the  child  close,  crooning  to  him,  rocking  him,  letting  him  wail  out  his  grief.  Richard’s  eyes
streamed tears as well in shared sorrow. 
Eventually they were both exhausted. Michael went still, his face smoothing out. His eyes went dead and
dull once more as he retreated into the sanctuary that appalling experience had created within him. Soon his

lids drooped and he slept.
Richard  stood  up,  careful  not  to  jar  him  awake,  and  carried  him  toward  the  rental.  He  removed  the
absurd crossbow and lay the child out in the back seat. When he straightened, Jordan Keyes was standing a
few paces away. The man had been damned quiet about it. Probably force of habit.
He seemed quite at home in his dusty fatigues and boots, his face liberally streaked with flat black paint.
All he had to do to be invisible in the dark was shut  his  eyes.  The  gun  in  his  hand  was  fitted  out  with  a
massive silencer. He was in matte black from head to toe, including the night-vision goggles hanging from
his neck.
“Well, that got pretty intense,” he said with a nod toward the fallen. He drew his arm across his sweating
brow, shoving back the knitted skullcap to reveal some pale forehead. The ski mask-styled covering bore a
cousin’s resemblance to a chain mail coif, giving him a knightly air. “You okay?” His gaze dropped to the
gash in Richard’s side.
“Just some scratches. Nothing to worry about. I want to get the boy out of here.”
“I’m all for it, but we got a hell of a mess. Can’t leave anything behind that the Feds can track back to
us . . . you hearing any of this?”
“Yes, I’m just a little tired.”
“No shit, Sherlock, but get with the program, we’ve still got work to do. You need caffeine tabs? I got
some.”
“No, thank you.” He drew himself up, shifting mental gears. They were rather rusty at the moment.
They walked to the center of things, surveying the battlefield. Richard looked at the fallen, scenting the
blood, but felt no hunger. He was weary in spirit and sick. He had no conscience left when it came to killing
killers. In the heat of necessity it was easy, but afterward doubts would  creep  in.  Who  were  they?  Had
they deserved their fate? And why was I the one chosen to deliver it to them?
“Too much work and risk to try hiding the bodies,” said Keyes. “But we’re going to have to destroy all
trace  of  our  specific  presence.  With  any  luck,  the  Federales  might  think  one  of  Trujillo’s  competitors
caught up with him. And having him on this particular site won’t hurt to keep them speculating. Just what
kind of a link do you have to this place? Is that going to be a problem?”
“There’s no paper trail to me from the land itself, but Luis worked  for  a  company  of  mine.  He’s  Luis
Marcelja there, but his fingerprints are on file; the alias will be found out. A smart inves-tigator will find me
sooner or later.”
“Trust  me,  they’re  going  to  have  nothing  but  smart  investigators  all  over  this  one  once  they  identify
Trujillo. Though if anybody comes after you, chances are they’ll want to shake your hand.”
With Bourland’s help and his own hypnotic abilities he’d manage. He’d done so before. “I can weather
it.”
“Well, I can’t. You and I don’t know each other, never heard of each other.”
“Of course.”
“Let’s start by moving your buggy . . . just what the hell did you do?” For the first time Keyes  noticed
the log rammed into the first Caddie. He looked at Richard. “There’s a story here.”
Richard shrugged. “Adrenaline.”
“Impressive.” He leaned into the  open  passenger  door  and  gingerly  twisted  the  keys,  careful  to  avoid
touching the corpse. The motor died. “Okay. She might roll forward—no way am I going to mess with the
parking brake—but you get your crate out of there.”
He did so, the bumpers scraping as Richard drove the rental clear and circled around the wide yard. He
went halfway to the entry road and parked. Going back he saw Keyes had found a dead tree branch and
was dragging it all over the ground, stirring their footprints and tire tracks back into the dust.
“Where did you walk, exactly?” he asked,  pausing  to  wipe  down  the  second  car’s  ripped-out  steering
wheel. He had no question over how it had come to rest yards outside of its vehicle.
“There and there, and I went to cover there.”
“Any sandy spots?”
“I don’t know.”
“Well, find ’em and sweep.” He gave Richard the branch, then went to crouch before the bumper of the
front  car.  He  brought  out  a  knife  and  a  penlight  and  proceeded  to  scratch  off  paint  traces  that  had
transferred over from its contact with the rental. He caught the tiny flakes and pocketed them, then did the
same for Richard’s transport.
They worked like a rehearsed team,  going  through  the  effects  of  the  dead,  not  for  booty,  but  for  any
linking evidence. None presented itself. Richard found cell phones and beepers, taking them away in case
anything  inconvenient  might  be  in  their  electronic  memories.  He’d  make  a  good  home  for  them  in  a

dumpster later, after smashing them to pieces.
Richard saw to Trujillo himself, Keyes to Anton. Both were clean.
“Mouth shot?” Richard asked, indicating the back of the neck exit wounds.
“Little something I picked up from a commando. Blows the spinal cord to hell and gone. The brain can
give all the orders it wants, but nothing goes out. No reflex twitching that can kill the hostage.”
And he’d done both with a silencer yet. “Impressive.” A near-instant death. Too good  for  the  bastard,
but necessary. He returned the Glock to Keyes, who put it with his Walther. 
“Hate to lose this one,” Keyes said about the latter. “I just got it broke in.”
“How will you dispose of them?”
“Probably take ’em apart, see what fun I can have with a blowtorch. I know ways to mess up a barrel
without even trying. You use that revolver at all? Good. One nice thing about those, they don’t throw brass.
Any chance of you finding your empties? Never mind, there won’t be prints on those anyway. It should be
enough to just lose the weapons. The forensic boys can’t  trace  something  that  doesn’t  exist  any  more.  I
think we’ve balled things up enough now; let’s boogie. What are you going to do about Luis?”
“Kill him.”
“You want a moment alone?” There was no irony in the question. He was aware  that  sometimes  cold
murder had to be a private act.
“Not yet. I’ve something . . . special in mind for him.”
Keyes looked disappointed. “You’re not going to set up some kind of Rube Goldberg thing, are you?”
“No, but I would like to ask about contracting for your services. I’ll pay your normal fee.”
“You haven’t heard it yet.”
“How much?”
He named a price. High, but Richard had the funds. “It’s -local work. I remember your policy against it,
but this would primarily be a watchman’s job. It can be done from a safe distance.”
Keyes’s mouth drew tight. “Well, I can see you’ve got a hell of a grudge on. Would you mind giving me
the headlines about that first?”
He did so, his voice cold as he looked down on Luis’s unconscious body. Richard had to be cold so  as
not to feed the rage. If  he  let  it  take  him  over,  then  Luis  would  die  now,  too  quickly,  deprived  of  a  just
punishment. In this creature’s case, Richard had absolutely no conscience at all. 
Keyes shook his head. “So he thought you fathered the kids, stewed about it  for  years,  and  then  went
postal with his brother’s help. That explains why Trujillo stepped outside  his  usual  box  with  the  explosion
stuff. Luis was the fireworks fan.”
“Yes. For Luis it must have been a symbolic thing as well. His way of utterly obliterating the life he had
here. I had no clue, not one hint of what was in his mind. If only I’d . . .”
“Hey, no way are you responsible for him being nuts. I want to know about  the  kids,  though.  The  boy
does look like you.”
“It’s genetics. The children took after their mother’s side; her ancestors are all from Iceland. Luis was
their real father. That’s why Stephanie and I parted. I could not give her children or the life she wanted. He
could.” And ripped it away. “As for this job, all you need to do is make sure he stays where I put him.” 
“What have you got in mind?”
Richard explained it to him. In detail.
Under his sweat-streaked mask of black paint, Keyes went a little pale.
“It won’t be easy to endure,” said Richard. “And I don’t know how long it will take. Are you willing?”
Keyes snorted, throwing a glance at the ruins of the house. “For a guy who did that to his own family?
Hell, yes. And keep your cash. This one’s on me.”
He left Keyes to tidy up the last details and drove home. 
This second trip was hauntingly similar  to  the  first:  the  boy  asleep  in  the  back  and  Richard  driving  all
battered and tired, his sheer weariness holding back the grief. It would need release and soon, but  when?
Tomorrow Bourland would arrive, and Richard would have to be there for him, if only to offer a drink and a
listening  ear.  Other  necessities  would  also  arise,  as  the  mundanities  of  the  world  closed  in,  demanding
attention.
In the old days he could go off on his own and wail his sorrows to the forgiving sky. No more. 
When may I truly grieve for you, my poor Stephanie?
His phone trilled. A wryly sardonic reply from the gods, it seemed.
“Richard, it’s Sam. Any news?”
“Yes, and it’s good. I’ve got Michael back and he’s unharmed.”

“Thank God for that. How?”
“It’s a bit complicated. I’ll explain when I see you, but I’ve sorted everything out. Michael’s  safe  now
with me. No one’s going to hurt him ever again.”
“How is he?”
“Same  condition.”  If  not  worse.  “I’ll  take  care  of  him  tonight,  then  we  can  see  about  that  specialist
tomorrow. Did you call Bourland?”
“Yes, and it was hell trying to fill him in when I didn’t know anything.”
“It’s all right; he’s used to me doing that to people. Would you call him again  for  me?  If  I  phone  he’ll
want  details,  and  I’m  too  exhausted.  Tell  him  what  I  just  said  and  that  he’ll  get  a  complete  debrief
tomorrow. A coherent one.”
“What about Luis? Where is he?”
“Not in the picture,” he said shortly.
Silence on the other end as Sam digested this. “Okay. You’ll tell me everything?”
“I promise.” Which, of course, was a lie. Richard had no inten-tion of telling  Sam  the  truth  about  Luis
and his horrific betrayal. The man dealt with evil enough on a daily basis, no need to add another nightmare
to his collection. 
Nor would Bourland hear any of it. He’d been fond  of  Luis  for  Stephanie’s  sake.  He  did  not  need  to
wonder  if  he  couldn’t  have  done  more,  sensed  something  or  anticipated  the  unimaginable,  and  have
somehow prevented the butchery—all the things that were eating at Richard’s soul.
This is my burden, my good friends. You’re better off without it.
He would come up  with  a  story  to  cover  Luis’s  disappearance.  Alejandro  would  get  the  blame.  That
would be the end of it.
But what of Michael, who knew the truth?
?????????????
He carried the still-sleeping boy gently, thumbed the elevator button, and waited for it to deliver him to a
few hours of peace before the morning storm. As before, he laid Michael in the big bed, then padded about
seeing to his own needs. Once clean, his skin flushed red from the heat of a scalding shower, he carried the
crossbow tripod out to the front room.
No need to wonder now how Trujillo’s hit man had gotten into the flat. Luis himself could have been the
one to set up the trap.
At least it wasn’t a bomb.
As soon as he thought of it, Richard made a quick, thorough search of the place, sniffing for Semtex in
every cupboard, peering under every stick of furniture. Then he went down to  his  safe  room  and  did  the
same. He felt ridiculous, but knew no rest would come to him until he satisfied his flare of paranoia.
That done, he stretched out heavily on the bedroom sofa, and listened to Michael’s soft breathing, waiting
for sleep to take him, too.
He was on the point of drifting into it when the sound of the elevator snapped him wide awake. Who on
earth . . . ?
Then he suddenly knew and hurried forth, his heart hammering.
The doors parted, and he swept Sabra up into his arms.
“You knew to come,” he said, quite some moments later. For a time it was enough to simply  hold  her.
His fatigue vanished.
“How could I not? Your pain and need called me like a thunderclap. I’m only sorry I could not get here
sooner.”
He put her down, and looked at her. Outwardly, she was the same as ever, beautiful, delicate of frame
and face, but there were changes in her  that  only  he  could  discern.  There  was  a  new  power  within  her
now, carefully veiled to most, quite visible to him. She possessed a strange strength that went  beyond  the
apparent limits of her small body, as though the woman before him was merely a projection of her real self,
an ephemeral vessel to interact with the temporal world. He had the feeling that should the projection ever
became a full reality, mountains would crumble.
The Grail had done that for her.
“You’ve suffered much,” she said, having gazed at him in turn.
“You’re here. I can bear anything now.”
She smiled. “Take care what you say, my Richard.”
“I know.” He was long familiar with the universe’s antic sense of humor. “But it’s still true.”
She  dragged  a  sizable  backpack  in  from  the  elevator,  leaving  it  on  the  floor.  Dressed  in
an  old,  oversized  sweater,  faded  jeans,  and jogging shoes, her long hair tied  back  with  a  bandanna,

she could have vanished into any college campus, but for her eyes. 
She could stop rivers with those eyes.
“Show me the child,” she said, straightening.
He  ushered  her  to  the  bedroom.  She  glanced  down  once  at  the  surprisingly  large  bloodstain  on  the
threshold carpet and looked up at him, one eyebrow raised. He shrugged sheepishly, then motioned toward
the bed. The only light came from the open bathroom door, more than sufficient for them both.
She  bent  over  Michael,  touching  a  loving  hand  to  his  forehead.  She  was  not  his  declared
godmother—that honor had gone to Bourland’s daughter—but was certainly his spiritual one for her link to
Richard. She caressed the silken blond hair, then went  still,  her  eyes  closed.  She  remained  so  for  a  long
time, then took a shuddering breath and pulled away, shivering.
He went to her. “What is it?”
“The child is dying.”
His heart plummeted. No. Not again. We’ve been through too much. 
Michael  could  not  die.  He  was  all  that  was  left,  all  that  remained  of  the  beauty  that  had  once  been
Stephanie, that had once held Richard so close, so wrapped in an unconditional, an undemanding love.  “Is
his fate sealed beyond all change?”
Sabra’s smile was sad, yet it warmed his very soul. In that smile he knew that no matter what, all would
be well. “Not quite.”
He sagged with relief. There was a chance then, and if it were even remotely within his power, he would
make it a certainty. “What must I do?”
She reached her hand up and gently touched his pale, unshaven face. “Ah, Richard, ever the knight, ever
the protector. Indeed there is much, and it is such that only you can do. A man betrayed the boy, and a man
must save him. Only another who has been so terribly wounded can heal his wound.”
“I do not understand.”
“Think back to another son despised by an unloving father, another so cast away, another wounded nigh
unto death.”
The inner vision was so strong, Richard saw it as though it were happening again: his father’s face full of
hate, the bite of the blade, and the tearing pain. Pain that went far deeper and continued longer than that of
any physical wound; pain that had been his enemy and then his strange, awful friend; pain that had  faded
yet never quite disappeared. His most bitter companion. How unloved is a son unloved by his father, how
desperate  and  unending  his  loneliness  and  despair.  Such  a  great,  unfillable  void  to  bestow  as  a  paternal
legacy.
“Whatever Michael needs, that will I do.”
“I knew as much. You must go and find his spirit. He is much hurt and needs your healing. Complete the
circle before his soul drifts so far away that it can never return.”
“Yes, of course I’ll go; but where?”
Her dark eyes glittered in the cool dimness of the room. -“Beyond.”
When she explained what was to be done, Richard took her hand, leading her out.
“I’ve the perfect place,” he said. “Bring all that you need.”
Puzzled, but trusting his judgment, she went to her backpack and drew forth a bundle that made discrete
clinking sounds. From it rose the dusky scent of herbs and incense. The second bundle was smaller, padded
well, and wrapped in pure white linen that he recognized as handwoven. He knew Sabra would have raised,
harvested, and worked the flax herself, weaving in magic with each pass of the thread shuttle. He had no
need to ask what was -inside, he could feel its serene force. She gave him the larger bundle,  hugging  the
smaller one to her breast.
He  motioned  Sabra  toward  the  center  of  the  room  where  what  appeared  to  be  a  square,
free-standing closet had been built  as  a  space  divider.  One  of  its  four  outer  walls  held  an  entertainment
center, two had shelving or displayed artwork. He opened the door set in the fourth, entering a cubicle with
a spiral staircase. It went up to a trapdoor in the ceiling, which he pushed open.
As she followed, emerging  into  the  chamber  above,  he  could  not  repress  a  grin.  How  good  it  was  to
know that even after fifteen hundred years he could himself surprise and enchant her.
They stood in the very apex of the great glass pyramid.
The slanting panels of glass met twenty feet overhead, the floor being an exact forty by forty feet. It was
huge, but not oppressive with its space as in some structures. Fresh air circulated from hidden floor vents,
which kept the heat from building up too much during the day, exposed as it was to the full sun.
He eased the trapdoor down, seamlessly enclosing them.

The floor was wood parquet, a light background with a dark red pattern stained into it. Within the largest
framing square was a circle, within the circle a smaller square, its angles aligned to the compass points. The
square-within-circle  pattern  continued  until  the  final  square.  Unlike  the  rest  of  New  Karnak,  the
measurements  here  were  balanced  and  true.  Richard  had  seen  to  that,  drawing  out  the  lines  and
painstakingly applying the stain himself.
But the focus was the construct in the middle. It was a step pyramid  within  the  smooth-sided  one  and
composed entirely of interlocking slats of thick, clear plastic. Free-standing, it rose to a platform ten feet up,
the top in the exact center of the -chamber.
“What do you think?” he asked, but was already delighting at the look on her face.
She finally found speech again, looking at him with bright, loving eyes. “You . . . absolutely amaze me.”
“This is why I had to have the place.” They climbed slowly to the top, his bare feet brushing the warm
plastic, the sun energy flowing up into him  in  a  form  that  did  not  injure.  Standing  there  made  it  seem  as
though they were suspended, floating not only in the room but above the night-dark city.
Beyond the glass, the city itself was a distant fairyland, all lights and shadows. To the  north  were  vast
unlit fields and woods, yet untouched.
“It’s my own world,” he said. “I come here to  meditate  and  remember  how  small  we  truly  are  in  the
universe and yet how boundlessly important.”
She took his hand. Her love seemed to course from her fingers and into him like a rushing fall of water.
“It is perfect. Let us begin.”
Midnight, not of the clock, but the true mid of night when the moon was at her Zenith and the sun blotted
out by the whole of the planet’s bulk.
They sat cross-legged on the high center platform, facing each other. Sabra looked west, Richard east.
Between them was a brass brazier on a tripod in which charcoal smoldered.
Sabra unwrapped the smaller, more precious  treasure  and  reverently  held  it  high.  A  small  cup  it  was,
very ancient, yet -untouched by time. Richard fell in love with its simple beauty and all that it represented all
over again. It was object and idea at once, promise and fulfillment, desire and satiation.
A frisson of its power went through him as Sabra placed it in his open upturned hands.
“Hold it gently,” she said. “It will be there when you are in need.”
He nodded, full well knowing the truth of that.
Sabra produced dried herbs from a leather pouch, casting them onto the redly glowing coals. The smoke
swirled about them, a heady mixture of sage, sweet grass, and others he could not tell. They kindled, flames
shooting up high and hot, but short-lived, guttering to extinction, releasing white smoke.
Magic was suddenly in the air. He could feel it all around, far more powerful than he, than even Sabra.
Yet what was here was but one minute tendril drawn down from the whole of the core.
She cast a handful of incense into the brass vessel. The smoke doubled, trebled, pouring out to permeate
every corner of the great chamber.
Absurdly,  it  occurred  to  him  the  alarm  in  the  rooms  below  could  well  go  off  bringing  heavy-booted
firemen,  all  axes  and  purpose,  crashing  in  on  them.   He  almost  said  something,  but  Sabra,  catching  his
thought  as  she  often  did,  merely  smiled  and  shook  her  head.  The  Goddess  would  take  care  of  such
problems.  He  needed  to  focus  on  the  task  before  him,  to  clear  his  mind  of  distractions.  Michael’s  life
depended on it.
The child still slept in the bedroom below, body intact, soul elsewhere.
Sabra began to chant, repeating over and over an ancient rhyme in a  tongue  he’d  never  heard  before.
She was calling out to someone, he discerned that much, and  it  was  working.  Softer  than  the  touch  of  a
shadow, other voices joined hers, one by one in the same key, female, strong, insistent.
The smoke thickened, whirling in a slow spiral around them.
The full moon was directly overhead, at first brilliant silver, so bright as to hurt his sensitive eyes. Then
the silver darkened, the mottled markings on her distant face turned blood red, spreading across the whole
of the disk. Its lurid light filled the room, melding with the smoke until he and Sabra seemed to float on a sea
of blood.
Her chanting—and the chanting of her unseen sisters—grew louder; the sea closed in on them. It rose
high until it filled all of Richard’s sight. He concentrated on keeping his mind clear  and  calm.  Fear  would
dispel everything.
Red darkness surrounded him, red moonlight bathed him from above, brightening again to hurt his eyes. It
physically pulled at him. 
He felt himself lifted toward the crimson light, drawn inexorably forth into its vortex. The chanting rang

in his  ears,  rushing  through  his  temples,  roaring  like  a  torrent  in  springtime.  He  stretched  his  arms  high.
Strong, invisible hands carried him swiftly upward; he passed through the barrier of glass as one might run
through a curtain of strung beads.
His eyes were  shut  tight  now;  he  strained  for  air,  his  breath  coming  in  heaving  gasps.  He  wanted  to
move  but  could  not;  something  held  him  close  in  an  iron  grip  along  the  whole  length  of  his  body.
Panic-stricken, he tried to speak, to open his eyes. He was paralyzed again by the poison, only this time he
would never wake from its spell. He  tried  to  scream,  but  all  he  could  hear  was  the  chanting,  the  voices
buffeting him like fists as he spun helpless and blind . . . 
And then silence. 
Suddenly released, he sat up as though from a nightmare, sweat cold on his brow, eyes staring. He could
scarce  take  in  what  they  showed  him:  a  bright  sunlit  meadow,  green  under  the  midsummer  sun,  quite
beautiful.
But slow, painful death if he did not find shade.
He saw a line of trees nearby. He  stumbled  toward  their  shelter,  not  understanding  why  he  could  not
persuade  his  unsteady  legs  to  more  speed.  They  dragged  like  leaden  weights  over  the  thick  overgrown
grass. It took him ages to cover the ground, and when he fell beneath the shade of a friendly oak, he gasped
like a dying fish. His side had caught a stitch and hurt like blazes. What was wrong? Was the poison still at
work on him? He felt so weak and tired from the exertion. No matter, he would soon recover. Sabra said
he had very little time left to find Michael, so while catching his second wind he took stock of himself, his
surroundings. 
He was no longer in his old blue bathrobe, but fully dressed in a soft woolen tunic and leggings the color
of twine. Leather boots were on his feet, leather belt riding low on his  hip,  all  handmade.  He’d  not  worn
such clothes for a thousand years. They felt strange to him, bringing back tactile memories long forgot. He
wasn’t just in another world but in very much another time.
The  Grail  was  gone  from  his  hands,  but  that  did  not  trouble  him.  In  this  magical  place  intent  was  as
strong as actuality. If and when he needed the Grail, it would be there as she’d promised.
What he’d first taken to be a meadow was actually a large clearing in  the  midst  of  a  great  wood.  He
recognized  nothing  about  this  place  with  no  landmarks  immediately  visible.  There  was  no  sign  of  gaudy
New Karnak. He certainly wasn’t in  Texas  any  more.  Not  with  these  massive  trees.  Some  of  the  oaks
here  were  a  full  ten  feet  or  more  in  girth,  ancient  even  by  his  standards,  with  shadows  black  as  death
gathered beneath them. Many raised their gnarled branches high to the sun, others were bent and twisted,
taking perverse glory in their corruption, and some were divided, with new growth above,  but  their  trunks
split asunder to show rotting cores. 
The day was warm, not burning hot, the sun shining gently from  a  pale  blue  sky.  All  around  were  the
sounds  of  life.  Birds  sang  incessantly,  one  taking  over  from  the  other  unbidden,  their  calls  filling  the
honey-sweet air with undeniable joy. Insects hummed along their busy way, drawn by the  heady  smell  of
wildflowers that drenched him, soothing as thoughts of love.
He  leaned  back  against  the  trunk  of  the  oak.  Such  a  blissfully  exquisite  day  he  had  not  known
for . . . how long? He couldn’t remember. Had he ever? No matter. He did now. 
He smiled, idly  pushing  his  fingers  deep  into  the  grass  until  they  reached  the  damp  earth  below,  then
raised them to his face to take in the wondrous scent of earth and green growth. It stirred his soul, that rich
smell, he wanted to rest here and just breathe for a week. He knew that wasn’t possible, but it couldn’t hurt
to steal just a moment. His eyelids flickered. He did not want to  sleep,  he  would  miss  the  beauty  around
him, but the heavy, lush air lulled him. The endless drone of insect and birdsong grew louder, shutting away
all else, and his eyelids drifted shut.
“Richard!”
A voice cut through his semi-slumber.
“Richard!”
He knew the voice yet could not name it. It came from everywhere and nowhere.
“Richard, do not sleep!”
Something slapped him, hard. He twice felt the hot sting of a hand on his face.  His eyes  flashed  open,
alarmed. “Sabra?” His own voice sounded strange, thick and slurred as if he  had  been  long  abed,  yet  he
had not dozed off. Or had he? He did not know. “I hear you, Sabra. What is wrong?”
“You must not sleep, my love. This is a dangerous place, treacherous. Time is not as it should be for you.
Many have been  here  before  and  slept,  some  never  to  waken,  some  to  return  eventually  to  life  but  old,
confused, swearing that they had closed their eyes but a moment. A moment here may be years elsewhere.
Time is loosened and is your enemy.”

He stood and rubbed his eyes. The air was cooler now,  the  birdsong  more  remote  and  less  seductive.
“Where are you?”
“Beyond.”  Sabra’s  voice  was  distant,  fading.  “This  is  all  the  help  I  can  give,  and  then  only  by  the
strength of the Goddess and the Nine Sisters. To find Michael you must follow the signs as in the old days.”
“What signs?”
“You will know them. Trust in that. But beware, there is danger for you that I did not foresee.”
“What danger?”
“In this land you are an ordinary man once more.”
“Ordinary? How can that be?” He could not believe such a thing.
“The magic demands balance. The blood of the Hounds of Annwyn was the price of your passage here.
I did not know the Guardians would take it from you. In this place you are a fragile mortal man. You can
die here. Truly die.”
No—that was impossible. He felt no different. Or did he? “Sabra . . . ?”
“Take care, my love, for there is danger all around. Hurry, do not tarry. Find him!”
And the voice was gone.
Nerves taut and all his senses alert, Richard stared around with fresh eyes. Mortality? How?  The  first
rush of terror froze him a moment, then eased as he thought things through. Danger was all  around,  true,
but  he’d  survived  in  a  tougher,  much  more  demanding  world  than  this  for  thirty-five  years  before  his
change. He could deal with this summer land for however long it took. 
At least now he understood why his run to the shelter of the trees seemed to take so much effort. And
why his senses seemed so muffled.
He  would  indeed  take  extra  care.  Yet  there  was  one  advantage  to  this  return  to  mortal  frailty.  He
stepped into the sunlight, raising his face like a supplicant for a blessing. It shone  full  on  him,  and  for  the
first  time  in  many,  many  centuries,  all  he  felt  was  its  warm  healing  caress.  No  blindness,  no  acidlike
burning. He closed his eyes and spun slowly in a circle,  arms  outstretched,  a  game  he  used  to  play  as  a
child, though he could not remember what it was called.
It was in truth a blessing, and he would remember it forever.
A sharp, cracking sound. A careless footfall? Richard dropped to his haunches, jolted from his  reverie.
He would remember forever . . . if he lived that long.
Something moved in the woods across the clearing, and he could not pierce the thick shadows under the
trees to see.
There,  again!  A  twig  snapping  and  the  rustle  of  dead  leaves.  It  was  closer.  Richard,  mindful  of  his
new-vulnerable state, slipped back to the shelter of the trees on his side. There was silence once more for
several long minutes. All he could hear now was the pounding of blood in his brain. Dear Goddess, but he’d
forgotten the feeling of this kind  of  fear.  Terror  and  exhilaration  at  once.  He’d  lost  the  memory  of  how
alive it made him from one instant to the next.
He strained his eyes searching the trees opposite for any sign of whoever or whatever it was but could
see nothing. He abruptly heard the sound again . . . there . . . yes, something white moved there. But what?
It emerged slowly from cover; delicate, shy, huge eyes innocent yet wise, a pure white hart stepped out
into the sunlight, graceful as a dancer.
He  slumped  and  tried  to  steady  his  still-racing  heart.  Relief  flooded  through  him  so  strongly  that  he
wanted to laugh; instead, he held himself quiet, not wanting to startle the animal.
The  hart  came  a  few  paces  into  the  clearing,  standing  quite  still,  only  her  ears  flicking  nervously  for
sound. And then she saw him. He would have sworn that it was not possible for her to know he was there.
He’d been quite silent, and was mostly hidden behind a tree. Yet as he watched she turned deliberately, and
fixed her great brown eyes upon him.
Come.
He gaped in response  to  the  flower-soft  whisper.  It  could  have  been  a  trick  of  the  wind.  Merely  the
leaves above shifting and not—
Come!
The voice was clear in his head this time. Then the hart turned and walked daintily back whence she had
come. At the edge of the clearing she paused, as though waiting, looking once over her shoulder at him. 
Follow the signs as in the old days, Sabra had said. The white hart had ever been a sign, a very powerful
one, leading to adventure and danger. Richard’s nerves tingled at the thought. She could only  be  here  for
him, to lead him to Michael. If his soul had retreated to this sanctuary, he might well have followed the hart
himself. What child could have resisted?
Richard stood. The sudden movement startled the animal, for she skittered and seemed about to flee, but

spun and stood her ground. He now stepped into the clearing, and they  faced  each  other,  man  and  beast
united in common purpose. 
“Where is Michael, good friend?” he murmured. “Lead me to him, if you will.”
She broke away at once, ears canted to hear his progress as he followed.
Deeper in the woods the daylight faded, filtered by the dense foliage. The hart kept her distance ahead,
and he did not try to close the gap. The  white  of  her  coat  was  easy  to  see  as  she  picked  her  way,  and
Richard knew better than to try to hurry her, else she would leave him. 
The  journey  was  not  easy.  The  trees  grew  close  together  here,  often  forming  a  barrier  that  he  was
unable to get through. Then he would have to circle around searching for a clear path. She would wait for
him at these times, nibbling at tender leaves or snuffling the ground until he caught up, then she would head
off again. 
The exertion was beginning to have its effect on Richard. The day was still warm, and no cooling breeze
could penetrate this growth. Sweat plastered his hair, and his clothes were soaked. Branches snapped and
snagged at his progress, scratching him, and a myriad of insects clung in a hovering cloud. They got in his
eyes and nose, biting, feeding on his blood.
So this is how it feels!
He swiped impatiently at them, angered that such small things could create so great a hurt.
When  he  looked  up,  the  hart  was  gone.  She’d  ever  been  in  sight,  but  no  longer.  The  forest  went
unnaturally still. No birds, only the insects remained to continue their torment. He was quite alone, deep in
the tangled trees and undergrowth with no idea of where he was or which way he must go.
He looked around desperately, cursing himself for a fool for having followed the animal unthinkingly. He
looked for the path that he’d broken through the trees, but it had vanished as well.  Fear  began  to  rise  up
once more, for it was in dark places as this that panic was first bred and birthed. This forest was an enemy,
terrifying in its vastness. He had to fight the urge to shout for help as he looked desperately  around;  who
would hear him? Should he stay or go, and which way? He could not see the sun to mark a direction.
It  would  get  dark  all  too  soon.  He  had  no  wish  to  spend  the  night  in  this  place.  Blindly  he  set  forth,
snapping branches as he went, going as fast as he could in the close surroundings. At least he was moving.
That certainly made him feel better. Then he spied a strangely gnarled tree just ahead and knew he’d seen
it before. His heart sank as he realized that it marked the spot where he’d stood when the hart disappeared.
Without her guidance he’d walked in a circle.
He sank to the  ground,  his  heart  hammering  as  he  gave  in  to  a  moment  of  pure  terror.  He  was  lost,
utterly, utterly lost. He wiped his brow and held his head in his hands, cursing the price he’d  unknowingly
paid to come to this hellish  place.  What  he  would  give  for  his  vampire  senses  now.  Tears  of  frustration
welled in his eyes, and he rubbed them away impatiently.
“This is not for me, but for Michael!” he called out. “Take me to him! Please!”
Movement.
A flash of white barely glimpsed through the tangle ahead. A pale gleam like a ghost. 
He hauled himself upright and with fresh hope staggered forward through tangling vines and tree roots.
The forest seemed against him, trying to hold him back, branches reaching forth to twist about his arms and
legs, slapping his face and neck, leaves rustling with cruel laughter. He pushed and fought his way through.
It had to end eventually. It must. He thought of free-flowing air and escape from the damned blood-sucking
insects.
But when he finally burst through into a clearing, the white he had glimpsed was not that of the hart. It
was the tattered dress of a woman leaning with her back against a tree. Her head was bowed  as  though
praying or asleep, her long, rippling hair hanging free.
The sight so surprised him that he forgot caution, standing in the open to stare. 
She was not really leaning. Her arms were drawn back around the trunk. She moved a little, and across
the space between  them  Richard  heard  the  unmistakable  sound  of  chains  clanking,  chains  and  her  quiet
sobbing.
She was not alone. Some twenty feet from  her  was  pitched  a  knight’s  pavilion.  His  war-horse,  in  full
battle armor, cropped contentedly at the sweet grasses of the clearing. A shield bearing no token to identify
its  owner  hung  from  one  of  the  boughs  nearby  along  with  a  sword  in  its  scabbard.   A  lance  leaned  up
against them.
Follow the signs as in the old days. Sabra’s words once more rang in his head.
This was definitely a knightly quest. The hart had led him here, and now he must rescue the lady. It was
one of the immutable laws of chivalry. A test of his courage. But he was mortal here, so any conflict could
be deadly, and this would be conflict against a fully armed and armored knight. He had no doubt such a one

occupied the pavilion.
Well, I’ve learned a few new tricks since those old days. Let’s see what happens.
Richard stole forward, his soft boots silent on the grass. The woman looked up at him, her eyes sad and
full of fear. He signed for her to be still, then reached for the sword and shield.
That’s when he heard the knight emerging from the tent.
Chapter Sixteen
He was a giant, half again Richard’s height, broad of shoulder, and clad in blood  red  armor.  Again,  there
was no sign or emblem of any sort on his things. His face was hidden by a tall, conical helmet with small,
hooded eye slits. In one hand he held a mace.
“Come to test me, boy?” he boomed, his voice harsh, mocking.
Richard  hurriedly  seized  the  sword  and  shield—just  in  time.  He  barely  got  the  shield  up  to  block  a
devastating blow from the mace. The force of it cracked against his lower arm and traveled up his shoulder,
knocking him to the ground.
Training from centuries past reasserted itself. He cast his shield arm to the side and rolled that way on
the momentum, keeping his sword close to his body. He  got  clear  and  was  on  his  feet  before  the  return
swing, circling to keep just out of the giant’s line of sight. It would be severely limited by the helmet.
“Who art thou who gives no challenge?” he demanded.
“Thy life and death at once!”
The great  man  lashed  out  wide.  Richard  ducked,  darting  forward  and  thrusting  up  at  the  unprotected
base of his weapon arm. The point of the blade connected and bit deep, raising a howl of pain and anger.
Reaction was quick, though; he had to drop and roll again, feeling the breeze of the mace as it brushed just
over the hair of his head.
I can’t smell the blood, he thought. He could see it, glistening as it flowed over the armor.
The giant paused only long enough to  shift  the  mace  to  his  left  hand.  He  strode  forward,  roaring.  He
moved very fast, each stride a match for two of Richard’s, and as for his reach . . . 
Richard used his shield again as the mace crashed down. The wood began to splinter along some hidden
flaw. Richard chopped at the man’s extended arm on the inside, striking sparks against the mail. 
“Weak vessel,” taunted the giant. “Unworthy! Think thou art a man?”
The mace swept down. Richard danced just outside the radius of the swing and  went  close  again,  this
time trying for the back of a leg. He succeeded, slamming a strong enough blow to buckle the left knee, but
failed to cut through the mail to break flesh. He blocked the return strike of the mace with the shield. He
got his sword up and caught the knight hard on the wrist. The -armor prevented him from severing it,  but
the weapon dropped.
“Yield!” he shouted.
“Never!”
“I would not kill thee. Yield and depart.”
The  giant  seemed  not  to  hear  and  struck  out.  The  thick  mail  of  his  gauntlets  saved  his  hands  as  he
warded off sword blows, laughing as he pressed on.
The best Richard could hope for was to keep the giant at a distance. Though larger and much stronger,
the weight of all that armor would tell on him sooner or later. When that happened . . . 
But Richard had to keep backing away, step-by-step, his chest aching for want of air. He should not be

so tired. In a few moments he’d be too exhausted himself to fight.
“Come, boy! Come and show me just how weak you are!”
Still backing, fighting defensively, trying to catch his breath and plan.  He was faster and could see better
than his opponent, about the only advantages left; time to use them before he was too spent.
He  feinted  to  the  left,  then  darted  right,  out  of  the  giant’s  view.  Before  he  could  turn,  Richard  had
reached the woman. He dropped the shield, using both hands to arc his sword down on the heavy chain. 
More sparks. He struck again and again to no effect, then the blade snapped in two. 
No  time  to  curse  the  luck.  The  giant  seized  him  round  the  waist,  lifting  him  high.  Richard  struggled,
swinging  down  and  backwards,  hacking  at  those  massive  arms.  That  helped;  he  was  half-thrown,
half-dropped to the  springy  turf.  He’d  forgotten  what  it  was  to  take  a  fall  from  a  horse,  all  bruises  and
disorientation; this was like that. He pushed upright, focusing to hold onto the sword. At a sound behind him,
he instinctively dodged, whirled, struck. Metallic clank. Bellow of outrage. Something hit  his  shoulder.  He
spun and nearly fell. 
He needed the lance. The length and weight of it called for much skill on horseback, which he possessed,
but there was no time to mount the tethered beast, and certainly no room to maneuver in this all-too-small
clearing.
Richard  stumbled  to  the  tree,  discarded  the  sword  and  grabbed  the  lance.  It  was  heavier  than  he
expected, more clumsy to balance than he remembered.
But now he was reduced to ordinary strength.
He’d have only one chance with it, too, for there was no way he could prevent the giant from taking the
weapon. To him, it would be as light as a jackstraw and as easily plucked away. 
Point control. One of  the  hardest  things  to  master.  Difficult  enough  on  the  back  of  a  galloping  horse,
holding balance,  keeping  the  lance  steady  and  level,  placing  it  precisely  in  one  telling  spot,  all  that  while
another man is charging at you with the same intent—and yet it was still easier than trying to do the same
thing on foot. 
He held it crosswise over his body like a spear, quickly moving on as more laughter erupted behind him.
“Think you to defeat me with that?”
He turned. The giant was in the center of the clearing, and except for the blood coming from his wound,
seemed little the worse for wear.
“Come and charge me, boy! Unhorse me with that twig.” He shook  both  his  fists.  There  was  less
movement in his right arm.
Richard hurried to his right, the giant’s left, causing him to turn. Sluggish he was, and there was pain in
that booming voice. All his effort was in intimidation and insult. He was in midword, when Richard suddenly
cut left, bringing the long staff to the horizontal as he rushed forward.
The sharp point ran true and caught the giant in the same wound. The impact was not as devastating as
it might be for a man full tilt on a horse, but it was enough. The giant screamed now and tried to fall back
and escape, but Richard kept pushing on.
Then the giant’s feet tangled upon each other, and down he dropped. 
Richard let go the lance and hurried to retrieve the sword. He returned just as the giant  began  to  right
himself. Richard threw a side kick at  the  helmet.  That  hurt  his  foot,  but  it  resulted  in  the  giant’s  sudden
collapse. 
“Yield!” he cried, standing over him. He pressed  the  broken  sword  up  under  the  helm,  past  the  chain
mail coif, the shattered end on the vulnerable flesh under his jaw. “Yield and live.”
“Never! Kill me and be done!”
“As you wish!”
Richard drove in solidly with all his remaining strength, driving the broken sword deep.  The  great  body
flailed in its death throes; one massive arm caught Richard, sending him staggering.
His legs gave out, the earth jarred his back. He shut his eyes against the spinning sky above and lay inert
on the grass, striving to breathe again. God, but he was tired. And how he thirsted. How strange it was to
thirst this way, without hunger, without the strength of his beast to carry him forward to hunt.
When the dizziness passed and he could trust himself to  walk  without  falling,  he  rose  and  went  to  the
giant.  Blood  had  fair  gushed  from  him,  soaking  the  turf.  Richard  felt  no  hunger  for  it;  indeed,  he  was
repulsed and wished to avoid contact, but hanging from the man’s belt was a key.
He took it  away  and  went  to  the  lady.  Though  he  must  have  been  a  fearsome  sight  himself  with  his
batterings, torn clothes, bloodings, and doubtless wild eyes, she did not shrink from him. Instead, once he’d
unlocked her bindings, she gathered him close to give comfort. 
“I thank thee, good Richard,” she whispered. 

He had no surprise that she knew him, for he seemed to know her. He pulled back  to  look  at  her,  but
there was something odd about her face.  It seemed to change like an image trapped  in  water,  shifting  as
light and shadow played over it. He shook his head, rubbing his eyes. 
She left him a moment, then returned with a water skin. He eagerly drank; though warm and tasting of
leather it was yet sweet on his parched lips and dust-dry throat. 
“Who was that knight?” he asked. 
“He was your life and death. Ending and deliverance.” 
Richard twitched a smile. “That wants explaining.”
“You will find the answer with him.”
“Who art thou?” 
“Your death and life. Beginning and continuance.”
And perhaps she would give a more clear reply, when the time was right for him to hear it. “Why did he
treat you so?”
“He did love and seduce me once upon a time. Fate and his own cruelty made him hate me.”
An old story, he thought, and went back to the knight. He dragged off the huge helmet. 
The man’s eyes were open, giving the world one last angry glare. Though definitely dead, there was still
a movement about him. Like the lady, his face seemed to change, rippling. 
In  that  face  Richard  recognized  the  features  of  many  men;  his  father,  his  brother,  Luis,
Alejandro . . . they and more like them shifted skin and bone like malleable clay. Hundreds of faces, callous
enemies all, some he’d killed himself, others he’d simply outlived.
He  thought  he  understood  now,  and  returned  to  the  lady.  She  was  also  one  of  hundreds,  perhaps
thousands. For a few seconds she was Elaine,  then  Stephanie,  then  Ghislaine,  then  Elena  and  Seraphina,
both grown to the womanhood they’d been denied—all were beautiful to him. One face he did  not  know,
yet she above the others drew him the strongest. 
“Do I know thee, lady?” 
“You have always known me.” 
How can such ice-blue eyes be so warm? he wondered. Then the answer came to him and he was on
his knees, arms around her, holding her like life itself. He had no tears, for  he’d  wept  them  out  centuries
ago, wept them for the mother he’d never seen, the mother who had bled out her life delivering him . . . 
She crooned to him, gentle hands caressing his hair. “You cannot stay, good Richard.” 
“I know, but ’tis sweet. There is so much I would say to thee, so much I would hear.” 
“Then speak to me in thy dreams, for I have always heard you.”
“But I shall not hear you in turn.”
“Nay, but you do. Thy heart has ever known my voice. I love thee and am proud of thee.”
He’d thought himself exhausted of tears. Fresh ones sprang to his eyes.
“You must find the child, now,” she said after an all-too-brief moment. “And quickly.”
“Yes, I swear it. Come with me. Guide me to him.”
“You know the way yourself. Though you walk in the darkness, the light within has ever guided you. Let
it guide you again.”
“Mother . . .” 
“Fare thee well, sweet Dickon.”
And she was gone. He remained on his knees, arms out as though in prayer. Between them was a shaft
of sunlight from a summer  out  of  time.  It  flared  brightly,  then  faded.  The  wood  around  him  dimmed  for
want of her presence.
His heart ached, his whole being  ached.  Pierced  right  through  he  was,  yet  he  took  a  strange  comfort
from it. She loved him, had always been there, though he’d known it not.
That was changed. “I will speak with thee again and soon,” he promised.
No reply came. Saddening, and he could not linger to mourn. He got tiredly to his feet, looking around for
the next sign to follow.
The big war-horse snorted and stamped as though to mock his lack of perception.
Richard boosted onto its back, dug his heels in, but held the reins loose. As he presumed, the big  beast
knew its own way, taking a trail from the clearing. A sudden turning around a stand of beech trees marked
the end of the wild forest and the beginning of open fields. He was on a rise, his  road  leading  down  to  a
lake and a shallow fording.
Of course. It had to be.
Beyond the lake was his father’s castle. No reflection of it lay on the water, yet he knew it to be real. To
himself at least. In this place.

He kicked the horse forward to a gallop, splashing over the ford, surging up the next rise and thence to
the gates and through. Within, all  was  silent.  No  armsmen  called  a  challenge,  no  servants  scuttled  up  to
attend him; he was quite alone but for his stamping mount. 
He threw a leg over its neck and slipped down. Untethered, it trotted off to the stables, there to vanish,
he supposed, as the hart had done, as had his mother. This journey, he now understood, was less to do with
Michael than with himself. His prayer was that he’d not been delayed too long.
Ignoring his stiff muscles and bruises, he pushed into a shambling run, going through  the  tall  doors  that
opened to the feasting hall. It was also empty, having no sign that anyone had been there in centuries.
He took the door opposite into the winding hall. No light shone here, but he knew the way, had walked it
often enough in nightmares. It ended, as the dreams always did, with the door to his father’s chamber.
He pushed through.
The great throne was yet there, next to it a simple table. The air stank of fat from the  burning  torches
along the walls. Their light was red, unsteady, the smokes rising black to layer the sooty ceiling.
On the throne . . . Michael, looking very small and frail. His dead eyes gazed out, all unseeing. He leaned
wearily against one arm of the chair.
To his horror, Richard saw that the boy was bleeding from his side, a deep wound, the blood flow slow
but steady. The terrible stream marched down the base of the throne to the floor, where it pooled, growing.
Richard rushed to him, but  the  closer  he  got  the  thicker  the  air  seemed,  until  he  was  unable  to  move
forward at all.
“Let me go to him!” he shouted at he knew not what.
“Would you heal him?” a voice asked. It was neither male nor female, kind or cruel. It just was.
“Yes! Of course!” he answered, looking wildly about for the source. “Let me pass. Please!” 
“You know him not.” 
“I don’t have to!” 
“Then learn.” 
Michael’s face changed, his form shifted, grew. No longer a little boy, a grown man sat in his place, the
same agonized posture, the same dead eyes. Such eyes Richard had last seen on Michel when they both lay
wounded on the grass that day so long ago. 
He  could  not  breathe.  Before  him  was  the  truth  he’d  always  known  in  his  heart,  but  never  dared  to
speak. How many lives have you had, boy? How many woundings? Could I have spared you? 
“Do you forgive?” the voice asked. “Do you forgive what had to be, what you could not help?” 
He shook his fists in frustration. “I forgave, years past I forgave. You know it to be so.” 
“You never forgave yourself. You still carry anger within for not doing more to stop the impossible.” 
“My anger is nothing to his need. Please, let me pass.” 
The man’s form shrank in upon itself to that of the desperately hurt child. “Wouldst heal him of this living
death?” 
“Yes!” 
“You know not the price.” 
“Name it, I will pay.”
“See it first.”
The  form  on  the  throne  shifted,  grew.  Richard  saw  himself  seated  there,  face  gray  and  gaunt,  eyes
hollow  and  lost,  but  wretchedly  aware.  He  was  old,  ancient,  hair  and  beard  gone  so  white  as  to  be
transparent, his wrinkled, spotted flesh hanging loose from aching bones. One skeletal hand was pressed to
his bleeding side; the pain like cold fire, unable to consume itself and die. His shrunken body trembled from
relentless  weariness;  he  could  not  lay  himself  down.  There  was  no  escape,  no  rest,  only  the  unending
torment of an injured soul.
“Thus will it come to pass, thus will it be for you forever,” said the voice. “To save  the  boy,  you  must
take his place, assume his hurts. You will live on in this agony until the last fall of night. And when that may
be no one knows.” 
Richard swallowed hard. “Never to die and find release?” 
“Never. The cup of life will ever sustain you.”
On the table was the Grail. Its presence alone, he knew, had power enough  for  miracles.  But  that  the
miracle of life could be so twisted . . . how could they ask so much of him? To leave him perpetually dying,
yet alive, without hope, alone . . . 
But  such  was  what  the  boy  now  endured,  where  he  was  trapped,  and  unlike  Richard,  he  had  no
understanding of why.
Richard was himself again, standing before the throne, looking at Michael—and just able to step forward.

The resistance was less than it was, but still strong. “I’ve seen your price and it matters not. Do what thou
wilt with me, but save the boy. Restore and heal him, I beg you.”
“Are you certain, Richard d’Orleans?”
In  answer,  he  pushed  closer  until  he  could  reach  Michael.  As  soon  as  he  touched  him  the  thick
resistance ceased. He gently gathered the boy into his arms. Precious burden. The last time he would ever
hold him. It would have to be enough.
He reached for the Grail. Picked it up. There was dark red wine in it, or something that appeared to be
wine.
He  put  the  cup  to  the  boy’s  lips,  persuading  him  to  drink.  Michael  did  so,  then  shut  his  dead  eyes,
seeming to sleep.
God and Goddess, help him!
Richard searched his face for some sign of change, then held him close. “There is so much I would say
to thee, so much I would hear. Speak to me in thy dreams, my son. If the gods are kind they may let  me
listen. They may let me reply.”
The voice around him was silent to this. No sound was within the chamber except for his own breath and
the hiss and burn of the torch fires.
He felt a wet warmth on his hand. Michael yet bled.
No! No more!
He put the holy cup on the table, then stepped away from the throne, taking Michael clear of the pool of
blood at  its  base.  With  nowhere  else  to  put  him,  he  had  to  lie  on  the  cold  flags,  no  covering,  no  pillow.
Richard peeled off his tunic. A wretched blanket, torn, bloody, and sweat-stained, but better than nothing.
He wrapped Michael with it, kissed his brow, and backed away. “Sleep, boy, and may heaven have pity
on thee.”
Richard  approached  the  throne.  A  memory  of  his  near-fatal  childhood  punishment  came  to  him.  He
tiredly thrust it away, turned, and sat.
It was worse than in the vision. The wounding he’d taken in the field in the far past was negligible to this.
In that same spot as the spear thrust, his flesh parted from within to without in a gash longer than his hand.
He gasped as though struck, clutching his side as though to stave the blood flow and agony, all for naught.
The pain devoured all his senses. Nothing else existed. Weak unto fainting, he leaned against the arm of the
throne to wait until the first shock of it passed.
Only it did not.
The bitterness held undiminished. Each time he shifted to ease himself only added to his suffering.
I chose this. I will endure. Better me than him.
So he did not cry out; he bit off all complaint. He remained in place, and watched as his  blood  trickled
down the same path as Michael’s to merge with the pool already there. In the hours, the years to come, it
would cover the whole of the floor, spread to the rest of the castle, be soaked up by the earth outside, cloak
the world.
He shivered.  How  could  such  a  close-aired  chamber  be  so  chill?  The  gooseflesh  plucked  at  his  bare
back and arms like knife points. He dared not move to rub warmth into them, lest his pain -increase.
He wondered if his face and form would also shift before the eyes of any who saw him. Would a visitor
someday come and take pity on him, try to ease  his pain? He doubted it. This was his world from now on,
this drab, cold chamber with the smoking torches, season beyond season unchanged forever.  In  unbroken
solitude he would count the stones of the walls and listen to his own heartbeat and groans of anguish. Sabra
had  warned  him  of  danger,  but  not  the  depth  of  it,  not  the  permanence.  There  were  worse  things  than
dying. He hoped  she  would  forgive  him  for  leaving  her.  Perhaps  she  would  wait  for  him  as  she’d  done
before, but this time he would not return.
But Michael . . . there, he was waking. All would be worth it if he could live free.
The child did not see him, his gaze was fixed on the open door. Pale light shone there, pale, but growing
stronger, brighter as something approached in the passage beyond. Richard held his breath as one  by  one
several women slowly filed in. They were of a kind with  their  serene  faces,  and  unadorned  white  robes.
Their  bare  feet  whispered  over  the  flags.  The  light  they  carried  was  their  own,  shining  out  from  their
smooth flesh. Eight in all, eight of the nine sisters of Avalon, they surrounded little Michael, who showed no
fear  of  them.  Three  of  them—they  looked  much  like  the  boy’s  mother  and  sisters—lifted  him  up  and
carried him away. Their light went with them, dimming with distance, then vanishing altogether.
None had marked Richard or shown any sign of his existence.
Richard was alone.
He slumped, accepting it, accepting everything. Wincing, he leaned back in the chair, knowing  the  pain

would keep him from ever sleeping again, but  wishing  for  a  respite  all  the  same.  He  wished  only.  Here,
there was no more hope.
He  felt  the  blood  seeping  past  his  fingers.  He’d  borne  a  thousand  such  woundings  and  worse  and
survived. They’d always healed, physically. This, though, represented not only all of Michael’s  hurts,  but
the  inner  wounds  Richard  had  endured  over  the centuries, the ones whose scars yet bled when his
thoughts touched on them. He would have much time now to think.
He closed his eyes.
Let go. The agonies of the past imprison and torture us all, but only if we allow it. Let go.
Indeed, were it only that simple. 
It is. You cannot have the past you wanted, only that which you had. Accept that it made you  what
you are and move on.
How? he wondered.
Just let go. Move forward.
I want to. How? Whose was this out-of-time voice? Was it part of the room or within his mind?
Release the past. Let go.
Then sleep stole over him after all . . . and dreams.
He  dreamed  that  he  was  able  to  sink  back  into  the  chair  and  find  true  comfort,  true  rest.  His  cares
slipped away, spiraling off into sweet darkness.
He dreamed that gentle arms were wrapped around him, a soft hand caressed his brow, a softer voice
called his name.
“Wake now, Richard. Come to me. Move forward and come to me.”
He drew  a  great  breath,  like  a  diver  just  surfaced,  and  struggled  to  sit  up.  The  pain  clutched  at  him,
holding him down.
“ ’Tis over,” Sabra whispered close to his ear. She cradled his shoulders and head in  her  lap.  “Waken,
my love.”
He saw a black sky and full moon, glass and metal framing above, none of it seemed real, not at all solid
as this chamber. One vision was hard upon the other, each wavering, fighting to assert itself.
“Come to me,” she said.
Her voice drew him like a lifeline. “But I must stay . . . for Michael.”
“He’s here. Come to us.”
Richard shook his head, trying to force his eyes to open on the right reality, the right time. The chamber
of pain faded; the torches winked out. Sabra was with him instead, holding him. And there was a weight on
his chest.
He sat up a little. Michael was unexpectedly in his arms, curled against him, his small fists hanging tight
to the fabric of the old blue bathrobe. He slept, but with that wonderful abandon that  only  children  know.
His little face was relaxed now, at peace.
Richard fiercely tightened his embrace around the child and kissed the top of his blond head. He looked
at Sabra. “Is he well? Truly well?”
“He is. You delivered his soul from its darkness. He will be able to heal in this world, now.”
“But I thought I had to stay.”
“Your willingness to do so was enough. The difficulty was persuading you away. You’re a man of duty,
my Richard.”
“I saw my mother there.”
“I know. Michael saw his, and long they spoke.”
“They may still be speaking, if he dreams.”
She nodded. “As it is for you. He is a special child.”
“Michel come back to me.”
“He’s done so before, only you knew it not. His soul has been in many vessels over time.”
“If only I had known.”
“Nay, but each life must be what it is, not what it was before, else there is no learning, no growth. You
must prune off limbs from a tree so that the trunk sprouts new ones more lush.”
“And sometimes the cutting is harsh?”
“But what must be. You and he have endured much, learned much, he through many lives, you through
this one. I think you will each understand one another better now.”
“What do you see for him?” He thought better of the question as soon as he’d asked it. Her Sight was a
terrible gift.
“His mother and sisters  are  close,  you  cannot  see  them,  but  he  will  know  and  they  will  comfort  him.

They will speak to him in his dreams and guide his waking steps. He has much power and must learn to be
wise with it.”
“Power?”
“He has gifts from the Goddess even I cannot grasp.”
“Like the Sight and the giving of visions?”
“Yes. Those among others.”
Richard thought of the nightmare vision he’d had of the house, the killings, the chase into the fields, and
looked down at Michael in wonder. The animal blood had not forced that imagining. It had  been  Michael,
reliving the memory, projecting it into Richard’s mind as a reality. Dear God. “He is waking to them. But so
young.”
“He needs teachers, you and I, and more, many, many more.”
“You will take him north with you, to the tribe there?”
“They will help with his healing as no others can.”
“I thought as much.”
“Perhaps you will come?” she asked.
Richard knew he needed healing as well. He would find it in the shadows of those tall woods with a wise
people who yet understood the Old Ways. “Yes,” he whispered. “As soon as may be.”
With Michael still enfolded protectively in his arms, he leaned back against Sabra and, for a  time,  slept
with that same peaceful abandon.
Relentless sun, blistering heat, muggy air. High noon in Texas.
Richard ignored those annoyances as he left his rental in the dust of a little-used lane and stalked through
the  scrub  oak.  He  carried  a  heavy  rucksack  slung  over  his  shoulder.  Now  and  then  he  checked  his
compass. When the tangle of trees and briars opened up to a field, he saw the hill he wanted a quarter-mile
ahead. He used the mirror on the reverse side of the compass and caught the sun in it, aiming the reflection
at the trees on the summit.
A moment later, two flashes returned to him.
He kept close to the edge of the field, walking as quickly as he could manage through the trees. His new
hat and old drover’s coat helped shield him from the sun, but the additional shade meant he could stay out
longer.
The last few days had been busy. Bourland  had  arrived,  still  weighed  down  with  grief  and  in  need  of
work  to  ease  it.  He  efficiently  took  on  the  red  tape  of  local  officialdom,  claiming  the  bodies,  running
interference for Richard’s part in things, and generally smoothing the way for Michael to leave the country.
Seated in the air-conditioned shelter of the New Karnak flat, a drink at his elbow, Bourland had listened
somberly to Richard’s version of things. He’d frowned hard over  Luis’s  disappearance  from  the  Anatole
hotel.
“My guess,” said Richard, “is that Alejandro had people watching all the major hotels in town, waiting for
Luis to surface. As soon as he walked in with Michael it was all up and they grabbed him. There must have
been a hell of a reward out.”
“That  seems  a  pretty  massive  effort  on  Alejandro’s  part.  Quite  a  long  shot,  in  fact,”  said  Bourland,
doubtful.
Richard fixed his old friend with a long look. “Nevertheless, that’s how it must have happened. Alejandro
took them both, killed Luis, then tried to use Michael as a lever against me. Thankfully, it didn’t work.” He
delicately released his mental hold.
Bourland shook his head, still frowning, but oblivious  to  what  had  just  happened.  “Poor  Luis.  You  and
Michael  were  damned  lucky  to  have  escaped  that  mess.  The  police  are  still  trying  to  sort  out  what
happened on the property. All  those  men  dead?  Ale-jandro,  yes,  he  can  rot  in  hell  forever,  but  so  many
others?” He looked across at Richard, as though finding it hard to believe that so quiet and controlled a man
was also capable of such savage violence. He knew it to occasionally be Richard’s business, but had rarely
seen evidence of it. The police crime photos had been most graphic.
“It’s an ugly world,  Philip.  I  did  what  was  necessary  to  save  Michael.  Let  the  police  form  their  own
conclusions so long as he’s left out of them.”
“Oh, absolutely. But what could have happened to poor Luis?”
Richard shrugged. “We may never know.”
“It’ll be hard on the boy.”
“He’ll deal with it. My friend Sabra is an expert at grief therapy. She’ll be there for him. We all will.”
“Yes. My daughter is already working on the custody papers for Michael. After that, it’s a short step to

adoption. Michael Bourland is a strong name, don’t you think?”
“Very strong. A good one.”
Richard gave the same story—and hypnotic nudge—to Dr. Sam and Helen. Both were astonished at the
change in Michael, -going from near-comatose withdrawal to subdued but close-to-normal interaction with
the world again. Both were delighted.
“He  just  needed  a  little  time,”  said  Sam  after  a  final  examination.  He,  too,  was  being  shielded  by
Bourland’s influence. The police knew nothing about Dr. Samuel Ross George’s part in things, and it would
remain so.
Richard’s own story of going to the house to visit an old employee friend, then finding Michael wandering
about the -ruins in shock was also accepted. His delay in coming forward got him a stern rebuke from the
investigators, but nothing more.
“They’re not going to bother you again?” Sam asked, surprised.
“No. I explained my reasons about wanting to protect the boy by keeping him clear, and they accepted
them.  They’re  thinking  that  after  the  explosion,  one  of  Alejandro’s  men  defected  to  a  rival,  who  simply
caught up with him.”
“But that’s a Federal case! It’s still being run on CNN.”
Richard had shrugged, unconcerned. “You just need to know how to talk to people, that’s all.”
Sabra stayed with Richard and would be flying back with Michael and  Bourland  when  the  time  came.
She and Bourland became fast friends within minutes of being introduced, but that was only to be expected
of  her  when  she  wished  it.  She  also  knew  the  value  of  cultivating  important  contacts.  Bourland  was
certainly in that category.
And he was a big, handsome man.
“Please  don’t  break  him,”  Richard  advised  her  sotto  voce,  well  aware  of  her  preferences.  But  she
merely smiled.
One last detail remained for Richard to see to; Sabra alone  knew  of  it,  but  said  nothing  either  way  of
what she thought.
This was strictly his business.
Drenched in sweat and red of face, he  reached  the  top  of  the  hill.  In  the  shade  beneath  the  trees  he
thought he could risk removing the heavy coat, but the hat remained in place. At least now he could feel the
wind, even though its source point must have been an oven.
“Over here,” said Jordan Keyes, quietly.
It took a moment for Richard to spot him.
He was again dressed to blend with the background, this time in green cammos,  with  a  matching  bush
hat.  Except  for  the  sunglasses,  it  all  looked  to  be  army  surplus,  well  broken  in.  Richard  gave  him  a
once-over.
“What, no face paint?” he asked.
“The  damn  stuff  gets  in  the  beard.”  Keyes  had  not  shaved  in  several  days,  nor  bathed,  indication  to
Richard that he’d been constantly on the job.  He looked tired, but gave no sign of leaving his post just yet.
“All I have to do to be invisible is keep low and  not  make  noise,”  Keyes  said.  “No  one  comes  out  here,
though.”
“So it would seem. How do you know of this place?”
“Deer hunting range. Owner of the property’s out of the -country.”
“Friend of yours?”
“Nope. He’s never heard of me. I found this acreage awhile back, liked it, and looked up who had it. I
keep tabs on him. If he ever decides to sell, I’ll be first in line.”
He and Keyes walked to the summit. It commanded a fine view of the  woods  and  fields  below.  Here
Keyes had set up something resembling a hunting blind. He’d strung camouflage netting around an area just
large enough for him to lie down in and high enough to be above his head while seated. Within, he’d set up
a folding camp chair and brought some paperbacks to read.  Near the chair was a rucksack similar to the
one Richard carried. It held empty food wrappers, depleted plastic water bottles, insect repellent, and a roll
of biodegradable toilet paper.
“Glad you found the place,” said Keyes. “I’m down to my last shot of water.”
“How are things progressing?”
“About what you’d expect. He was pretty noisy the first day,  but  the  duct  tape  took  care  of  that.  He
can’t talk any more, tongue’s too swollen. Probably won’t be too much longer, a couple, three days. Want a
look?” He offered up a pair of very powerful binoculars.
Richard took them, peering down the hill toward a tree some fifty yards away. The figure by  it  sprang

close in every awful detail.
Luis Trujillo was chained with his back to the tree, collapsed at its base. He was naked, but covered in
patches of vicious red skin that seemed to clothe him. His body occasionally twitched, and he kept shaking
his head as though trying to dislodge  something.  His  face  was  puffed,  his  eyes  sunken  and  bordering  on
madness.
“It’s a wonder he’s not passed out yet,” Richard commented.
“That little refinement you wanted . . . I added to it.”
“In what way?” Hanging from a limb in front of Luis was a large plastic  bag  holding  liquid.  A  flexible
tube extended from it, the end of which was within easy reach of his mouth, allowing him to drink whenever
he wished. The bag was nearly three quarters gone.
Keyes took a liter-sized bottle from his sack and  twisted  it  open.  “It  struck  me  that  just  putting  water
down there to make him last longer was a good start. I substituted some sports drink, and just to  improve
the taste mixed in a good dose of antihistamines and some uppers.”
“The drink I understand, but the rest?”
“I’m figuring the antihistamines to help counteract anaphylactic shock and the  uppers  to  make  sure  he
enjoys every fun-filled moment.”
“Very creative. My compliments.”
Richard held himself steady, staring hard through the lens, adjusting the focus.  He  could  just  make  out
minute lines creeping over Luis’s flesh. He writhed under them. Flies dotted his face and he shook his head
again. If he groaned or cursed, it went unheard in the distance.
“Of course,” Keyes continued, “if  he  really  goes  into  serious  shock  then  the  fat  lady’s  done  with  her
chorus. That’s when I pack up and boogie.”
“But not before—”
“Oh, hell no. Can’t let the fire ants get all the glory.”
“What have you got for it?”
“Party favor.” He pointed to an MP-5 on the ground by his chair. On top of it, a pair of surgical gloves.
“Still has Nick’s prints on it. I can pop three rounds in the skull, leave the gun, then it’s home for Stoli time.”
This was also the plan should someone  happen  along  and  find  Luis.  Keyes  was  to  kill the  prisoner  to
silence him, then vanish. In this heat, so far from anywhere, the happenstance was remote,  but  both  men
believed in preparation.
“What’d you bring me?” Keyes asked, reaching for Richard’s sack.
“More water, more food bars. The kind you said you wanted.”
“Great, I ran out this morning. I was getting hungry.” He tore the wrapper off one, taking a healthy bite.
“These  are  most  bueno, but  they  stop  you  up  like  a  summabitch—though  out  here  that’s  just  as  well.
What’s happening in the rest of the world? I take it no one followed you.”
“Not to worry. I was careful and your directions were clear.” Richard gave him a summation of events.
Most of it was even true. “No one knows what’s become of Luis. The general assumption is that Alejandro
killed him.”
“That’s fine. Just what you wanted.”
“You had no trouble getting Luis out here?”
“Not too much. I kept him drugged in the car until I found a good spot for each of us. I knew about this
hill; it was finding the right tree close enough to it that was the problem.”
“Right tree?”
“One that had fire ants. I lucked out, though, and turned up a mound next to that one. He woke up pretty
fast when I sat him down on it. Had to be quick with the chains to keep him there, then he started hollering,
so we had fun with the duct tape. He was freaking out for most of the day, then settled down. Too damn
tired to keep it up. Next morning I could take the tape off so he could drink. That’s when he tried to buy me
off. Tried to say he had the locations of some of his brother’s accounts. Like I could believe that. He got
pretty crazy, babbled a lot. Just to humor him I wrote the stuff down. Doubt if anything will come of it, but I
can play hacker and see what I turn up. If  you  hear  any  news  about  me  buying  an  island  you’ll  know  I
nailed it.”
Richard rather hoped he would. “All this is rather above and beyond.”
“Maybe so. Indirectly, he cost me a steady paying customer. ’Cause of him I had to bump Trujillo before
he bumped me. Now that would have probably happened sooner or later, but  it’s  -annoying  all  the  same.
But what really chaps my hide is what he did to his family. That was wrong.”
Agreed, Richard thought. But is this not just as wrong?
Even lowering the binoculars could not remove the sight of the dying Luis from his mind’s eye. Richard

had thought long and hard about the punishment he would inflict on Stephanie’s butcher. It had seemed just.
Certainly he’d done worse things to enemies in the past, but this time it was different. 
The righteous satisfaction was not there. 
He understood and had often reveled in its sweet, raw heat. But now . . . nothing. He couldn’t feel pity
for Luis, but could summon horror within for his own actions.
I’ve changed. This vengeance I thought so important is no longer necessary.
“Have you plans for after this?” he asked Keyes.
“I thought about buying a ticket to Aruba for the summer, but the cats’d hate it. They wouldn’t have me
around to bitch at. My neighbor who checks on them isn’t as much fun.”
“Perhaps it’s time you went back to them.”
Keyes finished  his  food  bar  and  stuffed  the  wrapper  into  one  of  the  sacks.  “You  wanting  to  cut  this
short?”
“He looks too far gone for anything more to matter to him.”
“I  expect  so.  The  ants  would  have  stopped  biting  sometime  back.  They’re  eating  on  him  by  now.
Different kind of intense, but his mind . . .”
“You’ve other things to do, I’m sure.”
“I can think of a few. You gonna do the honors?”
“Yes.”
Richard helped Keyes break camp. It took but a few moments to roll up and stow away the camouflage
netting. Richard hiked down to the tree and unhooked the plastic bag, draining it out on the return trip. Luis
was so far gone he did not seem to notice his presence. 
Keyes  had  folded  the  camp  chair  and  put  his  books  away.  He  hooked  the  bundle  straps  over  one
shoulder then stuck a hand toward Richard. 
They briefly shook.
“It’s been a pleasure,” said Keyes. “Let’s not do this again sometime.”
God forbid.
Richard waited until Keyes was well gone.  Before  too  long  he  caught  the  faint  sound  of  a  car  motor
turning over. He waited, spying a cloud of dust rising along the line that marked the road into the property.
He waited until the dust drifted lazily back into place.
Then Richard put on the surgical gloves.
He raised the gun, sighting along the barrel. He could see no real detail without the binoculars, but they
weren’t necessary. 
An easy enough shot.
Who was he? Did he deserve his fate?
An easy enough answer.
The figure down below moved fitfully, as one in the torment of a nightmare. Richard waited until the man
went still again. 
And why was I the one chosen to deliver it to him?
That one was easy as well.
Richard squeezed off a three-round burst.  The  cracking  of  the  shots  echoed  briefly,  then  the  summer
silence reasserted itself once more over field and wood.

