

Embryology 
at a Glance

Companion website 
This book is accompanied by a website containing a link to Dr Webster’s website and podcasts:
www.wiley.com/go/embryology

Embryology 
at a Glance
Samuel Webster
Lecturer in Anatomy & Embryology
College of Medicine
Swansea University
Swansea, UK
Rhiannon de Wreede
Honorary Lecturer
College of Medicine
Swansea University
Swansea, UK
A John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Publication

This edition first published 2012 © 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons, formed by the merger of Wiley’s global 
Scientific, Technical and Medical business with Blackwell Publishing.
Registered office:  John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, 	
	
PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial offices:  9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
	
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
	
111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774, USA
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for information about how to 
apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.
wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
The right of the author to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance 
with the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or 
otherwise, except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the 
prior permission of the publisher.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All 
brand names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or 
registered trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product 
or vendor mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate and 
authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding 
that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. If professional advice or other 
expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Webster, Samuel, 1974-
  Embryology at a glance / Samuel Webster, Rhiannon de Wreede.
      p. ; cm. – (At a glance series)
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-0-470-65453-8 (pbk. : alk. paper)
  I.  De Wreede, Rhiannon.  II.  Title.  III.  Series: At a glance series (Oxford, England). 
  [DNLM: 1.  Embryonic Development.  QS 604]
  612.6'4–dc23
	
2011049102
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in 
print may not be available in electronic books.
Cover image: © Joseph Mercier | Dreamstime.com
Cover design by Meaden Creative
Set in 9/11.5pt Times by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited
1  2012

Contents  5
Contents
Preface  6 
Acknowledgements  7
List of abbreviations  8
Timeline  9
Part 1  Early development 
  1  Embryology in medicine  10
  2  Language of embryology  12
  3  Introduction to development  14
  4  Embyonic and foetal periods  16
  5  Mitosis  18
  6  Meiosis  20
  7  Spermatogenesis  22
  8  Oogenesis  24
  9  Fertilisation  26
10  From zygote to blastocyst  28
11  Implantation  30
12  Placenta  32
13  Gastrulation  34
14  Germ layers  36
15  Neurulation  38
16  Neural crest cells  40
17  Body cavities (embryonic)  42
18  Folding of the embryo  44
19  Segmentation  46
20  Somites  48
Part 2  Systems development 
21  Skeletal system (ossification)  50
22  Skeletal system  52
23  Muscular system  54
24  Musculoskeletal system: limbs  56
25  Circulatory system: heart tube  58
26  Circulatory system: heart chambers  60
27  Circulatory system: blood vessels  62
28  Circulatory system: embryonic veins  64
29  Circulatory system: changes at birth  66
30  Respiratory system  68
31  Digestive system: gastrointestinal tract  70
32  Digestive system: associated organs  72
33  Digestive system: congenital anomalies  74
34  Urinary system  76
35  Reproductive system: ducts and genitalia  78
36  Reproductive system: gonads  80
37  Endocrine system  82
38  Head and neck: arch I  84
39  Head and neck: arch II  86
40  Head and neck: arch III  88
41  Head and neck: arches IV–VI  90
42  Central nervous system  92
43  Peripheral nervous system  94
44  The ear  96
45  The eye  98
Part 3  Self-assessment 
MCQs  101
MCQ answers  106
EMQs  107
EMQ answers  108
Glossary  109
Index  114
Companion website 
This book is accompanied by a website containing a link to Dr Webster’s website and podcasts:
www.wiley.com/go/embryology

6  Preface
Preface
We wrote this book for our students; those studying medicine with 
us, those listening to the podcasts wherever they may be, and those 
studying the other forms that biology takes on their paths to 
whatever goals they may have in life. We have introduced many 
students to the fascinating and often surprising processes of 
embryological development, and we hope to do the same in this 
book. It is written for anyone wondering, “where did I come 
from?”
The content of this book extends beyond the curricula of most 
medicine, health and bioscience teaching programmes in terms of 
breadth, but we have limited its depth. Many embryology text­
books cover development in detail, but students struggle to get 
started, and to get to grips with early concepts. Hopefully we have 
addressed these difficulties with this book.
We hope that you will use this book to begin your studies of 
embryology and development, but also that you will return to it 
when preparing for assessments or checking your understanding. 
You will find example assessment questions in Chapters 46 and 
47, and a glossary in Chapter 48.
Let this be the start of your integration of embryonic develop­
ment with anatomy, to the ends of improved understanding and 
better patient care or scientific insight.

Acknowledgements  7
Acknowledgements
Thank you to Kim and Robin for being so encouraging and 
putting up with the time demands of completing this book. We 
would also like to thank the editors at Wiley-Blackwell for leading 
us through this process and for their support and encouragement, 
and Jane Fallows for all her work with the illustrations.

8  List of abbreviations
List of abbreviations
AER 
Apical ectodermal ridge
CAM 
Cell adhesion molecule
CN 
Cranial nerve
CSF 
Cerebrospinal fluid
ECMO 
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
FGF 
Fibroblast growth factor
FSH 
Follicle stimulating hormone
GnRH 
Gonadotrophin releasing hormone
HbF 
Foetal haemoglobin
hCG 
Human chorionic gonadotrophin
hCS 
Human chorionic somatomammotrophin
IUD 
Intrauterine device – contraceptive device
IUGR 
Intrauterine growth restriction
IVC 
Inferior vena cava
IVD 
Intervertebral disc
IVF 
In vitro fertilisation
LH 
Luteinising hormone
LMP 
Last menstrual period
PDA 
Patent ductus arteriosus
PFO 
Patent foramen ovale
PTH 
Parathyroid hormone
PZ 
Proliferating zone
Rh 
Rhesus
SVC 
Superior vena cava
TGF 
Transforming growth factor
ZPA 
Zone of polarising activity

Time line  9
Timeline
Language of embryology (Chapter 2)
Introduction to development (Chapter 3)
Embryonic and foetal periods (Chapter 4)
Spermatogenesis (Chapter 7)
Oogenesis (Chapter 8)
Fertilisation (Chapter 9)
From zygote to blastocyst (Chapter 10)
Implantation (Chapter 11)
Placenta (Chapter 12)
Gastrulation (Chapter 13)
Formation of germ layers (Chapter 14)
Formation of the heart tube (Chapter 25)
Folding of the embryo (Chapter 18)
Neurulation (Chapter 15)
Segmentation (Chapter 19)
Formation of blood vessels (Chapter 27)
Somite development (Chapter 20)
Development of digestive system (Chapter 31)
Development of body cavities (Chapter 17)
Development of urinary system (Chapter 34)
Development of head and neck structures (Chapter 38–41)
Development of the eye (Chapter 45)
Migration of neural crest cells (Chapter 16)
Development of muscular system (Chapter 23)
Development of the ear (Chapter 44)
Development of central nervous system (Chapter 42)
Cranial neuropore closes (Chapter 15)
Development of endocrine system (Chapter 36)
Caudal neuropore closes (Chapter 15)
Heart tube divides into four chambers (Chapter 26)
Development of skeletal system (Chapter 22)
Development of peripheral nervous system (Chapter 43)
Development of musculoskeletal system (Chapter 24)
Development of respiratory system (Chapter 30)
Formation of the atrial septa (Chapter 26)
Ossification of skeletal system (Chapter 21)
Development of reproductive system (Chapter 35)
Foetus can hear external sounds (Chapter 44)
0
10
20
30
Days
Weeks
40
50
60
10
20
30
40
Death
Menopause
Days
Weeks
Adult
Puberty
Adult
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
10
20
30
40
Death
Puberty
Menopause

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
10  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
1
Embryology in medicine
Figure 1.1
The early embryo develops from a simple group of cells into complex shapes and structures in the early weeks
Figure 1.2
Development continues beyond embryology and 
the foetus continues to grow and mature
Figure 1.3
Development of biological structures and
systems continues through childhood,
adolescence and into adulthood. Changes
continue to occur throughout life

Embryology in medicine  Early development  11
What is embryology?
Animals begin life as a single cell. That cell must produce new cells 
and form increasingly complex structures in an organised and 
controlled manner to reliably and successfully build a new organ­
ism (Figures 1.1 and 1.2). As an adult human may be made up 
of around 100 trillion cells this must be an impressively well-
choreographed compendium of processes.
Embryology is the branch of biology that studies the early for­
mation and development of these organisms. Embryology begins 
with fertilisation, and we have included the processes that lead to 
fertilisation in this text. The human embryonic period is completed 
by week 8, but we follow development of many systems through 
the foetal stages, birth and, in some cases, describe how changes 
continue to occur into infancy, adolescence and adult life 
(Figure 1.3).
Aims and format
This book aims to be concise but readable. We have provided a 
page of text accompanied by a page of illustrations in each chapter. 
Be aware that the concise manner of the text means that the topic 
is not necessarily comprehensive. We aim to be clear in our descrip­
tions and explanations but this book should prepare you to move 
on to more comprehensive and detailed texts and sources.
Why study embryology?
Our biological development is a fascinating subject deserving 
study for interest’s sake alone. An understanding of embryological 
development also helps us answer questions about our adult 
anatomy, why congenital abnormalities sometimes occur and gives 
us insights into where we come from. In medicine the importance 
of an understanding of normal development quickly becomes clear 
as a student begins to make the same links between embryology, 
anatomy, physiology and neonatal medicine.
The study of embryology has been documented as far back as 
the sixth century bc when the chicken egg was noted as a perfect 
way of studying development. Aristotle (384–322 bc) compared 
preformationism and epigenetic theories of development. Do 
animals begin in a preformed way, merely becoming larger, or do 
they form from something much simpler, developing the structures 
and systems of the adult in time? From studies of chickens’ eggs 
of different days of incubation and comparisons with the embryos 
of other animals Aristotle favoured epigenetic theory, noting 
similarities between the embryos of humans and other animals in 
very early stages. In a chicken’s egg, a beating heart can be 
observed with the naked eye before much else of the chicken has 
formed.
Aristotle’s views directed the field of embryology until the inven­
tion of the light microscope in the late 1500s. From then onwards 
embryology as a field of study was developed.
A common problem that students face when studying embryol­
ogy is the apparent complexity of the topic. Cells change names, 
the vocabulary seems vast, shapes form, are named and renamed, 
and not only are there structures to be concerned with but also the 
changes to those structures with time. In anatomy, structures 
acquire new names as they move to a new place or pass another 
structure (e.g. the external iliac artery passes deep to the inguinal 
ligament and becomes the femoral artery). In embryology, cells 
acquire new names when they differentiate to become more spe­
cialised or group together in a new place; structures have new 
names when they move, change shape or new structures form 
around them. With time and study students discover these proc­
esses, just as they discover anatomical structures.
Embryology in modern medicine
If a student can build a good understanding of embryological and 
foetal development they will have a foundation for a better under­
standing of anatomy, physiology and developmental anomalies. 
For a medical student it is not difficult to see why these subjects 
are essential. If a baby is born with ‘a hole in the heart’, what does 
this mean? Is there just one kind of hole? Or more than one? Where 
is the hole? What are the physiological implications? How would 
you repair this? If that part of the heart did not form properly 
what else might have not formed properly? How can you explain 
to the parents why this happened, and what the implications are 
for the baby and future children? A knowledge of the timings at 
which organs and structures develop is also important in determin­
ing periods of susceptibility for the developing embryo to environ­
mental factors and teratogens.
Why read this book?
We appreciate that the subject of embryology still induces concern 
and despair in students. However, if it helps you in your profession 
you should want to dig deep into the wealth of understanding it 
can give you. We also appreciate that you have enough to learn 
already and so this book hopes to represent embryology in an 
accessible format, as our podcasts try to do.
One thing that has not changed with the development of embry­
ology as a subject is that the more information that is gathered, 
the more numerous are the questions left unanswered. For example, 
we barely mention the molecular aspects of development here. 
Should your interest in embryology and mechanisms of develop­
ment be aroused by this book, we hope that you will seek out more 
detailed sources of information to consolidate your learning.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
12  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
2
Language of embryology
Figure 2.1
The anatomical position
The adult anatomical position can be used to describe
structures that are medial or lateral relative to the 
median sagittal plane, and proximal or distal in the limbs. 
These also apply to the embryo
Figure 2.2
The surfaces of the embryo that rostral, 
caudal, dorsal and ventral refer to
Figure 2.4
The coronal plane in the embryo 
and the adult refer to a plane 
of section cut like this
Figure 2.5
Transverse planes are cut across
the embryo as in this diagram,
perpendicular to the coronal plane
Figure 2.3
Note how the descriptions of superior, inferior,
anterior and posterior of the adult anatomical
position relate to the descriptions of the embryo
Median (sagittal) plane
Medial
Lateral
Rostral
Superior
Anterior
(ventral)
Posterior
(dorsal)
Inferior
Caudal
Ventral
Dorsal
Proximal
Distal
Coronal plane
Transverse
planes
Figure 2.6
Oblique planes are cut in directions unlike the
other planes. They do not cut along a clear X, 
Y or Z axis

Language of embryology  Early development  13
Time period: day 0–266
Introduction
The language used to describe the embryo and the developmental 
processes that mould it is necessarily descriptive. It is similar to 
anatomical terminology, but there are some common differences 
that the reader should be aware of.
The embryo does not, and for most of its existence cannot, take 
on the anatomical position. The embryo is more curved and folded 
than the erect adult. The adult anatomical position is described as 
the body being erect with the arms at the sides, palms forward and 
thumbs away from the body (Figure 2.1). The anatomical relation­
ships of structures are described as if in this position, so for the 
embryo we need to rethink this a little.
Cranial–caudal
Anatomically speaking, you may interchangeably use cranial or 
superior, and caudal or inferior. Cranial clearly refers to the head 
end of the embryo and caudal (from the Latin word cauda, meaning 
‘tail’) refers to the tail end (Figure 2.2). If you imagine the early 
sheet of the embryo with the primitive streak (see Chapter 13) 
showing us the cranial and caudal ends, you can imagine that it 
can be clearer to use these terms rather than superior and 
inferior.
The term ‘rostral’ may also be used in place of cranial. Rostral 
is derived from the Latin word rostrum, meaning ‘beak’.
Dorsal–ventral
The dorsal surface of the embryo and the adult is the back (Figure 
2.2). Dorsal also refers to the surface of the foot opposite to the 
plantar surface, the surface of the tongue covered with papillae, 
and the superior surface of the brain, so some care is needed.
The ventral surface of the embryo is the front or anterior of the 
embryo, opposite the dorsal surface.
Medial–lateral
As with adult anatomy, structures nearer to the midline sagittal 
plane are more medial, and structures further from the midline are 
more lateral (Figure 2.3). This also helps us describe the left–right 
axis of the embryo.
Proximal–distal
Proximal and distal are a little different from medial and lateral, 
but similarly describe structures near to the centre of the body 
(proximal) and further from the centre (distal) (Figure 2.1). These 
terms are typically used to describe limb structures. The hand is 
distal to the elbow, for example.
Sections
Often, to show the parts of the embryo being described, illustra­
tions must be of a section of the embryo or a structure. These 
sections may be transverse, median, coronal or oblique. You can 
see these planes of sections in the illustrations on the opposite page 
(Figures 2.4–2.6).

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
14  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
3
Introduction to development
Figure 3.1
Mechanisms of growth
Figure 3.2
Morphogen secretion organises
cells during avian limb bud
development
Figure 3.3
An example of morphogenesis
The simple sheet of epiblast forms 3 layers that change shape to become the tube of the gut and give the general shape of the embryo
Foregut
Midgut
Hindgut
Proliferation
Hypertrophy
Accretion 
Normal polarising
region
Grafted cells
Posterior
Morphogen
gradient
Limb bud
Humerus
Ulna
Radius
Carpals
Anterior
Normal polarising
region
Normal polarising
region
Grafted cells
Extra embryonic
mesoderm
Epiblast
Hypoblast
Chronic cavity
Amniotic cavity
Connecting stalk
Secondary
yolk sac
Cytotrophoblast
Time period: day 0 to adult
Development
Development, in this book, describes our journey from a single cell 
to a complex multicellular organism. Development does not end 
at birth, but continues with childhood and puberty to early 
adulthood.
We must describe how a cell from the father and a cell from the 
mother combine to form a new genetic individual, and how this 
new cell forms others, how they become organised to form new 
shapes, specialised interlinked structures, and grow. With this 
knowledge we become able to understand how these processes can 
be interfered with, and how abnormalities arise.
Growth
Growth may be described as the process of increasing in physical 
size, or as development from a lower or simpler form to a higher 
or more complex form.
In embryology, growth with respect to a change in size may 
occur through an increase in cell number, an increase in cell size 
or an increase in extracellular material (Figure 3.1).

Introduction to development  Early development  15
Increasing cell number occurs by cells dividing to produce 
daughter cells by proliferation. Proliferation is a core mechanism 
of increasing the size of a tissue or organism, and is also found in 
adult tissues in repair or where there is an expected continual loss 
of cells such as in the skin or gastrointestinal tract. Stem cells are 
particularly good at proliferating.
An increase in cell size occurs by hypertrophy. In adults, muscle 
cells respond to weight training by hypertrophy, and this is one 
way in which muscles become larger. During development, hyper­
trophy of cartilage cells during endochondral ossification is an 
important part of the growth of long bones. Be aware that the term 
hypertrophy can also be used to describe a structure that is larger 
than normal.
Cells may surround themselves with an extracellular matrix, 
particularly in connective tissues such as bone and cartilage. By 
accretion these cells increase the size of the tissue by increasing the 
amount of extracellular matrix, either as part of development or 
in response to mechanical loading.
Cells may also die by programmed cell death, or apoptosis. This 
might be considered an opposite to growth, and in development is 
an important method of forming certain structures like the fingers 
and toes.
Differentiation
During development, cells become specialised as they move from 
a multipotent stem cell type towards a cell type with a particular 
task, such as a muscle cell, a bone cell, a neuron or an epithelial 
cell. When the cell becomes more specialised it is considered to 
have differentiated into a mature cell type. If that cell divides, its 
daughter cells will also be of that mature cell type.
In humans, a mature cell is unlikely to dedifferentiate back into 
a stem cell, but the process by which this can occur is being 
exploited in the laboratory with the aim of producing stem cells 
from adult tissues. These stem cells could then be pushed to dif­
ferentiate into the cell type needed to grow new tissue or treat a 
disease.
Signalling
A signal from one group of cells influences the development of 
another (adjacent, nearby or distant) group of cells. Hormones act 
as signals, for example. For a cell to be affected by a signal it must 
possess an appropriate receptor.
In the embryo the signalling of a vast array of different proteins 
by different groups of cells allows those cells to gain information 
about their current and future tasks, be that migration, prolifera­
tion, differentiation or something else.
Organisation
Early in development the ball of cells or simple sheets of the 
embryo do not give much clue about which cells will form which 
structures. It is difficult to determine which part will become the 
head and which will become the tail. However, the cells are aware 
of their position and the roles that they will have and we can 
see this by looking at the signalling proteins and connections 
between cells.
For example, the upper limb begins to develop as a simple bud 
of cells. The cells in that bud must be organised to produce the 
structures of the arm, the forearm and the hand. The ulna bone 
must form in the right place relative to the radius, and the thumb 
must form appropriately in relation to the fingers. This may occur 
partly because a group of cells on the caudal aspect of the limb 
bud produces a morphogen that diffuses across the early limb bud 
(Figure 3.2). Cells near the site of morphogen production experi­
ence a high concentration, and cells further away on the cranial 
side of the bud experience a lower concentration. Development of 
these cells progresses differently as a result. If experimentally you 
transplant some of the morphogen-producing cells to the cranial 
part of the limb bud, duplicate digital structures form. See Chapter 
23 for more about limb development.
This is one example of how cells organise themselves and others 
during development. With organisation, structure follows.
Morphogenesis
The formation of shape during development is morphogenesis. 
Cells are able to change the ways in which they adhere to one 
another, they can extend processes and pull themselves along, 
migrating to new locations, and they can change their own shapes. 
In a tissue there may be a change in cell number, cell size or accre­
tion of extracellular material. In these ways a tissue gains and 
changes shape.
An early example of morphogenesis in embryonic development 
occurs with the change from simple flat sheets of cells to the rolled 
up tubes of the embryo and gastrointestinal tract (Figure 3.3). A 
simple structure has become more complex. Chapter 13 covers this 
in more detail.
Clinical relevance
Interruptions of signalling, proliferation, differentiation, migra­
tion, and so on, cause congenital abnormalities. Teratogens that 
affect development during key periods may have significant effects. 
For example, if the drug thalidomide is taken during early limb 
development it can cause phocomelia (hands and feet attached to 
abnormally shortened limbs). Other environmental factors and 
genetic mutations can cause abnormal development. The embryo 
is most sensitive during weeks 3–8.
Dysmorphogenesis is a term used for the abnormal development 
of body structures. It may occur because of malformation or 
deformation. If the processes required to normally form a struc­
ture fail to occur the result is a malformation. If the neural tube 
fails to close, for example, the resulting neural tube defect is a 
malformation. A deformation occurs if external mechanical forces 
affect development. For example, damage to the amniotic sac can 
cause amniotic bands that may wrap around developing limbs and 
cause amputation of limbs or digits.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
16  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
4
Embryonic and foetal periods
Figure 4.2
Clinical timings of gestation related to the embryonic and foetal periods
Menstruation
(4–6 days)
Ovulation
(14 days before
menstruation starts)
Reparative
phase (4 days)
Proliferative
phase (10–12 days)
Secretory phase
(14 days)
Figure 4.1
The stages and timing of the menstrual cycle
Figure 4.3
The scale, in weeks, shows how gestation is dated clinically and embryologically. 
LMP refers to the date of the ‘last menstrual period’, from which the clinical period of gestation is determined. 
Embryologically speaking development of the new embryo begins with fertilisation. Clinically gestational timings 
are around 2 weeks longer than an embryologists’ timing
LMP
Embryo
Foetus
Birth
40
30
20
10
0
2
38
Clinical timing
Embryological
timing
28
16
8
0
4
12
20
24
32
Weeks of gestation
45
44
43
42
41
40
39
38
37
36
35
34
33
32
31
30
29
28
27
26
25
24
23
22
21
20
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Last menstruation
Fertilisation
First trimester
Fetal development
Embryogenesis
Second trimester
Third trimester
Prenatal development
Antepartum or perinatal period
50% survival chance
Viability
Childbirth average
Periods
Week no.
Month no.
Birth
classification
Term
Postmature
Preterm

Embryonic and foetal periods  Early development  17
Time period: day 0 to birth
Embryonic period
The embryonic period is considered to be the period from fertilisa­
tion to the end of the eighth week. The period from fertilisation 
to implantation of the blastocyst into the uterus (2 weeks) is some­
times called the period of the egg.
During the period of the egg the early zygote rapidly proliferates 
to produce a ball of cells that makes its way along the uterine tube 
towards the uterus. The complexity of the blastocyst increases as 
it progresses towards the site of implantation.
During the embryonic period the major structures of the embryo 
are formed, and by 8 weeks most organs and systems are estab­
lished and functioning to some extent, but many are at an imma­
ture stage of development. At the end of the eighth week the 
external features of the embryo are recognisable; the eyes, ears and 
mouth are visible, the fingers and toes are formed, and limbs have 
elbow and knee joints.
Foetal period
From the ninth week to birth the foetus matures during the foetal 
period. The foetus grows rapidly in size, mass and complexity, and 
its proportions change (for example, head to trunk, and limbs). 
The foetus’ weight increases considerably in the latter stages of the 
foetal period. Organs and systems continue in their functional 
development, and some systems change considerably at birth (for 
example, the respiratory and circulatory systems).
Birth in humans normally occurs between 37 and 42 weeks after 
fertilisation.
Trimesters
The nine calendar month gestation period is split into 3-month 
periods called trimesters. During the first trimester the embryonic 
and early foetal periods occur. In the second trimester the uterus 
becomes much larger as the foetus grows considerably, and symp­
toms of morning sickness tend to subside. A foetus in the third 
trimester turns and the head drops into the pelvic cavity (engage­
ment) in preparation for birth. Babies born prematurely during 
the third trimester may survive, particularly with specialised inten­
sive care treatment.
Clinical and embryological timings
Embryologists use timings from the date of fertilisation, and all 
the timings in this book will relate to that time. Embryologists 
studying the embryos of animals often have an advantage in being 
able to fairly accurately note when fertilisation occurred. Clini­
cally, the date of fertilisation is more difficult to determine.
A woman’s menstrual cycle will take around 28 days to com­
plete, starting with the first day of the menstrual period (bleed) 
and returning to the same point (Figure 4.1). Menstruation occurs 
for 3–6 days, followed by the proliferative phase for 10–12 days. 
Ovulation occurs around 14 days before the start of the next men­
strual period. If the released ovum is fertilised menstruation will 
not occur. Fertilisation must occur within 1 day of ovulation.
The event of the last menstrual period can be used to date the 
period of gestation clinically, although the date on which fertilisa­
tion took place will be uncertain because of variability in the length 
of the cycle between the start of menstruation and ovulation.
Clinically, gestational timings are around 2 weeks longer than 
an embryologist’s timing (Figure 4.2). If the embryonic period is 
complete at the end of week 8, a clinician would record this as the 
end of week 10 (Figure 4.3).
Clinical relevance
If you are a medical, nursing or health sciences student then you 
must be aware of the 2-week difference between embryologists’ 
and clinicans’ gestation timings.
A gestation period of 40 weeks is equal to 10 lunar months. A 
period of 10 lunar months is, on average, 7 days longer than any 
9 calendar months. Using the mother’s date of the start of her last 
menstrual period you can quickly calculate an estimated date of 
delivery by adding 9 calendar months and 7 days.
An awareness of the period of the egg, the embryonic period 
and the trimesters helps understand the periods of susceptibility of 
the embryo and the foetus. For example, after the period of the 
egg and during the embryonic period the embryo is particularly 
vulnerable to the effects of teratogens and environmental insults. 
The respiratory system develops significantly during the third tri­
mester, so linking the timing of a premature birth to the potential 
requirements of the baby are important.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
18  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
5
Mitosis
Figure 5.1
The cell cycle
G1, S and G2 are parts of the cell cycle (we call them interphase in this chapter)
and M indicates mitosis. Note that a single chromosome in G1 is duplicated during 
the DNA synthesis phase (S), and a chromosome made up of two, identical sister
chromatids is ready to enter mitosis in G2 phase
Figure 5.3
Parts of a
chromosome
during cell
division
Figure 5.4
Stages of mitosis
Figure 5.2
Interphase
A single cell in interphase (i.e. not in mitosis)
Nucleus
Chromosomes
(green)
M
S
G1
G2
Prophase
Telophase
Cell splits in two
Daughter cells
New nuclear 
membrane forming
Chromosomes
become less condensed
Chromosomes (green)
Centromere (red)
Nuclear membrane
Centrioles 
a collection of microtubules in a 9-triplet arrangement, with the 2 
centrioles at right angles to each other. They hold the microtubules 
spindles as the chromosomes attach ready to divide
specific sequence of DNA found nearly central on the chromosome. 
This region links the chromosome to the spindles necessary for mitosis
Microtubules
Chromatid
Centromere
Prometaphase
Nuclear membrane
breaking up
Microtubules
Metaphase
Anaphase

Mitosis  Early development  19
Time period: day 0 to adult
Cell division
Cell division normally occurs in eukaryotic organisms through the 
process of mitosis, in which the maternal cell divides to form two 
genetically identical daughter cells (Figure 5.1). This allows 
growth, repair, replacement of lost cells and so on. A key process 
during mitosis is the duplication of DNA to give two identical sets 
of chromosomes, which are then pulled apart and new cells are 
formed around each set. The new cells may be considered to be 
clones of the maternal cell.
Mitosis
A cell dividing by mitosis passes through six phases.
•	 Interphase: the cell goes about its normal, daily business (Figure 
5.2). This is also known as the cell cycle, and includes phases of 
its own: G1 (gap 1), S (synthesis) and G2 (gap 2). DNA is dupli­
cated (synthesised) during S phase.
•	 Prophase: DNA condenses to become chromosomes which are 
visible under a microscope (Figure 5.3). Centrioles move to oppo­
site ends of the cell and extend microtubules out (this is the mitotic 
spindle). The centromeres at the centre of the chromosomes also 
begin to extend fibres outwards (Figure 5.4).
•	 Prometaphase: the nuclear membrane disappears, microtubules 
attach centrioles to centromeres and start pulling the chromosomes.
•	 Metaphase: chromosomes become aligned in the middle of 
the cell.
•	 Anaphase: chromosome pairs split (centromeres are cut), and 
one of each pair (sister chromatids) move to either end of the 
cell.
•	 Telophase: sister chromatids reach opposite ends of the cell and 
become less condensed and no longer visible; new membranes 
form around the new nuclei for the daughter cells.
•	 Cytokinesis: an actin ring around the centre of the cell shrinks 
and splits the cell in two.
•	 Interphase: the cell goes about its normal, daily business (includ­
ing preparing for and doubling its DNA to form pairs of 
chromosomes).
Clinical relevance
Errors in mitotic division, although rare, will be carried into 
the daughter cells of that division, and onwards to new cells pro­
duced from them. Errors in early embryonic development could 
have catastrophic consequences, as an error in one cell would 
quickly become an error in a huge number of cells. Chromosomal 
damage can give small or significant effects, such as trisomy 
(an extra copy of a chromosome), or translocation or inversion 
of a broken section. Trisomy 21, for example, results in Down 
syndrome.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
20  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
6
Meiosis
Homologous
chromosomes
Prophase I
Sister
chromatids
Figure 6.2
A chromosome in the G1 phase
after mitosis (interphase)
Figure 6.3
A chromosome after S phase. The DNA has been
duplicated to produce two identical sister chromatids
Figure 6.4
A homologous pair of chromosomes (meiosis)
Interphase 
Homologous chromosomes begin to 
swap sections of DNA (alleles)
Red and green strands are pairs of (homologous) chromosomes
(a pair has one red and one green chromosome). The red strand
signifies the paternal DNA and the green strand the maternal 
DNA within this cell 
Metaphase I
Prometaphase I
Telophase I
Anaphase I
Metaphase II
Interphase II
4 haploid cells
Anaphase II
Telophase II
Figure 6.6
In the two haploid cells division begins again. At the end of meiosis II four haploid cells have formed, each with 23 chromosomes
(not paired) and a mix of maternally and paternally derived alleles
Figure 6.5
Meiosis I is similar to mitosis, but at the end of meiosis I two cells have formed, each with one chromosome of a homologous pair.
They are haploid cells. Note the crossover of alleles between homologous pairs
Figure 6.1
Human karyotype
(23 pairs of chromosomes condensed in prophase).
A pair is formed by two identical sister chromatids,
two separate chromosomes with the same genes 
but potentially different alleles (copies of those genes)
1
2
4
5
6
7
8
3
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
X
Y

Meiosis  Early development  21
Time period: day 0 to adult
Diversity
Cell division by mitosis gives no opportunity for change or diver­
sity, which is ideal for processes like growth and repair. In humans, 
sexual reproduction allows random mingling of maternal and 
paternal DNA to produce a new, unique individual. This is able 
to occur because of a different type of cell division called meiosis.
During meiosis a single cell divides twice to form four new cells. 
These daughter cells have half the normal number of chromo­
somes (they are haploid cells). Meiosis is the method of producing 
spermatozoa and oocytes. When an egg is fertilised by a sperm the 
chromosomes will combine to form a cell with the normal number 
of chromosomes.
Human chromosomes
There are 23 pairs of human chromosomes (Figure 6.1) in a normal, 
diploid cell (from the Greek word diploos, meaning ‘double’). Each 
chromosome is a length of DNA wrapped into an organised struc­
ture (Figure 6.2). Twenty-two of the pairs of chromosomes are 
known as autosomes. The remaining pair are known as the sex 
chromosomes, which hold genes linked to the individual’s sex. 
When condensed the pairs of autosomes look like X’s (Figures 6.3 
and 6.4), and the sex chromosomes look like X’s or Y’s (Figure 6.1). 
The female sex chromosome pair appears as XX, the male as XY.
Meiosis I
A cell dividing by meiosis divides twice (meiosis I and meiosis II). 
During meiosis I (Figure 6.5), a cell passes through phases very 
similar to those of mitosis, but with some significant differences. 
It begins with 23 pairs of chromosomes (46 chromosomes in total).
•	 Interphase: the cell goes about its normal, daily business (diploid).
•	 Prophase I: homologous chromosomes exchange DNA (homolo­
gous recombination); chromosomes condense and become visible; 
centrioles move to opposite ends of the cell and extend microtu­
bules out (mitotic spindle); centromeres extend fibres out from 
chromosomes (diploid).
•	 Prometaphase I: the nuclear membrane disappears, microtubules 
attach centrioles to centromeres and start pulling the chromo­
somes (diploid).
•	 Metaphase I: chromosomes are aligned in the middle of the cell 
(diploid).
•	 Anaphase I: homologous chromosome pairs split, one of each 
pair (each pair has two chromatids) moving to either end of the 
cell (diploid).
•	 Telophase I: homologous chromosomes reach each end of the 
cell; new membranes form around the new nuclei for the daughter 
cells (diploid).
•	 Cytokinesis: an actin ring around the centre of the cell shrinks 
and splits the cell in two (haploid).
After meiosis I each cell has 23 chromosomes, and each chromo­
some has two chromatids. It is therefore haploid.
Homologous recombination
The key event during meiosis I is the separation of homologous 
chromosomes, rather than the separation of sister chromatids as 
occurs during mitosis. But what are homologous chromosomes?
Sister chromatids (Figure 6.4) are identical copies of DNA that 
are attached to one another by the centromere to form the 
X-shaped chromosomes that we recognise. So, when sister chro­
matids are separated into two new cells by mitosis the new cells 
will be genetically identical.
Homologous chromosomes (Figure 6.4) are the two chromo­
somes that make up the ‘pair’ of chromosomes that we talk about 
in diploid cells. We say that human diploid cells contain 23 pairs 
of chromosomes. They are homologous in that they are the same 
chromosome but with subtle differences. One chromosome has 
been inherited from the father and one from the mother.
Homologous chromosomes contain genes for the same biologi­
cal features, but the genes may be slightly different. For example, 
the genes for eye colour would be found on both homologous 
chromosomes but one chromosome may hold the gene that 
encodes for blue eyes and the other for green eyes. These are dif­
ferent alleles of the same gene.
During homologous recombination those genes are swapped 
around randomly between the homologous chromosomes before 
they are pulled into new cells. Therefore, each new cell could be 
quite different with many, many genes randomly exchanged. In 
this way the gametes (eggs, sperm) formed by meiosis become very 
diverse.
The female sex chromosomes (XX) are homologous, but the 
male sex chromosomes (XY) are not.
Meiosis II
Without replicating its DNA the cell moves from meiosis I to 
meiosis II. Meiosis II is very similar to mitosis.
•	 Prophase II: chromatids condense and become visible; centrioles 
move to opposite ends of the cell and extend microtubules out 
(mitotic spindle); centromeres extend fibres out from chromo­
somes (haploid).
•	 Prometaphase II: the nuclear membrane disappears, microtu­
bules attach centrioles to centromeres and start pulling the chro­
mosomes (haploid).
•	 Metaphase II: chromosomes are aligned in the middle of the cell 
(haploid).
•	 Anaphase II: chromosome pairs split (centromeres cut), one of 
each pair (sister chromatids) moving to either end of the cell 
(haploid).
•	 Telophase II: sister chromatids reach opposite ends of the cell; 
new membranes form around the new nuclei for the daughter cells 
(haploid).
•	 Cytokinesis: an actin ring around the centre of the cell shrinks 
and splits the cell in two (haploid).
The end result is, generally speaking, 4 cells with 23 unpaired 
chromosomes each (Figure 6.6). We will find out more about this 
in the gamete chapters (see Chapter 7, spermatogenesis and 
Chapter 8, oogenesis).
Clinical relevance
Karyotyping and comparing a patient’s chromosomes to the 
expected normal chromosomal pattern is important in diagnosing 
a number of chromosomal abnormalities, such as trisomy 21 
(Down syndrome), XXY (Klinefelter syndrome) and trisomy 18 
(Edwards syndrome).
The homologous recombination of prophase I is an important 
mechanism of Mendelian inheritance. It is a key tenet of modern 
genetics and underlies most clinical disorders with a genetic basis.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
22  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
7
Spermatogenesis
XY
XY
XY
Meiosis I
Meiosis II
Spermiogenesis
X
X
X
Y
Y
Y
X
X
Y
Y
Spermatogonia A
(pool of proliferating cells)
Spermatogonia B
(diploid)
Primary spermatocyte
(diploid)
Secondary spermatocyte
(haploid)
Spermatids
(haploid)
Spermatozoa
(haploid)
Figure 7.1
Anatomy of the testis and epididymis
Figure 7.3
A mature human spermatozoon
Figure 7.2
Spermatogenesis
Note that the cytoplasmic bridges between cells are not shown here
for simplicity. Cells linked together by these bridges pass through
spermatogenesis in synchronisation
Pampiniform
plexus
Epididymis
Testis
Testicular
artery
Vas deferens
Tunica
vaginalis
Head
Acrosome
Mitochondria
Terminal disc
Plasma membrane
Centriole
Axial filament
Mid
(connecting)
piece
Tail
End
piece
Nucleus

Spermatogenesis  Early development  23
Time period: puberty to death
Meiosis continued
In the last chapter we talked about the importance of meiosis in 
sexual reproduction and diversity, and saw how haploid cells are 
formed. In males, meiosis occurs during spermatogenesis, in which 
spermatogonia in the testes become spermatozoa.
The germ cells that will form the male gametes (spermatozoa) 
are derived from germ cells that migrate from the yolk sac into the 
site of early gonad formation (see Chapter 36).
Aims of spermatogenesis
Spermatogonia are diploid germ cells in the testes that maintain 
their numbers by mitosis, thus maintaining spermatozoa numbers 
through life. Spermatogonia contain both X and Y sex chromo­
somes. At a certain point a spermatogonium will stop its other 
duties and begin meiosis. The cells that result will then pass 
through more stages of maturation and development and will 
become mature spermatozoa capable of travelling to and fertilising 
an ovum.
Anatomy
The testis is made up of very long, tightly coiled tubes called the 
seminiferous tubules that are surrounded by layers of connective 
tissue, blood vessels and nerves (Figure 7.1). The seminiferous 
tubules are linked to straight tubules and a network of tubes called 
the rete testis which lead to the epididymis. The epididymis is 
another collection of tubes on the posterior edge of the testis that 
passes inferiorly and is continuous with the ductus deferens (also 
known as the vas deferens). The ductus deferens carries mature 
spermatozoa from the testis to the urethra.
Spermatogonia are found in the walls of the seminiferous 
tubules, and as they progress through spermatogenesis they pass 
towards the lumina of those tubules. Leydig cells within the testes 
produce testosterone. Sertoli cells are also found in the seminifer­
ous tubules, and produce a number of hormones.
Spermatocytogenesis
The spermatogonia that we begin the process with are called sper­
matogonia A cells (Figure 7.2). These are the stem cells that pro­
liferate and replenish the root source of all spermatozoa. The cells 
that are about to begin meiosis are called spermatogonia B cells, 
and can be recognised partly because they are connected to one 
another by cytoplasmic bridges. They continue to divide by mitosis 
until they become primary spermatocytes. The cytoplasmic bridges 
will maintain connections between a group of cells during sperma­
togenesis, synchronising the process and batch producing groups 
of spermatozoa.
The primary spermatocytes enter meiosis I. Homologous recom­
bination of chromosomes occurs in this stage. One primary sper­
matocyte becomes two secondary spermatocytes. These cells are 
now haploid. Each secondary spermatocyte may contain an X or 
a Y sex chromosome.
Secondary spermatocytes enter meiosis II and again divide, 
forming spermatids. As the DNA was not replicated in meiosis II 
these cells have half their original DNA. During fertilisation this 
DNA will be combined with the DNA of the maternal ovum. This 
is the end of the first stage of spermatogenesis, known as 
spermatocytogenesis.
Spermiogenesis
During spermiogenesis the rounded spermatid cell changes shape, 
becoming elongated and developing the familiar head and tail. The 
cell loses cytoplasm, the nucleus is packed into the head, mito­
chondria become concentrated in the first part of the tail and an 
acrosome forms around the tip of the head. The acrosome contains 
enzymes that will help the sperm penetrate the outer layers of the 
ovum during fertilisation.
At the end of spermiogenesis the spermatids have become sper­
matozoa (Figure 7.3).
Spermatozoa
Spermatogenesis takes around 64 days to produce spermatozoa 
from germ cells in the above processes. The spermatozoa are then 
passed in an inactive state to the epididymis, where they continue 
to mature. During the next week they descend within the epidi­
dymis and become motile and ready to be passed into the ductus 
deferens during ejaculation.
Clinical relevance
Abnormalities in spermatogenesis are common, and during fertil­
ity investigations the number and concentration of spermatozoa, 
and the proportion of abnormal sperm, are counted in a semen 
sample. A number of biological and environmental factors will 
affect the sperm count and fertility, such as smoking, sexually 
transmitted diseases, toxins, testicular overheating and radiation.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
24  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
8
Oogenesis
Figure 8.1
Follicular development and meiotic divisions of oogenesis
Stages of meiosis
Follicular development
Figure 8.2
Stages of follicular development
Oogonium
Primordial
germ cells
Primary
oocyte
First
meiotic
division
Polar body – occasionally
the polar body also divides –
polar bodies degenerate
Secondary oocyte –
rests in metaphase II
Second meiotic division
Polar body
Ovulation
Ootid
Ovum
Meiosis II is only
complete if
fertilisation occurs
Oogonium
Birth to
puberty
Arrested in prophase I
(diplotene stage)
Follicular
antrum
Cuboidal epithelial
cells – now known
as granulosa cells
Antrum
Mature – Graafian
follicle
Secondary
follicle
Primary
follicle
37 hours prior
to ovulation
Primary oocyte –
primordial follicle
Flattened
epithelium cells
Primary oocyte
Primary follicle
Secondary follicle
Graafian follicle –
mature follicle
Ruptured
follicle
Antrum
Cumulus
oophorus
Ovum
Corpus
luteum
Collapsed corpus
luteum
First polar body
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Time period: week 12 to menopause
Overview
Female germ cells proliferate by mitosis in the ovaries to form a 
large number of oogonia. These cells are diploid, contain two X 
sex chromosomes, and will become haploid mature oocytes via the 
process of oogenesis. This process is similar to spermatogenesis 
but has some significant differences.
The germ cells that will form the female gametes (oocytes) are 
derived from germ cells that migrate from the yolk sac into the site 
of early gonad formation (see Chapter 36).
Ovaries
The ovaries are a pair of organs that produce oocytes and repro­
ductive hormones. They lie near the openings of the uterine tubes 
(also known as the Fallopian tubes or oviducts) that extend from 

Oogenesis  Early development  25
the uterus. Finger-like projections from the uterine tubes called 
fimbriae collect oocytes when they are expelled from the ovaries. 
The oocyte is carried into and along the uterine tube for fertilisa­
tion and subsequent implantation into the wall of the uterus.
The adult ovary is predominantly made up of connective tissue 
that supports a large number of follicles. Blood vessels and nerves 
are concentrated within the central medulla whereas follicles are 
found in the outer cortex, in varying stages of development.
Meiosis I
Oogonia begin oogenesis by entering meiosis I in week 12 of 
embryonic development (Figure 8.1). During meiosis I the cell is 
known as the primary oocyte, and is surrounded by a thin layer of 
squamous epithelial cells. This structure is a follicle, and in its very 
early stage is called a primordial follicle. The primary oocyte at this 
stage is developmentally arrested in prophase of meiosis I. This 
pause in development may continue for 45 years or more.
The number of primordial follicles vastly increases during the 
foetal period but many degenerate, leaving around 400,000 folli­
cles available at puberty. After birth no new oocytes form.
Puberty
With the onset of puberty some of the stalled primary oocytes 
continue oogenesis each month (Figure 8.1).
The primary oocyte becomes larger and the follicular cells 
around it become cuboidal and the layer thickens. The follicle is 
now a primary follicle (Figure 8.2).
The oocyte and the granulosa (follicle) cells produce a layer of 
glycoproteins on the surface of the oocyte called the zona 
pellucida.
When the follicle forms more than one layer of granulosa cells 
it is called a secondary follicle.
One follicle continues to develop and grow, and the others 
degenerate. It is not clear how one follicle is chosen over the others.
A cavity called the antrum forms between the layers of granulosa 
cells, and the mass of follicular cells is now termed the cumulus 
oophorus.
The connective tissue cells of the ovary around the follicle 
respond by differentiating and forming two new layers: the theca 
interna and the theca externa. The theca interna has a hormonal 
role, and the theca externa a supportive role. This follicle is now 
a mature vesicular follicle or Graafian follicle.
The thecal and granulosa cells of the developing follicles produce 
oestrogens that cause the thickening of the endometrial lining of 
the uterus and other preparations for receiving a fertilised oocyte. 
This occurs from days 5 to 14 of the menstrual cycle (see Figure 
4.1 and Chapter 11).
Ovulation
The primary oocyte of the Graafian follicle responds to surges in 
follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinising hormone (LH) 
produced by the pituitary gland on days 13–14 of the menstrual 
cycle by resuming meiosis I and continuing its stalled cell division 
(Figure 8.1).
When the oocyte divides it forms one large cell and one smaller 
remnant of the division known as a polar body. At the end of 
meiosis I the oocyte has become a secondary oocyte.
Polar bodies
Polar bodies are small, non-functional cells. They receive very little 
of the available cytoplasm and degenerate soon after division. In 
this way the oocyte is able to retain its size but discard chromo­
somal material to become a haploid cell ready for fertilisation.
One polar body is formed with meiosis I and two polar bodies 
are formed with meiosis II.
Meiosis II
The secondary oocyte begins meiosis II but this division is again 
halted, this time during metaphase II. Meiosis II will only continue 
if the oocyte is fertilised.
Post-ovulation
With ovulation the secondary oocyte is passed into the uterine 
tube, but the follicle remains within the ovary (Figure 8.2). At this 
stage the follicle is very large and makes up a significant portion 
of the ovary. This follicle becomes the corpus luteum.
In response to LH the corpus luteum produces progesterone, 
oestrogens and other hormones causing the endometrium of the 
uterus to thicken further, develop its vasculature, form glands and 
prepare for implantation.
If fertilisation does not occur the corpus luteum degenerates 
about 14 days later and becomes a scar tissue remnant of itself 
called the corpus albicans. Hormone production ceases and men­
struation begins as the thickened endometrium is shed.
Clinical relevance
The primary oocyte may be arrested in meiosis I throughout life 
for 40–50 years if it is not triggered to continue development until 
a menstrual cycle late in reproductive life. DNA fragmentation 
within those stored oocytes is more common in older women as 
DNA damage increases with time. This may be the reason for 
reduced fertility with increasing age.
Knowledge of the sex hormones’ effects on follicle development 
have allowed the invention of the oral contraceptive pill. High 
levels of oestrogens and progesterone inhibit gonadotrophin 
releasing hormone (GnRH) and subsequently LH and FSH 
release. Decreased levels of FSH mean that the follicle is not 
stimulated to develop, and the absence of an LH surge prevents 
ovulation occurring.
Chemotherapy and radiotherapy can destroy primordial ovarian 
follicles. As there is a finite reserve of oocytes formed prenatally, 
which cannot be replenished after treatment, the cryopreservation 
of oocytes before treatment begins should be considered. Frozen 
oocytes may be used for in vitro fertilisation at a later date if the 
patient becomes infertile.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
26  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
9
Fertilisation
Uterine tube
Normal
area of
fertilisation
Morula
Ovary
Uterus
Figure 9.1
The passage of spermatozoa through the male
reproductive tract
Figure 9.3
Sperm approach the ovum. One spermatozoon has
penetrated the corona radiata and has met the 
zona pellucida, triggering the acrosome reaction
Figure 9.2
The path of the ovum, from the ovary to the area of fertilisation
within the ampulla of the uterine tube, and onwards to the uterus
Figure 9.4
A single spermatozoon in different stages of the acrosome reaction
Bladder
Vas deferens
Urethra
Testis
Prostate
Bulbourethral
glands
Fimbrae
Ovulation
Developing follicles
Seminal
vesicles
Ejaculatory
duct
Cortical granules
Cortical granules
Acrosome
Zona pellucida
Sperm
(enlarged)
Corona radiata-
cumulus cells
Corona radiata-
cumulus cells
Zona pellucida
Enzymes released
1
2
3
4
5
Time period: day 0
Fertilisation
With meiosis and sexual reproduction an organism is able to 
reproduce and create genetically individual offspring. Here we 
discuss what happens when the gametes (ovum and spermatozoon) 
meet, combine their genetic material and begin the formation of 
an embryo.
Capacitation
Spermatozoa in the female genital tract become prepared for fer­
tilisation with a process called capacitation. Spermatozoa stored 
in the epididymis pass through the ductus deferens during ejacula­
tion and mix with secretions from the seminal vesicles, prostate 
and bulbourethral glands (Figure 9.1) as they are released into the 
vagina. With this, and a possible cue from the female environment, 
the outer surface of the acrosome becomes modified by the removal 
of glycoproteins and proteins. This is the final maturation step of 
the spermatozoa.
The spermatozoa become hyperactive and make their way 
through the cervix, uterus and uterine tube to find the ovum.
Ovulation
With ovulation the secondary oocyte (or ovum) is expelled from 
the follicle on the ovary surface. Fimbriae at the opening of the 
uterine tube collect it and pass it into the uterine tube (Figure 9.2). 

Fertilisation  Early development  27
The ovum is moved towards the ampulla of the uterine tube where 
it has roughly 24 hours to meet with a spermatozoon to become 
fertilised.
Acrosome reaction
The oocyte is surrounded by cumulus cells (also termed the corona 
radiata) from the follicle and spermatozoa must break through this 
outer layer to reach the oocyte itself (Figure 9.3). When a sperma­
tozoon succeeds in this it encounters the zona pellucida surround­
ing the plasma membrane of the oocyte and insulating it from the 
external environment. The spermatozoon binds to the zona pel­
lucida and is triggered to begin the acrosome reaction.
The acrosomal cap of the head of the sperm breaks down, 
releasing enzymes that dissolve the zona pellucida locally allowing 
the spermatozoon to enter the oocyte (Figure 9.4).
Cortical reaction
Once through the zona pellucida the membranes of the egg 
and sperm meet and fuse. The contents of the sperm are now 
within the egg, as its plasma membrane is left behind and lost 
(Figure 9.4).
Cortical granules containing enzymes are released from the egg, 
causing the binding proteins of the entire zona pellucida to become 
altered, preventing further sperm from binding.
With the zona pellucida, and the acrosome and cortical reac­
tions fertilisation by multiple sperm (dispermy or polyspermy) 
is prevented. This is a very important process in mammalian 
reproduction as hundreds of sperm reach the egg at the same time 
and dispermy would create an embryo with three haploid sets of 
chromosomes (triploidy) that would be extremely unlikely to 
survive.
Meiosis II
The secondary oocyte was paused partway through meiosis II (see 
Chapter 8). With the fusion of the spermatozoon cell membrane 
the oocyte is triggered to continue meiosis.
The two cells that result from this division are the definitive 
oocyte and the second polar body. The second polar body receives 
little cytoplasm, allowing the definitive oocyte to maintain its 
size.
Zygote
The fertilised oocyte contains the DNA of the spermatozoon and 
the DNA of the oocyte. In principle it contains a diploid set of 
chromosomes.
Although the DNA has not been reorganised yet, fertilisation 
has formed a genetically unique individual. This cell can be called 
a zygote (see Chapter 10).
Mitosis and DNA
The spermatozoon’s nucleus becomes the male pronucleus, and 
aligns with the female pronucleus. Each pronucleus is haploid at 
this stage. The two pronuclei lose their nuclear membranes and 
their DNA is duplicated. This takes around 18 hours.
The DNA condenses into chromosomes, and paternal and 
maternal chromosomes become aligned together on the equator of 
the cell. Sister chromatids from each chromosome are pulled 
towards either end of the cell, as observed during anaphase in the 
mitosis chapter (see Figure 5.4).
Mitosis continues and the cell is split in two.
Chromosomes
With fertilisation the diploid number of chromosomes has been 
restored by combining chromosomes from the father and the 
mother.
The spermatozoon will bring either an X or Y sex chromosome 
to the oocyte’s X sex chromosome. The spermatozoon determines 
the sex of the embryo by producing either an XY (male) or XX 
(female) pair of sex chromosomes.
Embryological and clinical timings
Fertilisation occurs during an 18–24 hour period shortly after 
ovulation in humans. It is impossible to determine an exact time 
of fertilisation, and very difficult to determine on which day ferti­
lisation occurred.
Embryologically we talk about developmental processes occur­
ring a number of days after fertilisation. For example, we say that 
the first somites form at 20 days. These are the timings that we use 
in this book, and that appear at the top of each chapter.
Clinically, however, gestation is timed from a more evident 
event: the last menstrual period (LMP). As ovulation occurs fairly 
reliably 2 weeks after menstruation, and fertilisation occurs within 
24 hours of ovulation, it is easier and more reliable to note the 
date of the LMP for a patient and from this record weeks of preg­
nancy and the predicted date of birth.
It is important to be aware that there is a 2-week difference 
between embryological and clinical timings (see Figure 4.2). If this 
textbook notes that the first somites occur at 20 days (around 3 
weeks after fertilisation), this occurs at 5 weeks clinically.
Clinical relevance
An extra-uterine pregnancy (or ectopic pregnancy) can occur 
because of the movement of the ovum from the ovaries to the 
uterus. A fertilised ovum may implant into the uterine tube, the 
cervix, the ovary or the abdomen. Tubal pregnancies within 
the uterine tube are the most common type. Typically, an ectopic 
pregnancy is not viable and in extreme cases can lead to the death 
of the mother.
For in vitro fertilisation techniques, sperm must be artificially 
induced to begin capacitation. With capacitation the sperm is 
primed to undergo the acrosome reaction when it meets the 
ovum.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
28  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
10
From zygote to blastocyst
Figure 10.1
Cleavage
2 different blastocysts
pass into the uterus
and implant separately
2 cell stage
Morula
Blastocyst
Embryoblast
Uterine
tube
Ovum
Morula
Ovary
Uterus
Blastocoele
Trophoblast
One
mitotic
division
More
cleavage
Zona
pellucida
16 or more cells
Figure 10.2
The morula forms after multiple cell divisions and then a 
cavity forms in the centre. The morula has become a blastocyst
Figure 10.3
The ovum is released into the uterine tube and is fertilised. It begins
 to develop as it passes along the uterine tube towards the uterus
Figure 10.4
A common arrangement of dizygotic twins
Figure 10.5
A common arrangement of monozygotic twins
A single blastocyst
with 2 embryonic
masses enters the
uterus and implants
One placenta
Two amniotic sacs
One chorionic sac
Two placentas
Two amniotic sacs
Two chorionic sacs

From zygote to blastocyst  Early development  29
Time period: days 0–5
Zygote
With fertilisation the oocyte and spermatozoon combine to become 
a zygote. The zygote is the simplest form of the new animal, and 
will begin to split and divide into new cells that will become organ­
ised, specialised and form shapes and new structures as it becomes 
more complex.
Cleavage
Around 24 hours after fertilisation the zygote begins to increase 
its number of cells by rapid mitosis, but without increasing its size. 
The cells become smaller with each cell division. The number of 
cells doubles with each division. This is cleavage (Figure 10.1).
The cells of the zygote are called blastomeres.
Morula
Cells become compacted and tightly squashed together. From 
around the 12-cell stage the ball of cells becomes called the morula 
(Figure 10.2), derived from the Latin word for mulberry, which it 
now resembles.
The cells of the morula will not only give rise to the cells of the 
embryo, but also to many of its supporting structures, such as part 
of the placenta.
By this stage the cells are communicating with each other and 
becoming organised and ready for the next stage.
The blastomeres in the middle of the morula become the 
inner cell mass or embryoblast. These cells will directly form the 
embryo.
The blastomeres on the outside of the morula become the outer 
cell mass or trophoblast. These cells will form some of the support­
ing structures for the embryo.
Blastocyst
The morula passes into the uterus around 4 days after fertilisation 
(Figure 10.3).
Trophoblast cells pull luminal fluid from the uterine cavity into 
the centre of the morula (Figure 10.2). The fluid-filled space that 
forms is called the blastocoel (or blastocyst cavity). The cells of the 
inner cell mass are pushed to one end of the cavity and become 
called the embryonic pole. The morula is now called a blastocyst.
Implantation
Around 5 days after fertilisation the blastocyst loses the zona pel­
lucida. By doing this it becomes able to grow in size and interact 
with the uterine wall. The blastocyst attaches to the endometrial 
epithelium lining the uterus, triggering changes to the trophoblast 
and to the endometrium in preparation for the implantation of the 
blastocyst into the uterine wall (see Chapter 12).
Twins
Twinning can occur in different ways. Two separate blastocysts 
may form from fertilisation by different sperm of two different ova 
released from an ovary simultaneously. These twins would not be 
identical twins, and they would have separate placentas (dichori­
onic), separate amniotic sacs (diamniotic) and may even be of 
different sexes (Figure 10.4). These would be dizygotic twins (or 
fraternal or non-identical twins).
A zygote may split during cleavage, or later, when the inner cell 
mass has formed, or later still, when the embryo has become more 
complicated and formed a bilaminar embryonic disc (see Chapter 
12). If the zygote splits during cleavage each blastocyst will implant 
separately. If the zygote splits at a later stage the two embryos may 
share the same chorion, amnion or placenta (Figure 10.5).
If a single zygote splits identical twins will grow. These twins 
would come from the same ovum and spermatozoon, so would be 
genetically identical. These would be monozygotic twins (or identi­
cal twins). This is rarer. It is common for monozygotic twins to 
share a placenta (monochorionic), but have separate amniotic sacs 
(diamniotic). This situation arises from cleavage of the blastocyst 
4–8 days after fertilisation. A small number of monozygotic twins 
share their amnion (monoamniotic), and this occurs if the division 
of the zygote occurs later than 9 days after fertilisation. The more 
tissues shared between twins the greater the risk to the embryos. 
Hence, dizygotic twins have the lowest mortality risk. Conjoined 
twins are at significant risk. This situation arises when the zygote 
splits incompletely later than 12 days after fertilisation.
Clinical relevance
It is thought that blastocyst abnormalities are common and not 
compatible with life. Most probably do not implant into the 
uterus, show no signs of pregnancy and therefore often the preg­
nancy is not detected.
Twins are more likely to be born prematurely, resulting in low 
birth weights and the associated complications.
In vitro fertilisation (IVF) treatments can result in multiple 
zygotes because of the drugs used to encourage ovulation. Clomid 
is a drug that blocks oestrogen receptors, so the body perceives 
low oestrogen levels, more FSH is released and more follicles 
mature in the ovary to be released and fertilised.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
30  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
11
Implantation
Implantation
site
Figure 11.2
Normal implantation commonly occurs in the superior parts of the
uterus, but can occur at a number of sites
Progesterone
Oestrogen
FSH
LH
Ovulation
1
Days
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
21 23 25 27
Circulating hormone levels
Figure 11.1
Circulating hormone levels during the menstrual cycle
Figure 11.3
Implantation of the blastocyst into the uterine wall begins
Figure 11.4
Implantation continues and the blastocyst becomes embedded within the wall of the uterus 
Figure 11.5
The development of the chorionic cavity between the amniotic cavity, yolk sac and the chorion leaves a connecting stalk between the embryo and the
developing placenta
Endometrial
capillary
Syncytiotrophoblast
Cytotrophoblast
Day 6
Day 7
Day 9
Fibrin plug
Day 12
Day 13
Decidua
Embryoblast
Blastocoele
Trophoblast
Uterine
epithelium
Cytotrophoblast
Uterine cavity
Uterine epithelium
Epiblast
Hypoblast
Blastocoele
Uterine epithelium
Uterine epithelium
Cytotrophoblast
Day 8
Amniotic
cavity
Amnioblasts
Bilaminar disc
Uterine epithelium
Cytotrophoblast
Blastocoele
Primary yolk sac
Yolk sac
Exocoelomic
membrane
Exocoelomic
membrane
Amniotic cavity
Amniotic cavity
Extra-embryonic
coelom appearing
Extra embryonic
mesoderm
Epiblast
Hypoblast
Chronic cavity
Amniotic cavity
Connecting
stalk
Secondary
yolk sac
Cytotrophoblast

Implantation  Early development  31
Time period: days 5–13
Introduction
At this early stage of development timings are very individual and 
often a range is more appropriate. All timings described here are 
the typical ages documented in a range of literature.
Implantation
The travelling morula enters the uterus at approximately day 4 and 
begins to form a blastocyst at around 4.5 days. It begins the 
process of implantation roughly a day later (6–7 days). Implanta­
tion occurs to enable the developing embryo to take oxygen and 
nutrients from the mother, thus enabling its growth.
The menstrual cycle (uterus)
For the blastocyst to implant successfully the walls of the uterus 
make certain preparations. The endometrial lining of the uterus 
undergoes changes every month as part of the menstrual cycle. 
There are three main stages: the proliferative (or follicular) phase, 
the secretory (luteal or progestational) phase and the menstrual 
phase.
The proliferative phase begins on day 5 of an average menstrual 
cycle and finishes on day 13, prior to ovulation. Changes to the 
uterus during this phase include an increase in thickness of the 
endometrium and an increase in vascularisation.
During the secretory phase arteries and glands become coiled 
and secretions increase helping to maintain the thickness of the 
endometrium. There are three distinct layers of the endometrium: 
a superficial compact layer, a middle spongy layer and a deep basal 
layer.
There is also a group of new rounded cells that cover the whole 
surface of the endometrium. These are the decidual cells. If fertili­
sation does not occur the spongy and compact layers and the 
decidual cells are shed.
Decidualization
Decidualization is the collective term for the changes that the 
endometrium undergoes in pregnancy. Decidual cells have a high 
secretory capacity of laminin and fibronectin (both have adhesive 
qualities) and the vascularity of the tissue is improved. At implan­
tation these cells accumulate fats and glycogen.
The decidua remains important and has a role in the develop­
ment of the placenta (see Chapter 12).
The menstrual cycle (hormones)
The phases of the menstrual cycle are coordinated by hormones 
(Figure 11.1).
Proliferative (follicular) phase
Follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), secreted from the anterior lobe 
of the pituitary gland, initiates the maturation of a few follicles in 
the ovary. A day before ovulation the pituitary gland also releases 
a surge of luteinising hormone (LH) inducing the ovary to release 
an ovum.
The empty Graafian follicle (see Chapter 8) matures and pro­
duces oestrogen. In a positive feedback loop the oestrogen induces 
more FSH and LH to be produced by the pituitary and conse­
quently more oestrogen is produced. This causes the thickening of 
the endometrium.
Secretory (luteal) phase
The Graafian follicle matures into the corpus luteum and begins to 
produce progesterone as well as oestrogen. Progesterone main­
tains the developing endometrium and increases the uterine gland 
secretions. The presence of progesterone and oestrogen inhibits 
production of FSH and LH dropping the levels of both 
hormones.
Upon fertilisation and implantation the trophoblast cells 
produce human chorionic gonadotrophin hormone (hCG) causing 
the corpus luteum to continue progesterone production.
Implantation mechanism
The location for implantation is commonly superiorly on the ante­
rior or posterior walls of the uterus (Figure 11.2).
At implantation the blastocyst comprises a fluid-filled core, an 
outer cell mass (trophoblast) and an inner cell mass (embryoblast) 
at the embryonic pole (Figure 11.3).
The process of implantation can be broken down into four 
stages. The first is hatching, as the developing blastocyst has to 
‘hatch’ out of its surrounding zona pellucida. Apposition follows, 
as the trophoblast cells come into contact with the decidua of the 
endometrium. If the embryonic pole is not closest to the area of 
contact the inner cell mass rotates to become aligned with the 
decidua. Then adhesion occurs and molecular communication 
between blastocyst and endometrial cells is vastly increased. 
Finally, invasion of the endometrium by the trophoblast begins.
Bilaminar germ disc
By day 8 implantation has begun and the blastocyst develops again 
into a more complex structure. The inner cell mass differentiates 
into an epiblast layer and a hypoblast layer (Figure 11.4). The 
hypoblast layer is located nearer to the blastocyst cavity. These 
two layers are now called the bilaminar disc.
Simultaneously another cavity forms within the epiblast, called 
the amniotic cavity. The cells of the hypoblast will develop into the 
extraembryonic membranes (amnion, yolk sac, chorion and allan­
tois) and the epiblast will develop to form the embryo (Figure 
11.5).
Clinical relevance
Implantation can be negatively influenced by many factors at any 
stage of the process. This is a common cause of miscarriage, espe­
cially for couples undergoing IVF treatment.
Immunosuppressant cytokines are produced during implanta­
tion to prevent an immune reaction, and some autoimmune 
diseases (systemic lupus erythematosus and antiphospholipid syn­
drome) can mean the mother’s body attacks the embryo at 
implantation.
If implantation occurs near to the internal os of the cervix the 
placenta can develop in a dangerous position (placenta praevia) 
which can result in severe bleeding in later pregnancy and labour.
Intrauterine devices (IUDs) used for contraception were origi­
nally intended to prevent implantation of the blastocyst by irritat­
ing the endometrium. It is likely that instead they work by 
inhibiting sperm and ovum migration and fertilisation. Medicated 
IUDs also contain progesterone, which inhibits FSH and LH 
release, preventing ovulation.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
32  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
12
Placenta
Figure 12.1 
The blastocyst has implanted into the endometrium and the cells of the
trophoblast invade the maternal tissue. (End of week 2)  
Figure 12.2. The syncytiotrophoblast meets and erodes the maternal endometrial blood 
vessels, and lacunae within the syncytiotrophoblast form pools of blood that will 
become interconnected. The cells of the cytotrophoblast start to form chorionic villi
Figure 12.3. The structure of the placenta
Uterine epithelium
Cytotrophoblast
Maternal spiral arteries
of the endometrium
Yolk sac
Exocoelomic
membrane
Amniotic cavity
Extra-embryonic
coelom appearing
Uterine
epithelium
Lacunae
Syncytiotrophoblast
(multinucleate)
Maternal
sinusoids
Umbilical
cord
Cotyledon
Maternal blood
Placental villi
Supporting tissue
Primary chorionic villi
(cytotrophoblast)
Time period: day 7 to week 12
Introduction
As the human embryo grows its need for nutrition increases, 
requiring a connection to the mother for nutrient, gas and waste 
exchange. The placenta develops to meet these needs.
Trophoblast
The trophoblast develops from the outer layer of the blastocyst 
before implantation into the endometrium. Trophoblast cells 
produce human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG). Around 6–7 days 
after fertilisation the trophoblast begins to invade the endome­
trium, triggering the decidual reaction (see Chapter 11) and the 
process that will form the placenta from both embryonic and 
maternal tissues (see Figure 11.3).
The trophoblast layer has important roles in implantation and 
placental development, and protects the embryo from maternal 
immunological attack. With implantation the trophoblast divides 
into two layers (Figure 12.1): the inner cytotrophoblast (mononu­
clear cells) and the outer syncytiotrophoblast (multinucleated).

Placenta  Early development  33
After 2 weeks the front line of invading trophoblasts of the 
syncytiotrophoblast reach the endometrial blood vessels and erode 
them, forming pools of maternal blood within trophoblastic 
lacunae that have formed (Figure 12.2). At the same time chorionic 
villi begin to grow from embryonic tissue, and will grow, branch 
and become more complex until the end of the second trimester.
Initially, chorionic villi cover the whole surface of the chorion 
and by the end of the third week embryonic blood begins to flow 
through the capillaries within the villi. A week after the chorionic 
villi appear the basic structure of the placenta has formed and 
the embryo has developed a primitive circulatory system (see 
Chapter 25).
Structure
Development of the placenta continues to give a mature placental 
structure at 12–13 weeks.
Villi become restricted to just one region of the chorion. Linked 
pools of maternal blood are filled by spiral arteries of the 
endometrium, themselves branches of the uterine arteries. Foetal 
blood enters the placenta through the two umbilical arteries, which 
branch and continually divide until they reach the looping capil­
laries of the chorionic villi. These branching blood vessels form 
15–25 units called cotyledons (Figure 12.3).
In the villi the syncytiotrophoblasts and endothelium create the 
barrier between maternal and fetal blood. Due to the syncytiotro­
phoblasts’ multinucleated structure the nuclei gather in certain 
places (proliferation knots) leaving other areas free of nuclei. 
These are exchange zones and they create an extremely thin and 
efficient selective barrier through which nutrients, gas, waste prod­
ucts and antibodies may pass.
The villi are bathed in maternal blood, and exchange takes 
place. Blood returns to the mother through the uterine veins, and 
the blood within these maternal pools is replaced 2–3 times per 
minute. Oxygen-rich blood is returned to the foetus by the umbili­
cal vein (see Chapter 29).
Function
The placenta has vital roles in hormone production, nutrient, 
metabolite and gas exchange, and in protecting the foetus from 
immune attack by maternal cells and pathogens, and in enabling 
the passage of antibodies from mother to foetus.
Gas exchange
Oxygen diffuses into the embryonic circulation and carbon dioxide 
diffuses out. Foetal haemoglobin (HbF) has a higher affinity for 
oxygen than adult haemoglobin.
Nutrients
For example, amino acids, lipids, glucose, cholesterol and water-
soluble vitamins.
Waste removal
For example, urea, bilirubin and creatine.
Hormones
HCG is produced by the placenta for the first 2 months of preg­
nancy, maintaining the corpus luteum, which in turn produces 
progesterone to maintain the endometrium. By week 16 the pla­
centa takes on the task of progesterone production.
The placenta also produces oestrogens that aid development of 
the uterus and mammary glands, and human chorionic somatomam­
motrophin (hCS, or placental lactogen), an insulin antagonist, that 
modulates maternal carbohydrate metabolism, prioritises foetal 
access to maternal blood glucose and aids breast development for 
lactation.
Antibodies
Maternal immunoglobulins are selectively transferred from about 
14 weeks, and the foetus gains passive immunity that persists in 
the newborn infant for several months. Other maternal proteins 
are degraded by the trophoblast.
Changes to the placenta
Late in the third trimester the syncytiotrophoblast layer develops 
grape-like nucleated clusters within its cytoplasm called syncytial 
knots which break off and pass into the maternal circulatory 
system. Shortly before birth fibrinoid deposits appear on the villi.
After birth blood flow ceases through the umbilical arteries and 
veins, and blood flow to the lungs increases as they fill with air. 
The lungs are about 15 times better at gas exchange than the pla­
centa. The placenta is extruded as the afterbirth.
Clinical relevance
Most drugs (infamously, thalidomide), antibiotics and corticoids, 
some viruses (e.g. toxoplasma, HIV) and other pathogens can pass 
across the placenta into foetal blood.
Rhesus (Rh) factors are red blood cell surface molecules that will 
provoke an immune response (against Rh factors). If an Rh– 
mother bears an Rh+ child her immune system is likely to only see 
the Rh factors during birth when foetal blood may cross the pla­
centa to meet maternal blood. The mother will develop anti-Rh 
antibodies. If she bears a second Rh+ child those anti-Rh antibod­
ies will cross the placenta and destroy foetal red blood cells causing 
erythroblastosis fetalis.
Pre-eclampsia is often diagnosed by increased blood pressure 
and proteinuria. It occurs in up to 10% of pregnancies and is more 
common in first-time mothers. It may arise from a shallowly 
implanted placenta becoming hypoxic and initiating an immune 
response from the mother. Birth of the baby is the only treatment 
option.
Placenta accreta, placenta increta and placenta percreta involve 
the placenta attaching too firmly to the wall of the uterus. Accreta 
is too firmly attached, increta is even more firmly attached (into 
the myometrium) and percreta is attached through the uterine wall 
sometimes to internal organs, even as far as the bladder. Manual 
exploration and the removal of the retained placental tissue are 
necessary.
Placental insufficiency and intrauterine growth restriction 
(IUGR) describe conditions in which the placenta cannot supply 
the necessary nutrients to the foetus. Drug or alcohol abuse, 
smoking, pre-eclampsia, long-term high blood pressure, infections, 
diabetes, problems with kidney function or Rh incompatibility are 
all thought to be related.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
34  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
13
Gastrulation
Figure 13.1.
The bilaminar disk of the early embryo
Figure 13.2.
The primitive streak appears in the epiblast as cells migrate 
and dive beneath this layer in the midline of the embryo 
Figure 13.3.
The cells migrating from the epiblast push away the cells beneath,
eventually forming three layers of cells 
Figure 13.4.
The three layers of the trilaminar germ disc 
Epiblast
(columnar cells)
Hypoblast
Amniotic cavity
Yolk sac
(exocoelomic
cavity) 
Amniotic cells
Amniotic cavity
Epiblast 
Amniotic cavity
Epiblast 
Primitive
node
Primitive node
Primitive streak
Mesoderm cells
Yolk sac
Hypoblast 
Primitive
streak 
Primitive node
Buccopharyngeal
membrane
Cloacal
membrane
Hypoblast
Amniotic
cavity
Yolk sac
Mesoderm
Ectoderm
Endoderm
Yolk sac
(exocoelomic cavity) 

Gastrulation  Early development  35
Time period: day 14
Trilaminar disc
If we consider the second week of development produces the bil­
aminar disc (Figure 13.1), we might say that the main event of the 
third week of development is the formation of the trilaminar disc. 
The process by which this takes place is called gastrulation.
The purpose of gastrulation is to produce the three germ layers 
from which embryonic structures will develop: ectoderm, meso­
derm and endoderm.
Primitive streak
Gastrulation is initiated at about day 14 or 15 with the formation 
of the primitive streak (Figure 13.2). The primitive streak runs as 
a depression on the epiblastic surface of the bilaminar disc and is 
restricted to the caudal half of the embryo. Towards the cephalic 
end there is a round mound of cells called the primitive node, sur­
rounding the primitive pit.
The appearance of the primitive streak gives the observer an 
indication of the body axes that the cells are using to organise 
themselves. Until this point it was unclear which parts of the 
embryonic sheets were cephalic or caudal (superior or inferior in 
the adult), ventral or dorsal (anterior or posterior) and left or right. 
With the primitive streak the embryologist can determine where 
the head and tail will develop, which side is the left side and which 
surface will form the outermost layers of the skin.
Epiblast cells migrate towards the streak and when they reach 
it they invaginate or slip under the epiblast layer to form new 
layers (Figure 13.3). The first cells to invaginate replace the hypob­
last layer and produce the endodermal layer.
Some epiblast cells form the mesodermal layer between the epi­
blast layer and the endodermal layer. Cells migrating through the 
lateral part of the primitive node and cranial part of the streak 
become paraxial mesoderm, cells migrating through the mid-streak 
level become intermediate mesoderm and cells that migrate through 
the caudal part of the streak are destined to be lateral plate meso­
derm (see Chapter 23). Cells that migrate through the most caudal 
tip of the streak contribute to the extra-embryonic mesoderm, 
along with the cells of the hypoblast.
The epiblast layer now becomes the ectodermal layer (Figure 
13.4).
After cells have migrated through the streak and begun their 
path to specialisation, they continue to travel to different areas of 
the embryo. The first cells that travel towards the cephalic end 
form the prechordal plate, inferior to the buccopharyngeal (or 
oropharyngeal) membrane.
The buccopharyngeal membrane will eventually become the 
mouth opening. Here there is no mesodermal layer; the ectoderm 
and endoderm are in direct contact. This also occurs at the cloacal 
membrane, which will become the opening of the anus.
Signalling
This period of development is a good example of how the cells of 
the developing embryo are organised (see Chapter 3). Signalling 
molecules are a key part of this organisation. There are three 
groups of molecules involved in the control of our developing 
embryo: transcription factors, signalling molecules and cell adhesion 
molecules (CAMs).
Transcription factors act upon the cells that produce them and 
affect gene expression by binding DNA and controlling transcrip­
tion of DNA to mRNA.
A signalling molecule secreted by a cell can affect other cells 
nearby or at a distance, or the cell that produces it. A cell must 
have an appropriate receptor ligand to be able to respond to a 
signalling molecule, and the affect may be positive (e.g. prolifera­
tion) or negative (e.g. apoptosis). Signalling molecules are inducers 
of a wide range of cellular events. Growth factors are a well-known 
group of signalling molecules.
CAMs allow cells to recognise similar cells or extracellular 
matrix structures, and aggregate. There are two main groups: 
calcium dependent (e.g. cadherins) and calcium independent (e.g. 
integrins).
Often these three types of signalling work in combination to 
create the complex structures we see develop in morphogenesis. 
Cells of the primitive streak produce fibroblast growth factor 8 (a 
signalling molecule) and this molecule causes a down-regulation 
in E-cadherin (a CAM) production that usually make the cells 
sticky. Having less E-cadherin means that the cells are more 
motile, thus stimulating migration towards the primitive streak.
Transcription factors brachyury (which acts more dorsally) and 
goosecoid (which activates chordin, a signalling molecule) are 
known to be involved in the differentiation of migrating cells from 
epiblast to mesoderm.
Also nodal, a signalling molecule of the transforming growth 
factor β (TGF-β) family, is a mesoderm inducer and helps to 
maintain the primitive streak. An antagonist to nodal called cer­
berus is produced by cells of the hypoblast and thought to cause 
restriction of the streak at the caudal end of the embryo.
A range of factors are now in play, and the organisation of the 
embryo is becoming more complicated as it takes shape.
Clinical relevance
Gastrulation is a period of development very susceptible to tera­
togens. In week 3 of development (often before the mother knows 
of the pregnancy), factors that can have damaging effects on the 
embryo include alcohol, caffeine and tobacco. Other known factors 
that may affect cells at this stage include drugs such as thalido­
mide, temazepam, forms of retinoic acid (vitamin A), radiation, 
infections (e.g. rubella and herpes virus) and metabolic imbalances 
including folic acid deficiency and diabetes. If the embryo is 
exposed to these factors the upset to signalling or proliferation at 
an early stage in development results in defects that can be wide 
ranging and affect multiple developmental processes. Often, the 
defect originates from a lack of cell numbers in a certain region, 
and may be so catastrophic as to cause spontaneous abortion.
Sacrococcygeal teratomas occur when cells of the primitive 
streak get left behind in the sacrococcygeal region, and these cells 
develop into tumours. Often identified before birth with routine 
ultrasound scans, most are external and can be removed 
surgically.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
36  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
14
Germ layers
Figure 14.1
Structures that develop from the
ectodermal cell layer
Figure 14.2
Structures that develop from the
mesodermal cell layer
Figure 14.3
Structures that develop from the
endodermal cell layer
Central
nervous
system
Retina, cornea,
lens, sclera
Muscle
(skeletal,
smooth)
Major blood
vessels
Heart
Adrenal
cortex
Kidneys
Ureters
Gonads
Cartilage
Connective
tissue
Bones
Epidermis
(skin)
Peripheral
nervous
system
Tonsils
Thyroid gland
Parathyroid
glands
Thymus
Liver
(glandular
cells)
Lungs
Trachea
GI tract
(epithelial
lining)
Pancreas
(glandular
cells)
Bladder
Urethra

Germ layers  Early development  37
Time period: day 15
Trilaminar disc
In the third week of development the embryonic trilaminar disc is 
formed, giving the embryo three germ layers: ectoderm, mesoderm 
and endoderm (see Figure 13.4). From these germ layers almost all 
of the structures of the embryo will develop.
Ectoderm
The ectoderm will form the external surface of the embryo: the 
epidermis of the skin (Figure 14.1). The dermis is formed from the 
mesoderm layer. Melanocytes, the cells that give the skin its 
pigment, are derived from neural crest cells. These cells are them­
selves ectodermal and are involved in the development of a range 
of structures (see Chapters 15 and 16).
The nervous system is also formed from ectoderm (Figure 14.1), 
as we see when we study neurulation (see Chapter 15). This 
probably reflects the evolutionary internalisation of sensory appa­
ratus. Simpler, early animals had external sensory apparatus 
that allowed the animal to sense nutrients, chemicals, light, and so 
on. This apparatus developed from ectoderm, the external layer. 
In humans much of this sensory apparatus remains external to 
some extent (the retina, touch, temperature and pain senses in the 
skin), but the nervous system that has evolved is now located 
internally.
Mesoderm
The mesoderm is a major contributor to the embryo and its cells 
are used to build the bones, cartilage and connective tissues of the 
skeleton, striated skeletal muscle, smooth muscle, most of the 
cardiovascular system and lymphatic system, the reproductive 
system, kidneys, the suprarenal cortex, ureters, the linings of body 
cavities such as the peritoneum, the dermis of the skin and the 
spleen (Figure 14.2). Cells of the cardiovascular and immune 
systems formed in the bone marrow are also derived from 
mesoderm.
Endoderm
So the remainder of the embryo must be formed from endoderm. 
What is left? Epithelia derived from endoderm line internal pas­
sages exposed to external substances, including the gastrointestinal 
tract, the lungs and respiratory tracts (Figure 14.3). Glands that 
open into the gastrointestinal tract and the glandular cells of 
organs associated with the gastrointestinal tract, such as the pan­
creas and liver, are also derived from the endoderm (Figure 14.3).
The epithelia of the urethra and bladder come from endoderm 
cells, as do the tonsils, the thymus, the thyroid gland and the par­
athyroid glands (Figure 14.3). You can find out how these latter 
structures form in the pharyngeal arch chapters (see Chapters 
38–41).
Endoderm and ectoderm meet at the openings of the mouth and 
anus. Thus, the oral cavity and part of the pharynx have an epi­
thelium derived from ectoderm, and the remainder of the pharynx 
has a lining derived from endoderm. The same thing occurs at the 
anus, and this has important anatomical ramifications for the 
development of the vasculature there, with respect to portosys­
temic venous anastomoses for example.
Germ cells
The germ layers should not be confused with germ cells. Germ cells 
migrate from the yolk sac through the gut tube and dorsal mesen­
tery into the dorsal mesenchyme of the embryo (see Chapter 36). 
Here they differentiate to form gametes; either oocytes or 
spermatocytes.
A gamete is a reproductive cell with a haploid (half) set of chro­
mosomes that will combine with another gamete during fertilisa­
tion to produce a new cell with a full, diploid complement of 
chromosomes (see Chapter 9). That cell (zygote) will become the 
embryo and its supporting structures.
A gamete, then, is an example of a cell that does not develop 
from embryonic ectoderm, endoderm or mesoderm.
Clinical relevance
With the meeting of the ectoderm and endoderm near the anal 
opening of the gut tube, the rectum develops with links partly to 
the ectoderm and partly to the endoderm. The superior part of the 
rectum (endoderm, gut tube) drains blood back to the liver via the 
superior rectal vein and subsequently the inferior mesenteric vein 
and the portal vein. The inferior part of the rectum (ectoderm, not 
gut tube) drains blood via the inferior and middle rectal veins to 
pelvic veins, iliac veins, the inferior vena cava and thus into the 
systemic circulation. Venous anastomoses (links) exist between 
the superior, middle and inferior rectal veins. An impedance to the 
flow of blood through the liver from the portal vein to the inferior 
vena cava will cause the blood to find an alternate route, one 
example of which are the rectal portosystemic venous anastomoses. 
The veins here stretch and enlarge, causing haemorrhoids.
Germ cell tumours are growths that develop from germ cells. 
They may occur within or outside the gonads, possibly from aber­
rant or normal migration, and can be congenital.
Germ cell tumours of different types exist, including teratomas. 
A teratoma may form structures of any of the three germ layers, 
including thyroid, liver or lung tissues, or occasionally hair, teeth 
or bone.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
38  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
15
Neurulation
Figure 15.1
Early neurulation
Ectoderm
Figure 15.3
Ectoderm involutes, starts to form
a tube
Figure 15.6
Embryo around day 22–23. The neural tube has formed
but neuropores have yet to close
Figure 15.7
Classifications of spina bifida: (a) spina bifida occulta, (b) meningocele and
(c) myelomeningocele (also known as cystica)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 15.2
Signals from the notochord start off the 
processes of neurulation in the ectoderm
Figure 15.4
Neural crest cells appear in the crests
of the waves of the ectoderm that are
moving towards each other
Figure 15.5
The neural tube has formed, and neural
crest cells move away
Notochord
Neural crest cells
Mesoderm
Endoderm
Neural crest cells migrate
Involution
Rostral (cranial)
neuropore
The two edges of the
neural plate are coming
together like a zip to 
form the neural tube
Caudal neuropore
Yolk sac
Somite
Spinal cord
Protrusion of
meninges
Protrusion of meninges 
with nerve endings
within the sac

Neurulation  Early development  39
Time period: days 18–28
Introduction
The formation of the neural tube from a flat sheet of ectoderm is 
called neurulation. The initially simple tube will develop and form 
the brain, spinal cord and retina, and is the source of neural crest 
cells and their derivatives.
Notochord
As cells of the epiblast pass through the primitive streak during 
gastrulation, some of those cells are destined to form a distinct 
collection of cells in the midline of the developing embryo.
The primitive node extends as a tube of mesenchymal cells 
running in the midline of the embryo between the ectoderm and 
endoderm. This is the notochordal process. It grows and extends in 
a cranial direction developing a lumen.
Around day 20 the notochordal process fuses with the endoderm 
beneath it, forming the notochordal plate. A couple of days later 
the cells of the notochordal plate lift from the endoderm and form 
a solid rod, again running almost the full length of the midline of 
the embryo. This is the notochord (Figure 15.1).
Neural plate
The notochord is a signalling centre that signals to the cells of the 
overlying ectoderm. As the notochord forms the ectoderm in the 
midline of the embryo thickens, becoming the neural plate from 
day 18 (Figure 15.2). Now the ectoderm is becoming neuroecto­
derm. This begins at the cranial end of the embryo and extends 
towards the caudal end.
The neural plate is broader cranially, and this will form the 
brain. The remainder of the neural plate elongates and develops 
into the spinal cord.
Neural tube
The neural plate dips inwards in the midline, beginning to fold and 
form a neural groove (Figure 15.3). The sides of the groove are the 
neural folds, and the parts of neuroectoderm brought towards one 
another to meet are the neural crests. The neural crests look like the 
crests of two waves crashing into each other to complete the tube.
The two sides of the neural plate are brought together, meet and 
fuse, forming a self-contained tube of neuroectoderm running the 
length of the embryo, open at either end (Figure 15.4). This is the 
neural tube.
The neural tube separates from the ectoderm, which reforms 
over the neural tube, forming the external surface of the embryo 
(Figure 15.5).
Development of the neural tube from the neural plate extends 
cranially and caudally, leaving either end open at the cranial and 
caudal neuropores (Figure 15.6). The cranial neuropore closes on 
day 24 and the caudal neuropore closes on day 26. Neurulation is 
now complete.
Neural crest cells
As the neural tube forms from the neural plate a new cell type 
appears in the neural crest. These are neural crest cells (Figure 
15.4), and as the neural tube forms these cells leave the neural tube 
and migrate away to other parts of the embryo (Figure 15.5). They 
become parts of a wide range of organs and structures, and dif­
ferentiate to form a variety of different cell types.
For example, they will form much of the peripheral nervous 
system, skeletal parts of the face and pigment cells in the skin 
(melanocytes). Migration and differentiation of these cells is well 
organised and an important part of the normal development of 
much of the embryo.
Development of the central nervous 
system
From neurulation the central nervous system continues to develop 
as the cranial end of the neural tube dilates and folds to form 
spaces that will become the brain. The remainder of the neural 
tube, caudal to the first 4 somites, will become the spinal 
cord.
Cells of the walls of the tube differentiate and proliferate to 
become neurons, glial cells and macroglial cells, and the walls 
thicken. You can read about the development of the central 
nervous system in Chapter 42.
Clinical relevance
The most common congenital abnormalities of neurulation are 
neural tube defects. As the neuropores are the last parts of the 
neural tube to close, defects are most likely to occur at its cranial 
or caudal ends.
Failure of the neural tube to close caudally affects the spinal 
cord and the tissues that overlie it, including the meninges, verte­
bral bones, muscles and skin.
Spina bifida (from the Latin for ‘split spine’) is a condition 
in which vertebrae fail to form completely. It may manifest in 
different degrees of severity. Spina bifida occulta is the least 
severe form with a small gap in one or more vertebrae in the 
region of L5–S1 (Figure 15.7), often causing little or no symptoms. 
An unusual tuft of hair may be present in this region of the 
back.
Spina bifida meningocoele is a failure of vertebrae to fuse that 
is large enough to allow the protrusion of the meninges of the 
spinal cord externally (Figure 15.7). If the spinal cord or nerve 
roots also protrude this is called spina bifida with meningo­
myelcoele. This may affect sensory and motor innervation at 
the level of the lesion, potentially affecting bladder and anal 
continence.
The neural tube may also fail to close at the cranial end, causing 
abnormal brain and calvarial bone development. The brain may 
be partly outside the skull (exencephaly) or the forebrain may fail 
to develop entirely (anencephaly). Exencephaly may precede anen­
cephaly as the extruded brain tissue degenerates. Anencephaly is 
incompatible with life.
The incidence of neural tube defects is reduced by folic acid 
supplements in the diet, but as neurulation occurs during the third 
and fourth weeks it should be considered early in pregnancy or 
when trying to conceive.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
40  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
16
Neural crest cells
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 16.1
Neural crest cells arise during neurulation and begin to migrate away from the neural tube
Gut
Somite
Dorsal aorta
Neural crest cells
Neural tube
Figure 16.3
Ventral migration of trunk
neural crest cells
Figure 16.2
Dorsolateral migration of trunk
neural crest cells
Neural crest cells migrate
Region of section for figures
16.2 and 16.3
Dorsal aorta
Neural tube
Neural crest cells
Gut
Ectoderm
Notochord
Neural crest cells
Mesoderm
Endoderm
Mesonephrenic
duct
Mesonephros
Mesonephrenic
duct
Mesonephros

Neural crest cells  Early development  41
Time period: from day 22
Neural crest cells
During neurulation (see Chapter 15) a group of cells arises in the 
crests of the neural plates that are brought together to form the 
neural tube (Figure 16.1). These neural crest cells migrate out of 
and away from the neural tube to other parts of the developing 
embryo. As they break cell contacts and leave the neuroectoderm 
they become mesenchymal. The term mesenchyme typically refers 
to the connective tissue of the embryo formed from the mesoderm. 
Neural crest cells become histologically similar to the cells of the 
mesenchyme.
They migrate, proliferate and differentiate into a number of 
different adult cell types, contributing to many structures and 
organs, and you will find them throughout this book. As they are 
able to differentiate into a number of different cell types they are 
regarded as multipotent rather than pluripotent, like many of the 
cells of the embryo at this stage.
Migration and differentiation
The migration of neural crest cells begins in the cranial end of the 
embryo shortly before the neuropores of the neural tube close. 
Although they soon become interspersed amongst the cells of the 
embryo that they are moving through, they can be tracked in the 
lab with cell labelling techniques.
A cranial group of neural crest cells migrates dorsolaterally to 
take part in formation of structures of the head and neck. Two 
groups of trunk neural crest cells migrate in different direc­
tions; either dorsolaterally around towards the midline ectoderm 
(Figure 16.2) or ventrally around the neural tube and notochord 
(Figure 16.3).
When migrating neural crest cells encounter an obstacle that 
prevents further progress they tend to clump and accumulate. An 
obstacle may be another group of cells, a basal lamina or extracel­
lular matrix molecules such as chondroitin sulphate-rich prote­
oglycans. A barrier to migration may cause the neural crest cells 
to migrate along it in a particular direction. Other extracellular 
matrix molecules such as fibronectin, proteoglycans and collagen 
will also affect the migration of neural crest cells. By altering the 
localisation and concentration of molecules that aid, encourage or 
inhibit migration the final location of neural crest cells can be 
modified by the embryo.
Destinations
Differentiation of neural crest cells occurs in response to a range 
of external stimuli encountered during migration.
Neural crest cells taking the dorsolateral routes towards the 
ectoderm of the embryo will differentiate into the melanocytes of 
the skin, for example. Some neural crest cells in the trunk region 
that migrate ventrally will become neurons of the dorsal root 
ganglia and sympathetic ganglia (see Chapters 37 and 43).
Clinical relevance
Neural crest cells are obviously important in various areas of 
embryological development, and they must migrate in a very 
organised manner to complete this development normally.
Sometimes, neural crest cells do not migrate to their intended 
destinations. For example, a deficiency in the number of neural 
crest cells available to form mesenchyme in the developing face 
can cause cleft lip and cleft palate.
Albinism may be caused by a failure of neural crest cell migra­
tion but is more likely to be caused by a defect in the melanin 
production mechanism. However, pigmentation anomalies are 
apparent in patients with Waardenburg syndrome, such as eyes of 
different colours, a patch of white hair or patches of hypopigmen­
tation of skin. Waardenburg syndrome is associated with an 
increased risk of hearing loss, facial features such as a broad, high 
nasal root and cleft lip or palate. Gene mutations of one of at least 
four genes can cause Waardenburg syndrome, including Pax3, a 
gene involved in controlling neural crest cell differentiation.
An abnormality of migration of neural crest cells into the pha­
ryngeal arches can lead to improper development of the parathy­
roid glands, thymus, facial skeleton, heart, aorta and pulmonary 
trunk. This is 22q11.2 deletion syndrome or DiGeorge syndrome 
(also known as CATCH22 syndrome). Congenital defects vary 
between patients with DiGeorge syndrome but it is likely that they 
will suffer hypocalcaemia, a cleft palate, a conotruncal defect such 
as a ventricular septal defect or tetralogy of Fallot, recurrent infec­
tions, renal problems and learning difficulties. These varied struc­
tures are linked by their development from neural crest cells and 
pharyngeal arches.
Neural crest cell derivatives
•	 Melanocytes (skin)
•	 Dermis, some adipose tissue and smooth muscle of the neck 
and face (skin)
•	 Neurons (dorsal root ganglia)
•	 Neurons (sympathetic ganglia)
•	 Neurons (ciliary ganglion)
•	 Neurons (cranial sensory V, VII, maybe VIII, IX, X)
•	 Schwann cells (nervous system)
•	 Adrenomedullary cells (adrenal glands)
•	 Enteric nervous system (gastrointestinal tract, parasympa­
thetic nervous system)
•	 Craniofacial cartilage and bones (musculoskeletal)
•	 Bones of the middle ear (musculoskeletal)
•	 Thymus (immune system)
•	 Odontoblasts (teeth)
•	 Conotruncal septum (heart)
•	 Semilunar valves (heart)
•	 Connective tissue and smooth muscle of the great arteries 
(aorta, pulmonary trunk)
•	 Neuroglial cells (central nervous system)
•	 Parafollicular cells (thyroid gland)
•	 Glomus type I cells (carotid body)
•	 Connective tissue of various glands (salivary, thymus, 
thyroid, pituitary, lacrimal glands)
•	 Corneal endothelium, stroma (eye)

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
42  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
17
Body cavities (embryonic)
Amniotic cavity
Germ layers
Yolk sac
Yolk sac
Neural tube
Notochord
Gastrointestinal
tract
Phrenic nerve
Common
cardinal vein
Heart
Dorsal aorta
Pericardioperitoneal canals
(shaded area) part of the
intraembryonic cavity
Lung
Pleuropericardial fold:
Double layered –
splanchnic and somatic
Figure 17.1
Formation of the intraembryonic cavity, (a) location of the germ layers within the embryo, (b) movement of the embryo pinches off the yolk sac, 
(c) formation of the intraembryonic cavity in week 4
Figure 17.2
Development of the pleuropericardial folds and the pericardioperitoneal canals
at approximately 9 weeks gestation
Figure 17.4
The development of the diaphragm at around week 7. Fusion of the
pleuroperitoneal folds with the septum transversum, the oesophageal
mesentery and muscular ingrowth from the body walls
(a)
(b)
(c)
Amniotic cavity
Neural tube
Notochord
Dorsal aorta
Dorsal mesentery
Gut
Intraembryonic
body cavity
Dorsal aorta
Lung
Pleuropericardial fold
Figure 17.3
Development of the thoracic cavity, formation of the pleural
and pericardial cavities. As the lungs grow more anteriorly,
the pleuropericardial folds fuse with each other and with the
root of the lungs. The phrenic nerve ends up residing within the
fibrous pericardium, which completely surrounds the heart
Heart
Pleural cavity
Pericardial cavity
Fibrous pericardium
Vertebral body
Dorsal aorta
Spinal cord
Pleuroperitoneal
membrane
Oesophageal
mesoderm
Septum transversum
Inferior vena cava
Foregut
Body wall

Body cavities  Early development  43
Time period: day 21 to week 8
Body cavities
From a tightly packed, flat trilaminar disc of cells the body cavities 
must form. This is initiated around 21 days in the lateral plate 
mesoderm, which splits into splanchnic and somatic divisions. 
Between these mesodermal divisions vacuoles form and merge 
creating a U-shaped cavity in the embryo. This is the intra-
embryonic cavity (Figure 17.1) and initially has open communica­
tion with the extra-embryonic cavity (or chorionic cavity).
When the embryo folds the connection with the chorionic cavity 
is lost resulting in a cavity from the pelvic region to the thoracic 
region of the embryo.
Of the two layers of lateral plate mesoderm that divided, a 
somatic layer lines the intra-embryonic cavity and a splanchnic 
layer covers the viscera.
The septum transversum divides the cavity into two: the thoracic 
and abdominal (peritoneal) cavities. The division is not complete 
and there remains communication between these cavities through 
the pericardioperitoneal canals (Figure 17.2).
Membranes develop at either end of these canals. These mem­
branes separate the thoracic cavity into the pericardial cavity and 
pleural cavities and are called pleuropericardial folds (Figures 17.2 
and 17.3). The folds carry the phrenic nerves and common cardinal 
veins and as the position of the heart changes inferiorly, the folds 
fuse. The pleuropericardial folds will form the fibrous pericardium 
(Figure 17.3).
Diaphragm
The diaphragm consists of components of the septum transver­
sum, pleuroperitoneal folds, some oesophageal mesentery and a 
little muscular ingrowth from the dorsal and lateral body walls 
(Figure 17.4).
The septum transversum originates around day 22 at a cervical 
level, but caudal to the developing heart. It receives innervation 
from spinal nerves C3–C5, the beginning of the phrenic nerve. With 
growth of the embryo the position alters to rest at the level of the 
thoracic vertebrae.
The septum transverum is a boundary between the abdominal 
cavity and the thoracic cavity. There are two connections be­
tween these cavities as mentioned above; the pericardioperitoneal 
canals.
The pleuroperitoneal folds arise from the dorsal body wall and 
eventually close off the pericardioperitoneal canals and prevent 
communication between the abdominal and thoracic cavities.
The pleuroperitoneal folds fuse with the septum transversum, 
the oesophageal mesentery and the muscular ingrowth from the 
body walls to form the diaphragm. Muscle cells from the septum 
transversum and the body wall invade the folds forming the mus­
cular part of the diaphragm (Figure 17.4). The septum transver­
sum forms the central tendon and the mesentery of the oesophagus 
merges into the central tendon, thus allowing passage of the aorta, 
vena cava and oesophagus.
Clinical relevance
In a congenital diaphragmatic hernia, caused by a failure of the 
diaphragm to form completely, the abdominal contents herniate 
into the thoracic cavity negatively affecting lung development, 
leading to pulmonary hypoplasia and hypertension. Generally 
survival rates are about 50%, but if the liver is unaffected they 
are nearer 90%. Treatment involves mechanical ventilation and 
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) to perform gas 
exchange, and even a lung transplant has been successfully 
reported.
Gastroschisis is also a herniation of the bowel, but caused by an 
anterior abdominal wall defect, usually just to the right of the 
umbilicus. Viscera are not covered with peritoneum or amnion, 
and it is not associated with the same level of other abnormalities 
(unlike omphalocoele). Surgical intervention is required and gen­
erally survival rates are good.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
44  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
18
Folding of the embryo
Yolk sac
Figure 18.2
Transversely cut sections of the embryo in week 4 show the left and right edges of the embryonic sheet rolling under the sheet as it grows.
The germ layers eventually meet and fuse to form a ‘tube within a tube’
Figure 18.1
The cranial (head) and caudal (tail) folding of the embryonic disk
Day 26
Day 28
Amniotic cavity
Neural tube
Notochord
Dorsal aorta
Dorsal aorta
Dorsal mesentery
Gut
Intraembryonic
body cavity
Amniotic cavity
Connecting
stalk
Ectoderm
Mesoderm
Endoderm
Extra-embryonic
endoderm
Yolk sac
Day 18
Day 21
Day 24
Day 28
Caudal fold
Heart tube
Cranial fold
Allantois
Amniotic cavity
Ectoderm
Mesoderm
Endoderm
Extra-embryonic
endoderm
Yolk sac
Day 18
Hindgut
Neural tube,
future brain
Heart tube
Buccopharyngeal
membrane
Cloacal
membrane
Neural tube,
future brain

Folding of the embryo  Early development  45
Time period: days 17–30
Flat sheet
After the formation of the three germ layers of the embryo during 
week 3 (see Chapter 13), the embryo remains a flat, oval sheet of 
cells with an amniotic cavity above it and a yolk sac beneath. Dif­
ferential growth of these embryonic and extra-embryonic cells 
causes the flat embryo to curve and fold at the head end, the tail 
end and laterally. With this folding and rolling up the embryo 
begins to take on the early shape of a body.
Longitudinal folding
As the flat embryo grows, its amniotic cavity grows, but the yolk 
sac does not. The enlarging sheet of the embryo pushes out and 
over the rim of the yolk sac, and is pulled around and underneath 
itself (Figure 18.1).
As the cranial fold progresses, the buccopharyngeal (or oropha­
ryngeal) membrane (see Figure 13.2) moves around to the position 
of the future mouth, and the early neural tube that will form the 
brain comes to lie cranially to it. A region of cells that begin to 
form the heart tube (see Chapter 25) are also pulled around and 
come to lie in the future thorax, caudal to the mouth.
At the caudal end, folding brings the cloacal membrane (Figure 
13.2) underneath the embryo, and the connecting stalk around 
towards the future umbilical region of the embryo’s abdomen. 
With this movement the connecting stalk, the allantois and the 
yolk sac are all brought close together (Figure 18.1). The connect­
ing stalk is the link between the embryo and the placenta. The yolk 
sac by this stage (day 26) is linked to the early gastrointestinal tract 
by the vitelline duct (see Chapter 31).
Lateral folding
As the embryo curls up longitudinally, it also rolls up across its 
width. The left and right flanks of the embryonic disc extend and 
curl around underneath the embryo, squeezing the sides of the yolk 
sac (see Figure 17.1).
The left and right flanks meet, and the germ layers of either side 
meet and fuse. The ectoderm of the left side meets the ectoderm 
of the right side forming a continuous external surface for the 
embryo. Similarly, the mesodermal and endodermal layers meet. 
The endoderm forms a tube that ends at the buccopharyngeal 
and cloacal membranes, which also remains continuous with 
the yolk sac. This is the lining of the gastrointestinal tract (see 
Chapter 31). This meeting of the left and right flanks or folds of 
the embryo begins at the cranial and caudal ends and continues 
towards the middle. By day 30 the yolks sac’s connection to the 
gastrointestinal tract is squeezed by this growth, but remains sub­
stantial (Figure 18.1).
Tube within a tube
As a result of this folding, curving, rolling and pinching, the 
embryo has a ‘tube within a tube’ body plan at the start of week 
5. The outer tube is made of ectoderm, the inner tube is endoderm, 
and in between lies mesoderm and the early body cavity (also 
known as the coelom). This arrangement is common to many 
embryos, from nematodes to humans, and marks a major trend in 
evolution.
Clinical relevance
Gastroschisis describes the herniation of abdominal contents exter­
nally through the anterior abdominal wall. It is usually detected 
before birth by ultrasound, and the defect often lies to one side 
of the umbilicus. Gastroschisis may result from a failure of 
the anterior body wall to form normally as described above. It 
can be treated after birth surgically or by protecting the her­
niated bowel in an aseptic film and allowing the intestine to return 
to the abdominal cavity slowly over time. Omphalocoele is a 
different type of foetal herniation, in which the abdominal con­
tents herniate into the umbilicus and are therefore covered (see 
Chapter 33).

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
46  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
19
Segmentation
Figure 19.1
The early Drosophila embryo has a striped
pattern of gap gene expression
Figure 19.2
Pair rule genes are expressed in
alternating stripes by the cells
of the embryo, and segments
can be visualised by looking for
this pattern
Figure 19.3
Segment polarity genes are 
expressed in bands within
the segments
Figure 19.4
Hox genes begin the specification of segments of the embryo for
morphogenesis to form different structures, (e.g. legs or antennae)
Figure 19.5
If Hox gene expression is disrupted segments
are not specified correctly, and can instead
develop like a different segment. In the case
of the Drosophila antennapedia mutant here,
the fly develops legs where it would normally
have antennae
Drosophila adult
lab
Head
Tail
pb
Dfd
Scr
Antp
Ubx
Abd-A
Abd-B
Drosophila embryo
Figure 19.6. 
The segmentation clock
Cells in the presomitic mesoderm oscillate from high to low levels of expression of genes 
of the Notch pathways. As these cells leave the morphogen gradient they leave at a point 
of high (blue) or low (green) levels of Notch expression. This determines their formation of 
cranial or caudal parts of the somite   
Tail (growing)
FGF + Wnt
morphogen
gradient 
Wavefront
Somite
New
somite
Level of notch
gene expression
(the clock) 
high
low

Segmentation  Early development  47
Time period: days 18–35
Introduction
Segmentation is an important concept in embryology. Early 
animals, for example nematodes or very early insects, are built 
around a repeating pattern. The segments of later insects are also 
repeated, but some have become specialised with modified legs, 
mouth parts or wings. The evolution of these changes is recorded, 
to an extent, within the genes responsible for early organisation 
and patterning of the embryos of these animals.
Pair rule genes
A common insect used for investigating and discussing embryol­
ogy, and segmentation in particular, is the fruit fly, also known as 
Drosophila melanogaster.
The cells of the Drosophila embryo are initially organised along 
a craniocaudal axis by a morphogen gradient (see Chapter 3 for a 
similar example of a morphogen gradient). This is followed by the 
expression of different genes by the cells of the embryo, but only 
in particular bands along its length. These are gap genes (Figure 
19.1).
This banded pattern of gene expression becomes more pro­
nounced when pair rule genes are expressed in alternating stripes 
by the cells of the embryo (Figure 19.2). This level of organisation 
is pushed even further by the expression of segment polarity genes 
within those segments (Figure 19.3).
Hox genes
Now that the embryo is organised into similar segments, the cells 
of each segment need further information from which morphogen­
esis will shape the appropriate structures for each segment (e.g. a 
wing, or a leg).
Hox genes are genes that share a similar homeobox domain 
of 180 base pairs, which encodes for a sequence of 60 amino 
acids. The term ‘homeobox’ refers to the sequence of base 
pairs, and the term ‘homeodomain’ refers to the section of protein 
that corresponds to the homeobox. The homeodomain is 
highly conserved between genes and between species, with small 
differences.
Hox genes are involved in the very early specification of the 
segments of the embryo, from which the development of morpho­
logically different segments can occur. They are expressed in bands 
along the length of the embryo (Figure 19.4), and in vertebrates 
there are multiple, overlapping, similar sets of Hox genes (clusters) 
that gives some redundancy and more complex organisation than 
possible in the development of the fly. The Hox genes of Dro­
sophila do not have this redundancy, so knocking out Hox genes 
gives profound effects. A common example is the Antennapedia 
mutant, in which the fly develops legs where its antennae would 
normally form (Figure 19.5). The Hox gene that would normally 
specify this segment is lost, the pattern is broken and the segment 
is re-specified.
Hox genes are found together on the same chromosome, lined 
up. Interestingly, they are lined up in their order of expression 
along the craniocaudal axis. In humans the 4 clusters of Hox genes 
are found on 4 different chromosomes.
Hox proteins
The Hox proteins that result from Hox gene expression are DNA 
binding transcription factors, able to switch on cascades of genes. 
The homeodomain is the DNA binding region of the protein.
Segmentation clock
All of this organisation leads to the formation of visible early 
segmentation patterns such as the somites (see Chapter 20), from 
which adult segmented structures develop. In humans and other 
vertebrates the segmentation pattern can be seen in the vertebrae, 
ribs, muscles and nervous innervation patterns (see Figure 20.5). 
These segments form sequentially, one pair after another.
Before somites form, cells of the presomitic mesoderm display 
oscillating patterns of gene expression, meaning the expression of 
genes switches on, off and on again with time. This rhythmic 
expression of genes of the Notch pathways and their targets is 
known as the segmentation clock. You can think of each cell 
having its own clock and its own time.
A morphogen gradient of fibroblast growth factor (FGF) and 
Wnt is secreted by cells at the tail end of the presomitic mesoderm. 
You might call the edge of this morphogen gradient the 
wavefront.
As cells at the caudal end of the presomitic mesoderm proliferate 
and the tail grows, the cells producing FGF and Wnt move further 
away from the head and from other presomitic mesoderm cells. 
Some cells of the presomitic mesoderm no longer feel the effects 
of FGF and Wnt as the wavefront moves away from them, and 
they begin to form somites.
The band of cells that leave the wavefront will either form the 
cranial end or the caudal end of the somite depending upon the 
time of their segmentation clock at the point at which they leave 
the wavefront. The temporal nature of the segmentation clock is 
translated into the spatial arrangement of somites via these mecha­
nisms (Figure 19.6).
How the segmentation clock works is still not entirely under­
stood, but the understanding of these mechanisms has developed 
remarkably over the last 15 years.
Vertebrates
Through the embryology of segmentation we can see the path of 
evolution and links between vastly different animals, existing now 
and in prehistory, and the mechanisms behind anatomical similari­
ties amongst vertebrates. The giraffe, for example, has 7 cervical 
vertebrae in its very long neck, just as we do in our much shorter 
variant. While segmentation is clearly apparent in the bony struc­
tures of adult anatomy, the embryology here helps us understand 
the arrangement of many of the soft tissues too.
Clinical relevance
Minor errors in segmentation can produce vertebral and interver­
tebral defects. A wedge-shaped hemivertebra may form, causing a 
form of congenital scoliosis that worsens as the hemivertebra 
grows. A number of variations have been documented. Other ver­
tebrae may be fused completely, just laterally, posteriorly or ante­
riorly, if the intervertebral space fails to form completely causing 
kyphosis or lordosis. Other developmental processes may also 
cause these deformities.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
48  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
20
Somites
Figure 20.1
Posterior aspect of a day 23 embryo. 
10–13 pairs of somites have formed by this point
Figure 20.2
Mesodermal somites develop in pairs under the ectoderm
along the length of the back of the embryo. By day 34, 
up to 37 somites have formed
Neural tube
Embryo
Yolk sac
Somites
Somites
Figure 20.3
Two stages of somite development
A condensation of cells around the somitocoel separate to
become dermamyotome and sclerotome. The dermamyotome
further separates into dermatome and myotome 
Figure 20.4
Derivatives of different parts of a somite
Figure 20.6
A shingles rash can highlight a dermatome
Figure 20.5
Dermatome map
Early somite
Mature somite
Neural tube
Somitocoel
Dermatome
Myotome
Dorsal aorta
Sclerotome
Intrinsic back muscles
Dermis
Limb muscles
Ventrolateral wall muscles
Connective tissue
Vertebral arch
Distal rib
Vertebral body
Proximal rib
Connective tissue
C3
C3
C2
C4
T2
T3
T4
T5
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
L1
L2
L3
L5
L4
S1
L5
S1
L4
L5
S2
L3
S5
S3
S4
S1
L1
L2
T12
T11
T10
T9
T8
T7
T6
T5
T4
T3
T2
T1
C5
C6
C7
C8
C5
C6
C7
T1
C8
T6
C2
C4
Time period: days 20–35
Mesoderm
In the formation of the trilaminar disc we see the 3 layers of the 
cells of the embryo becoming organised as ectoderm, mesoderm 
and endoderm (see Chapter 14). The mesoderm layer is further 
organised into areas of paraxial mesoderm (medially), intermediate 
mesoderm and lateral mesoderm (laterally). These areas of meso­
derm will contribute to the formation of different structures (see 
Figure 23.1).

Somites  Early development  49
The somite
A clumping of cells and a thickening of the mesodermal layer on 
either side of the midline of the embryo forms from paraxial meso­
derm and gives the first pair of somitomeres. Here we see the 
beginning of the characteristic segmentation of vertebrate animals. 
In the cranial region, the first 7 somitomeres contribute to the 
development of the musculature of the head, but the remaining 
somitomeres become somites.
Somites are cuboidal-shaped condensations (groupings) of cells 
visible upon the surface of the embryo (Figures 20.1 and 20.2). The 
organisation of cells here will give rise to much of the axial muscu­
loskeletal system and body wall of the embryo.
What signals initiate somite formation? The answer to this is 
complex, but many signals come from the overlying ectoderm. 
Notch signalling and Hox genes are certainly involved here, 
amongst others (see Chapter 19).
The first somite forms during day 20 and subsequent somites 
appear at a rate of 3 pairs a day. Somites form in a cranial to 
caudal sequence, lying laterally to the neural tube. By the end of 
week 5 a full complement of somites will have formed, including 
4 occipital, 8 cervical, 12 thoracic, 5 lumbar, 5 sacral and 8–10 
coccygeal pairs. The number of visible somites is often used as a 
method of dating (or staging) an embryo.
The first occipital and last 5–7 coccygeal somites degenerate, so 
from the 42–44 pairs of somites that form around 37 remain. The 
tightly packed cells of the remaining somites develop a lumen in 
their centres, termed the somitocoele (Figure 20.3). The somito­
coele cells are involved in many complex interactions resulting in 
epithelialisation (layering) and polarity within the somite (cells 
become organised).
The cells in each somite differentiate and move to give ventral 
and dorsal groups of cells called the sclerotome and dermomyo­
tome, respectively (Figure 20.3).
Sclerotome
The cells of the ventromedial part of the somite form the scle­
rotome. When they lose their tight bindings to one another they 
migrate to surround the notochord.
These cells will form the vertebrae, the intervertebral discs, the 
ribs and connective tissues (Figure 20.4). The caudal part of the 
sclerotome of one somite and the dorsal part of its neighbouring 
somite’s sclerotome combine to form a single vertebral bone (see 
Chapter 22).
The word sclerotome is formed from the Greek words skleros, 
meaning ‘hard’, and tome, meaning ‘a cutting’. Cells from the 
sclerotome form hard structures of the axial skeleton.
A specific dorsolateral region in the sclerotome has relatively 
recently been shown to form the origins of tendons, termed the 
syndetome (see Chapter 23).
Myotome
The dermomyotome mass of cells in the dorsolateral part of the 
somite splits again into 2 more groups: the myotome and the der­
motome (Figure 20.3). The cells of the myotome will become 
myoblasts and form the skeletal muscle of the body wall.
Medially positioned cells within the myotome form the epaxial 
muscles intrinsic to the back (e.g. erector spinae). Lateral cells 
will form the hypaxial muscles (the muscles of the ventrolateral 
body wall such as the intercostal muscles and the abdominal 
oblique and transverse muscles). Laterally placed cells will also 
migrate out to the limb buds and form the musculature of the 
limbs (Figure 20.4).
This is covered in a little more detail in Chapters 23 and 24.
Dermotome
The other part of the dermomyotome, the dermotome, is the most 
dorsal group of cells within the somite. These cells will contribute 
to the dermis and subcutaneous tissue of the skin of the neck and 
trunk (Figure 20.4).
Skin
The integumentary system receives contributions from a variety of 
sources. The epidermis, nails, hair and glands develop from ecto­
derm, the dermis (connective tissue and blood vessels) develop 
from mesoderm and the dermotome, and pigmented cells (melano­
cytes) differentiate from migrating neural crest cells.
Innervation
It is important to note that cell groups retain their innervation 
from their segment of origin, no matter where the migrating cells 
end up. A spinal nerve develops at the level of each somite and 
will comprise a collection of sensory and motor axons.
The groups of cells within each myotome and dermotome will 
migrate to their final destinations trailing the axons of these 
neurons in their paths. In the adult clear patterns of innervation 
segmentation remain, commonly seen by medical students in der­
matome maps (Figure 20.5).
Dermatomes
Not to be confused with dermotomes, a dermatome is a region of 
skin that is predominantly supplied by the sensory component of 
one spinal nerve (Figure 20.5). The dermatomes are named accord­
ing to the spinal nerve that supplies them. In diagrams the der­
matomes are shown as very specific areas, but in reality there is 
significant overlap between dermatomes. Although sensation may 
be affected by nerve damage it may not completely numb the area. 
Also be aware that the overlap between dermatomes varies for the 
sensations of temperature, pain and touch.
Clinical relevance
The varicella zoster virus that causes chickenpox can lie dormant 
in dorsal root ganglia after the patient has recovered. Later in life 
the virus may follow the pathway of a spinal nerve to travel to the 
skin, causing shingles (herpes zoster; Figure 20.6). It manifests 
visibly as a rash restricted to a single dermatome, amongst other 
symptoms. Sometimes, starkly delineated rashes show the shape 
of the dermatome derived from a single somite’s dermotome.
By testing for a loss of sensation in particular dermatomes your 
knowledge of somitic embryology can also be used to find clues to 
help identify the level of spinal cord damage in a patient or to 
determine whether specific spinal nerves have been injured.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
50  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
21
Skeletal system (ossification)
Figure 21.1
Mesenchymal cells condense 
and form a model of the future bone
Figure 21.4
The diaphysis becomes ossiﬁed but the epiphyses 
remain cartilaginous
Figure 21.6
With the epiphyses and diaphysis ossiﬁed, the bone 
continues to grow in length from the growth plates. 
Eventually the growth plates also ossify, and growth ceases
Figure 21.5
Later, the epiphyses also begin to ossify
Figure 21.7
Mesenchymal cells form a condensation between 2 developing bones
Figure 21.8
Mesenchymal cells become organised into layers, and differentiate
into different cell types, in this case the tissues of a synovial joint
Figure 21.2
Mesenchymal cells differentiate into 
chondrocytes, and the matrix becomes
calciﬁed in the future diaphysis 
Figure 21.3
Blood vessels invade, bringing progenitor cells that
become osteoblasts and haematopoietic cells 
Hypertrophic
chondrocytes
Perichondrium
Periosteum, bone
forming beneath 
Osteoblasts
Primary centre of
ossiﬁcation
Epiphysis
Diaphysis
Bony spicules
Secondary
centre of
ossiﬁcation  
Epiphyseal growth plate
Stages of endochondral ossiﬁcation
Bone (epiphysis)
Joint capsule
Articular cartilage
Internal ligament
Synovial membrane
Joint development

Skeletal system: ossification  Systems development  51
Time period: week 5 to adult
Introduction
Mesodermal cells form most bones and cartilage. Initially an 
embryonic, loosely organised connective tissue forms from meso­
derm throughout the embryo, referred to as mesenchyme. Neural 
crest cells that migrate into the pharyngeal arches are also involved 
in the development of bones and other connective tissues in the 
head and neck (see Chapters 39–42).
Bones begin to form in one of two ways. A collection of mesen­
chymal cells may group together and become tightly packed (con­
densed), forming a template for a future bone. This is the start of 
endochondral ossification (Figure 21.1). Alternatively, an area of 
mesenchyme may form a hollow sleeve roughly in the shape of the 
future bone. This is how intramembranous ossification begins.
Long bones form by endochondral ossification (e.g. femur, 
phalanges) and flat bones form by intramembranous ossification 
(e.g. parietal bones, mandible).
Endochondral ossification
The cells of the early mesenchymal model of the future bone dif­
ferentiate to become cartilage (chondrocytes). This cartilage model 
then begins to ossify from within the diaphysis (the shaft of the 
long bone). This is the primary centre of ossification, and the 
chondrocytes here enter hypertrophy (Figure 21.2). As they 
become larger they enable calcification of the surrounding extra­
cellular matrix, and then die by apoptosis.
The layer of perichondrium that surrounded the cartilage model 
becomes periosteum as the cells here differentiate into osteoblasts, 
and bone is formed around the edge of the diaphysis. This will 
become the cortical (compact) bone (Figures 21.2 and 21.3).
Blood vessels invade the diaphysis and bring progenitor cells 
that will form osteoblasts and haematopoietic cells of the future 
bone marrow (Figure 21.3). Bone matrix is deposited by the oste­
oblasts on to the calcified cartilage, and bone formation extends 
outwards to either end of the long bone (Figure 21.4). Osteoclasts 
also appear, resorbing and remodelling the new bony spicules of 
spongy (trabecular) bone.
When osteoblasts become surrounded by bone they are called 
osteocytes, and connect to one another by long, thin processes 
through the bony matrix.
The epiphyses (ends) of most long bones remain cartilaginous 
until the first few years after birth. The secondary centres of ossi­
fication appear within the epiphyses when the chondrocytes here 
enter hypertrophy, enable calcification of the matrix and blood 
vessels invade bringing progenitor cells that differentiate into oste­
oblasts (Figure 21.5). The entire epiphysis becomes ossified (other 
than the articular cartilage surface), but a band of cartilage remains 
between the diaphysis and the epiphysis. This is the epiphyseal 
growth plate (Figure 21.6).
The growth plates contain chondrocytes that continually pass 
through the endochondral ossification processes described above. 
A proliferating group of chondrocytes enter hypertrophy in a 
tightly ordered manner, calcify a layer of cartilage adjacent to the 
diaphysis, apoptose, and this calcified cartilage is replaced by 
bone. In this way the long bone continues to lengthen.
Bones grow in width as more bone is laid down under the peri­
osteum. Bone of the medullary cavity is remodelled by osteoclasts 
and osteoblasts.
When growth ceases at around 18–21 years of age, the epiphy­
seal growth plates are also replaced by bone (see Chapter 22).
Intramembranous ossification
The flat mesenchymal sleeves that create the templates of flat 
bones formed by intramembranous ossification contain cells that 
condense and form osteoblasts directly. Other cells here form cap­
illaries. Osteoblasts secrete a collagen and proteoglycan matrix 
that binds calcium phosphate, and the matrix (osteoid) becomes 
calcified.
Spicules of bone form and extend out from their initial sites of 
ossification. Other mesenchymal cells surround the new bone and 
become the periosteum.
As more bone forms it becomes organised, and layers of compact 
bone form at the peripheral surfaces (aided by osteoblasts forming 
under the periosteum), whereas spongy trabeculated bone is 
constructed in between. Osteoclasts are involved in resorbing 
and remodelling bone here to give the adult bone shape and 
structure.
The mesenchymal cells within the spongy bone become bone 
marrow.
Joint formation
Fibrous, cartilaginous and synovial joints also develop from mes­
enchyme from 6 weeks onwards. Mesenchyme between bones 
may differentiate to form a fibrous tissue, as found in the sutures 
between the flat bones of the skull, or the cells may differenti­
ate into chondrocytes and form a hyaline cartilage, as found 
between the ribs and the sternum. A fibrocartilage joint may 
also form, as seen in some midline joints, for example the pubic 
symphysis.
The synovial joint is a more complex structure, comprising mul­
tiple tissues. Mesenchyme between the cartilage condensations of 
developing limb bones, for example, will differentiate into fibrob­
lastic cells (Figure 21.7). These cells then differentiate further, 
forming layers of articular cartilage adjacent to the developing 
bones, and a central area of connective tissue between the bones. 
The edges of this central connective tissue mass become the syno­
vial cells lining the joint cavity (Figure 21.8). The central area 
degenerates leaving the space of the synovial joint cavity to be 
filled by synovial fluid. In some joints, such as the knee, the central 
connective tissue mass also forms menisci and internal joint liga­
ments such as the cruciate ligaments.
Clinical relevance
Pregnant women require higher quantities of calcium and phos­
phorus in their diet than normal because of foetal bone and tooth 
development. Maternal calcium and bone metabolism are signifi­
cantly affected by the mineralising foetal skeleton, and maternal 
bone density can drop 3–10% during pregnancy and lactation, and 
is regained after weaning.
A lack of vitamin D, calcium or phosphorus will cause soft, 
weak bones to form as the osteoid is unable to calcify. This leads 
to deformities such as bowed legs and curvature of the spine. Weak 
bones are more vulnerable to fracture. This is called rickets. Other 
conditions that interfere with the absorption of these vitamins and 
minerals, or malnutrition during childhood will also lead to rickets. 
Vitamin D is required for calcium absorption across the gut.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
52  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
22
Skeletal system
Figure 22.1
The sphenoid, ethmoid, occipital bones, and the 
petrous parts of the temporal bones develop from 
the cartilaginous part of the neurocranium
Figure 22.3
The sutures and fontanelles of the foetal skull
Figure 22.2
The parietal and frontal bones form from 
the membranous part of the neurocranium
Figure 22.4
The membranous viscerocranium forms the maxilla,
mandible and zygomatic bones, and the squamous
parts of the temporal bones
Ethmoid bone
Sphenoid bone
Temporal bones
Occipital bone
Zygomatic
Maxilla
Temporal
Mandible
Parietal
Frontal
Lambdoid suture
Posterior fontanelle
Sagittal suture
Anterior fontanelle
Coronal suture
Metopic suture
Figure 22.6. 
Ossification of a long bone with age
Foetus
Diaphysis of humerus has
ossified, but epiphyses
remain cartilaginous
Adult
Growth plates have 
now ossified
Child
Epiphyses have now ossified
but growth plates remain
between the diaphysis and
the epiphyses
Figure 22.5
Developing vertebrae form from the fusion of the caudal half of one sclerotome
and the cranial half of the next. Residual parts of the notochord are left to
become the intervertebral discs
Notochord
Sclerotome
Nerves
Artery
Developing
muscle bulk 
Residual notochord
– future IVD
Cranial portion
Caudal portion
Caudal portion
Cranial portion
Nerves
Artery

Skeletal system  Systems development  53
Time period: day 27 to birth
Introduction
Cells for the developing skeleton come from a variety of sources. 
We have described the development of the somites, and the sub­
division of the sclerotome (see Chapter 20). Those cells are joined 
by contributions from the somatic mesoderm and migrating neural 
crest cells.
Development of the skeleton can be split into two parts: the 
axial skeleton consisting of the cranium, vertebral column, ribs 
and sternum; and the appendicular skeleton of the limbs.
Cranium
The skull can be divided into another two parts: the neurocranium 
(encasing the brain) and the viscerocranium (of the face).
Neurocranium
The bones at the base of the skull begin to develop from cells 
originating in the occipital somites (paraxial mesoderm) and 
neural crest cells that surround the developing brain. These carti­
laginous plates fuse and ossify (endochondral ossification) forming 
the sphenoid, ethmoid and occipital bones and the petrous part of 
the temporal bone (Figure 22.1).
A membranous part originates from the same source and forms 
the frontal and parietal bones (Figure 22.2). These plates ossify 
into flat bones (through intramembranous ossification) and are 
connected by connective tissue sutures.
Where more than two bones meet in the foetal skull a fontanelle 
is present (Figure 22.3). The anterior fontanelle is the most promi­
nent, occurring where the frontal and parietal bones meet. Fonta­
nelles allow considerable movement of the cranial bones, enabling 
the calvaria (upper cranium) to change shape and pass through 
the birth canal.
Viscerocranium
Cells responsible for the formation of the facial skeleton originate 
from the pharyngeal arches (see Chapters 38–41), and the viscero­
cranium also has cartilaginous and membranous parts during 
development. The cartilaginous viscerocranium forms the stapes, 
malleus and incus bones of the middle ear, and the hyoid bone and 
laryngeal cartilages. The squamous part of the temporal bone 
(later part of the neurocranium), the maxilla, mandible and zygo­
matic bones develop from the membranous viscerocranium (Figure 
22.4).
Vertebrae
In week 4, cells of the sclerotome migrate to surround the noto­
chord. Undergoing reorganisation they split into cranial and 
caudal parts (Figure 22.5).
The cranial half contains loosely packed cells, whereas the 
caudal cells are tightly condensed. The caudal section of one scle­
rotome joins the cranial section of the next sclerotome. This creates 
vertebrae that are ‘out of phase’ with the segmental muscles that 
reach across the intervertebral joint. When these muscles contract 
they induce movements of the vertebral column.
Axial bones
Ribs also form from the sclerotome; specifically, the proximal ribs 
from the ventromedial part and the distal ribs from the ventrola­
teral part (Figure 20.4). The sternum develops from somatic meso­
derm and starts as two separate bands of cartilage that come 
together and fuse in the midline.
Appendicular bones
Endochondral ossification of the long bones begins at the end of 
week 7. The primary centre of ossification is the diaphysis and by 
week 12 primary centres of ossification appear in all limb long 
bones (Figure 22.6).
The beginning of ossification of the long bones marks the end 
of the embryonic period. Ossification of the diaphysis of most long 
bones is completed by birth, and secondary centres of ossifica­
tion appear in the first few years of life within the epiphyses 
(Figure 22.6).
Between the ossified epiphysis and diaphysis the cartilaginous 
growth plate (or epiphyseal plate) remains as a region of continuing 
endochondral ossification. New bone is laid down here, extending 
the length of growing bones.
At around 20 years after birth the growth plate also ossifies, 
allowing no further growth and connecting the diaphysis and epi­
physis (Figure 22.6).
Clinical relevance
Cranium
Craniosynostosis is the early closure of cranial sutures, causing an 
abnormally shaped head. This is a feature of over 100 genetic 
syndromes including forms of dwarfism. It may also result in 
underdevelopment of the facial area.
Neural crest cells are often associated with cardiac defects and 
facial deformations due to failed migration or proliferation. 
Neural crest cells are also vulnerable to teratogens. Examples 
of cranial skeletal malformations include: Treacher Collins 
syndrome (mandibulofacial dysotosis), which describes underde­
veloped zygomatic bones, mandible and external ears; Robin 
sequence of underdeveloped mandible, cleft palate and posteri­
orly placed tongue; DiGeorge syndrome (small mouth, widely 
spaced down-slanting eyes, high arched or cleft palate, malar flat­
ness, cupped low-set ears and absent thymus and parathyroid 
glands).
Vertebrae
Spina bifida is the failure of the vertebral arches to fuse in the 
lumbosacral region. There are two types. Spina bifida occulta 
affects only the bony vertebrae. The spinal cord remains unaf­
fected but is covered with skin and an isolated patch of hair. This 
can be treated surgically. Spina bifida cystica (meningocoele and 
myelomeningocoele) occurs with varying degrees of severity. The 
neural tube fails to close leaving meninges and neural tissue 
exposed. Surgery is possible in most cases but, because of the 
increased severity of cystica, continuous follow-up evaluations are 
necessary and paralysis may occur. It is currently possible to detect 
spina bifida using ultrasound and foetal blood alpha-fetoprotein 
levels.
Pregnant women and those trying to be come pregnant are 
advised to take 0.4 mg/day folic acid as it significantly reduces the 
risk of spina bifida. Folates have an important role in DNA, RNA 
and protein synthesis.
Scoliosis is a condition of a lateral curvature of the spine that 
may be caused by fusion of vertebrae, or by malformed vertebrae. 
The range of treatments for congenital scoliosis includes physio­
therapy and surgery. Klippel–Feil syndrome is a disease where cer­
vical vertebrae fuse. Common signs include a short neck and 
restricted movement of the upper spine.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
54  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
23
Muscular system
Figure 23.1
Regions of mesoderm
Figure 23.2
Regions of a somite
Figure 23.3
Derivatives of  a somite
Figure 23.5
Cells of the myotome have migrated and differentiated to
form the 3 layers of muscle of the body wall (intercostal
muscles in the thorax, external oblique, internal oblique and
transversus abdominus muscles in the abdomen)
Figure 23.9
Note where the splanchnic mesoderm is. This will form
smooth muscle and cardiac muscle
Figure 23.4
Cells of the myotome begin to migrate 
(transverse section of the embryo)
Figure 23.6
Skeletal muscle. Myoblasts congregate (a), fuse (b) and form a long
multinucleate muscle cell (c) (myocyte)
(a)
(b)
Figure 23.7
Smooth muscle. Splanchnic mesoderm forms myoblasts (a) that differentiate
into the adult pattern of separate, elongated smooth muscle cells (b)
(a)
Early somite
Mature somite
Neural tube
Somitocoel
Dermatome
Syndetome
Myotome
Dorsal aorta
Sclerotome
Syndetome
Intrinsic back muscles
Dermis
Limb muscles
Ventrolateral wall muscles
Connective tissue
Vertebral arch
Vertebral body
Connective tissue
Paraxial Intermediate
Mesoderm
Lateral
Endoderm
Ectoderm
Tendon
Tendon
Dorsal part
of myotome
Neural tube
Ventral part
of myotome
Gut tube
Epaxial muscles
of the deep back
Neural tube
Notochord
Somatic mesoderm
Splanchnic mesoderm
Dorsal aorta
Hypaxial muscles
of the body wall
Vertebra
Somite
(c)
(b)
Figure 23.8
Cardiac muscle. Myoblasts (a) do not fuse but form individual cardiac muscle
cells (b) connected by intercalated bridges
(a)
(b)

Muscular system  Systems development  55
Time period: day 22 to week 9
Introduction
Most muscle cells originate from the paraxial mesoderm (Figure 
23.1), and specifically the myotome portion of the somites. The 
three types of muscle described here are skeletal, smooth and 
cardiac muscle.
Skeletal muscle
Within each somite the myotome splits into two muscle-forming 
parts: a ventrolateral edge and a dorsomedial edge (Figures 23.2 
and 23.3). The ventrolateral edge cells will form the hypaxial mus­
culature (i.e. that of the ventral body wall and, in the limb regions, 
musculature of the limbs) (Figures 23.4 and 23.5). The dorsome­
dial edge will form the epaxial musculature (the back muscles).
During formation of skeletal muscle multiple myoblasts (muscle 
precursor cells) fuse to form myotubes at first, and then long 
multinucleated muscle fibres (Figure 23.6). By the end of month 
3, microfibrils have formed and the striations of actin and myosin 
patterning associated with skeletal muscle are visible. Important 
genes involved in myogenesis include MyoD and Myf5, which 
cause mesodermal cells to begin to differentiate into myoblasts, 
and then MRF4 and Myogenin later in the process.
A fourth part of the somite, the syndetome, has been recently 
shown to contain precursor cells of tendons (Figures 23.2 and 
23.3). The cells of the syndetome lie at the ventral and dorsal edges 
of the somites between the cells of the myotome and sclerotome; 
blocks of cells whose tissues they will connect. They also migrate, 
but develop independently of muscles and connect later in devel­
opment. However, tendon cells will also arise from lateral plate 
mesoderm to populate the limbs, so the full story of tendon devel­
opment is not limited to the somite.
Limbs
The upper limb bud is visible from day 26 around the levels of 
cervical somite 5 to thoracic somite 3. The lower limb starts at the 
level of lumbar somite 2 and finishes between lumbar 5 and sacral 
2 (see Figure 24.1). The migrating muscle precursors migrate into 
the limbs, coalesce and form specific muscle masses which then 
split to form the definitive muscles of the limbs (see Chapter 24). 
It is known that, as in skeletal development, cell death is important 
in the development of these muscle masses. Joints within the limbs 
develop independently from the musculature (see Chapter 21) but 
foetal musculature and the motions that occur are required to 
retain the joint cavities.
Neurons of spinal nerves that follow migrating myoblasts are 
specific to their original segmental somites. By roughly 9 weeks 
most muscle groups have formed in their specific locations. The 
migration of whole myotomes and fusion between them accounts 
for the grouping of muscular innervation seen in adult limb 
anatomy.
Movements of the limbs can be detected using ultrasound at 7 
weeks and isolated limb movements from around 10–11 weeks.
Head
In the head area the somitomeres undergo similar changes but 
never fully develop the three compartments of the somite, and this 
process remains less well understood.
Myogenesis in the head differs from trunk and limb myogenesis 
as these muscles have different phenotypic properties, although 
myoblasts still develop from the paraxial mesoderm of the somito­
meres and migrate into the pharyngeal arches and their terminal 
locations.
The surrounding connective tissues coordinate migration and 
differentiation of muscle as elsewhere, but the nerves to these 
muscles are present before their formation, as they are cranial 
nerves. Musculature formed from pharyngeal arches and their 
innervation is described in Chapters 38–41.
Extraocular muscles probably arise from mesenchyme near the 
prechordal plate (a thickening of endoderm in the embryonic 
head). Muscles of the iris are derived from neuroectoderm, whereas 
ciliary muscle is formed by lateral plate mesoderm. Muscles of the 
tongue form from occipital somites, as does the musculature of the 
pharynx. Movement of the mouth and tongue and the ability to 
swallow amniotic fluid begins around week 12.
Smooth muscle
Most smooth muscle of the viscera and gastrointestinal tract 
(Figure 23.7) is derived from splanchnic mesoderm that is located 
where the organs are developing (Figure 23.8). Developing blood 
vessels surround local mesenchyme that forms smooth muscle. 
Larger blood vessels (aorta and pulmonary vessels) receive contri­
butions from neural crest cells.
Exceptions to the splanchnic mesoderm rule include muscles of 
the pupil, erector pili muscles of hair, salivary glands, lacrimal 
glands, sweat glands and mammary gland smooth muscle, all of 
which are derived from ectoderm.
Cardiac muscle
Cardiac muscle cells are also derived from splanchnic mesoderm 
surrounding the early heart tube.
The cardiac myoblasts differ from skeletal myoblasts in that 
they do not fuse to form multinucleated fibres, and they remain 
individual but connected via intercalated discs (Figure 23.9).
At approximately 22 days a cardiac tube has formed that can 
contract (see Chapter 25).
Clinical relevance
Muscular dystrophy is a group of over 20 muscular diseases that 
have genetic causes and all produce progressive weakness and 
wasting of muscular tissue.
Duchenne muscular dystrophy affects boys (in extremely rare 
cases symptoms show in female carriers) and affects the gene 
coding for the protein dystrophin. Patients develop problems with 
walking between 1 and 3 years of age, wheelchairs are necessary 
between 8 and 10 years, and life expectancy is limited to late teens 
to early adulthood as cardiac muscle is affected in the later stages 
of the disease. There is no cure but research into using stem cells 
in forms treatment is ongoing.
An absence or partial absence of a skeletal muscle can occur 
(e.g. Poland anomaly which exhibits a unilateral lack of pectoralis 
major). Other commonly affected muscles include quadriceps 
femoris, serratus anterior, latissimus dorsi and palmaris longus, 
and are relatively common.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
56  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
24
Musculoskeletal system: limbs
Figure 24.1
The limb buds appear at the end of the 4th week,
grow and are clearly recognisable by the middle
of the 5th week
Figure 24.4
Condensations of mesenchyme form
digital rays, and the cells in between
die by apoptosis
Figure 24.7
Dermatomes of the upper
limb bud
Figure 24.8
The limbs bend 
and rotate
Figure 24.5
Digits form as the shape of the hand
emerges
Formation of the digits
Figure 24.3
The zone of polarising activity organises cells of the limb
bud in a cranial–caudal manner, which will arrange the
development of structures that form the different digits,
for example
Figure 24.6
Cells from a somite’s myotome
migrate into the limb bud.
Axons of motor and sensory 
neurones follow
Figure 24.9
The migrating myotomes and neurones maintain
their segmented pattern in the early limb bud,
but this is altered with growth and rotation
of the limb
Figure 24.2
The cells of the apical ectodermal
ridge induce proliferation of the
mesenchymal cells of the progress
zone, causing the limb bud to grow
distally
Patterning of the limb bud
Zone of 
polarising
activity
Cranial
Cranial – caudal
organisation
Caudal
C3
C2
C4
T2
T3
T4
T5
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
L1
L2
C5
C6
C7
T1
C8
T6
Neural tube
Somite
Dermatome
Myotome
C5
C6
C7
C8
T1
Lower limb bud
Somites
Webbing
between
digits
Upper limb bud
Apoptotic
cells
Digital
rays
Apical
ectodermal
ridge
Progress
zone
Time period: week 4 to adult
Introduction
Limb development has been studied in great detail, although it is 
not entirely clear how it is initiated. The mechanisms by which the 
cells of the early limb are organised, and the fates of those cells, 
have been explored for decades, as aberrations of these processes 
cause gross limb abnormalities.
Limb buds
Cells in the lateral mesoderm at the level of C5–T1 begin to form 
the upper limb buds at the end of the fourth week and they are 

Musculoskeletal system: limbs  Systems development  57
visible from around day 25. The lower limb buds appear a couple 
of days of later at the level of L1–L5 (Figure 24.1).
Each limb bud has an ectodermal outer covering of epithelium 
and an inner mesodermal mass of mesenchymal cells.
Distal growth
A series of reciprocal interactions between the underlying meso­
derm and overlying ectoderm result in the formation of a thick­
ened ridge of ectoderm called the apical ectodermal ridge (AER; 
Figure 24.2). This ridge forms along the boundary between the 
dorsal and ventral aspects of the limb bud.
The AER forms on the distal border of the limb and induces 
proliferation of the underlying cells via fibroblast growth factors 
(FGF), inducing distal outgrowth of the limb bud. This area of 
rapidly dividing cells is called the proliferating zone (PZ; Figure 
24.2). As cells leave the PZ and become further from the AER they 
begin differentiation and condense into the cartilage precursors of 
the bones of the limb. Endochondral ossification of these bones is 
described in Chapter 21.
Organisation
Patterning within the early limb bud controls the proliferation 
and differentiation of mesenchymal cells, forming the structures 
of the limb. The AER controls the proximal–distal axis, for 
example.
A group of cells in the caudal mesenchyme of the limb bud act 
as a zone of polarising activity (ZPA; Figure 24.3), secreting a 
morphogen that diffuses cranially and themselves contributing to 
development of the digits. The ZPA has a role in a cranial–caudal 
axis (i.e. specifying where the thumb and little finger form; Figure 
24.3).
The dorsal–ventral axis is controlled by signals from the dorsal 
and ventral ectoderm. These signals specify which side of the hand 
the nails should form on and which side the fingertips, for example.
Disruption of these patterning signals (and others) causes limb 
malformations.
Digits
During weeks 6 and 7 (development of the lower limbs lags behind 
that of the upper limbs) the distal edges of the limb buds flatten 
to form hand and foot plates. Digits begin to develop as condensa­
tions of mesenchymal cells clump together to construct long thick­
enings (Figure 24.4). Localised programmed cell death between 
these digit primordia splits the plate into five digital rays, and the 
mesenchymal condensations develop to become the bones and 
joints of the phalanges (Figures 24.4 and 24.5).
Dermatomes and myotomes
Cells from the dermamyotomes of somites (see Chapter 20) at the 
levels of the limb buds migrate into the limbs, and differentiate 
into myoblasts. They group to form dorsal and ventral masses, 
which will approximate to the muscles of the flexor and extensor 
compartments of the adult.
Motor neurons from the ventral rami of the spinal cord at the 
levels of the limb buds (C5–T1 for the upper limbs, L4–S3 for the 
lower limbs) extend axons into the limbs, following the myoblasts 
(Figure 24.6). Control of this axon growth also occurs independent 
of muscle development, however. Dorsal branches from each 
ventral ramus pass to muscles of the dorsal mass (extensors), and 
ventral branches from each ventral ramus pass to the ventral mass 
(flexors). Also, more cranial neurons (C5–C7 in the upper limb, 
for example) pass to craniodorsal parts of the limb bud, and more 
caudal neurons (C8–T2) pass to ventrocaudal parts.
As axons enter the limb bud they mix to create the brachial and 
lumbosacral plexuses during this development stage, before the 
axons continue onwards to their target muscles. Branches combine 
to form larger dorsal and ventral nerves, eventually the radial, 
musculocutaneous, ulnar and median nerves in the upper limb, for 
example. The radial nerve forms from dorsal branches, as it is a 
nerve that innervates the extensor muscles of the upper arm and 
forearm.
The muscle groups, initially neatly organised, fuse and adult 
muscles may be derived from myoblasts from multiple somites. 
Likewise, axons of the dorsal root ganglia initially carry sensory 
innervation from the skin of the limb in an organised pattern of 
dermatomes.
The upper limb begins to become flexed at the elbow, and the 
lower limb develops a bend at the knee in week 7. The limbs also 
rotate, transforming from a simple, outwardly extending limb bud 
to a more recognisable limb shape. The upper limb rotates laterally 
by 90° and the lower limb rotates medially by 90° (Figure 24.7). 
By the end of week 8 the upper and lower limbs are well defined, 
with pads on the fingers and toes. The hands meet in the midline, 
and the feet have become close together.
With the rotation and bending of the limbs, and the fusing 
of early muscles, the patterns of muscle innervation and der­
matomes are disrupted and produce the adult patterns (Figures 
24.7–24.9).
Clinical relevance
The period of early limb development of weeks 4 and 5 is suscep­
tible to interruption by teratogens, as seen in the thalidomide 
epidemic of congenital limb abnormalities of the 1950s and 1960s. 
The earlier the teratogen is applied to the foetus, the more severe 
the developmental defects.
Achondroplastic dwarfism is caused by a mutation in the fibrob­
last growth factor receptor 3 gene (FGFR3). FGF signalling via 
this receptor is involved in growth plate function, and disruption 
of this causes limited long bone growth and disproportionate short 
stature.
Meromelia describes the partial absence of a limb, and amelia 
the complete absence of a limb. Phocomelia refers to a limb in 
which the proximal part is shortened, and the hand or foot is 
attached to the torso by a shortened limb.
In polydactyly an extra digit, often incomplete, forms on the 
hand or foot. Ectrodactyly describes missing digits, and often 
lateral digits forming a claw-shaped hand or foot. A hand or foot 
with brachydactyly has shortened digits. A person with syndactyly 
has webbed digits as the interdigital cells failed to apoptose 
normally.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
58  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
25
Circulatory system: heart tube
Vasculogenesis
forming blood
islands in the
mesoderm
Figure 25.1
Blood islands appear in the lateral plate mesoderm from 
angioblasts that join together as a syncytium (week 3)
Figure 25.2
Location of the endocardial tube and myocardial cells in the
embryo before the embryo begins folding. Transverse section
Figure 25.3
Anterior position of the endocardial tube surrounded by the pericardial
cavity relative to the gut, in cross section at 22 days.
Insert: Region of cross section
Figure 25.4
The early heart tube (22 days)
Figure 25.5
The folded heart tube (29 days)
Neural plate
Ectoderm
Mesoderm
Notochord
Dorsal
aorta
Endoderm
Myocardial cells
Endocardial tube
Embryonic
folding
Dorsal aorta
Notochord
Gut
Pericardial cavity
Endocardial tube
Pericardial
cavity
Endocardial
tube
Bulbus cordis
Ventricle
Atrium
Sinus venosus
Truncus arteriosus
Bulbus cordis
Ventricle
Left atrium
Truncus arteriosus

Circulatory system: heart tube  Systems development  59
Time period: days 16–28
Formation of the heart tube
During the third week of development blood islands appear in the 
lateral plate mesoderm (Figure 25.1) from angioblasts that accu­
mulate as a syncytium (rather like the formation of the syncytio­
trophoblast that we saw form during the development of the 
placenta in Chapter 12). From these cells new blood cells and 
blood vessels form through vasculogenesis. Blood islands at the 
cranial end of the embryo merge and assemble a horseshoe-shaped 
tube lined with endothelial cells which curves around the embryo 
in the plane of the mesoderm.
Progenitor cells that migrated from the epiblast differentiate in 
response to signals from the nearby endoderm to become myob­
lasts and surround the horseshoe-shaped tube (Figure 25.2). This 
developing cardiovascular tissue is called the cardiogenic field.
The early heart tube expands into the newly forming pericardial 
cavity (Figure 25.3) as it begins to link with the paired dorsal 
aortae cranially and veins caudally. The developing central nervous 
system and folding of the embryo (see Chapter 18) pushes it into 
the thorax and brings the developing parts of the cardiovascular 
system towards one another (Figures 25.1–25.3).
Looping and folding of the heart tube
The early, simple heart tube (Figure 25.4) undergoes a series of 
foldings to bring it from a straight tube to a folded shape ready to 
become four chambers. The heart tube begins to bend at 23 days 
(stops at 28 days) and develops two bulges. The cranial bulge is 
called the bulbus cordis and the caudal one is the primitive ventricle 
(Figure 25.5). These continue to bend and create the cardiac (or 
bulboventricular) loop during the fourth week of development.
When the heart tube loops, the top bends towards the right so 
that the bulboventricular part of the heart becomes U-shaped. 
This looping changes the anterior–posterior polarity of the heart 
into the left–right that we see in the adult. The bulbus cordis forms 
the right part of the ‘U’ and the primitive ventricle the left part. 
You can see the junction between the bulbus cordis and ventricle 
by the presence of the bulboventricular sulcus. The looping causes 
the atrium and sinus venosus to move dorsal to the heart loop.
The atrium is now dorsal to the other parts of the heart and the 
common atrium is connected to the primitive ventricle by the 
atrioventricular canal. The primitive ventricle will develop into 
most of the left ventricle and the proximal section of the bulbus 
cordis will form much of the right ventricle. The conus cordis will 
form parts of the ventricles and their outflow tracts, and the 
truncus arteriosus will form the roots of both great vessels.
Sinus venosus (right atrium)
The sinus venosus comprises the inflow to the primitive heart tube 
and is formed by the major embryonic veins (common cardinal, 
umbilical and vitelline) as they converge at the right and left sinus 
horns (see Chapter 28). The sinus venosus passes blood from the 
veins to the primitive atrium.
With time, venous drainage becomes prioritised to the right side 
of the embryo and the left sinus horn becomes smaller and less 
significant, eventually forming the coronary sinus and draining the 
coronary veins into the right atrium. The right sinus horn persists, 
enlarges and becomes part of the inferior vena cava entering the 
heart and incorporated into the right atrium, forming much of its 
wall.
Similarly, a single pulmonary vein is initially connected to the 
left side of the primitive atrium and divides twice during the fourth 
week to form four pulmonary veins. These become incorporated 
into the wall of the future left atrium and extend towards the 
developing lungs.
Clinical relevance
Many congenital heart defects occur later in development during 
the division of the heart into its four chambers.
Dextrocardia is a condition in which the heart lies on the right, 
with the apex of the left ventricle pointing to the right, instead of 
the left. This is often associated with situs inversus, a condition in 
which all organs are asymmetrical. Other congenital heart defects 
can occur with dextrocardia but it is often asymptomatic.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
60  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
26
Circulatory system: heart chambers
LV
LV
Figure 26.1
The endocardial cushions split the single atrioventricular canal
into 2 canals linking the atrium and ventricle (weeks 5 and 6)
Figure 26.3
The formation of the interventricular septum (weeks 5 to 7)
Figure 26.2
The formation of the atrial septa (weeks 5 and 6)
Figure 26.4
The single outflow tract of the conus arteriosus and truncus
arteriosus is split into 2 by the conotruncal septum
Figure 26.5
The adult pulmonary trunk 
and aorta twist around each 
other as they rise superiorly 
from the ventricles
Pulmonary
trunk
Aorta
Outflow
Outflow
Inflow
Inflow
Inflow
Common atrioventricular
canal
Endocardial
cushions
Septum primum
Septum secundum
Septum secundum
Ostium secundum
Foramen ovale
LA
Endocardial cushion
Superior
Inferior
Left and right
atrioventricular canals
Endocardial
cushions
Superior
Inferior
Septum primum
Interventricular
foramen
Interventricular
septum
Membranous part
Muscular part

Circulatory system: heart chambers  Systems development  61
Time period: day 22
Dividing the heart into chambers
Heart septa appear during week 5 and divide the heart tube into 
four chambers between days 27 and 37. The septa form as inward 
growths of endocardium separating the atrial and ventricular 
chambers, splitting the atrium into left and right, and splitting the 
ventricle and bulbus cordis into left and right ventricles, respec­
tively (Figure 26.1).
The atrioventricular canal connects the primitive atrium and 
ventricle. At the end of week 4 the endocardium of the anterior 
and posterior walls of the atrioventricular canal thicken and bulge 
outwards into the canal’s lumen. These are the endocardial cush­
ions and by the end of week 6 they meet in the middle, splitting 
the atrioventricular canal into two canals (Figure 26.1).
Atria
At the same time, new tissue forms in the roof of the primitive 
atrium. This thin, curved septum is the septum primum and extends 
down from the roof, growing towards the endocardial cushions. 
The primitive atrium begins to split into left and right atria. The 
gap remaining inferior to the septum primum is the ostium primum 
(Figure 26.2). Growth of the endocardial cushions and the septum 
primum cause them to meet.
A second ridge of tissue grows from the roof of the atrium, on 
the right side of the septum primum. This is called the septum 
secundum (Figure 26.2) and grows towards the endocardial cush­
ions, but stops short. The gap remaining is the ostium secundum, 
and the two holes and flap of the septum primum against septum 
secundum form a one-way valve allowing blood to shunt from the 
right atrium to the left but not in reverse. This is the foramen ovale 
(Figure 26.2) and is one of the routes that exist before birth allow­
ing blood circulation to circumvent the developing lungs. A change 
in pressure between atria at birth holds the septum primum closed 
against the septum secundum, and the foramen becomes perma­
nently sealed.
Ventricles
From the end of the fourth week a muscular interventricular septum 
arises from the floor of the ventricular chamber as the two primi­
tive ventricles begin to expand (Figure 26.3). The septum rises 
towards the endocardial cushions, leaving an interventricular 
foramen. As the atrioventricular septum is completed late in the 
seventh week the endocardial cushion extends inferiorly (as the 
membranous interventricular septum) to complete the interventricu­
lar septum and close the interventricular foramen (Figure 26.3).
Now the heart is four connected chambers with two input tubes. 
The single outflow tract of the primitive heart must also split into 
two to pass blood from the ventricles to the pulmonary and sys­
temic circulatory systems (Figure 26.4). The conotruncal outflow 
tract, comprising the conus arteriosus and truncus arteriosus, devel­
ops a pair of longitudinal ridges on its internal surface. These grow 
towards one another and fuse to form the conotruncal septum, 
which meets with the muscular interventricular septum to link each 
ventricle with its outflow artery. The conotruncal septum spirals 
within the conus arteriosus and truncus arteriosus, giving the inter­
twining nature of the adult pulmonary trunk and aorta (Figure 
26.5).
Valves
After the fusion of the endocardial cushions to form two atriov­
entricular canals, mesenchymal cells proliferate in the walls of the 
canals. The ventricular walls inferior to this erode, leaving leaflets 
of primitive valves and thin connections to the walls of the ventri­
cles. These connections develop into the fibrous chordae tendinae 
with papillary muscles at their ventricular ends. The left atrioven­
tricular valve develops two leaflets (the bicuspid valve) and the 
right atrioventricular valve usually develops three (the tricuspid 
valve).
The semilunar valves of the aorta and pulmonary trunk develop 
in a similar manner during the formation of the conotruncal 
septum.
Neural crest cells
Neural crest cells, appearing during neurulation, migrate from the 
developing neural tube to take part in the development of an 
astounding range of different structures, including the heart. In 
the heart they contribute to the conotruncal septum.
Clinical relevance
Heart defects are the most common congenital defects, generally 
occurring because of problems with structural development proc­
esses. Six in 1000 children are born with a heart defect.
A ventricular septal defect is the most common heart defect, and 
failure of the membranous interventricular septum to close com­
pletely allows blood to pass from the left to right ventricles. Most 
will close on their own but surgery may be required. This can be 
linked to other conotruncal defects. Atrial septal defects occur 
when the foramen ovale fails to close (patent foramen ovale), 
allowing blood to pass between atria after birth. Treatment is 
surgical.
Abnormal narrowing of the pulmonary or aortic valves can give 
pulmonary or aortic stenosis, forcing the heart to work harder. 
Stenosis of the aorta will limit the systemic circulation, with clear 
consequences. These arteries can be transposed if the conotruncal 
septum fails to form its spiral course, and the aorta will arise from 
the right ventricle and the pulmonary trunk from the left ventricle 
(transposition of the great vessels). Low oxygen blood is passed 
into the systemic circulation.
Tetralogy of Fallot describes four congenital defects resulting 
from abnormal development of the conotruncal septum: pulmo­
nary stenosis, an overriding aorta connected to both ventricles, a 
ventricular septal defect and hypertrophy of the wall of the right 
ventricle. Poorly oxygenated blood is pumped in the systemic cir­
culation with symptoms of cyanosis and breathlessness. Surgical 
intervention is required.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
62  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
27
Circulatory system: blood vessels
Figure 27.1
The primitive blood vessels of the embryo at around 28 days
Figure 27.3
The adult anatomy of the major arteries of the
upper thorax and neck
Figure 27.2
The aortic arch arteries (found in the pharyngeal arches)
form important arteries in the head, neck and thorax
Heart
Aorta
Pulmonary artery
Common carotid artery
Primitive heart tube
Dorsal aorta
Vitelline veins
Subclavian artery
Brachiocephalic artery
Umbilical
arteries
Cardinal veins
(b)
(a)
Dorsal
aorta
Aortic arches
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
Heart
Heart
Aortic arches
III
IV
VI
Internal carotid artery
External carotid artery

Circulatory system: blood vessels  Systems development  63
Time period: day 18 to birth
Vasculogenesis
Vasculogenesis is the formation of new blood vessels from cells 
that were not blood vessels before. As if by magic, blood cells and 
vessels appear in the early embryo. In fact, mesodermal cells are 
induced to differentiate into haemangioblasts, which further dif­
ferentiate into both haematopoietic stem cells and angioblasts. 
Haematopoietic stem cells will form all the blood cell types, and 
angioblasts will build the blood vessels. Separate sites of vasculo­
genesis may merge to form a network of blood vessels, or new 
vessels may grow from existing vessels by angiogenesis. When the 
liver forms it will be the primary source of new haematopoietic 
stem cells during development.
Angiogenesis
Angiogenesis is the development of new blood vessels from exist­
ing vessels. Endothelial cells detach and proliferate to form new 
capillaries. This process is under the influence of various chemical 
and mechanical factors. Although important in growth this also 
occurs in wound healing and tumour growth, and as such angio­
genesis has become a target for anti-cancer drugs.
Primitive circulation
Near the end of the third week blood islands form through vascu­
logenesis on either side of the cardiogenic field and the notochord 
(see Chapter 25). They merge, creating two lateral vessels called 
the dorsal aortae (Figure 27.1). These blood vessels receive blood 
from three pairs of veins, including the vitelline veins of the yolk 
sac (a site of blood vessel formation external to the embryo), the 
cardinal veins and the umbilical veins (Figure 27.1).
Blood flows from the dorsal aortae into the umbilical arteries 
and the vitelline arteries. Branches of the dorsal aortae later fuse 
to become the single descending aorta in adult life.
The heart tube will form where veins drain to the dorsal aortae. 
The aortic arches within the pharyngeal arches form here, linking 
the outflow of the primitive heart to the dorsal aortae. Blood flow 
begins during the fourth week.
Aortic arches
Five pairs of aortic arches form between the most distal part of 
the truncus arteriosus and the dorsal aortae. They develop within 
the pharyngeal arches during weeks 4 and 5 of development and 
are associated with other structures derived from the pharyngeal 
arches in the head and neck.
The aortic arches grow in sequence and therefore are not all 
present at the same time. One little mystery in embryology is that 
the fifth aortic arch (and pharyngeal arch) either does not form or 
it grows and then regresses. For that reason the five aortic arch 
arteries that do develop are named I, II, III, IV and VI (Figure 
27.2).
The truncus arteriosus also divides and develops into the ventral 
part of the aorta and pulmonary trunk. Its most distal part forms 
left and right horns that also contribute to the brachiocephalic 
artery.
The five aortic arches and paired dorsal aortae combine and 
develop into a number of vessels of the head and neck (Figure 
27.3):
Aortic arch I
Maxillary artery
Aortic arch II
Stapedial artery (rare)
Aortic arch III
Common carotid artery and internal carotid 
artery (external carotid artery is an angiogenic 
branch of aortic arch III)
Aortic arch IV
Right side, right subclavian artery (proximal 
portion)
Left side, aortic arch (portion between the left 
common carotid and subclavian arteries)
Aortic arch VI
Right side, right pulmonary artery
Left side, left pulmonary artery and ductus 
arteriosus
Ductus arteriosus
Aortic arch VI forms as a link between the truncus arteriosus 
and the left dorsal aorta (Figure 27.2); this link persists until 
birth as the ductus arteriosus. This vessel allows blood flow to 
bypass the lungs as it connects the pulmonary trunk with the 
aorta. Foetal pulmonary vascular resistance is high and most 
blood from the right ventricle (85–90%) passes through the ductus 
arteriosus to the aorta. Blood flow to the lungs is minimal during 
gestation and they are protected from circulatory pressures during 
development. This shunt also allows the wall of the left ventricle 
to thicken.
Coronary arteries
The blood supply to the tissue of the heart has been considered to 
form by angiogenesis from the walls of the right and left aortic 
sinuses (bulges in the aorta that occur just superior to the aortic 
valve). This may be influenced by specific tension in the walls of 
the heart. Vessels form that link with a plexus of epicardial vessels 
on the surface of the heart. The reverse may be true, however, and 
these arteries may grow from the epicardial plexus into the aorta 
and right atrium to initiate their function. Recently, cells from the 
sinus venosus have been tracked as angiogenic sprouts that migrate 
over the myocardium and form both coronary arteries and veins 
and these cells may, in fact, be the source of all the coronary blood 
vessels.
Clinical relevance
Coarctation of the aorta is a narrowing of the aorta sometimes 
found distal to the point from which the left subclavian artery 
arises. It may be described as preductal or postductal depending 
upon its location relative to the ductus arteriosus. With postductal 
coarctation, a collateral circulation develops linking the aorta 
proximal to the ductus arteriosus with inferior arteries. With a 
preductal coarctation the route of blood flow through the ductus 
arteriosus to inferior parts of the body is lost with birth causing 
hypoperfusion of the lower body.
Aberrations in aortic arch development may give anomalous 
arteries, such as a right arch of the aorta or a vascular ring around 
the trachea and oesophagus.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
64  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
28
Circulatory system: embryonic veins
Common
cardinal
vein
Anterior cardinal vein
Posterior cardinal vein
Umbilical vein
Vitelline vein
Heart
Aortic arches
Yolk sac
Vitelline artery
Dorsal aorta
Placenta
Internal jugular vein
(anterior cardinal vein)
Superior vena cava
(anterior cardinal vein)
Subclavian vein
Azygos and hemiazygos veins
(supracardinal veins)
Inferior vena cava
(vitelline vein, subcardinal
vein, supracardinal vein)
Left brachiocephalic vein
(anterior cardinal veins)
Renal vein
(subcardinal vein)
Common iliac vein
Figure 28.4. 
Veins at birth
Figure 28.1
Distribution of embryonic circulatory system at 28 days
of development
Figure 28.3
Veins at 35 days. As above, plus subcardinal veins
Subcardinal
vein
Supracardinal
vein
Figure 28.2
Veins at 28 days
Anterior cardinal vein
Heart
(Head)
Sinus venosus
Vitelline vein
Umbilical vein
Posterior cardinal vein

Circulatory system: embryonic veins  Systems development  65
Time period: day 18 to birth
Vitelline vessels
The vitelline circulation is the flow of blood between the embryo 
and the yolk sac through a collection of vitelline arteries and veins 
that pass within the yolk stalk (Figure 28.1).
The vitelline arteries are branches of the dorsal aortae, and most 
of them degenerate in time. Those that remain fuse and form the 
3 unpaired ventral arterial branches of the aorta that supply the 
gut: the celiac trunk, superior mesenteric artery and inferior 
mesenteric artery.
The vitelline veins will give rise to the hepatic portal vein and 
the hepatic veins of the liver.
Umbilical vessels
The umbilical circulation is the flow of blood between the chorion 
of the placenta and the embryo. The umbilical arteries carry poorly 
oxygenated blood to the placenta and the veins carry highly oxy­
genated blood initially to the heart of the embryo (Figure 28.1), 
and later into the liver when it forms (see Figure 29.1). The right 
umbilical vein is lost around week 7, leaving only the left to carry 
blood from the placenta.
The formation of the ductus venosus during the foetal period 
causes about half of the blood from the umbilical vein to flow 
directly into the inferior vena cava, bypassing the liver (Figure 
29.1). This, with other mechanisms, preferentially shunts highly 
oxygenated blood to the foetal brain.
Of the umbilical arteries only the proximal portions persist as 
parts of the internal iliac arteries and superior vesical arteries in 
the adult. The distal portions do not remain as arteries but become 
the medial umbilical ligaments. The umbilical vein becomes the 
ligamentum teres, passing from the umbilicus to the porta hepatis 
in the adult (see Chapter 29).
Cardinal veins
The common cardinal veins initially form an H-shaped structure, 
with the horizontal bar being the sinus venosus that links the major 
veins and the atrium of the early heart tube (Figure 28.2). The left 
and right anterior (or superior) branches drain blood from the 
head and shoulder regions and the posterior (or inferior) branches 
drain from the abdomen, pelvis and lower limbs.
At 6 weeks a subcardinal vein arises on either side of the embryo 
caudal to the heart and anastomoses with the posterior cardinal 
veins (Figure 28.3). The subcardinal veins also form an anastomo­
sis with each other anterior to the dorsal aortae, and tributaries 
are sent into the developing limbs. The right subcardinal vein joins 
vessels of the liver. Similarly, at 7 weeks supracardinal veins form 
and link to the posterior cardinal veins (Figure 28.3).
The posterior cardinal veins degenerate, although the most 
caudal parts continue as a sacral venous plexus and later as the 
common iliac veins.
An important junction between the right supracardinal and 
right subcardinal vein forms and both will become sections of the 
inferior vena cava (IVC). Parts of the right posterior cardinal 
veins, common, subcardinal and supracardinal veins also contrib­
ute. A shift towards the right side occurs, with degeneration of 
venous structures on the left side and the formation and enlarge­
ment of the inferior vena cava on the right (Figure 28.4).
Similarly, the degeneration of much of the left anterior cardinal 
vein gives a shift to the right side as the right anterior cardinal vein 
forms part of the superior vena cava (SVC) and the right brachio­
cephalic vein (Figure 28.4). An anastomosis between the 2 anterior 
cardinal veins persists as the left brachiocephalic vein.
The right supracardinal vein becomes much of the azygos vein, 
and the left supracardinal vein forms part of the hemiazygos vein 
and the accessory hemiazygos veins (Figure 28.4). Branches from 
the subcardinal vein network form renal, suprarenal and the 
gonadal veins.
Clinical relevance
The formation of the venous system is somewhat variable and 
complicated, and can give rise to variations in adult SVC and IVC 
anatomy. The hepatic section of the IVC may fail to form, for 
example, and blood instead flows back to the heart through the 
azygos and hemiazygos veins from the inferior parts of the body 
(azygos continuation). Persistence of supracardinal veins can leave 
double inferior vena cavae, and persistence of the left anterior car­
dinal vein can give double SVC. In this case the right anterior vena 
cava may even degenerate, leaving only a left SVC. These varia­
tions are not common.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
66  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
29
Circulation system: changes at birth
Figure 29.1
The foetal circulatory system. Half of the blood from the umbilical vein bypasses the
liver via the ductus venosus. Oxygen saturation of the blood leaving the heart is
reduced by blood entering from the superior vena cava and the coronary sinus
Brain
Placenta
Liver
Lungs
Umbilical vein
Umbilical arteries
Ductus
arteriosus
Aorta
Pulmonary trunk
Pulmonary
vessels
Superior
vena cava
Inferior
vena cava
Figure 29.2
The foetal circulation, a closer view of the heart
Right atrium
Right
ventricle
Left atrium
Left ventricle
Lung
Lung
Foramen ovale
Aorta
(behind heart)
Common carotid artery
Internal jugular vein
Subclavian artery
Superior vena cava
Inferior vena cava
Common iliac vessels
Well oxygenated blood flow
Fairly well oxygenated blood flow
Less well oxygenated blood flow
Poorly oxygenated blood flow
Ductus venosus
Pulmonary trunk
Ductus arteriosus
Ductus arteriosus
(closed)
Figure 29.4
Neonatal circulation, a closer view of the heart
Lung
Lung
Fossa ovale
(closed)
Figure 29.5 
Neonatal circulation. At birth the lungs begin to function, the ductus
arteriosus and ductus venosus close, and the umbilical vessels close 
Ductus arteriosus
(closed)
Ductus venosus
(closed)
Umbilical arteries
(closed)
Umbilical vein
(closed)
Umbilical
cord, cut 
Hepatic portal vein
(blood from GI tract)

Circulation system: changes at birth  Systems development  67
Time period: birth (38 weeks)
Foetal blood circulation
Dramatic and clinically significant changes occur to the circulatory 
and respiratory systems at birth. Here, we look at changes prima­
rily of the circulatory system and how these changes prepare the 
baby for life outside the uterus.
If we were to follow the flow of oxygenated blood in the foetus 
from the placenta (Figure 29.1), we would start in the umbilical 
vein and track the blood moving towards the liver. Here, half the 
blood enters the liver itself and half is redirected by the ductus 
venosus directly into the inferior vena cava, bypassing the liver. 
The blood remains well oxygenated and continues to the right 
atrium, from which it may pass into the right ventricle in the 
expected manner or directly into the left atrium via the foramen 
ovale (Figure 29.2). Blood within the left atrium passes to the left 
ventricle and then into the aorta.
Blood entering the right atrium from the superior vena cava and 
the coronary sinus is relatively poorly oxygenated. The small 
amount of blood that returns from the lungs to the left atrium is 
also poorly oxygenated. Mixing of this blood with the well-oxy­
genated blood from the ductus venosus reduces the oxygen satura­
tion somewhat.
Blood within the right ventricle will leave the heart within the 
pulmonary artery, but most of that blood will pass through the 
ductus arteriosus and into the descending aorta. Almost all of 
the well-oxygenated blood that entered the right side of the heart 
has avoided entering the pulmonary circulation of the lungs, and 
has instead passed to the developing brain and other parts of the 
body (Figure 29.3).
Ductus venosus
The umbilical arteries constrict after birth, preventing blood loss 
from the neonate. The umbilical cord is not cut and clipped imme­
diately after birth, however, allowing blood to pass from the pla­
centa back to the neonatal circulation through the umbilical vein.
The ductus venosus shunted blood from the umbilical vein to 
the inferior vena cava during foetal life, bypassing the liver. After 
birth a sphincter at the umbilical vein end of the ductus venosus 
closes (Figure 29.4). The ductus venosus will slowly degenerate 
and become the ligamentum venosus.
Once the umbilical circulation is terminated the umbilical vein 
will also degenerate and become the round ligament (or ligamen­
tum teres hepatis) of the liver. This may be continuous with the 
ligamentum venosus. The umbilical arteries will persist in part as 
the superior vesical arteries, supplying the bladder, and the remain­
der will degenerate and become the median umbilical ligaments.
Ductus arteriosus
The shunt formed by the ductus arteriosus between the pulmonary 
trunk and the aorta in foetal life causes blood rich in oxygen to 
bypass the lungs, which have a very high vascular resistance during 
development. With birth, the first breath of air and early use of 
the lungs the pulmonary vascular resistance drops and blood flow 
to the lungs increases. An increase in oxygen saturation of the 
blood, bradykinin produced by the lungs, and a reduction in cir­
culating prostaglandins cause the smooth muscle of the wall of the 
ductus arteriosus to contract, restricting blood flow here and 
increasing blood flow through the pulmonary arteries (Figure 
29.4). Physiological closure is normally achieved within 15 hours 
of birth.
During the first few months of life, the ductus arteriosus closes 
anatomically, leaving the ligamentum arteriosum as a remnant. As 
this is a remnant of the sixth aortic arch the left recurrent laryngeal 
nerve can be found here (see Chapter 41).
Foramen ovale
The direction in which blood flows into the right atrium from the 
inferior vena cava and the crista dividens (the lower edge of the 
septum secundum, forming the superior edge of the foramen 
ovale) preferentially direct the flow of blood through the foramen 
ovale into the left atrium, reducing mixing with poorly oxygenated 
blood entering the right atrium from the superior vena cava 
(Figures 29.2 and 29.3).
As the child takes his or her first breath the reduction in pulmo­
nary vascular resistance and subsequent flow of blood through the 
pulmonary circulation increases the pressure in the left atrium. As 
the pressure in the left atrium is now higher than in the right atrium 
the septum primum is pushed up again the septum secundum, thus 
functionally closing the foramen ovale (Figure 26.3). Anatomical 
closure is usually completed within the next 6 months. In the adult 
heart a depression called the fossa ovalis remains upon the interior 
of the right atrium.
Clinical relevance
Patent foramen ovale (PFO) is an atrial septal defect. The foramen 
ovale fails to close anatomically although it is held closed by the 
difference in interatrial pressure. A ‘backflow’ of blood can occur 
from left to right under certain circumstances which increases 
pressure in the thorax. These circumstances include sneezing or 
coughing, and even straining during a bowel movement. Autopsy 
studies have shown a PFO incidence of 27% in the US population 
but those with this defect generally do not have symptoms. Treat­
ment varies depending upon age and associated problems, but 
often no treatment is necessary.
If the ductus arteriosus fails to close at birth it is termed a patent 
ductus arteriosus (PDA). Well-oxygenated blood from the aorta 
mixes with poorly oxygenated blood from the pulmonary arteries, 
causing tachypnoea, tachycardia, cyanosis, a widened pulse pres­
sure and other symptoms. Longer term symptoms seen during the 
first year of life include poor weight gain and continued laboured 
breathing. Premature infants are more likely to develop a PDA. 
Treatment can be surgical or pharmacological.
A portosystemic shunt is less common and occurs when the 
ductus venosus fails to close at birth, allowing blood to continue 
to bypass the liver. A build-up of uric acid and ammonia in the 
blood can lead to a failure to gain weight, vomiting and impaired 
brain function.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
68  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
30
Respiratory system
Figure 30.1
Early lung bud formation. Week 4
Figure 30.2
Respiratory tree development
Figure 30.3
Two of the main differences between the alveoli before 
and after birth are the volume of each alveolus and 
the thickness of the blood–air boundary
Alveolar sacs
36 weeks–
postnatal
Alveolar
ducts
24–36 weeks
Terminal
(respiratory)
bronchioles
16–24 weeks
Buds of new
terminal bronchioles
starting to form
Bronchial
branching
3–16 weeks
Primitive alveoli
begin to develop
Alveoli become
mature
Terminal
bronchiole
Foetal
Thick walled sacs
smaller lumen
Adult
thin walled sacs
large lumen
Alveolar
sac
Tracheoesophageal
septum
Oesophagus
Bronchial
buds
Right
Left
Foregut
Trachea
Time period: day 28 to childhood
Introduction
The development of the respiratory system is continuous from the 
fourth week, when the respiratory diverticulum appears, to term. 
The 24-week potential viability of a foetus (approximately 50% 
chance of survival) is partly because at this stage the lungs have 
developed enough to oxygenate the blood. Limiters to oxygena­
tion include the surface area available to gaseous exchange, the 
vascularisation of those tissues of gaseous exchange and the action 
of surfactant in reducing the surface tension of fluids within the 
lungs.
Development of the respiratory system includes not only the 
lungs, but also the conducting pathways, including the trachea, 
bronchi and bronchioles. Lung development can be described in 
five stages: embryonic, pseudoglandular, canalicular, saccular and 
alveolar.
Although not in use as gas exchange organs in utero, the lungs 
have a role in the production of some amniotic fluid.
Lung bud
The development of the respiratory system begins with the growth 
of an endodermal bud from the ventral wall of the developing gut 
tube in the fourth week (Figure 30.1).
To separate the lung bud from the gut tube two longitudinal 
folds form in the early tube of the foregut, meet and fuse, creating 
the tracheoesophageal septum. This division splits the dorsal 
foregut (oesophagus) from the ventral lung bud (larynx, trachea 
and lung). These structures remain in communication superiorly 
through the laryngeal orifice.

Respiratory system  Systems development  69
Being derived from the gut the epithelial lining is endodermal in 
origin, but as the bud grows into the surrounding mesoderm recip­
rocal interactions between the germ layers occur. The mesoderm 
develops into the cartilage and smooth muscle of the respiratory 
conduction pathways.
Respiratory tree
In the fifth week the tracheal bud splits and forms two lateral 
outgrowths: the bronchial buds. It is at this early stage we see the 
asymmetry of the lungs appear; the right bud forms three bronchi 
and the left two. The bronchial buds branch and extend, forming 
the respiratory tree of the three right lobes and two left lobes of 
the lungs (Figure 30.1).
Up to week 5 the first period of lung development is known as 
the embryonic stage.
From 6 weeks their development enters the pseudoglandular 
stage. The respiratory tree continues to lengthen and divide 
with 16–20 generations of divisions by the end of this stage 
(Figure 30.2). Histologically, the lungs resemble a gland at this 
stage.
Epithelial cells of the bronchial tree become ciliated and the 
beginnings of respiratory elements appear. Cartilage and smooth 
muscle cells appear in the walls of the bronchi. Lung-specific type 
II alveolar cells (pneumocytes) begin to appear. These are the cells 
that will produce surfactant.
The pseudoglandular stage ends at approximately 16 weeks, by 
which time the entire respiratory tree, including terminal bronchi­
oles, has formed (Figure 30.2).
Alveoli
During the next phase, known as the canalicular stage (17–24 
weeks), the respiratory parts of the lungs develop. Canaliculi 
(canals or tubes) branch out from the terminal bronchioles. Each 
forms an acinus comprising the terminal bronchiole, an alveolar 
duct and a terminal sac (Figure 30.2). This is the primitive 
alveolus.
The duct lumens become wider and the epithelial cells of some 
of the primitive alveoli flatten to form type I alveolar cells (also 
known as type I pneumocytes, or squamous alveolar cells). These 
will be the cells of gaseous exchange.
An invasion of capillaries into the mesenchyme surrounding the 
primitive alveoli brings blood vessels to the type I alveolar cells. 
Towards the end of the canalicular stage some primitive alveoli 
are sufficiently developed and vascularised to allow gaseous 
exchange, and a foetus born at this stage may survive with inten­
sive care support.
The saccular stage (or terminal sac period, from 25 weeks to 
birth), describes the continued development of the respiratory 
parts of the lungs. Type II alveolar cells (also known as type II 
pneumocytes, great alveolar cells or septal cells) begin to produce 
surfactant, a phospholipoprotein that reduces the surface tension 
of the fluid in the lungs and will prevent collapse of the alveoli 
upon expiration and improve lung compliance after birth.
During this stage many more primitive alveolar sacs develop 
from the terminal bronchioles and alveolar ducts. The blood–air 
barrier between the epithelial type I alveolar cells and endothelial 
cells of the capillaries develops in earnest, and the surface area 
available to gaseous exchange begins to increase considerably.
The final alveolar stage (36 weeks onwards) begins a few weeks 
before birth and continues postnatally through childhood. Alveoli 
increase in number and diameter enlarging the surface area avail­
able to gas exchange (Figure 30.2). The squamous (type I alveolar) 
epithelial cells lining the primitive alveoli continue to thin before 
birth, forming mature alveoli (Figure 30.3). Septation divides the 
alveoli. Surfactant is produced in sufficient quantities for normal 
lung function with birth. Continued development through child­
hood will increase the number of alveoli from 20–50 million at 
birth to around 400 million in the adult lung (Table 30.1).
Circulation
Two classes of blood circulation are present in the lungs: pulmo­
nary and bronchial. Pulmonary arteries derive from the artery of 
the sixth pharyngeal arch and accompany the bronchial tree as it 
branches, while the pulmonary veins lie more peripherally. This 
part of the circulatory system is involved in gaseous exchange, and 
until birth little blood flows through the pulmonary vessels. For 
the changes to this circulatory system that occur at birth see 
Chapter 29.
Bronchial vessels supply the tissues of the lung. These vessels 
are initially direct branches from the paired dorsal aortae.
Clinical relevance
Respiratory distress syndrome (hyaline membrane disease) caused 
by a lack of surfactant results in atelectasis (lung collapse). This 
affects premature infants, and treatment options include a dose of 
steroids given to the infant to stimulate surfactant production, or 
surfactant therapy. Surfactant is administered to the infant directly 
down a tracheal tube. These treatments together with oxygen 
therapy and the application of a continuous positive airway pres­
sure using a mechanical ventilator mean that the prognosis is good 
in many cases.
Oesophageal atresia and tracheoeosphageal fistulas are relatively 
common abnormalities. If the separation of the trachea from the 
foregut is incomplete various types of communicating passages 
may persist. This type of abnormality is often associated with 
other faults, including cardiac defects, limb defects and anal 
atresia. It is also possible that an oesophageal atresia will lead to 
polyhydramnios as the amniotic fluid is not swallowed by the 
foetus, or pneumonia after birth as fluid may enter the trachea 
through the fistula. Surgery is generally required.
Ectopic lung lobes and abnormalities in the branching of the 
bronchial tree rarely produce symptoms.
Congenital cysts of the lung can result in common infection sites 
and difficulty in breathing.
Table 30.1  Stages in the development of the respiratory system
Stage
Time
Development
Embryonic
3–5 weeks
Initial bud and 
branching
Pseudoglandular
6–16 weeks
Complete branching
Canalicular
17–24 weeks
Terminal bronchioles
Saccular
25 weeks to term
Terminal sacs and 
capillaries cone into 
close contact
Alveolar
8 months to childhood Well-developed 
blood–air barrier

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
70  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
31
Digestive system: gastrointestinal tract
Fig 31.1
Divisions of the gut tube, including the
cranial and caudal membranes, and the
retained connection to the yolk sac
through the vitelline duct (week 4)
Fig 31.4
Rotation and herniation of the small intestine
Fig 31.5
The urorectal septum splits the cloaca of the 
hindgut into anterior urogenital and posterior 
anorectal spaces during weeks 4 to 7
Fig 31.6
Sagittal view of the mesenteries of the gut. (a) The adult arrangement of mesenteries,
highlighting greater and lesser omenta. (b) The blood vessels of the gastrointestinal tract
reach their targets within the mesenteries
(a)
(b)
Fig 31.2
Blood supply to the divisions of the 
gut tube are direct branches from 
the aorta
Fig 31.3
Rotation and growth of the stomach, along its horizontal
axis (weeks 4 to 6)
Bladder
Perineum
Urogenital sinus
Vitelline duct
Urorectal septum
Urorectal septum
Cloacal membrane
Cloaca
Hindgut
Allantois
Vitelline duct
Lesser omentum
Greater sac
Greater omentum
Lesser sac
Mesentery of
small intestine
Aorta
Celiac trunk
Superior
mesenteric
artery
Inferior
mesenteric
artery
Bifurcation 
of aorta into
iliac arteries
Foregut
Midgut
Hindgut
Buccopharyngeal
membrane
Aorta
Celiac artery
Superior 
mesenteric
artery
Inferior
mesenteric
artery
Vitelline
duct
Cloacal
membrane
Foregut
Midgut
Hindgut
Urogenital
membrane
Anal membrane
Anorectal canal
32 days
The intestinal loop
begins to lengthen
33 days
The rapidly growing
intestine herniates
into the umbilical cord
39 days
90 degrees clockwise 
rotation occurs
44 days
Further growth and
rotation of the gut
49 days
The intestinal loops return to the
abdominal cavity having undergone
a 270 degree clockwise rotation
Navel
opening
Navel
opening

Digestive system: gastrointestinal tract  Systems development  71
Time period: days 21–50
Induction of the tube
The gut tube forms when the yolk sac is pulled into the embryo 
and pinched off (see Figure 18.2) as the flat germ layers of the early 
embryo fold laterally and cephalocaudally (head to tail). Conse­
quently, it has an endodermal lining throughout with a minor 
exception towards the caudal end. Epithelium forms from the 
endoderm layer and other structures are derived from the 
mesoderm.
Initially, the tube is closed at both ends, although the middle 
remains in contact with the yolk sac through the vitelline duct (or 
stalk) even as the yolk sac shrinks (Figure 31.1).
The cranial end will become the mouth and is sealed by the buc­
copharyngeal membrane, which will break in the fourth week, 
opening the gut tube to the amniotic cavity. The caudal end will 
become the anus and is sealed by the cloacal membrane, which will 
break during the seventh week.
Buds develop along the length of the tube that will form a vari­
ety of gastrointestinal and respiratory structures (see Chapter 32).
Divisions of the gut tube
The gut is divided into foregut, midgut and hindgut sections by 
the region of the gut tube that remains linked to the yolk sac and 
by the anterior branches from the aorta that supply blood to each 
part (Figure 31.2).
The foregut will develop into the pharynx, oesophagus, stomach 
and the first two parts of the duodenum to the major duodenal 
papilla, at which the common bile duct and pancreatic duct enter. 
The midgut includes the remainder of the duodenum and the small 
and large intestine through to the proximal two-thirds of the trans­
verse colon. The hindgut includes the distal third of the transverse 
colon and the large intestine through to the upper part of the anal 
canal.
Blood supply
Each division of the gut is supplied by a different artery. The 
foregut is supplied by branches from the coeliac artery directly 
from the descending aorta. The midgut receives blood from the 
superior mesenteric artery and the hindgut from the inferior 
mesenteric artery (Figure 31.2).
Lower foregut
The foregut grows in length with the embryo, and epithelial cells 
proliferate to fill the lumen. The tube is later recanalised and only 
becomes a squamous epithelium during the foetal period. Failure 
of this normal process causes problems of stenosis (narrowing) or 
atresia (blocked) in the oesophagus or duodenum.
Part of the foregut tube begins to dilate in week 4, the dorsal 
side growing faster than the ventral side until week 6. This will 
become the stomach, and the dorsal side becomes the greater 
curvature. The dorsal mesentery (dorsal mesogastrium) will 
expand significantly to form the greater omentum.
The stomach rotates to bring the left side around to become the 
ventral surface, explaining why the left vagus nerve innervates the 
anterior of the stomach (Figure 31.3). This rotation also moves 
the duodenum into the adult C-shaped position.
Twists of the midgut
The midgut also lengthens considerably, looping and twisting as 
it does so, filling the abdominal cavity. At approximately 6 weeks 
the midgut grows so quickly there is not enough room in the 
abdomen to contain it, and it herniates into the umbilical cord 
(Figure 31.4).
The midgut also rotates through 270° counterclockwise (if you 
were to be looking at the abdomen), bringing the developing 
caecum from the inferior abdomen up the left of the developing 
small intestine to the top of the abdomen, and around to descend 
to its adult location in the lower right quadrant. The axis of this 
rotation is the superior mesenteric artery and the rotation is of 
particular significance when considering the layout of the small 
and large intestines and accessory organs in adult anatomy.
The midgut re-enters the abdomen in week 10, and it is thought 
that growth of the abdomen together with regression of the mes­
onephric kidney and a reduced rate of liver growth are important 
factors in this occurring normally.
Story of the hindgut and the cloaca
The last part of the gut tube, the hindgut, ends initially in a simple 
cavity called the cloaca. The cloaca is also continuous with the 
allantois, a remnant of the yolk sac that largely regresses but con­
tributes to the superior parts of the bladder in the human embryo.
A wedge of mesoderm, the urorectal septum, moves caudally 
towards the cloacal membrane as the embryo grows and folds 
during weeks 4–7 (Figure 31.5). The urorectal septum divides the 
cloaca into a primitive urogenital sinus anteriorly and an anorectal 
canal posteriorly. The urogenital sinus will form parts of the 
bladder and the urogenital tract.
The cloacal membrane ruptures in the seventh week, opening 
the gut tube to the amniotic cavity. The caudal part of the lining 
of the anal canal is thus derived from ectoderm and the cephalic 
part from endoderm. Subsequently, the caudal part of the anal 
canal receives blood from branches of the internal iliac arteries and 
the cephalic part receives blood from the artery of the hindgut, the 
inferior mesenteric artery. Similarly, portosystemic anastomoses 
also occur here.
Mesenteries
Mesenteries of the gut form as a covering of mesenchyme passing 
over the gut tube from the posterior body wall of the embryo when 
the tube is in close contact with it. With growth the gut tube moves 
further into the abdominal cavity and away from the posterior 
wall. A bridging connective tissue forms suspending the gut and 
its associated organs within the abdomen in a dorsal mesentery for 
most of its length and a ventral mesentery around the lower foregut 
region. The ventral mesentery is derived from the septum 
transversum.
The dorsal mesentery will form the mesenteries of the small and 
large intestines of the adult gastrointestinal tract, and also forms 
the greater omentum (Figure 31.6). The ventral mesentery will form 
the lesser omentum between the stomach and the liver, and the 
falciform ligament between the liver and the anterior abdominal 
wall.
The extensive lengthening and rotation of the midgut causes 
the dorsal mesentery to become considerably larger and more 
convoluted, and its initial simplicity explains the short diagonal 
attachment of the mesentery of the small intestine to the posterior 
abdominal wall in the adult. When the hindgut finds its final posi­
tion in the foetus the mesenteries of the ascending and descending 
colon fuse with the peritoneum of the posterior body wall.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
72  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
32
Digestive system: associated organs
Figure 32.1
Organs begin to develop as buds from the gut tube 
in the fourth week of development
Figure 32.3
Rotation of the intestine pulls the greater sac and the spleen
into position into the left of the abdomen, transverse section
Figure 32.4
Early buds of the foregut. Note the buds of the pancreas
on either side of the gut tube
Figure 32.5
Rotation of the gut tube brings the ventral pancreatic bud
close to the dorsal pancreatic bud
Figure 32.2
The location of the developing spleen in the folds of the dorsal mesogastrium,
with relation to the stomach and liver, transverse section
Pancreas
Kidney
Lienorenal
ligament
Spleen
Gastrosplenic
ligament
Stomach
Liver
Greater sac
Stomach
Rotation
Liver
Gallbladder
Ventral pancreas
Dorsal pancreas
Lesser sac
Lung bud
Liver bud
Allantois
Cloaca
Oesophagus
Stomach
Dorsal 
pancreatic
bud
Left kidney
Aorta
Splenorenal
ligament
Gastrosplenic
ligament
Stomach
Hepatic
artery
Bile
duct
Portal
vein
Ventral bud
Liver
Gallbladder
Dorsal bud
Spleen

Digestive system: associated organs  Systems development  73
Time period: day 21 to birth
Introduction
In Chapter 31 we looked at the development of the gastrointestinal 
tract as a tube and mentioned a number of buds that sprout from 
the tube and its associated mesenchyme. These develop into a 
number of organs (Figure 32.1).
Lung bud
As the oesophagus develops and elongates during week 4 the res­
piratory diverticulum buds off from its ventral wall (Figure 32.1). 
To create two separate tubes a septum forms between the respira­
tory bud and the oesophagus called the tracheoesophageal septum 
(see Figure 30.1). This creates the oesophagus dorsally and the 
respiratory primordium ventrally (see Chapter 30).
Spleen
In the fifth week the spleen starts to develop from a condensation 
of mesenchymal cells between the folds of the dorsal mesogastrium 
(Figure 32.2). With the rotation of the stomach and duodenum the 
spleen is moved to the left side of the abdomen, explaining the 
adult location of the splenic artery, a branch of the coeliac trunk. 
The gastrosplenic ligament between the stomach and spleen is an 
adult remnant of the dorsal mesogastrium, as is the splenorenal 
ligament between the spleen and left kidney (Figure 32.3).
The spleen begins to create red and white blood cells in the 
second trimester and is an important site of haematopoesis 
during the foetal period. After birth it stops producing red blood 
cells and concentrates on its adult functions of the lymphatic and 
immune systems, and of removing old red blood cells from 
circulation.
Liver and gallbladder
Beginning as an epithelial outgrowth from the ventral wall of the 
distal end of the foregut the liver bud, or hepatic diverticulum 
(Figure 32.1), appears at the end of week 3. Growing rapidly 
during week 4 the liver bud grows into the septum transversum, a 
sheet of mesodermal cells located between the pericardial cavity 
and the yolk sac stalk. The septum transversum will contribute to 
the diaphragm (see Chapter 17) and the ventral mesentery here. 
Both the liver bud and septum transversum integrate to form parts 
of the liver. The liver bud grows within the ventral mesentery, and 
retains a connection with the foregut that will become the bile duct. 
A cranial part of the liver bud will form the liver, and a caudal 
bud will form the gallbladder (Figure 32.4).
The liver is formed from cells of different sources. The liver bud 
from the foregut will form hepatocytes and the epithelial lining of 
the bile duct. The vitelline and umbilical veins will form hepatic 
sinusoids. Cells of the septum transversum will form the stroma 
and capsule (connective tissues) of the liver and also haematopoi­
etic cells, Kupffer cells, smooth muscle and connective tissue of 
the biliary tract. The lesser omentum between the stomach and the 
liver, and the falciform ligament between the liver and the anterior 
abdominal wall are the adult structures of the ventral mesentery.
By week 10 of development the liver accounts for around 10% 
of the embryonic weight. At birth this reduces to 5% of total body 
weight. A main embryological function of the liver is haematopoi­
esis, with the liver producing red and white blood cells.
With the rotation of the stomach and duodenum the route 
of the common bile duct to the duodenum is altered from anterior 
to the foregut to a posterior course (Figure 32.5), and is joined by 
the pancreatic duct at the ampulla of Vater. Eventually the bile 
duct passes behind the duodenum and bile is formed by the liver 
in week 12.
Pancreas
Two pancreatic buds develop from the foregut (duodenum) giving 
dorsal and ventral buds (in the fourth and fifth week, respectively) 
within the mesentery. The dorsal bud is larger, and the ventral bud 
is a bud from the hepatic diverticulum (Figure 32.4).
With the rotation of the duodenum to the right the ventral bud 
moves dorsally (much like the movement of the bile duct entrance 
to the duodenum) to rest below and behind the dorsal bud (Figure 
32.5). In week 7 the duct systems of the buds fuse and the adult 
main pancreatic duct forms from the main duct of the ventral bud 
and the distal part from the dorsal bud. Occasionally, the proximal 
part of the duct of the dorsal bud persists as an accessory duct that 
opens into the duodenum a little proximal to the main duct.
The uncinate process and most of the head of the pancreas 
forms from the ventral bud, and the rest forms from the dorsal 
bud. Exocrine and endocrine cells are all derived from endoderm, 
taking separate differentiation pathways. The islets of Langerhans 
(endocrine cells) form in the third month and insulin is secreted 
from the fourth to fifth month.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
74  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
33
Digestive system: congenital anomalies
Figure 33.4
Tracheoesophageal ﬁstula
Figure 33.5
Meckel’s or ileal diverticulum
Figure 33.6
Omphalocoele
Figure 33.8
Rectovaginal ﬁstula 
Figure 33.7
Rectourethral ﬁstula
Umbilical cord
Abdominal wall
Herniation into
umbilical cord
(omphalocoele)
Loops of small
intestine
Lung
Trachea
Proximal oesophagus
(blind-ended)
Distal oesophagus links
trachea and stomach 
Stomach
Umbilicus
Vitelline ligament
(remnant of yolk sac)
Meckel’s or
ileal diverticulum
Loop of ileum
Bladder
Urethra
Large intestine
Rectourethral
ﬁstula
Hind gut has failed
to open at anal pit
Bladder
Uterus
Large intestine
Urethra
Vagina
Rectum
Fistula
Maxillary process
Figure 33.1
The parts of the embryo that need to meet to form
the lip normally. 30 day embryo
Figure 33.2
Unilateral complete cleft lip
Figure 33.3
Isolated cleft palate
You can see the nasal
cavity through this gap
Nasal prominence – lateral
Nasal prominence – medial

Digestive system: congenital anomalies  Systems development  75
Time period: birth
Facial abnormalities
A relatively common congenital abnormality is cleft lip and/or 
cleft palate which affects around 1 in 600–700 live births and has 
a collection of defects.
Cleft lip (cheiloschisis) can be incomplete (affects upper lip only) 
or complete (continues into the nose) and unilateral (Figure 33.1) 
or bilateral. It is caused by the incomplete fusion of the medial 
nasal prominence with the maxillary process (Figure 33.2). When 
these fuse normally they form the intermaxillary segment, which 
goes on to become the primary (soft) palate.
The secondary (hard) palate forms from outgrowths of the max­
illary process called the palatine shelves. Failure of these shelves 
to fuse or ascend to a horizontal position causes cleft palate (pala­
toschisis). In very severe cases the cleft can continue into the upper 
jaw. Cleft palate is often accompanied by cleft lip (complete), but 
not always (incomplete; Figure 33.3), and can also be unilateral or 
bilateral.
A cleft lip is generally diagnosed at the 20-week anomaly scan, 
whereas cleft palates are diagnosed after birth. Cleft lips require 
surgical intervention before 3 months, whereas cleft palate surgery 
should happen before the child reaches 12 months old. Cleft lip 
and palate can affect feeding and speech, but also hearing. To aid 
prevention of cleft lip and palate maternal dietary folic acid is 
recommended (see also spina bifida, Chapter 15).
Foregut abnormalities
Abnormalities in development of the foregut can include stenosis 
and atresia at various points along its length, and hypertrophy of 
the pylorus of the stomach. Depending upon the point of restric­
tion projectile vomiting can be a symptom, and the presence or 
absence of bile in the vomit can help diagnose the location.
The respiratory tract forms as a bud from the foregut, so 
a tracheoesophageal fistula can form (Figure 33.4). The most 
common variant sees the proximal oesophagus end blindly and the 
trachea connected to the distal oesophagus. There are many other 
variations and frothy oral secretions are often a symptom. Surgery 
is required.
A congenital hiatal hernia is caused by the oesophagus not 
lengthening fully, preventing the diaphragm from forming nor­
mally and pulling the top of the stomach up into the thorax. This 
can affect the development of respiratory structures, and occurs in 
varying severity.
Midgut abnormalities
A remnant of the vitelline duct that connected the yolk sac to the 
midgut may persist as an ileal diverticulum (also known as Meck­
el’s diverticulum; Figure 33.5) or as a vitelline cyst (also known as 
an omphalomesenteric duct cyst) in the distal ileum. An ileal diver­
ticulum is present in around 2% of the population, but the majority 
are asymptomatic. Ulceration may form here with bleeding. If the 
vitelline duct persists as fibrous cords between the abdominal wall 
and the ileum loops of intestine may become twisted around it. 
The duct may survive as a true duct between the ileum and the 
external umbilicus.
The midgut may fail to complete its rotation or to fail to rotate 
in the normal direction during development, giving abnormal rota­
tion or reverse rotation of intestine. Abnormal rotation is caused 
by only a 90° rotation and gives a left-sided colon, whereas reverse 
rotation causes the transverse colon to lie posterior to the superior 
mesenteric artery after a 90° clockwise rotation of the midgut 
instead of the normal 270° counterclockwise rotation.
Omphalocoele (or exomphalos) is the herniation of abdominal 
contents into the umbilicus, and the contents remain covered by 
peritoneum and amnion (Figure 33.6). This can normally be diag­
nosed by antenatal ultrasound scanning. Omphalocoele is thought 
to occur as a failure of the midgut to reenter the abdominal cavity 
after the normal herniation of weeks 6–10. Omphalocoele is often 
associated with cardiac and neural tube defects, trisomy 13 and 18 
and Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome.
Hindgut abnormalities
The urorectal septum normally separates the cloaca into urogeni­
tal and hindgut spaces. If this fails to occur normally links between 
the two spaces can occur, such as a rectourethral (urorectal) fistula 
(Figure 33.7) or a rectovaginal fistula (Figure 33.8).
Anal atresia can occur, possibly as a result of interrupted blood 
supply during development. Imperforate anus may also occur if the 
cloacal membrane does not break down. There are different 
degrees of severity, and some require a colostomy whereas others 
are repairable with surgical intervention, often within 24 hours of 
birth.
Associated organs
Liver
Jaundice affects 60% of healthy newborn infants and has multiple 
causes, often categorised by age of onset. It is normally identified 
through the infant’s skin colour and bilirubin levels. Most cases 
of jaundice do not need treatment, but phototherapy helps reduce 
bilirubin levels. In extreme cases an exchange transfusion is 
necessary.
Pancreas
Due to abnormalities in the rotation of the ventral bud pancreatic 
tissue can end up surrounding the duodenum. This is called an 
annular pancreas. It is possible that this tissue can constrict the 
duodenum and cause a complete blockage. Early signs can include 
polyhydramnios. It is normally treated with surgery.
Spleen
Splenic lobulation and an accessory spleen are relatively common. 
Rarer conditions include a wandering spleen and polysplenia (mul­
tiple accessory spleens).
Splenogonadal fusion, a very rare developmental anomaly, 
results from the abnormal fusion of the splenic and gonadal pri­
mordia during prenatal development.
Hyposplenism (reduced splenic function) may occur because of 
a congenital failure of the spleen to form. Affected individuals are 
at increased risk of bacterial sepsis.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
76  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
34
Urinary system
Figure 34.2
The mesonephric forms functional nephrons, but all degenerate 
in the 3rd month. The mesonephric duct and tubules of the
mesonephros form parts of the male reproductive system
Figure 34.1
The mesonephros forms as the pronephros
degenerates in week 4
Figure 34.4
The definitive kidney forms from the
ureteric bud and the metanephric cap
Figure 34.7
The collecting system of the adult
kidney forms from the ureteric bud
Figure 34.6
The development of a nephron in the
metanephros
Figure 34.8
A male bladder, ureters, urethra and prostate gland
Figure 34.5
The ureteric bud branches, and the metanephric
blastema caps these branches. The ureteric bud
will form the urine collecting system, and the 
metanephric cap will form the nephrons, along 
with capillaries from the aorta
Figure 34.3
The metanephros begins as the
ureteric bud in week 5
Mesonephric duct
Pronephros
Mesonephros
Nephrogenic cord
Cloaca
Metanephric
cap
Gut tube
Metanephros
Somite
Mesonephrenic
duct
Mesonephros
Gonadal ridge
Major calyx
Ureteric
bud
Metanephric cap
Ureteric bud
(branch)
Bowman’s capsule
(forming)
Bowman’s capsule
(forming)
Capillary
Collecting duct
Collecting tubule
Glomerulus
Ureter
Ureters enter
the bladder
Prostate gland
Bladder
Urethra
Renal pelvis
Ureter
Calyces
Time period: day 21 to birth
Introduction
The development of the urinary system is closely linked with that 
of the reproductive system. They both develop from the intermedi­
ate mesoderm, which extends on either side of the aorta and forms 
a condensation of cells in the abdomen called the urogenital ridge. 
The ridge has two parts: the nephrogenic cord and the gonadal ridge 
(see Figure 36.2).
Kidneys
Three structures involved in kidney development grow from inter­
mediate mesoderm in an anterior to posterior sequence, termed the 
pronephros, mesonephros and metanephros.

Urinary system  Systems development  77
The pronephros appears in the third week in the neck region of 
the embryo and disappears a week later. In humans this is a primi­
tive, non-functional kidney that consists of vestigial nephrons 
joined to an unbranched nephric duct.
Mesonephros
Appearing in the fourth week the first functional kidney unit, the 
mesonephros, forms as the pronephros begins to regress (Figures 
34.1 and 34.2). The mesonephric ducts (Wolffian ducts) are epithe­
lia-lined tubes that form in the intermediate mesoderm and extend 
caudally to the cloaca. They stimulate formation of the mesone­
phros itself as mesonephric tubules (different to the ducts) from the 
mesenchyme. The tissue of the mesonephros appears initially as a 
segmented structure along the mesonephric duct.
Renal corpuscles develop from mesonephric tubules (Bowman’s 
capsule) and capillaries from the dorsal aortae (glomerulus). At the 
lateral end the tubules join the mesonephric duct. The duct dis­
charges into the cloaca where the bladder will form. The mesone­
phros starts to produce urine at about 6 weeks but degenerates 
almost completely between weeks 7 and 10.
The mesonephric ducts contribute to the ducts of the male 
reproductive system, but regress in the female foetus (see Chap­
ter 36).
Metanephros
The third renal structure that develops will finally become the 
adult kidney. It starts to appear at the beginning of the fifth week 
as a bud from the caudal end of the mesonephric duct, called the 
ureteric bud (Figures 34.3 and 34.4).
The bud branches and develops into the collecting parts of the 
adult kidney: the ureter, renal pelvis, calyses and collecting tubules. 
The bud grows into surrounding intermediate mesoderm and 
induces the cells in that region (the metanephric blastema) to form 
a metanephric cap upon the ureteric bud.
As the ureteric bud forms collecting tubules, cells of the metane­
phric cap form nephrons that link to the collecting tubules. Recip­
rocal interactions between the buds and the caps initiate and 
maintain this development (Figure 34.5).
Capillaries grow into the Bowman’s capsule from the dorsal 
aortae and convolute to form the glomeruli (Figure 34.6). These 
functional renal units produce urine from week 12 onwards.
The formation of nephrons continues until birth when there are 
approximately 1 million nephrons in each kidney. Infant kidneys 
are lobulated because of the branching of the calyces (Figure 34.7), 
but further growth and elongation of the nephrons after birth 
pushes out the kidney and the lobulation disappears.
Blood supply
The location of the metanephros changes during development 
from the level of the pelvis, through growth of the embryo and 
migration of the kidneys, to the lumbar region. They also rotate 
medially in ascent. As they ascend, a series of blood vessels from 
either the common iliac arteries or aorta generate and degenerate 
to continually supply the kidneys. Usually, the most cranial remain 
and become the renal arteries.
Bladder and urethra
In week 4 the cloaca is split into the ventral urogenital sinus and 
the dorsal anal canal by the urorectal septum (see Figure 31.5).
The urogenital sinus can be split into a further three parts. The 
top part is the biggest and becomes the bladder, the middle part 
forms the urethra in the female pelvis and the prostatic and 
membranous urethra in the male (Figure 34.8), and the lowest 
part forms the penile urethra in the male and the vestibule in the 
female. The allantois also contributes to the upper parts of the 
bladder.
The mesonephric ducts become incorporated into the posterior 
wall of the bladder. The openings of the mesonephric ducts and 
ureters enter the bladder separately. Remember that the ureters 
form from the metanephric ducts. The ureters move anteriorly 
whereas the mesonephric ducts move posteriorly and become the 
ejaculatory ducts in the male pelvis.
The specialised transitional epithelium of the bladder develops 
from the endoderm of the urogenital sinus.
The ventral surface of the cloaca (which becomes the urogenital 
sinus) is continuous with the allantois, which degenerates after 
birth to form the urachus and eventually the median umbilical liga­
ment (an embryological remnant with no clinical significance). The 
medial umbilical ligaments are the remnants of the umbilical arter­
ies, which are a little lateral to the urachus.
Clinical relevance
Incomplete division of the ureteric bud can lead to supernumerary 
kidneys and, more commonly, supernumerary ureters.
Kidney cysts form when the developing nephrons fail to connect 
to a collecting tubule in development, or the collecting ducts fail 
to develop. There are dominant and recessive forms of polycystic 
kidneys. The recessive form is more progressive and often results 
in renal failure in childhood.
Balance of fluid in the amnion is vital in the development of the 
embryo. If urine is not being produced there is a reduction in the 
amniotic fluid and oligohydramnios develops. This can be a 
symptom of bilateral renal agenesis, in which both kidneys fail to 
form. This is lethal. Unilateral renal agenesis generally causes no 
symptoms.
Accessory renal arteries are quite common, especially on the left 
and often are only seen during a surgical procedure as they are 
asymptomatic. They enter the kidney at the superior and inferior 
poles. Abnormal rotation or location of the kidneys may be found 
in a patient, and they may fail to ascend into the abdomen. The 
inferior poles of the left and right kidneys can fuse, forming a 
horseshoe kidney. In this case the kidney cannot ascend as it gets 
snagged on the inferior mesenteric artery.
Bladder defects may occur, such as exstrophy in which part of 
the ventral bladder wall is present outside of the abdominal wall. 
A urachal cyst, fistula or sinus can form if the degeneration of the 
allantois is not completed.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
78  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
35
Reproductive system: ducts and genitalia
Figuer 35.1
The mesonephric and paramesonephric ducts at the indifferent stage
Figure 35.3
During the development of the female 
reproductive system the paramesonephric 
ducts form the uterovaginal primordium, 
and the mesonephric duct degenerates
Figure 35.6
The male reproductive ducts form from the
mesonephric duct. The paramesonephric
duct has degenerated
Figure 35.7
The ducts of the adult male reproductive system
Figure 35.8
Development of female external genitalia
Figure 35.9
Development of male external genitalia
Figure 35.4
Sinovaginal bulbs form where the uterovaginal
primordium meets the urogenital sinus. The
vagina will form from both these structures
Figure 35.5
The adult female reproductive system
Sinovaginal
bulbs
Urogenital
sinus
Figure 35.2
The mesonephric and paramesonephric ducts at the indifferent stage
Somite
Mesonephric duct
Paramesonephric
duct
Nephrogenic cord
Gonadal ridge
Mesonephric duct
Paramesonephric
duct
Gonads
Mesonephros
Bladder
Medial section
Vas deferens
Urethra
Testes
Epididymis
Prostate
Ejaculatory
duct
Bulbourethral
glands
Seminal
vesicles
Uterus
Uterine tube
Ovary
Vagina
Paramesonephric
duct
Paramesonephric
duct
Uterovaginal
primordium
Rectum
Mesonephric duct
degenerating
Mesonephric duct
= vas deferens
Seminiferous tubules
Genital tubercle
Developing glans
of clitoris
Labia minora
Clitoris
Urethral opening
Vestibule
Vaginal opening
(hymen)
Labia minora
Labia majora
Labia majora
Urethral groove
Primordial phallus
Labioscrotal swellings
Urogenital membrane
Urogenital folds
Anus
Indifferent stage
(weeks 4–7)
Around
11 weeks
12 weeks
Around
11 weeks
12 weeks
Indifferent stage
(weeks 4–7)
Genital tubercle
Epithelial cord growing
inwards to meet the urethra
Glans
Penis
Urethral groove
Scrotum
Scrotal raphe
External urethral
opening
Midline raphe
Primordial phallus
Labioscrotal swellings
Urogenital membrane
Urogenital folds
Anus
Cortical cords
Uterovaginal primordium

Reproductive system: ducts and genitalia  Systems development  79
Time period: day 35 to postnatal 
development
Introduction
The reproductive systems develop from a series of epithelial cell-
lined ducts, derived from mesoderm. The initial stage of genital 
development is the same for both sexes up to week 7, and is called 
the indifferent stage.
Ducts
The indifferent stage involves the mesonephric ducts (or Wolffian 
ducts) from the developing urinary system and the paramesone­
phric ducts (or Müllerian ducts), named because of their location 
lateral to the mesonephric ducts (Figures 35.1 and 35.2). The para­
mesonephric ducts form from longitudinal invaginations of the 
surface epithelium of the gondal ridge.
Female
The paramesonephric ducts descend, meet in the midline and fuse 
in the pelvic region to form the uterovaginal primordium (Figure 
35.3). This bulges into the dorsal wall of the developing urogenital 
sinus (see Chapters 31 and 34) but does not break the wall. The 
bulge forms the paramesonephric tubercle (or sinus tubercle, or 
Müller tubercle).
The paramesonephric ducts open into the peritoneal cavity, and 
the free unfused cranial ends become the uterine tubes. The uterus 
forms from the midline uterovaginal primordium.
The paramesonephric tubercle induces the urogenital sinus to 
form 2 outgrowths of cells within its lumen. These outgrowths 
proliferate and form the sinovaginal bulbs, which fuse and form the 
vaginal plate (Figure 35.4). This will canalise to form a hollow core, 
which is completed by the fifth month.
The inferior part of the vagina probably forms from the vaginal 
plate, and the superior part from uterovaginal primordium. The 
vagina is separated from the urogenital sinus by the hymen.
The female reproductive system (Figure 35.5) is likely to grow 
from 2 tissue origins: the lining of the lower portion of the vagina 
is endodermal and the upper portion, fornices and uterus are 
mesodermal. The muscle and connective tissues of the vagina and 
uterus are derived from the surrounding mesenchyme.
The mesonephric ducts degenerate, although remnants may 
remain.
Male
Mesonephric ducts become the efferent ductules and epididymis of 
the testes, the ductus deferens (or vas deferens) and the ejaculatory 
duct (Figures 35.6 and 35.7).
The seminal vesicles form as an outgrowth from the ductus 
deferens, whereas the prostate gland arises from numerous out­
growths from the urethra. The endodermal cells of the urethra 
differentiate to become the glandular tissue of the prostate gland, 
and the surrounding mesenchyme forms the smooth muscle and 
connective tissue.
Paramesonephric ducts degenerate (although remnants can 
remain).
External genitalia
Until the ninth week of development the external genitals appear 
the same for both sexes (Figures 35.8 and 35.9). You cannot see 
the difference in the sex of a developing embryo until around 11 
weeks’ gestation. To prevent mistakes made in ultrasound identi­
fication, if the sex of the foetus is required it is identified at the 
20-week scan.
During the indifferent stage, the cloacal membrane is surrounded 
by mesenchymal folds called urogenital (cloacal) folds that fuse 
ventrally into a genital tubercle. Around week 7, the urogenital 
septum splits the cloacal membrane into a ventral urogenital mem­
brane and a dorsal anal membrane.
Another pair of folds develop lateral to the urogenital folds, 
called the labioscrotal swellings. The urogenital membrane degen­
erates leaving the urogenital sinus in direct communication with 
the amniotic cavity. The genital tubercle elongates and forms the 
primordial phallus.
Female
Induced by oestrogens secreted from the placenta and foetal 
ovaries, the genital turbercle develops into the clitoris (Figure 
35.8). During the third and fourth months the clitoris is larger than 
its male counterpart. The urogenital groove remains open and 
develops into the vestibule which contains the openings of the 
vagina and urethra. The urogenital folds remain largely unfused 
(the two sides only meet posteriorly) and become the labia minora. 
The labioscrotal swellings become the labia majora.
Male
Induced by androgens secreted from the developing testes, the 
primordial phallus grows to form the penis (Figure 35.9). The 
urogenital sinus forms a groove bound laterally by the urogenital 
folds, and endodermal cells divide and line the groove which is 
now termed the urethral plate. The urethral folds eventually fuse 
on the underside (penile raphe) surrounding a tube (the spongy 
part of the urethra).
The urethra temporarily ends blindly in the anterior part of the 
penis. In the fourth month the terminal part of the urethra is 
formed when cells from the glans grow internally producing an 
epithelial cord. A lumen then forms and creates the external ure­
thral meatus. The lateral genital swellings form the scrotum and 
the visible line of fusion is the scrotal raphe.
Sex determination
The SRY gene (sex-determining region of the Y chromosome) 
encodes for a transcription factor that is expressed in the gonad 
during the indifferent stage, triggering male development. If this 
transcription factor is absent female development occurs.
Clinical relevance
Hypospadias is caused by incomplete fusion of the urethral folds 
in the male, and the urethra opens onto the ventral surface of the 
penis. Epispadias results from the genital tubercle developing in 
the area of the urorectal septum, causing the urethra to open on 
the dorsal surface of the penis. Epispadias usually occurs in males 
but can occur in females and results in a split clitoris and an 
abnormally positioned urethral opening.
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia is an enzyme deficiency causing 
the adrenal glands to fail to produce sufficient cortisol and aldos­
terone, but the body produces excess androgens. This can result in 
ambiguous genitalia development in females but will not affect 
males. Further developmental problems occur, such as precocious 
puberty.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
80  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
36
Reproductive system: gonads
Gut tube
Gonadal ridge
Primitive sex cords
Germ cells
Cortical cords
Female
Germ cells
Cortex
Medulla
Gut
Foregut
Midgut
Hindgut
Nephrogenic
cord
Gonadal
ridge
Migrating
germ cells
Figure 36.5
Route of the testes’ descent. (a) Possible ectopic 
locations and (b) the normal descent
Medullary cords
Male
Medulla
Germ cells
Cortex
Abdominal
location runs 
down to
scrotal location
Superficial
ectopic
Prepenile
Femoral
Transverse
scrotal
Perineal
(a)
(b)
Epididymis
(mesonephric duct)
Rete testis
Figure 36.1
Migration of cells from the yolk sac to the 
gonadal ridge
Figure 36.2
Migration of cells from the yolk sac to the gonadal ridge. 
Transverse section, week 5.
Note the formation of the primitive sex cords
Figure 36.3
Female gonadal development 
at about 12 weeks
Figure 36.4
Male gonadal development 
at about 12 weeks
Lung bud
Liver bud
Allantois
Cloaca
Oesophagus
Dorsal 
pancreatic
bud
Mesonephric duct
Paramesonephric
duct

Reproductive system: gonads  Systems development  81
Time period: day 30 to postnatal 
development
Introduction
In the chapter on renal development (see Chapter 34) we talked 
about the development of the gonadal ridge from intermediate 
mesoderm, an important source of cells for the reproductive system 
and the location for the beginning of the development of the 
gonads.
Gonads
Gonads are formed from three sources of cells: the intermediate 
mesoderm, the mesodermal epithelium that lines the developing 
urogenital ridge and germ cells.
Germ cells originate in the extra-embryonic endoderm of the 
yolk sac near the allantois and migrate along the dorsal mesentery 
of the hindgut to reach the gonadal ridge at the beginning of week 
5 (Figure 36.1). By the sixth week they invade the gonadal ridge 
(see Figure 34.2). Also at this time the epithelium overlying the 
mesoderm begins to proliferate, penetrating the mesoderm and 
forming cords that are continuous with the surface epithelium 
(Figure 36.2).
This indifferent gonad has a discernible external cortex and 
internal medulla. If the migrating germ cells fail to arrive the 
gonads will not develop because of the absence of reciprocal inter­
actions between germ cells and surrounding epithelia.
Female
In the early female gonad the cortex develops and the medulla 
regresses. The primitive sex cords dissociate and form irregular cell 
clusters containing germ cells (Figure 36.3). These cords and clus­
ters disappear and are replaced with blood vessels and connective 
tissue.
Surface epithelia continue to proliferate and produce a second 
wave of sex cords that remain close to the surface. In the fourth 
month of development these also dissociate and form cell clusters 
surrounding one or more germ cells. This is the primitive follicle 
and the surrounding epithelial cells develop into follicular cells (see 
Figure 8.1). Each primitive germ cell becomes an oogonium. 
Oogonia divide significantly before birth but there is no division 
postnatally.
A part of peritoneum attached to the gonad develops into the 
gubernaculum. This structure passes through the abdominal wall 
(the future inguinal canal) and attaches to the internal surface of 
the labioscrotal swellings (see Figure 35.8). The ovaries descend 
into the pelvis, and the gubernaculum becomes attached to the 
uterus. In the adult the gubernaculum remains as the round liga­
ment (passing through the inguinal canal) of the uterus and the 
ovarian ligament.
Male
The cortex regresses and the medulla develops (Figure 36.4). 
Testes develop quicker than ovaries, and the primitive sex cords 
do not degenerate but continue to grow into the medulla.
Testosterone producing cells, called Leydig cells, develop from 
mesoderm of the gonadal ridge and are located between the devel­
oping sex cords. They produce testosterone by week 8.
The primitive sex cords break up and form two networks of 
tubes: the rete testis and the seminiferous tubules. The tunica albug­
inea (thick fibrous connective tissue) develops to separate the net­
works from the surface epithelia. The rete testes are the connection 
between the seminiferous tubules and the efferent ducts of the 
testes (see Figure 7.1), which are derived from the mesonephric 
tubules (see Chapter 34).
In the fourth month the seminiferous tubules contain two 
important cell types: primitive germ cells that form spermatogo­
nia, and Sertoli cells that have support roles for the cells passing 
through spermatogenesis. The male gubernaculum runs from the 
inferior pole of the testis to the labioscrotal folds (see Figure 35.9) 
and guides the testis into the scrotum, along with the ductus defer­
ens and its blood vessels, as the foetus becomes longer and the 
pelvis becomes larger. The inguinal canal normally closes behind 
the testis, but failure of this process increases the risk of an indirect 
inguinal hernia.
Blood supply
The gonads develop in the abdomen and hence receive their blood 
supply directly from the abdominal aorta. The male arteries are 
called the testicular arteries and the female arteries the ovarian 
arteries. During the descent of the testes their blood vessels are 
pulled behind them as they pass through the inguinal canal and 
into the scrotum. The lymphatic system of both gonads also 
follows these pathways.
Clinical relevance
Undescended testes (cryptorchidism) describes the failure of the 
testes to descend normally into the scrotum by birth. This may 
occur bilaterally or unilaterally, and is more common in premature 
males. The testes may remain in the abdominal cavity, at a point 
along their normal route of descent or within the inguinal canal 
(Figure 36.5). Often, the testes will have descended to the scrotum 
by the end of the first year, but testes that remain undescended 
are likely to cause fertility problems. Undescended testes, even if 
they later descend, are linked to an increased risk of testicular 
cancer.
Hormonal imbalances can result in a varied range of develop­
mental abnormalities to the reproductive system. Chromosomal 
defects are also responsible for many genital abnormalities, often 
presenting with other congenital defects. Those with gonadal dys­
genesis have male chromosomes but no testes. Patients can have 
female external genitalia and underdeveloped female internal geni­
talia or ambiguous external genitalia and a mixture of both sexes 
internally, but are often raised as girls.
Ovarian and testicular cancers are relatively common forms of 
cancer. If testicular cancer is suspected it is often from a lump 
found in one testis and diagnosed through an ultrasound scan. It 
is important to remember that lymph drainage is to the retroperi­
toneal para-aortic lymph nodes rather than pelvic nodes, and these 
are involved in the staging of testicular cancer. Affected nodes 
must also be removed surgically together with the testis. The prog­
nosis for testicular cancers is generally good. Ovarian cancer symp­
toms are often absent and if present, unspecific. An increase in 
abdominal size and urinary problems are possible. Surgical treat­
ment is often required but because of the lack of early symptoms 
and diagnosis the prognosis is generally poor.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
82  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
37
Endocrine system
Figure 37.1
Development of the pituitary gland
Figure 37.2
Development of the adrenal glands
8 weeks
Hypophysial
diverticulum
Neurohypophysial
diverticulum
Mouth
Diencephalon
3 weeks
Week 5
Week 6
Anterior lobe
of the 
pituitary
gland
Posterior lobe
of the 
pituitary gland
Sphenoid
bone
Tongue
Brain
Secondary
palate
Adult
Sphenoid
bone
Pituitary
gland
Hypothalamus
Sympathetic
ganglia
(developing)
Foetal cortex
of the
suprarenal
gland
GI tract
Abdominal
mesenchyme
Foetal period
One year
after birth
Kidney
Kidney
Permanent cortex differentiates
to form the layers of zona 
glomerulosa, zona fasciculata
and zona reticularis
Vertebrae
Kidney
Mesenchymal cells
surround the foetal
cortex and form the
permanent cortex  
Neural crest cells
penetrate
suprarenal cortex
and form the
suprarenal gland’s 
medulla  
Week 8
Neural crest cells
migrate to 
suprarenal cortex 
from sympathetic 
ganglion  
Time period: day 24 to birth
Introduction
The glands of the endocrine system begin to form during the 
embryonic period and continue to mature during the foetal period. 
Functional development can be detected by the presence of the 
various hormones in the foetal blood, generally in the second tri­
mester of pregnancy.
The development of the gonads, pancreas, kidneys and placenta 
are covered elsewhere in this book.

Endocrine system  Systems development  83
Pituitary gland
Also known as the hypophysis, the pituitary gland develops from 
two sources. An outpocketing of oral ectoderm appears in week 3 
in front of the buccopharyngeal membrane (Figure 37.1). This 
forms the hypophysial diverticulum (or Rathke’s pouch), which will 
become the anterior lobe.
The second source is an extension of neuroectoderm from 
the diencephalon, called the neurohypophysial diverticulum (or 
infundibulum). The infundibulum grows downwards, developing 
into the posterior lobe. These two parts grow towards one another 
and by the second month the hypophysial diverticulum is isolated 
from its ectodermal origin and lies close to the infundibulum.
Growth hormone secreted by the pituitary gland can be detected 
from 10 weeks.
Hypothalamus
The hypothalamus begins to form in the walls of the diencephalon 
(see Chapter 42), with nuclei developing here that will be involved 
in endocrine activities and homeostasis.
Pineal body
The pineal body first appears as a diverticulum in the caudal part 
of the roof of the diencephalon. It becomes a solid organ as the 
cells here proliferate.
Adrenal glands
The adrenal (or suprarenal) glands develop from two cell types. 
The cells of the cortex differentiate from mesoderm of the poste­
rior abdominal wall near the site of the developing gonad (Figure 
37.2). The adrenaline and noradrenaline secreting cells of the 
medulla are derived from migrating neural crest cells that formed 
a sympathetic ganglion nearby. These cells become surrounded by 
the cell mass of the cortex.
The foetal cortex produces a steroid precursor of oestrogen that 
is converted to oestrogen by the placenta. More mesenchymal cells 
surround the foetal cortex and will become the layers of the per­
manent cortex.
The adrenal glands are exceptionally large in the foetus because 
of the size of the cortex which regresses after birth. Substances 
secreted from the adrenal glands are involved in the maturation of 
other systems of the embryo, such as the lungs and reproductive 
organs.
Thyroid gland
This is the first endocrine gland to develop, beginning at about 24 
days between the first and second pharyngeal pouches from a 
proliferation of endodermal cells of the gut tube. It begins as a 
hollow thickening of the midline where the future tongue will 
develop. It eventually becomes solid and then splits into its two 
lobes.
As the thyroid descends into the neck it remains connected to 
the tongue via the thyroglossal duct with an opening on the tongue 
called the foramen cecum. The duct degenerates between weeks 7 
and 10 and the thyroid reaches its end location anterior to the 
trachea by week 7. If parts of the duct remain the person may also 
have a pyramidal lobe. This is quite common and seen in about 
50% of the population.
C cells (or parafollicular cells) are derived from neural crest cells 
that invade the ultimobranchial body (a fifth pharyngeal pouch 
derivative; see Chapter 41).
Parathyroid glands
The inferior parathyroid glands develop from epithelium (endo­
derm) of the dorsal wing of the third pharyngeal pouch. The cells 
here move with the migration of the thymus gland into the neck 
(see Chapter 40). When this connection breaks down they become 
located on the dorsal surface of the thyroid gland.
Endoderm cells of the dorsal wing of the fourth pharyngeal arch 
begin to collect and differentiate to form the superior parathyroid 
glands (initially the superior parathyroid glands are inferior to the 
inferior parathyroid glands). These cells are associated with the 
developing thyroid gland and migrate with it, but for a shorter 
distance than the cells of the inferior parathyroid glands (see 
Chapter 41). They also rest on the dorsal surface of the thyroid, 
but generally more medially and posteriorly.
Clinical relevance
Pituitary gland
Congenital hypopituitarism is a decrease in the amount of one or 
more of the hormones secreted by the pituitary gland. Symptoms 
are wide ranging, depending upon which hormones are affected. 
The cause is often hypoplasia of the gland or complications with 
delivery. Treatment is commonly oral or injection replacement of 
the insufficient hormones.
Adrenal glands
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia is an autosomal recessive disease 
causing excessive production of steroids, with 95% of patients 
deficient in the enzyme 21-hydroxylase (required in the production 
of adrenal secretions). There are degrees of severity and this 
can cause ambiguous genitalia and infertility. Various treatment 
options are available and can include glucocorticoids, sex hormone 
replacement and genital reconstructive surgery.
Thyroid gland
Congenital hypothyroidism is a deficiency in thyroid hormone pro­
duction. Symptoms include excessive sleeping and poor feeding. 
Newborn infants are screened for this and if this deficiency is 
found treatment is a daily thyroxine tablet.
Ectopic thyroid tissue left behind during migration is relatively 
common but asymptomatic. Parts of the thyroglossal duct may 
persist and form a midline, moveable cyst in a child.
Parathyroid glands
Hypoparathyroidism is an absence of parathyroid hormone. Symp­
toms are wide ranging but often not diagnosed until 2 years of age. 
They include seizures and poor growth. Treatment includes 
vitamin D and calcium supplements.
Ectopic parathyroid tissue left behind during migration is rela­
tively common but asymptomatic. It is more common for the 
inferior parathyroid glands.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
84  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
38
Head and neck: arch I
Figure 38.1
Lateral aspect of the 4 week embryo with the
pharyngeal arches visible lying cranial to the somites
Figure 38.4
The arches appear and develop at different rates, so the first 
arches are more developed by the time the sixth arches appear.
Each arch has its own nerve, artery, connective tissue cells
and muscle cells
Figure 38.5
Structures derived from the cells of the first pharyngeal arch
Figure 38.6
Week 6. The clefts between most of the pharyngeal arches have
disappeared, but the first cleft remains as the external acoustic
meatus. The first pouch will form the pharyngotympanic tube
Figure 38.7
External acoustic meatus
(1st pharyngeal cleft)
Figure 38.2
Ventral aspect of the cranial part of the
embryo showing the structures developing
around the stomodeum, including the
first, second and third pharyngeal arches
Figure 38.3
An outline of the relationship between
each pharyngeal arch and each pharyngeal
cleft and pouch
E
N
D
O
D
E
R
M 
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
E
C
T
O
D
E
R
M
   
   
 
  
Cleft
Cleft
Pouch
Pouch
Arch
(mesenchyme)
Inside
embryo
Outside
environment
Tensor tympani
muscle
Malleus and
incus bones
Muscles of
mastication
Maxillary nerve
(CN V2)
Mandibular nerve
(CN V3)
Anterior belly of
digastric muscle
Mylohyoid muscle
Mandible
Maxilla
Head
Tail
Pharyngeal
arches
Stomodeum
Somites
Nerve
Stomodeum
Stomodeum
First arch
First cleft
First pouch
Nasal placode
Maxillary prominence
(first arch)
Mandibular prominence
(first arch)
Second arch
Third arch
Gut tube
Endoderm
Connective
tissue
Blood vessel
Muscle cells
Arch 1
Arch 2
Arch 3
Arch 4
Arch 6
Gut tube

Head and neck: arch I  Systems development  85
Time period: day 21 onwards
Introduction
Pharyngeal (or branchial) arches are paired structures that develop 
in the ventrolateral parts of the head of the embryo (Figures 38.1 
and 38.2). Six arches will form and contribute to the development 
of head and neck structures, although arch V is ignored as it fails 
to appear in human embryos. In this chapter we concentrate on 
arch I and its derivatives.
Each pharyngeal arch is a bud, or bar of mesenchymal tissue, 
with clefts separating the arches externally, and pouches separat­
ing them internally (Figure 38.3). Pharyngeal pouches develop 
internally as blebs of the foregut at the level of the pharynx.
Each pharyngeal arch consists of mesenchyme from paraxial 
and lateral plate mesoderm and receives an influx of neural crest 
cells. Neural crest cells from rhombomeres 1 and 2 (see Chapter 
43 and Figure 43.4) migrate into the first pharyngeal arch. Hox 
genes, important in the organisation of the segmentation of verte­
brates and in setting up the anteroposterior axis, are also impor­
tant in neural crest cell migration here.
Each arch has its own nerve, artery, connective tissue cells and 
muscle cells (Figure 38.4).
Arch I
In week 4 a depression in the surface ectoderm of the embryo 
forms in the future face, the stomodeum (Figure 38.2). It is continu­
ous with the gut tube and will become the mouth. It forms the 
centre of the face early in development, and surrounding it are the 
first pair of pharyngeal arches.
The first arch can be divided into a dorsal maxillary process and 
a ventral mandibular process (Figure 38.2). The mandibular 
process contains Meckel’s cartilage, which provides the horseshoe-
shaped model for the mandible to form around and later degener­
ates after contributing to the connective tissue structures of the 
first arch, such as the incus and malleus of the middle ear (see box). 
The mandible forms by intramembranous ossification, rather than 
endochondral ossification.
Note how the mandibular branch of the trigeminal nerve (CN 
V) supplies motor fibres to the muscles of mastication in the adult. 
All these structures are derived from first arch cells. The trigeminal 
nerve is the cranial nerve of the first arch and is the major sensory 
nerve of the skin of the face. Only its maxillary and mandibular 
branches (V2 and V3) supply structures derived from the first arch, 
however.
Ectoderm and endoderm from this arch also form the mucous 
membrane and glands on the anterior two-thirds of the tongue.
Cleft I
The only cleft of any embryological importance in humans is 
present in week 5 and will form the external auditory meatus of the 
ear (Figures 38.6 and 38.7). Considering that the overlap between 
arch I and II structures is at the ear (note the origins of the malleus, 
incus and stapes bones) this makes sense. The other clefts largely 
disappear.
The pharyngeal cleft has an ectodermal surface (Figure 38.3).
Pouch I
The first pharyngeal pouch becomes a lengthy ingrowth which 
becomes the tubotympanic recess (Figure 38.6). With other pha­
ryngeal structures this will form the pharyngotympanic tube. The 
first pouch extends towards the first cleft. The tubotympanic recess 
can be divided into dorsal and ventral parts, forming the middle 
ear cavity and auditory tube, respectively.
The pharyngeal pouch has an endodermal surface (Figure 38.3).
Clinical relevance
Facial abnormalities can be caused by failures of neural crest cell 
migration and are associated with other abnormalities including 
cardiac defects. Failure of neural crest cells to migrate into the 
arches can affect any of the structures that arise from pharyngeal 
arch I.
Treacher Collins syndrome is characterised by craniofacial 
abnormalities, including a cleft palate, a small mandible and mal­
formed or absent ears. Linked to a mutation on chromosome 5 it 
can be inherited but can also arise from a random mutation. This 
mutation prevents neural crest cell migration into the first pharyn­
geal arch. Deformities can vary in severity and surgery is often 
required. Hearing problems are common, as you might imagine 
given the ear structures formed by the first arch.
Robin sequence is also characterised by facial abnormalities but 
is a sequence of events rather than a genetic abnormality, and its 
cause is not completely understood. Patients show a small mandi­
ble, cleft palate and upper airway obstruction. Nasopharyngeal 
cannulation is often necessary to aid breathing and feeding. Surgi­
cal treatment is also required.
Structures formed from the first pharyngeal 
arch (Figure 38.5)
Bones
Incus, malleus, maxilla, mandible (also 
squamous part of the temporal bone, 
zygomatic bone, palatine bones)
Ligaments
Sphenomandibular ligament, anterior ligament 
of malleus
Muscles
Muscles of mastication (temporalis, masseter, 
pterygoids), anterior belly of digastric, 
mylohyoid, tensor veli palatini and tensor 
tympani
Nerve
Trigeminal nerve (CN V) (maxillary and 
mandibular branches – V2 and V3)
Blood supply
Maxillary artery (first branch from the first 
aortic arch)

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
86  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
39
Head and neck: arch II
Figure 39.1
Location of the second pharyngeal arch
Figure 39.3
Structures derived from the cells
of the second pharyngeal arch
Figure 39.4
Rapid growth of the second arch creates isolation of the second, third
and fourth pharyngeal clefts, forming a structure called the cervical sinus
Figure 39.5
Endoderm and mesoderm cells from the region of the second pharyngeal
pouch form epithelial and lymphoid tissue respectively that contribute
to the palatine tonsils
Figure 39.2
Pharyngeal arch II contains its own connective tissue, muscle and
nerve cell precursors and blood vessels
Frontalis
Auricularis
Orbicularis oculi
Orbicularis oris
Connective tissue
Aortic arch II
Cranial nerve VII
Muscle cells
Pharyngeal arch II
Endoderm
Ectoderm
Pharyngeal pouch II
Cervical sinus
Cranial nerve VII
Lesser horn of hyoid bone
Styloid process
Stylohyoid ligament
Stapes bone
Stapedius muscle
Posterior belly
of digastric 
Platysma
Pharyngeal
arch II
Buccinator
Endoderm
Mesoderm
Palatine tonsil

Head and neck: arch II  Systems development  87
Time period: day 21 onwards
Introduction
The second arch forms caudally to the first arch (Figure 39.1). 
Pharyngeal arches I and II are bigger than III and IV. Arch II 
grows rapidly and inferiorly to cover the smaller arches forming 
the operculum. This growth forms a ‘lid’ over the other arches and 
creates the smooth covering of the neck.
Arch II
Highlighting the overlap between arches I and II at the ear, the 
stapes bone is formed from the connective tissue element of the 
second arch, whereas the malleus and incus bones develop from 
the first arch. Likewise, the tensor tympani muscle of the ear forms 
from the first arch but the stapedius muscle is derived from the 
second arch.
The second arch also contributes to the bony styloid process of 
the skull, cranial parts and lesser horn (cornu) of the hyoid bone 
and the stylohyoid ligament that connects them. The remainder of 
the hyoid bone develops from the third arch, highlighting another 
overlap between arches.
The cranial nerve of the second arch is the facial nerve (CN VII; 
Figure 39.2). Consider this when looking at the anatomical route 
that CN VII neurons take in relation to the middle and inner ear 
and the styloid process. The facial nerve will innervate the muscle 
and mucosal derivatives of the second arch (e.g. the mucosa of the 
tongue).
The facial nerve is also the nerve to the muscles of facial expres­
sion, and these muscles are derived from the muscle block of the 
second arch.
The blood vessels of the pharyngeal arches are described in the 
cardiovascular chapters, and in general the second aortic arches 
are lost. The second aortic arch forms a stapedial artery that links 
internal and external carotid arteries, but normally does not persist 
beyond foetal life. The stapedial artery passes through stapes, 
forming its foramen. Of note, the middle meningeal artery is asso­
ciated with the development of the first and second aortic arches 
(see box).
Cleft II
The second pharyngeal cleft becomes isolated from the external 
environment by growth of the second arch when it forms the 
operculum. Consequently, it forms a sinus with the third and 
fourth clefts, the cervical sinus, lined with ectodermal epithelia 
(Figure 39.4).
With further growth this sinus normally disappears entirely. The 
ectoderm of the sinus is eventually involved in the epithelial cells 
of Hassall’s corpuscles found in the thymus gland.
Pouch II
The endoderm of the second pharyngeal pouch proliferates and 
pushes into the mesenchyme beneath to form lymphoid tissue. The 
palatine tonsils form as a result, with the lymphoid tissue derived 
from the mesoderm, and epithelial cell-lined crypts (Figure 39.5).
Clinical relevance
A persistent stapedial artery presents as a pulsing in the ear or 
accidentally found during surgery, but can cause hearing loss.
Pharyngeal cleft (or branchial) cysts can be found after birth, in 
which cysts are located under the platysma muscle, laterally, and 
anterior to the sternocleidomastoid muscle. The cysts commonly 
enlarge slowly and appear much later in life. The cysts have formed 
from the remnants of the pharyngeal clefts that normally combine 
to briefly create the cervical sinus. The cyst may open externally 
as a sinus.
Congenital facial paralysis is rare but results in a lack of facial 
expression and can affect lateral eye movement. Goldenhar syn­
drome affects both first and second pharyngeal arches and the 
affected individual can show facial palsy, but also malformations 
of other facial bones including the maxilla and zygomatic bones.
Structures formed from the second 
pharyngeal arch (Figure 39.3)
Bones
Stapes, styloid process of temporal bone, 
lesser horn and superior part of the body of 
the hyoid bone
Muscles
Muscles of facial expression, stapedius, 
mylohyoid, posterior belly of digastric, 
auricular, buccinator, platysma
Ligaments
Stylohyoid ligament
Nerve
Facial nerve (CN VII)
Blood supply
Hyoid artery (foetal), stapedial artery (foetal)

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
88  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
40
Head and neck: arch III
Figure 40.1
Location of the third pharyngeal arch
Figure 40.2
Pharyngeal arch III contains its own connective tissue, muscle and
nerve cell precursors and blood vessels
Figure 40.3
Structures derived from cells of the third pharyngeal arch
3rd pouch cells migrate to
posterior thyroid gland to
become inferior parathyroid
glands and thymus
Figure 40.4
Cells of the third pharyngeal pouch form the thymus and the inferior parathyroid glands
(a)
(b)
Stylopharyngeus muscle
Cranial nerve IX
Body of hyoid bone
Pharyngeal
arch III
Endoderm
Ectoderm
Pharyngeal pouch III
Pouch cells migrate
Connective tissue
Aortic arch III
Cranial nerve IX
Muscle cells
Pharyngeal arch III
Thymus
Parathyroid glands
(behind thyroid gland)
Thyroid gland

Head and neck: arch III  Systems development  89
Time period: day 28 onwards
Introduction
The third and fourth pharyngeal arches form in the fifth week 
(Figure 40.1). Both are considerably smaller than the first two 
arches and have fewer derivatives.
Arch III
The connective tissue element of the third arch will become the 
greater horn (cornu) and caudal parts of the hyoid bone (Figures 
40.2 and 40.3). The second arch formed the other parts of the 
hyoid (see Chapter 39).
The muscle element becomes the stylopharyngeus muscle, 
passing from the styloid process to the pharyngeal constrictor 
muscles. The third arch is involved in the development of pharyn­
geal structures, and its nerve is the glossopharyngeal nerve (CN 
IX). Motor fibres to the stylopharyngeus muscle are supplied by 
CN IX, and this nerve also supplies motor fibres and sensory fibres 
to the pharyngeal plexus for innervation of the muscles and 
mucosa of the pharynx.
The pharyngeal plexus forms from glossopharyngeal and vagus 
nerve (CN X) fibres. The vagus nerve is the nerve of the fourth 
and sixth arches, and the overlap between structures of the head 
and neck derived from different pharyngeal arches is apparent in 
adult anatomy.
The third aortic arches, the arteries of the third pharyngeal 
arches (one on either side of the neck), form major parts of the 
adult common and internal carotid arteries (see Figure 41.3). The 
internal carotid arteries are formed from the third aortic arch on 
either side in combination with the dorsal aortae (see box).
Cleft III
The third pharyngeal cleft is incorporated into the cervical sinus 
and eventually obliterated (see Chapter 39).
Pouch III
The endoderm lining the third pharyngeal pouch is involved in the 
development of endocrine glands in the neck. The third pouch can 
be split into a ventral wing and a dorsal wing.
Cells of the ventral parts of the left and right third pharyngeal 
arches come together and migrate caudally to form the majority 
of the thymus gland (Figure 40.4). Neural crest cells are also 
involved in development of the thymus gland, which continues to 
mature after birth.
The cells of the dorsal part of the third pouch differentiate into 
parathyroid gland cells in the sixth week, and migrate with the cells 
of the thymus gland to descend into the neck (Figure 40.4). These 
cells will form the inferior parathyroid gland and later separate 
from the thymus gland, moving dorsally to it as found in the adult.
Clinical relevance
Defects in pharyngeal arch III related development affect the 
formation of the thymus and parathyroid glands. Neural crest 
cell migration or proliferation problems may affect thymus 
development.
Congenital hypoparathyroidism is a condition in which parathy­
roid hormone (PTH) is secreted in low levels, potentially caused 
by a failure of one or more parathyroid glands to develop 
normally. Symptoms are wide ranging but often not diagnosed 
until 2 years of age, and include seizures and poor growth. Treat­
ment options include administering vitamin D and calcium 
supplements.
Ectopic parathyroid tissue left behind during migration of the 
cells of the third pouch is relatively common but asymptomatic. 
This may be more common for the inferior parathyroid gland.
Structures formed from the third 
pharyngeal arch (Figure 40.3)
Bones
Greater horn and the inferior part of the body of 
the hyoid bone
Muscles
Stylopharyngeus muscle
Nerve
Glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX)
Blood 
supply
Common carotid artery and the first part of the 
internal carotid artery

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
90  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
41
Head and neck: arches IV–VI
Laryngeal
cartilages
Superior laryngeal
nerve (CN X)
Recurrent laryngeal
nerve (CN X)
Pharyngeal
constrictor
muscles
Levator
veli palatini
muscle
Figure 41.1
Pharyngeal arches IV and VI contain their own connective 
tissue, muscle and nerve cell precursors and blood vessels
Figure 41.3
The aortic arches discussed in Chapter 27 are the arteries of the
pharyngeal arches. 
(a) The aortic arches bridge the outflow from the heart with the 
paired dorsal aortae at this stage
(b) With development some aortic arches are lost, and some
combine
(c) The recurrent laryngeal nerves of the sixth arch loop around
the ductus arteriosus (and aorta) on the left and around the
subclavian artery on the right
Figure 41.2
Structures derived from the cells of the fourth and sixth pharyngeal arches
Aortic arch IV
Superior laryngeal nerve (CN X)
Aortic arch VI
Recurrent laryngeal nerve (CN X)
Pharyngeal arch IV
Pharyngeal arch VI
(b)
Recurrent laryngeal nerves (CN X)
(a)
(c)
Dorsal
aorta
Aortic arches
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
Heart
Heart
Aortic arches
III
IV
VI
Heart
Arch of aorta
Ductus arteriosus
Pulmonary artery
Descending aorta
Internal carotid artery
External carotid artery

Head and neck: arches IV–VI  Systems development  91
Time period: day 28 onwards
Introduction
The fourth and sixth pharyngeal arches are often discussed 
together (Figure 41.1). Although separate, they are linked by the 
structures that they will form in the neck. A fifth pharyngeal arch 
forms briefly but it quickly degenerates leaving no remnants in 
humans. The fourth and sixth arches eventually fuse.
Neural crest cells from rhombomere 6 (see Chapter 43) migrate 
into the fourth pharyngeal arch (as well as the third arch, as we 
saw in Chapter 40).
The connective tissue elements of the fourth and sixth arches 
combine and fuse to form all the laryngeal cartilages, except for 
the epiglottis (Figure 41.2). Not surprisingly, the muscle cells of 
the fourth and sixth arches form the muscles of the larynx and 
pharynx, including the intrinsic muscles of the larynx (fourth 
arch), the constrictors of the pharynx (sixth arch) and one of the 
muscles of the palate (levator veli palatini, sixth arch).
From your anatomical knowledge of the pharynx and larynx 
you should already be guessing that the cranial nerve associated 
with both of these pharyngeal arches is the vagus nerve (CN X).
The fourth arch is associated with the superior laryngeal branch 
of the vagus, and the sixth arch is associated with the recurrent 
laryngeal nerve. The muscles of the sixth arch are the intrinsic 
muscles of the larynx, and these muscles receive motor innervation 
from the recurrent laryngeal nerve. The vagus nerve also contrib­
utes to the pharyngeal plexus with the glossopharyngeal nerve, 
innervating pharyngeal mucosa and musculature.
You may also recall the lengthy detour that the recurrent laryn­
geal nerve takes in the adult, descending from the neck to loop 
around the subclavian artery on the right and the arch of the 
aorta on the left, before ascending between the oesophagus and 
trachea to the larynx. The right subclavian artery forms from 
the right fourth aortic arch (this is the artery of the fourth 
pharyngeal arch) and the arch of the adult aorta forms from the 
left fourth aortic arch (Figure 41.3). The left sixth aortic arch 
forms the left pulmonary artery and its connection to the aorta: 
the ductus arteriosus. The right sixth aortic arch forms the right 
pulmonary artery but its link to the embryonic right dorsal aorta 
is lost.
The nerves form here too, at the same levels. Evidence that the 
recurrent laryngeal nerve is the nerve of the sixth arch can be found 
in the adult, as the left recurrent laryngeal nerve passes around 
the ligamentum arteriosum, the remnant of the ductus arteriosus, 
the sixth arch artery linking the left pulmonary artery with the 
aorta (Figure 41.3). The nerves are prevented from ascending fully 
into the neck as the embryo grows and lengthens by the ductus 
arteriosus on the right and the subclavian artery on the left (see 
box).
Cleft IV
The fourth pharyngeal cleft is incorporated into the cervical sinus 
with the third cleft and eventually obliterated (see Figure 39.4).
Pouch IV
From the endoderm of the fourth pharyngeal pouch the superior 
parathyroid glands form. From the fifth pouch (often considered 
part of the fourth pouch) the ultimobranchial body (or ultimopha­
ryngeal body) forms. Cells of the ultimobranchial body invade the 
thyroid gland and differentiate into the C cells (or parafollicular 
cells) which will produce calcitonin (Figure 41.3).
There is no pharyngeal pouch VI.
Clinical relevance
Congenital cricoid cartilage abnormalities tend to affect the size 
or shape of the cartilage. This can lead to congenital subglottic 
stenosis, causing difficulty in breathing, and requires surgery.
Laryngomalacia is a common congenital laryngeal abnormality 
and patients have a larynx that collapses during breathing causing 
significant breathing difficulties. Other symptoms include a noise 
that can be heard during inspiration and gastroesophageal reflux. 
In most cases as the larynx continues to develop the symptoms are 
eased and are insignificant by 2 years of age. In severe cases surgery 
may be required.
Abnormal development of pharyngeal arch IV can affect the 
parathyroid glands and subsequently the quantity of hormones 
that these cells produce. Low levels of parathyroid hormone 
(hypoparathyroidism) can result in hypocalcaemia (low serum 
calcium levels). DiGeorge syndrome is a known cause of hypopar­
athyroidism. Symptoms are wide ranging and include muscle 
cramps, pain in the face and abdomen, dry hair, nails and skin and 
weak tooth enamel. Treatment includes calcium, vitamin D and 
synthetic parathyroid hormone supplements.
Structures formed from the fourth and 
sixth pharyngeal arches (Figure 41.2)
Cartilage	 Thyroid, cricoid, arytenoid, corniculate, cuneiform
Muscles	
Arch IV: cricothyroid, levator veli palatini and 
the pharyngeal constrictors
Arch VI: intrinsic muscles of the larynx (except 
cricothyroid)
Nerve	
Arch IV: superior laryngeal, branch of the vagus 
nerve
Arch VI: recurrent laryngeal, branch of the vagus 
nerve
At this level in the embryo we see differences in 
the cardiovascular system develop between left 
and right sides.
Blood	
Arch IV: left, aortic arch; right, subclavian artery
Arch VI: left, pulmonary artery and ductus 
arteriosus; right, pulmonary artery

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
92  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
42
Central nervous system
Mantle layer
(grey matter)
Figure 42.1
The development of a section of the neural tube into the spinal cord and spinal nerves
Figure 42.2
The spinal cord and the vertebral column are the same length in the foetus, but by adulthood the spinal cord only reaches as far as the L1 or L2 vertebrae
Figure 42.3
The cranial end of the neural tube at
28 days and the three vesicles
Figure 42.4
The cranial end of the neural tube has begun to fold
by week 4
Figure 42.5
The cranial parts of the central nervous system
in week 5
Marginal layer
(white matter)
Neural tube
Neurocoel (future
central canal)
Ventricular
zone
(proliferating
neuroepithelial
cells)
Efferent fibres from 
ventral root ganglion
Marginal layer
Roof plate
Basal plate (mantle layer)
Floor plate
Sulcus
limitans
Afferent fibres from
dorsal root ganglion
Alar plate (mantle layer)
Spinal cord
Foetus
Prosencephalon
Mesencephalon
Rhombencephalon
Spinal cord
Newborn
L3
L1/
L2
Adult
Vertebrae
White matter
Central canal
Grey matter
Dorsal root
Dorsal root ganglion
Spinal nerve
Ventral root
Ventral (motor) horn
Metencephalon
Pontine flexure
Spinal cord
Cranial end of neural
tube expands, folds
Rhombencephalon
Neural tube
Prosencephalon
Telencephalon
Diencephalon
Mesencephalon
Myelencephalon
Cephalic
flexure
Mesencephalon

Central nervous system  Systems development  93
Time period: day 22 to postnatal 
development
Introduction
Ectoderm is induced by the notochord to form neuroectoderm 
during neurulation (see Chapter 15). This neuroectoderm in turn 
produces the neural tube and neural crest cells from which the 
central nervous system develops. The central nervous system com­
prises the brain and spinal cord.
Spinal cord
The caudal end of the neural tube continues to elongate and form 
the spinal cord. A lumen through the centre of the spinal cord, the 
neurocoel (or neural canal), forms by week 9 and will become the 
central canal. The neurocoel is lined with thickening layers of 
neuroepithelia known as the ventricular zone (Figure 42.1) or 
ependymal layer.
Cells of the ventricular zone differentiate into neuroblasts and 
glioblasts (or spongioblasts). Glioblasts will form supporting cells, 
or neuroglial cells. Neuroblasts become neurons and migrate out 
to form the mantle (or intermediate) layer of cell bodies, which will 
form the grey matter. Surrounding this layer is the outer marginal 
layer that carries the axons from the neurons in the mantle layer, 
and will become white matter (Figure 42.1).
Dorsal root ganglia (also known as spinal ganglia) outside the 
neural tube formed from neural crest cells extend central processes 
which grow into the neural tube. Some form synapses with neurons 
in the mantle layer (grey matter) while other central processes 
ascend within the marginal layer (white matter).
Further distinction of the mantle layer occurs as the ventral area 
becomes the basal plates and the dorsal part becomes the alar 
plates, forming the ventral motor horns and dorsal sensory horns, 
respectively (Figure 42.1). They are divided by a groove, the sulcus 
limitans. Between these horns the intermediate horn develops con­
taining neurons of the sympathetic nervous system between spinal 
levels T1 and L2 (or L3).
Spinal nerves form as the axons of dorsal and ventral roots from 
the spinal cord combine, with input from peripheral processes of 
the dorsal root ganglia and, where level appropriate, input from 
the autonomic nervous system.
In the embryo the spinal cord reaches to the caudal end of the 
vertebral column. Towards the end of the embryonic period the 
coccygeal vertebrae are reduced and the vertebral column grows 
rapidly causing the tail of the spinal cord to extend to the level of 
the L3 vertebra by birth, and by adulthood commonly only reaches 
to between L1 and L2 (Figure 42.2).
Brain
Three vesicles develop in the cranial end of the neural tube (Figure 
42.3). The distinct alar and basal plates we saw in the spinal cord 
are retained as the hindbrain and midbrain develop, whereas in 
the forebrain the dorsal alar plates expand and the ventral basal 
plates degenerate.
The vesicles become the prosencephalon (forebrain), mesen­
cephalon (midbrain) and rhombencephalon (hindbrain). As the vesi­
cles grow the tube folds (Figure 42.4). In the fifth week the three 
vesicles become five, with the forebrain and hindbrain both split­
ting into two, forming the telecephalon and diencephalon from the 
forebrain, and from the hindbrain the metencephalon and the 
myelencephalon form (Figure 42.5).
The dorsal telencephalon of the forebrain will grow rapidly to 
form the cerebral cortex, and the ventral telencephalon will become 
the basal ganglia.
The diencephalon will form the optic cup and stalk, pituitary 
gland, thalamus, hypothalamus and pineal body.
The caudal part of the hindbrain, the myelencephalon, becomes 
the medulla oblongata. The metecephalon develops into the pons 
ventrally and the cerebellum dorsally. The midbrain, together with 
the pons and medulla oblongata form the brainstem.
Ventricles of the brain form from the lumen of the neural tube. 
Ventricles contain cerebrospinal fluid produced by choroid plex­
uses. Lateral ventricles of the telencephalon link with the third 
ventricle of the diencephalon, which is connected to the fourth 
ventricle of the myelencephalon through the cerebral aqueduct of 
the mesencephalon. The fourth ventricle is continuous with the 
central canal of the spinal cord.
Neural crest cells
Neural crest cells migrate to both sides of the spinal cord and form 
the dorsal root ganglia (sensory ganglia) of the spinal nerves. In 
the hindbrain area they contribute to cranial nerve ganglia, sensory 
ganglia of CN V, VII, VIII, IX and X.
Meninges
Of the connective tissue layers that surround the brain, the pia 
mater and arachnoid mater are mesoderm and neural crest cell 
derived, whereas the dura mater is only mesoderm derived.
Clinical relevance
Encephalocoele is the herniation of dura, potentially containing 
brain tissue, through a midline skull defect, caused by incomplete 
closure of the neural tube. Repaired surgically, recovery depends 
upon whether or not neural tissue was enclosed in the 
encephalocoele.
Anencephaly describes incomplete closure at the cranial end of 
the neural tube, resulting in a complete failure of forebrain forma­
tion. This is lethal and most infants with this condition are 
stillborn.
Hydrocephalus is a condition resulting from excess cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) resulting from a blockage of flow, failure to reabsorb 
or increased production. Conditions include increasing head cir­
cumference and vomiting, but ventricular dilation can be identified 
before symptoms become visible. Treatment options include 
inserting a shunt to open a blockage or to redirect the CSF to an 
area where it can be reabsorbed.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
94  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
43
Peripheral nervous system
Figure 43.1
Neural crest cells become the neurons of the dorsal root ganglia
Figure 43.4
The rhombomeres of the developing 
brain are involved in the development
of motor neurones of some of the
cranial nerves
Figure 43.3
The parts of the grey matter of the spinal cord at a lumbar level
Dorsal (sensory) root
Ventral (motor) root 
Dorsal root ganglion
(neural crest cells)
Spinal nerve
Grey ramus
communicans
(purple fibres)
White ramus
communicans
(blue-grey fibres)
Alar plate
28 days
23 days
22 days
DRG
DRG
Neural crest cells
Neural tube
Neural crest cells
Neural tube
Rhombomeres
Pharyngeal
arches
Cranial nerves
r1
r2
r3
r4r5
r6r7
r8
White matter
Dorsal (sensory) horn
Ventral (motor) horn
Lateral or intermediate
(sympathetic motor) horn
Figure 43.2
Neural crest cells also form the sympathetic trunks
Sympathetic ganglion
Sympathetic ganglion

Peripheral nervous system  Systems development  95
Time period: day 27 to birth
Introduction
The peripheral nervous system develops in tandem with the brain 
and spinal cord. It connects the central nervous system to struc­
tures of the body as they form and includes the spinal nerves, 
cranial nerves and autonomic nervous system.
This process begins with neurulation (see Chapter 15), when 
ectoderm is induced by the notochord to form neuroectoderm. 
This neuroectoderm in turn produces neuroblasts (primitive 
neurons) and neural crest cells.
Spinal nerves
Neural crest cells migrate out from the neural tube, passing 
towards multiple targets throughout the embryo (see Chapter 16). 
Some neural crest cells only migrate a little way from the develop­
ing spinal cord, collect together and differentiate to form neurons 
of the dorsal root ganglia (Figure 43.1). Located bilaterally to the 
spinal cord, the dorsal root ganglia send afferent processes back 
towards the alar plate of the spinal cord (see Figure 42.1), eventu­
ally passing to the dorsal horn. The dorsal root ganglia also send 
processes out to run alongside processes of neurons of the ventral 
root. Their combined bundle of neuronal axons become the spinal 
nerve.
Dorsal root ganglia contain the cells bodies of sensory neurons 
from afferent spinal nerve fibres. It could be considered that these 
ganglia are grey matter of the spinal cord that have moved out to 
the peripheral nervous system.
Neurons in the (ventral) basal plates of the developing spinal 
cord send fibres outwards from the cord to meet the fibres from 
the dorsal root ganglion. Fibres grouping to leave the spinal cord 
form the ventral horn, the motor fibres of the spinal nerves (Figures 
42.1 and 43.1).
The mixed collection of motor and sensory fibres split again 
almost as soon as they meet, forming two bundles of fibres: the 
dorsal ramus and the ventral ramus. The dorsal ramus passes dor­
sally to the deep axial musculature of the back, the synovial ver­
tebral joints and the skin of this region. The ventral ramus sends 
fibres to the ventral and lateral parts of the trunk and to the upper 
and lower limbs, depending upon the spinal level.
Neural crest cells migrate to the new axons that extend away 
from the central nervous system and wrap themselves around 
them, differentiating to become neurolemmal (Schwann) cells. 
Myelin within these cells causes the fibres to appear white. This is 
apparent from around week 20.
Dermatomes
Spinal nerves develop at the level of each somite, and the seg­
mented organisation of embryonic development can be seen in the 
adult segmented pattern of cutaneous dermatomes (see Chap­
ter 20).
A dermatome is a region of skin that is predominantly supplied 
by the sensory component of one spinal nerve. The dermatomes 
are named according to the spinal nerve that supplies them (see 
Figure 20.5).
Autonomic nervous system
Some neural crest cells migrating out from the neural tube collect 
dorsolaterally to the dorsal aorta in the thorax. They differentiate 
and become chains of sympathetic ganglia connected by longitu­
dinal nerve fibres running cranially and caudally (Figure 43.2). 
Neuroblasts migrate from the ganglia cranially into the neck and 
caudally into the abdomen and pelvis to complete the sympathetic 
trunks.
Other neural crest cells migrate ventrally to the aorta to form 
the preaortic ganglia such as the coeliac and mesenteric 
ganglia, while others migrate towards organs such as the lungs, 
heart and gastrointestinal tract to form sympathetic organ 
plexuses.
Sympathetic neurons of the developing spinal cord in the inter­
mediolateral cell column (intermediate or lateral horn) of thora­
columbar segments T1–L2 (Figure 43.3) send axons out from the 
spinal cord through the ventral root to each trunk ganglion. These 
axons form the white ramus communicans passing between the 
spinal nerve and the sympathetic ganglion (Figure 43.2). These 
preganglionic sympathetic fibres either synapse with neurons in the 
ganglion, ascend or descend to synapse in a ganglion of a different 
level, or pass through the ganglion/ganglia without synapsing to 
run towards preaortic (or prevertebral) ganglia or organs as 
splanchnic nerves.
Postganglionic fibres pass onwards to viscera or group together 
to pass back to a spinal nerve as a grey ramus communicans (unmy­
elinated). Grey ramus communicans are found at all spinal levels 
and allow postganglionic fibres to pass with other nerves to reach 
structures, for example in the limbs.
Neurons of the parasympathetic nervous system form in the 
brainstem and sacral part of the spinal cord. The parasympathetic 
nuclei in the brainstem contribute preganglionic fibres to the ocu­
lomotor (CN III), facial (CN VII), glossopharyngeal (CN IX) and 
vagus (CN X) nerves. Preganglionic parasympathetic fibres of the 
sacral spinal cord form pelvic splanchnic nerves.
Postganglionic parasympathetic neurons differentiate from 
neural crest cells and can be found either in ganglia or near the 
viscera.
Cranial nerves
Cranial nerves develop in a similar way to the spinal nerves, with 
motor nuclei differentiating from the neuroepithelium and sensory 
nuclei forming outside the brain.
The olfactory nerve (CN I) and the optic nerve (CN II) are 
linked with the telencephalon and diencephalon, respectively. The 
olfactory nerve connects to the olfactory bulb, a growth from the 
prosencephalon. The oculomotor nerve (CN III) originates from 
the dorsal midbrain (mesencephalon) and the trochlear nerve (CN 
IV) from the ventral midbrain (metencephalon). Similarly, CN 
V–VIII arise from the metencephalon and CN IX–XII arise from 
the myelencephalon.
Cranial nerves IV–VII and IX–XII develop from the hindbrain 
which has been divided into eight sections called rhombomeres by 
day 25 (Figure 43.4). Rhombomeres appear ventral to the cephalic 
flexure by day 29 and will form the motor neurons for these cranial 
nerves (note that these are the cranial nerves with motor function, 
hence the skipping of CN VIII).
Neural crest cells form the parasympathetic neurons for CN III, 
VII, IX and X.
The development and structure of the cranial nerves is very 
similar to the spinal nerves, but remember that not all cranial 
nerves carry both sensory and motor neurons.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
96  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
44
The ear
Figure 44.1
The ear begins to form as an otic placode
(a thickening) in the ectoderm late in the
third week, and invaginates as the otic pit
during the fourth week of development. 
The otic pit becomes internalised as the 
otic vesicle
Figure 44.4
The formation of the ossicles, the inner ear, the external acoustic meatus, and the pharyngotympanic tube of the ear
Figure 44.5
The ossicles of the middle ear (adult)
Figure 44.6
Formation of the auricle
Figure 44.3
The vestibulocochlear apparatus (adult)
Inner ear – anterolateral view
Utricle
Ampulla
Saccule
Cochlea
Superior or
anterior
SC canal
Lateral
SC canal
Posterior
SC canal
Endolymphatic sac
Figure 44.2
The parts of the otic vesicle as it develops structure
Neural tube
Otic placode
Notochord
Dorsal aorta
Hindbrain
Otic pit
Otic vesicle
Mesenchyme
Primordia of
basilar membrane
Scala tympani
Scala media
(cochlear duct)
Primordia of
vestibular membrane
Scala vestibuli
28 days
32 days
5 weeks
(a)
(b)
(a)
Hillocks
Hillocks
(b)
(c)
(d)
(c)
Otic vesicle
Pharyngeal
pouch I
Ossicles
Pharyngeal 
cleft I
External
acoustic
meatus
Incus
Stapes
Brain
Semicircular canals
Cochlear
Pharyngotympanic
tube
Malleus
Endodermal
epithelium
Incus
Malleus
Stapes
1
Oval window
Tympanic
cavity
Tympanic
membrane
Helix
Anti-tragus
Tragus
Lobule
1
1
2
2
2
3
3
3
4
4
4
5
5
5
6
6
6
Anti-helix
Scapha
Time period: 22 day to birth
Internal ear
The function of the internal ear is to receive sound waves and 
interpret them into nerve signals, and to identify changes in 
balance.
Membranous labyrinth
At about 22 days, a thickening of ectoderm on either side of the 
hindbrain develops; this is the otic placode (Figure 44.1). The 
placode invaginates forming a pit that later becomes separated 
from the ectoderm, forming the otic vesicle (or otocyst) deep to the 
ectoderm. The otic vesicle is surrounded by mesoderm that will 

The ear  Systems development  97
become the otic capsule, the cartilaginous precursor of the bony 
labyrinth.
The upper parts of the otic vesicle will develop into the utricle, 
semicircular canals and endolymphatic duct (the part of the 
inner ear involved in balance). The lower portion will become 
the saccule, which develops a tubular outgrowth that becomes 
the cochlear duct (the part of the inner ear involved in 
hearing).
Mesenchyme surrounding the cochlear duct becomes cartilagi­
nous and two vacuoles appear within the cartilage. These vacuoles 
become the scala tympani and scala vestibuli. Positioned between 
them the cochlear duct (the scala media) remains, separated from 
the other spaces by membranes of mesenchyme (Figure 44.2). The 
spaces fill with perilymphatic fluid.
In the sixth week the cochlear duct grows into the surrounding 
mesenchyme, spiralling. It completes 2.5 spirals by the end of week 
8 and is fully developed by the end of the second trimester (Figure 
44.3).
Epithelial cells of the cochlear duct differentiate into the sensory 
cells and tectorial membrane of the auditory system, collectively 
called the Organ of Corti. These cells transmit auditory signals to 
the vestibulocochlear nerve (CN VIII). This space is also filled with 
endolymph that functions as a mechano-electric transducer for 
sound waves.
The foetus can hear external sounds by week 20.
The saccule and utricle remain connected to the cochlear duct 
via the ductus reuniens and the utriculosaccular duct, respectively. 
The saccule develops a group of sensory cells involved in translat­
ing vertical movements of the head.
Three flattened bud outgrowths protrude from the utricle to 
form three semicircular canals, each with an ampulla at one end, 
filled with endolymph. In each ampulla is a collection of sensory 
cells that aid balance. The utricle is involved in detecting horizon­
tal movements of the head (Figures 44.3 and 44.4).
Bony labyrinth
The cartilage that surrounds the membranous labyrinth is ossified 
(weeks 16–24) and creates a perilymph-filled protective space for 
the inner ear. This area is connected to the subarachnoid space at 
the base of the brain through the cochlear aqueduct in the temporal 
bone. This is the petrous part of the temporal bone and is one of 
the hardest bones in the body. The vestibule of the inner ear con­
tains the oval window, which is in contact with the stapes bone of 
the middle ear (Figures 44.4 and 44.5).
Middle ear
The middle ear consists of the tympanic cavity, the pharyngotym­
panic tube (or auditory or Eustachian tube) and the ossicles 
(Figures 44.4 and 44.5).
Endoderm of the first pharyngeal pouch (see Chapter 38) 
extends laterally and on contact with the ectoderm of the first 
pharyngeal cleft forms the tubotympanic recess. The distal part of 
the tubotympanic recess becomes the tympanic cavity and the 
proximal part becomes the pharyngotympanic tube (Figure 44.4).
Mesenchyme of the first and second pharyngeal arches develops 
into the ossicles. Specifically, the malleus and incus are derived 
from the first arch and the stapes from the second arch. These 
bones remain snug in surrounding tissue until the eighth month 
when the tissue dissipates and they become suspended within 
the developing cavity. As the tissue regresses the endoderm recedes 
but continues to line the cavity as a mesentery. The ligaments 
that will help to hold the ossicles in place develop from this 
mesentery.
Organisation of development of the muscles of the middle ear 
corresponds to the development of the bones. The tensor tympani 
muscle which inserts on to the malleus develops from the first 
pharyngeal arch and is innervated by the mandibular branch of 
the trigeminal nerve. The stapedius muscle which inserts on to the 
stapes develops from the second pharyngeal arch and is innervated 
by the facial nerve (see Chapters 38 and 39).
External ear
The external ear begins internally with the tympanic membrane, 
also known as the eardrum. This is the junction at which the 
internal endoderm-lined tympanic cavity meets the ectoderm of 
the external auditory meatus. Squeezed between these two layers 
is a layer of connective tissue (Figure 44.4).
Developing from the first pharyngeal cleft, the external auditory 
meatus retains cells in its proximal part which form a plug until 
the seventh month. This disintegrates leaving a layer of epithelia 
to form part of the tympanic membrane.
The auricle (or pinna) develops from six swellings or hillocks 
(hillocks of Hiss) formed by proliferating cells which can be seen 
from week 6. Hillocks 1–3 are from the first pharyngeal arch, and 
4–6 are from the second arch. The developing auricle begins in a 
location caudal to the mandible, and with directional embryonic 
growth its position ascends to approximately the level of the eyes 
(Figure 44.6).
Clinical relevance
Many factors affecting the developing ear will result in deafness. 
Most are caused by genetic factors but some environmental factors 
are involved. The rubella virus can affect the development of the 
organ of Corti if infected in the seventh to eighth week of develop­
ment. Other factors known to cause deafness are cytomegalovirus, 
hyperbilirubinemia (jaundice) and bacterial meningitis.
External ear defects are quite common as the fusion of the 
auricular hillocks is complicated. Anomalies are often associated 
with other malformations. Most common chromosomal disorders 
have ear malformation as one of their traits. For example, trisomy 
13 (Patau syndrome) gives an underdeveloped tragus and lobule, 
trisomy 21 (Down syndrome) gives microtia, and Ehlers–Danlos 
syndrome causes lop ears which stand away from the head and are 
often larger than normal.
Less severe anomalies can include pits and appendages (or 
sinuses and tags). These are remnants of the developing hillocks.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
98  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
45
The eye
Figure 45.1
Blebs from the forebrain form optic grooves 
that become optic vesicles. When the optic 
vesicles come into contact with the overlying 
ectoderm they trigger the initiation of the 
lens placode (a thickening of ectoderm)
Figure 45.4
Magnified section of a part of the posterior 4/5 of the retina, showing all the cells that make up 
this highly specialised tissue. N.B. The intraretinal space becomes filled with cells, but there remains 
a potential space between the pigmented epithelia and the photoreceptive layer. This is a remnant 
of the intraretinal space and is termed the optic ventricle
Figure 45.6
Development of the optic nerve and closure of the choroid fissure
Figure 45.2
Formation of the lens vesicle and the optic cup. Note the outer and inner layers. The developing 
lens loses contact with the overlying ectoderm as it becomes the lens vesicle, and the stalk
linking these structures with the forebrain becomes the optic stalk
Figure 45.3
Formation of the primary lens fibres
Figure 45.5
Anterior 1/5 of the retina, and the iris
and ciliary body that develop from it
Figure 45.7
The iridopupillary membrane should regress but can persist after birth.
(a) This sagittal section shows the location of the iridopupillary membrane
(b) Anterior view of the iridopupillary membrane as it covers the pupil
Invaginating
lens placode
Forebrain
Forebrain
Surface ectoderm
Surface ectoderm
Optic grooves
Optic vesicle
Invaginating
optic placode
Intraretinal
space (optic
vesicle cavity)
Light
Post
Ant
Optic cup
Lens placode
Surface ectoderm
Surface ectoderm
Lens vesicle
Outer pigment layer
Inner neural layer
Optic stalk
Optic stalk
Intraretinal space
Suspensory
ligament
Ciliary muscle
Lens
Cornea
Iris
Sclera
Cornea
Anterior
chamber
Irido-
pupillary
membrane
Lens
Iris
Ciliary
muscles
Choroid
Posterior chamber
(a)
(b)
Axons heading
to the optic
nerve
Posterior 4/5 retina
Anterior 
1/5 retina
Ganglion cells
Bipolar cells
Rods and 
cones
Pigment layer
(epithelium)
Choroid
Choroid
Choroid
fissure
Hyeloid
vessels
Shows narrowing
of choroid fissure
through development
Central artery
of the retina
Light
Optic
nerve
Optic
nerve
Sclera
Optic
nerve

The eye  Systems development  99
Time period: weeks 3–10
Introduction
The development of the eye begins around day 22 with bilateral 
invaginations of the neuroectoderm of the forebrain (Figure 45.1).
Optic cup and lens
As the neural tube closes these invaginations become the optic 
vesicles and remain continuous with the developing third ventricle 
(Figure 45.1). Contact of these optic vesicles with the surface ecto­
derm induces the formation of the lens placodes (Figures 45.1 and 
45.2).
As the optic vesicle invaginates it forms a double-walled struc­
ture, the optic cup (Figure 45.2). At the same time the lens placode 
invaginates and forms the lens vesicle which lies in the indent of 
the optic cup and is completely dissociated from the surface 
ectoderm.
Epithelial cells on the posterior wall of the lens vesicle lengthen 
anteriorly and become long fibres that grow forwards. It takes 
about 2 weeks for these fibres to reach the anterior cell wall of the 
vesicle. These are primary lens fibres (Figure 45.3). Secondary lens 
fibres form from epithelial cells located at the equator of the lens 
and are continuously added throughout life along the scaffold 
made by the primary fibres from the centre of the lens. These cells 
elongate and eventually lose their nuclei to become mature lens 
fibres. This occurs in early adulthood.
Retina
In the optic cup there is an outer layer that develops into the pig­
mented layer of the retina and an inner layer that becomes the 
neural layer.
The posterior four-fifths of the inner neural layer (Figure 45.4) 
consists of cells forming the rods and cones of the photoreceptive 
layer. Deep to this are the neurons and supporting cells. Deeper 
again lies a fibrous layer comprising the axons of these neurons, 
with axons leading towards the optic stalk that will develop into 
the optic nerve.
The anterior one-fifth of the inner layer remains one cell thick. 
It becomes parts of the iris and ciliary body (Figure 45.5). Ciliary 
muscle forms from mesenchyme that covers this part of the optic 
cup and is internally connected to the lens by the suspensory liga­
ment. The complete iris forms from the inner retinal layer, the 
pigmented outer layer and a mesenchymal layer sandwiched 
between them, becoming the sphincter and dilator muscles.
Optic nerve
The optic cup remains attached to the forebrain via the optic stalk 
(Figure 45.2). Axons from the photoreceptor cells and other 
neurons within the retina run along the inner wall of the optic 
stalk.
Within the optic stalk is a groove, the choroid fissure (Figure 
45.6), and within this lie the hyaloid blood vessels formed from 
invading mesenchyme. The number of neurons running through 
the optic stalk increases and during week 7 the choroid fissure 
closes forming a tunnel for the hyaloid artery which becomes the 
central artery of the retina (Figure 45.6). Continually increasing 
numbers of neurons fill the stalk and the lumen of the optic stalk 
is obliterated. By week 9 it is the optic nerve.
Meninges
The choroid and sclera of the eye are comparable to the pia mater 
and dura mater of the brain, respectively. They develop from 
the loose mesenchyme that surrounds the posterior part of the 
developing eye. The choroid is highly vascular and pigmented 
whereas the sclera is tougher and more fibrous. The sclera is con­
tinuous with the dura mater that surrounds the optic nerve (Figure 
45.6).
Cornea
Loose mesenchyme surrounding the anterior part of the develop­
ing eye is split by vacuolisation, forming the anterior chamber. An 
inner iridopupillary membrane is created that degenerates, leaving 
open communication between the two fluid-filled spaces of the 
anterior and posterior chambers (Figure 45.7). The outer portion 
is continuous with the sclera and becomes the cornea.
The cornea has three parts: an epithelia layer from ectoderm, 
the mesenchyme part mentioned above and another epithelial 
layer that lines the anterior chamber. Neural crest cells contribute 
to the sclera and the cornea.
Extraocular muscles
Extraocular muscles include the inferior and superior oblique, 
medial, lateral, inferior and superior rectus and levator palpebrae 
superioris muscles. These muscles may develop from paraxial 
mesoderm of somitomeres 1–4 or from mesenchyme near the pre­
chordal plate (a thickening of endoderm in the embryonic head) 
and are innervated by CN III, IV and VI.
Clinical relevance
Neonatal vision is tested in the 24 hours after birth and again at 
6 weeks. Many abnormalities of the eye cause blindness, but not 
all. Most affect vision to some degree and as newborn infants’ eyes 
are not aligned and an intermittent squint can develop, it is impor­
tant that these tests are carried out.
Congenital cataracts can be caused by infection, such as rubella 
during pregnancy, or by hereditary factors, but often there is 
no known cause. Cataracts may be identified from a squint, dif­
ficulty in focusing or from the child holding his or her head at 
an odd angle to see, and in a few cases a clouding in the lens of 
the eye.
Congenital glaucoma is generally inherited and caused by an 
increase in intraocular pressure through excess fluid. It presents as 
watering of the eye with dilated pupils, irritability, and the cornea 
may be hazy. Treatments are aimed at decreasing the pressure 
through increasing the drainage of fluid from the eye or decreasing 
fluid production.
Coloboma is caused by incomplete closure of the choroid fissure. 
There are varying degrees, and usually only a cleft in the iris is left, 
which tends not to affect vision. The cleft can affect the eyelid, 
ciliary body, retina, choroid, lens or even the optic nerve, which 
would affect vision and can cause blindness in the most severe 
cases. There is currently no treatment.
Albinism affects pigmentation in the skin, hair, iris and retina, 
and is diagnosed from an eye examination. The lack of pigment in 
the iris and retina can lead to numerous eye conditions including 
macular hypoplasia, optic nerve hypoplasia, nystagmus, light sen­
sitivity and overall poor vision.


Self-assessment MCQs
Embryonic and foetal periods
1  When does the embryonic period end?
(a)	 end of week 7
(b)	 beginning of week 8
(c)	 end of week 8
(d)	 end of week 9
(e)	 beginning of week 10
2  Which event in the female cycle is used to clinically date 
gestation?
(a)	 fertilisation
(b)	 first day of last menstruation
(c)	 last day of last menstruation
(d)	 length of menstruation
(e)	 ovulation
The f﻿irst 18 days of development
3  Which hormone, secreted by the trophoblast, is important 
in maintaining the endometrium after implantation of the 
blastocyst?
(a)	 follicle stimulating hormone (FSH)
(b)	 human chorionic gonadotrophin
(c)	 luteinising hormone (LH)
(d)	 oestrogen
(e)	 testosterone
4  What is the final maturation process of spermatozoa that 
occurs in the female genital system?
(a)	 acrosome reaction
(b)	 capacitation
(c)	 cortical reaction
(d)	 spermatocytogenesis
(e)	 spermiogenesis
5  The acrosome and cortical reactions help prevent fertilisation 
of an ovum by more than one sperm. Which structure also 
helps prevent this?
(a)	 cortical granules
(b)	 cumulus cells
(c)	 fimbrae
(d)	 plasma membrane
(e)	 zona pellucida
6  Which structure is not formed from mesoderm?
(a)	 bone
(b)	 bone marrow
(c)	 dermis
(d)	 epidermis
(e)	 ureter
7  Which structure is not formed from endoderm?
(a)	 kidneys
(b)	 liver
(c)	 pancreas
(d)	 parathyroid glands
(e)	 tonsils
8  Which structure is not formed from ectoderm?
(a)	 epidermis
(b)	 central nervous system
(c)	 peripheral nervous system
(d)	 retina
(e)	 thymus gland
9  How many days after fertilisation does the blastocyst begin to 
implant into the uterine endometrium?
(a)	 3 days
(b)	 6 days
(c)	 10 days
(d)	 14 days
(e)	 21 days
10  During which phase of the menstrual cycle does implantation 
occur? 
(a)	 decidualization
(b)	 follicular
(c)	 menstrual
(d)	 proliferative
(e)	 secretory
11  During which phase of implantation does the inner cell mass 
rotate to become aligned with the decidua?
(a)	 adhesion
(b)	 apposition
(c)	 hatching
(d)	 implantation
(e)	 invasion
Gastrulation
12  Which signalling molecule helps cells of the epiblast move 
towards the primitive streak?
(a)	 brachyury
(b)	 fibroblast growth factor 4
(c)	 fibroblast growth factor 8
(d)	 transforming growth factor-beta
(e)	 vascular endothelial growth factor
13  Which process is not part of gastrulation?
(a)	 create cephalic–caudal axis
(b)	 create left–right axis
(c)	 create ventral–dorsal axis
(d)	 formation of the bilaminar disc
(e)	 formation of trilaminar disc
Neurulation
14  The caudal neuropore fails to close in an embryo. What condi­
tion will result if the foetus survives?
(a)	 cleft lip
(b)	 cerebral palsy
Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
© 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.	
101

102  Self-assessment  MCQs
(c)	 cystic fibrosis
(d)	 Down syndrome
(e)	 spina bifida
Body cavities
15  The diaphragm is formed from the septum transversum, pleu­
roperitoneal folds and some muscular ingrowth from the 
lateral body walls, and which other component?
(a)	 falciform ligament
(b)	 hepatic diverticulum
(c)	 lesser omentum
(d)	 oesophageal mesentery
(e)	 pleuropericardial folds
16  Which cavity links the thoracic and abdominal cavities in the 
fifth week of development?
(a)	 extra-embryonic cavity
(b)	 intra-embryonic cavity
(c)	 pericardioperitoneal canals
(d)	 peritoneal cavity
(e)	 pleural cavity
17  Which structure will form the adult pericardium?
(a)	 pleuropericardial folds
(b)	 pleuroperitoneal folds
(c)	 septum transversum
(d)	 somatic mesoderm
(e)	 splanchnic mesoderm
Musculoskeletal system
18  Which part of the somite will form the muscles of the anterior 
abdominal wall?
(a)	 dermatome
(b)	 dorsal myotome
(c)	 somitocoele
(d)	 sclerotome
(e)	 ventral myotome
19  What type of cell forms new bone, but is not completely sur­
rounded by bone?
(a)	 chondrocyte
(b)	 hypertrophic chondrocyte
(c)	 osteoblast
(d)	 osteoclast
(e)	 osteocyte
20  Where does the secondary centre of ossification occur in a long 
bone such as the femur?
(a)	 articular cartilage
(b)	 diaphysis
(c)	 epiphysis
(d)	 growth plate
(e)	 periosteum
21  Which group of cells organises the development of structures 
in the cranial–caudal axis of the limb?
(a)	 apical ectodermal ridge
(b)	 hand plate
(c)	 proliferating zone
(d)	 ventral ectoderm
(e)	 zone of polarising activity
Cardiovascular system
22  What separates most of the single outflow tube of the early 
heart into the pulmonary trunk and aorta?
(a)	 atrioventricular septum
(b)	 conotruncal septum
(c)	 endocardial cushions
(d)	 septum primum
(e)	 septum secundum
23  What vessel allows blood to bypass the liver?
(a)	 ductus arteriosus
(b)	 ductus venosus
(c)	 sinus venosus
(d)	 umbilical artery
(e)	 umbilical vein
24  Which aortic arch artery forms part of the aorta?
(a)	 aortic arch I
(b)	 aortic arch II
(c)	 aortic arch III
(d)	 aortic arch IV
(e)	 aortic arch V
25  What structure grows within the heart to separate the atria 
from the ventricles?
(a)	 conotruncal septum
(b)	 endocardial cushion
(c)	 interventricular septum
(d)	 septum primum
(e)	 septum secundum
26  Two weeks after birth a cyanotic baby is found to be tachy­
cardic, tachypnoeic and has a wide pulse pressure. What is the 
most likely diagnosis?
(a)	 mitral valve defect
(b)	 patent ductus arteriosus
(c)	 patent foramen ovale
(d)	 portosystemic shunt
(e)	 ventricular septal defect
Respiratory system
27  Which cell type forms a blood–air barrier with the endothelial 
cells of the pulmonary capillaries?
(a)	 ciliated epithelial cells
(b)	 columnar epithelial cells
(c)	 stratified epithelial cells
(d)	 type I alveolar cells
(e)	 type II alveolar cells
28  In the alveolar stage of lung development the number of alveoli 
increases, as does their volume, increasing the surface area 
available to gas exchange. When does the alveolar stage begin, 
approximately?
(a)	 3 weeks
(b)	 6 weeks

MCQs  Self-assessment  103
(c)	 17 weeks
(d)	 25 weeks
(e)	 36 weeks
29  Because of its developmental origins, the trachea is most likely 
to form a fistula with what structure if it does not develop 
correctly?
(a)	 aorta
(b)	 diaphragm
(c)	 oesophagus
(d)	 pericardium
(e)	 spinal cord
Digestive system
30  What is the artery of the midgut?
(a)	 coeliac trunk
(b)	 ductus venosus
(c)	 inferior mesenteric artery
(d)	 superior mesenteric artery
(e)	 umbilical artery
31  By how much, and in which direction, does the midgut 
rotate?
(a)	 90° counterclockwise
(b)	 180° clockwise
(c)	 270° counterclockwise
(d)	 270° clockwise
(e)	 360° counterclockwise
32  Which gut structure becomes separated into two parts by the 
urorectal septum?
(a)	 allantois
(b)	 cloaca
(c)	 hindgut
(d)	 perineum
(e)	 vitelline duct
33  Which organ develops from two separate dorsal and ventral 
buds of the gastrointestinal tract that rotate and fuse?
(a)	 gallbladder
(b)	 liver
(c)	 lung
(d)	 pancreas
(e)	 spleen
34  Daily doses of folic acid in the first 3 months of pregnancy is 
known to reduce the risk of spina bifida and which common 
gastrointestinal anomaly?
(a)	 cheiloschisis
(b)	 omphalocoele
(c)	 polyhydramnios
(d)	 tracheoesophageal fistula
(e)	 vitelline cyst
35  Which gastrointestinal anomaly is thought to be caused by 
failure of the intestines to return to the abdominal cavity after 
the normal umbilical herniation process?
(a)	 anal atresia
(b)	 omphalocoele
(c)	 polyhydramnios
(d)	 rectourethral fistula
(e)	 vitelline cyst
36  Identify one of the factors that can cause congenital hiatal 
hernia.
(a)	 gastric stenosis
(b)	 diaphragmatic hernia
(c)	 oesophageal atresia
(d)	 oesophageal stenosis
(e)	 shortened oesophagus
Urinary and reproductive systems
37  The tubes of the female reproductive system (i.e. the uterine 
tubes and the uterus) form from which embryonic structure?
(a)	 mesonephric ducts
(b)	 metanephros
(c)	 mesonephros
(d)	 paramesonephric ducts
(e)	 pronephros
38  What cells will differentiate into the transitional epithelium of 
the bladder?
(a)	 amniocytes
(b)	 ectoderm
(c)	 endoderm
(d)	 mesoderm
(e)	 yolk sac
39  Where do the definitive adult kidneys start to form?
(a)	 abdomen
(b)	 limb
(c)	 neck
(d)	 pelvis
(e)	 thorax
40  Where do the gonads start to form?
(a)	 abdomen
(b)	 limb
(c)	 neck
(d)	 pelvis
(e)	 thorax
41  Definitive nephrons (but not collecting ducts) develop from 
which embryonic structure?
(a)	 pronephros
(b)	 urachus
(c)	 ureteric bud
(d)	 urogenital sinus
(e)	 metanephric cap
Endocrine system
42  The inferior parathyroid glands are derived from cells from 
which embryonic structure?
(a)	 first pharyngeal arch
(b)	 second pharyngeal arch
(c)	 third pharyngeal arch

104  Self-assessment  MCQs
(d)	 fourth pharyngeal pouch
(e)	 sixth pharyngeal pouch
43  Which endocrine organ is derived from oral ectoderm and 
neural ectoderm?
(a)	 adrenal glands
(b)	 hypothalamus
(c)	 parathyroid glands
(d)	 pineal body
(e)	 pituitary gland
44  The medulla of the suprarenal (or adrenal) gland produces 
adrenaline and noradrenaline. What cell type is it formed 
from?
(a)	 dermamyotome
(b)	 epithelial
(c)	 mesoderm
(d)	 neural crest cell
(e)	 yolk sac
Head and neck
45  Which cranial nerve innervates many structures derived from 
the second pharyngeal arch?
(a)	 CN V (trigeminal nerve)
(b)	 CN VII (facial nerve)
(c)	 CN IX (glossopharyngeal nerve)
(d)	 CN X (vagus nerve)
(e)	 CN XII (hypoglossal nerve)
46  Which group of muscles are formed by the cells of the second 
pharyngeal arch?
(a)	 muscles of facial expression
(b)	 muscles of mastication
(c)	 muscles of the larynx
(d)	 muscles of the pharynx
(e)	 tensor tympani muscle
47  The mandible is a derivative of which pharyngeal arch?
(a)	 pharyngeal arch I
(b)	 pharyngeal arch II
(c)	 pharyngeal arch III
(d)	 pharyngeal arch IV
(e)	 pharyngeal arch VI
48  Calcitonin producing parafollicular cells of the thyroid gland 
are derived from cells of one of the pharyngeal pouches that 
migrate into the gland. Which pharyngeal pouch is the source 
of these cells?
(a)	 pharyngeal pouch I
(b)	 pharyngeal pouch II
(c)	 pharyngeal pouch III
(d)	 pharyngeal pouch IV
(e)	 pharyngeal pouch VI
49  The stapes bone is a derivative of which pharyngeal arch?
(a)	 pharyngeal arch I
(b)	 pharyngeal arch II
(c)	 pharyngeal arch III
(d)	 pharyngeal arch IV
(e)	 pharyngeal arch VI
Nervous system
50  From what cell layer does the central nervous system form?
(a)	 ectoderm
(b)	 endoderm
(c)	 mesoderm
(d)	 trophoblast
(e)	 yolk sac
51  In which week do the neuropores close?
(a)	 week 2
(b)	 week 3
(c)	 week 4
(d)	 week 5
(e)	 week 6
52  The dorsal root ganglion is a collection of sensory cell neurons 
that form peripheral nerves. What embryonic cell type differ­
entiates to become these neurons?
(a)	 endoderm
(b)	 dermamyotome
(c)	 neural crest cell
(d)	 neuroepithelia
(e)	 paraxial mesoderm
53  The ventral horn of the spinal cord contains motor neurons. 
What part of the developing spinal cord becomes the ventral 
horn?
(a)	 alar plate
(b)	 basal plate
(c)	 marginal layer
(d)	 metencephalon
(e)	 pia mater
54  What is a function of the notochord?
(a)	 to initiate neurulation
(b)	 to initiate somite formation
(c)	 to organise dermatomes
(d)	 to regulate axon outgrowth
(e)	 to regulate limb development
The ear
55  In which week can the foetus hear external sounds?
(a)	 week 3
(b)	 week 6
(c)	 week 8
(d)	 week 10
(e)	 week 20
56  In the membranous labyrinth which structure is involved in 
translating vertical movements of the head?
(a)	 endolymphatic duct
(b)	 saccule
(c)	 scala tympani
(d)	 tectorial membrane
(e)	 utricle

MCQs  Self-assessment  105
57  The tubotympanic recess forms the tympanic cavity and part 
of which other structure?
(a)	 external auditory meatus
(b)	 pharyngotympanic tube
(c)	 stapes
(d)	 tensor tympani
(e)	 tympanic membrane
58  In the seventh to eighth week the rubella virus can affect the 
development of which structure?
(a)	 auricle
(b)	 cochlea
(c)	 organ of Corti
(d)	 trigeminal nerve
(e)	 tympanic membrane
The eye
59  Which neural cavity does the developing optic vesicle remain 
in contact with?
(a)	 central canal
(b)	 fourth ventricle
(c)	 lateral ventricle (inferior horn)
(d)	 lateral ventricle (main body)
(e)	 third ventricle
60  Which structure degenerates to allow communication between 
the anterior and posterior chambers of the eye?
(a)	 choroid fissure
(b)	 iridopupillary membrane
(c)	 lens vesicle
(d)	 sclera
(e)	 suspensory ligament
61  Which congenital abnormality of the eye can be caused by a 
rubella infection?
(a)	 albinism
(b)	 cataracts
(c)	 glaucoma
(d)	 macula hypoplasia
(e)	 nystagmus

Self-assessment MCQ answers
Embryonic and foetal periods
1c, 2b
The f﻿irst 18 days of development
3b, 4b, 5e, 6d, 7a, 8e, 9b, 10e, 11b
Gastrulation
12c, 13d
Neurulation
14e
Body cavities
15d, 16c, 17a
Musculoskeletal system
18e, 19c, 20c, 21e
Cardiovascular system
22b, 23b, 24d, 25d, 26b
Respiratory system
27d, 28e, 29c
Digestive system
30d, 31c, 32b, 33d, 34a, 35b, 36e
Urinary and reproductive systems
37d, 38c, 39d, 40a, 41e
Endocrine system
42d, 43e, 44d
Head and neck
45b, 46a, 47a, 48d, 49b
Nervous system
50a, 51c, 52c, 53b, 54a
The ear
55e, 56b, 57b, 58c
The eye
59e, 60b, 61b
Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
106  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Self-assessment EMQs
The f﻿irst week of development
a. Blastocoele
b. Blastomere
c. Embryoblast
d. Epiblast
e. Exocoelomic membrane
f. Extra-embryonic mesoderm
g. Follicle
h. Hypoblast
i. Morula
j. Oogonia
k. Polar body
l. Trophoblast
m.  Zona pellucida
n. Zygote
Choose the most appropriate option from the option list. Each 
option may be used once, more than once or not at all.
1  A spermatozoon fertilises an ovum to initially form what?
2  What is the name for the outermost cells of the blastocyst that 
will take part in the formation of the placenta?
3  Which layer must a spermatozoon penetrate to fertilise an 
ovum?
4  Which structure will develop the primitive streak, from which 
the germ layers will develop?
5  Cells 
of 
which 
structure 
produce 
human 
chorionic 
gonadotrophin?
Cardiovascular embryology
a. Coronary artery
b. Coronary sinus
c. Crista terminalis
d. Ductus arteriosus
e. Ductus venosus
f. Endocardial cushion
g. Ostium primum
h. Ostium secundum
i. Septum primum
j. Septum secundum
k. Sinus venosus
l. Truncus arteriosus
m.  Umbilical artery
n. Vitelline artery
Choose the most appropriate option from the option list. Each 
option may be used once, more than once or not at all.
1  What structure develops to separate the primitive atrium from 
the primitive ventricle?
2  What structure allows blood to pass from the pulmonary trunk 
to the aorta?
3  What structure is formed by union of the major veins that drain 
into the primitive heart?
4  What is the outflow tract of the primitive heart called?
5  What structure forms the flap valve of the foramen ovale?
Gastrointestinal tract development
a. Appendix
b. Caecum
c. Colon
d. Duodenum
e. Gallbladder
f. Jejunum
g. Ileum
h. Liver
i. Oesophagus
j. Pancreas
k.  Rectum
l. Stomach
Choose the most appropriate option from the option list. Each 
option may be used once, more than once or not at all.
1  The vitelline duct may persist as an outpocketing of which part 
of the gastrointestinal tract?
2  Severe vomiting in a newborn infant that contains bile may 
indicate a narrowing of the gastrointestinal tract where?
3  At which point along the adult gastrointestinal tract does the 
foregut end?
4  In which part of the gastrointestinal system may a fistula form 
that connects to the respiratory system?
5  What forms from the cloaca?
Neurulation and the central nervous 
system
a. Alar plate
b. Basal plate
c. Caudal neuropore
d. Cranial neuropore
e. Dorsal root ganglion
f. Mesencephalon
g. Metencephalon
h. Neural fold
i. Neural groove
j. Notochord
k. Primitive node
l. Primitive streak
m. Prosencephalon
n. Rhombencephalon
Choose the most appropriate option from the option list. Each 
option may be used once, more than once or not at all.
1  Where do neural crest cells come from?
2  Spina bifida occurs if what structure does not close properly?
3  From what does the hindbrain develop? (Choose the chrono­
logically latest structure.)
4  Which structure signals to the midline ectoderm to form the 
neural tube?
5  Which structure is formed by neural crest cells?
Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
© 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.	
107

Self-assessment EMQ answers
The f﻿irst week of development
1n, 2l, 3m, 4d, 5l
Cardiovascular embryology
1f, 2d, 3k, 4l, 5j
Gastrointestinal tract development
1g, 2d, 3d, 4i, 5k
Neurulation and the central nervous 
system
1h, 2c, 3n, 4j, 5e
Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
108  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Glossary of medical conditions and terms
Accretion: Increase in size by gradual addition of smaller parts 
(e.g. a cell surrounding itself with matrix).
Achondroplastic dwarfism: Condition caused by limited long 
bone growth.
Acrosome: An organelle within the head of the sperm that 
carries enzymes.
Alar plates: Dorsal parts of the mantle layer of cell bodies that 
will become the dorsal sensory horns of the spinal cord.
Albinism: Defect in melanin production produces a lack of 
pigment.
Allantois: Extension of the primitive gut or yolk sac (depending 
on the stage of development) into the umbilical cord.
Amnioblasts: Cells of the amniotic membrane. From the 
epiblast.
Amnion: A thin, tough, membranous sac that encloses the 
embryo or foetus of a mammal, bird or reptile. It is filled 
with a serous fluid in which the embryo is suspended.
Anal atresia: No anus forms.
Anal membrane: Dorsal division of the cloacal membrane split 
by the urogenital septum.
Anencephaly: Failure of closure at the cranial end of the neural 
tube.
Anorectal canal: Posterior part of the cloaca when divided by the 
urogenital septum.
Antrum: A cavity formed between the layers of follicular cells.
Aortic arches: The vessels of the pharyngeal arches, link the 
heart and the dorsal aortae.
Aortic stenosis: A narrowing of the aorta.
Apical ectodermal ridge: Thickened ridge of ectoderm located 
along the distal edge of the limb bud.
Apoptosis: Programmed cell death (deliberate cell suicide).
Atrioventricular canal: Temporary connection between the 
primitive atria and ventricles.
Basal plates: Ventral parts of the mantle layer of cell bodies that 
will become the ventral motor horns of the spinal cord.
Bilaminar disc: Epiblast and hypoblast layers of the developing 
embryo.
Blastocoele: The fluid-filled central cavity of a blastocyst (or 
blastula).
Blastocyst: The early embryo as a sphere of cells with a fluid-
filled central cavity (sometimes called the blastula).
Blastomeres: Any cell resulting from cleavage of a fertilised egg 
early in embryo development.
Bronchial buds: Lateral buds off the tracheal bud.
Buccopharyngeal membrane: Cranial area where endoderm is in 
direct contact with ectoderm, will form the mouth.
Bulboventricular sulcus: The junction between the bulbus cordis 
and the ventricle formed from the cardiac loop.
Bulbus cordis: Cranial bulge of the developing heart tube.
Capacitation: The process by which spermatozoa in the female 
genital tract become prepared for fertilisation.
Cardiac loop: Also called the bulboventricular loop, the first 
bend in the heart tube that occurs in week 4.
Cardinal veins: Two lateral vessels, the initial network of the 
veins that carry blood to the heart.
Cardiogenic field: Early developing cardiovascular tissue.
Cervical sinus: A sinus formed from pharyngeal clefts II, III and 
IV after the rapid growth of pharyngeal arch II forms the 
operculum.
Cheiloschisis: Cleft lip.
Chorionic: The outer membrane enclosing the embryo in reptiles, 
birds and mammals (contributes to the placenta in placental 
mammals).
Choroid fissure: A groove within the optic stalk where the 
hyaloid blood vessels are located.
Cleavage: A series of cell divisions in the ovum immediately 
following fertilisation.
Cloacal membrane: Caudal area where endoderm is in direct 
contact with ectoderm, will form the anus.
Coarctation of the aorta: Narrowing of the aorta.
Coelom: Fluid-filled body cavity lined by cells derived from 
mesoderm tissue in the embryo.
Coloboma: Incomplete closure of the choroid fissure.
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia: Autosomal recessive disease 
causing excessive steroid production.
Congenital cataracts: A clouding in the lens of the eye.
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia: Abdominal contents herniate 
into the thoracic cavity effecting development of the lungs.
Congenital glaucoma: Damage to the optic nerve through 
increased pressure in the eye.
Congenital hiatal hernia: A shortened oesophagus causes the 
stomach to be pulled into the thorax.
Congenital hypoparathyroidism: Incomplete development of the 
parathyroid glands resulting in low parathyroid hormones 
levels.
Congenital hypopituitarism: Decreased amounts of one or more 
of the hormones secreted by the pituitary gland.
Congenital hypothyroidism: Deficiency in thyroid hormone 
production leading to excessive sleeping and poor 
feeding.
Congenital subglottic stenosis: Abnormalities in the size and 
shape of the epiglottis can lead to breathing difficulties.
Conotruncal septum: A spiralled septum dividing the conus 
arteriosus and truncus arteriosus.
Conus arteriosus: Part of the outflow tract from the heart, will 
become the pulmonary trunk.
Conus cordis: Part of the heart tube that will become part of the 
left and right ventricles.
Corpus albicans: Scar tissue on the ovary formed from the 
corpus luteum.
Corpus luteum: A mature Graafian follicle that produces 
oestrogen and progesterone.
Cortical granules: Granules within the oocyte containing 
enzymes that bind the zona pellucida.
Cotyledons: Subunits of the placenta.
Craniosynostosis: Early closure of the cranial sutures.
Cryptorchidism: Undescended testes.
Cumulus oophorus: Also called the corona radiata, a layer of 
specialised cells that surround the oocyte.
Cytotrophoblast: The inner layer of the trophoblast.
Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
© 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.	
109

110  Glossary
Decidualisation: Changes the endometrium undergoes in 
pregnancy.
Dermatomes: Regions of skin predominantly supplied by the 
sensory component of one spinal nerve.
Dermotome: Dorsal part of the somite that will develop into the 
dermis.
Dextrocardia: Heart lies on the right-hand side instead of the 
left.
Diencephalon: Part of the forebrain that will become the optic 
cup and stalk, pituitary gland, thalamus, hypothalamus and 
pineal body.
Differentiation: The process by which cells or tissues undergo a 
change toward a more specialised form or function.
Diploid: Cells with the full number of paired chromosomes (46 in 
humans).
Dorsal aortae: Two lateral vessels that are the beginning of the 
systemic blood system.
Dorsal mesentery: Develops as an outgrowth of the posterior 
body wall that passes over the gut and suspends it in the 
abdomen.
Dorsal roof plate: Dorsal bridging area for nerve fibres between 
the dorsal horns of the spinal cord.
Double inferior vena cavae: Caused by the persistence of the 
supracardinal veins.
Double superior vena cava: Caused by the persistence of the left 
anterior cardinal vein.
Ductus arteriosus: A vessel that acts as a shunt for blood 
passing between the pulmonary trunk and the aorta, allowing 
the majority of the blood to bypass the lungs.
Ductus venosus: A vessel that shunts blood from the umbilical 
vein to the inferior vena cava bypassing the liver.
Ectoderm: The outermost of the three primary germ layers of an 
embryo, from which the epidermis, nervous tissue and sense 
organs develop.
Ectrodactyly: Absence of a digit.
Embryo: The embryo of vertebrates is defined as the organism 
between the first division of the zygote (a fertilised ovum) 
until it becomes a foetus (8 weeks in humans).
Embryoblast: Any of the germinal disc cells of the inner cell 
mass in the blastocyst that form the embryo.
Embryology: The subdivision of developmental biology that 
studies embryos and their development.
Encephalocele: Herniation of the dura and neural tissue through 
a midline skull defect.
Endocardial cushions: Endocardium bulges that grow inwards 
and split the atrioventricular canal into two atrioventricular 
canals.
Endoderm: The innermost of the three primary germ layers of an 
animal embryo, developing into the gastrointestinal tract, the 
lungs and associated structures.
Endometrium: The glandular mucous membrane that lines the 
uterus.
Epiblast: The outer layer of cells in the inner cell mass that will 
form the embryo.
Epispadias: Urethral opening on the dorsal surface of the 
penis.
Exencephaly: Part of the brain exposed outside the skull.
Exstrophy: Ventral wall of the bladder is present outside of the 
abdominal wall.
External auditory meatus: The ear canal formed from the first 
pharyngeal cleft.
Extraembryonic: Of or being a structure that is outside the 
embryo.
Extraembryonic cavity: Fluid-filled cavity that forms surrounding 
the embryo, also known as the chorionic cavity.
Extra-uterine pregnancy: Also called ectopic pregnancy, implan­
tation of the fertilised ovum somewhere other than the 
uterus.
Fertilisation: The process of a sperm fusing with an ovum, which 
eventually leads to the development of an embryo.
Fibrinoid deposits: Fibrin, placental secretions and dead 
trophoblast cells accumulate in the placenta.
Foetus: (alternatively, fetus or fœtus). An unborn vertebrate 
offspring after the embryo stage. In humans, a foetus 
develops from the end of week 8 of pregnancy (when the 
major structures have formed), until birth.
Follicle: Squamous epithelial cells that surround a primary 
oocyte.
Fontanelle: An area in the foetal skull where more than two 
bones meet.
Foramen cecum: The opening on the tongue of the thyroglossal 
duct.
Foramen ovale: An aperture between the right and left atria 
allowing blood to flow directly between atria.
Fossa ovalis: A depression left on the interior of the right atria 
after the foramen ovale closes.
Gap junctions: An intercellular network of protein channels that 
facilitates the cell–cell passage of ions, hormones and 
neurotransmitters.
Gastroschisis: Herniation of the bowel through the ventral 
abdominal wall.
Gastrulation: A phase early in the development of animal 
embryos, during which the morphology of the embryo is 
dramatically restructured by cell migration. In humans this 
process gives rise to the three embryonic germ layers.
Genital tubercle: Ventral fusion of the urogenital folds.
Goldenhar syndrome: Affects pharyngeal arches I and II and 
results in malformations of the facial bones and facial 
palsy.
Gonadal dysgenesis: Condition with male chromosomes but no 
testes.
Gondal ridge: Part of the urogenital ridge, contains cells that are 
the source of most of the genital system.
Graafian follicle: A mature follicle that expels the oocyte at 
ovulation.
Greater omentum: Develops from the dorsal mesentery.
Growth: In biology, growth is increase in size.
Gubernaculum: Part of the peritoneum attached to the gonad.
Haploid: Cells with half the number of paired chromosomes (23 
in humans).
Homologous chromosomes: Two chromosomes that make up a 
‘pair’ of chromosomes.
Hydrocephalus: Excess cerebrospinal fluid.
Hypertrophy: An increase in size brought about by an increase in 
cell size rather than division. It is most commonly seen in 
muscle that has been actively stimulated, the most well-
known method being exercise.
Hypoblast: The inner layer of cells of the inner cell mass.

Glossary  111
Hypophysial diverticulum: Also known as Rathke’s pouch and 
outpocketing of oral ectoderm that will become the anterior 
lobe of the pituitary gland.
Hypospadias: Incomplete closure of the urethral folds.
Hyposplenism: No splenic function.
Implantation: The process by which a fertilised egg implants in 
the uterine lining.
Induction: The action of inducing cells to undergo change, 
usually in response to signalling molecules.
Intermediate horn: Small horn between dorsal and ventral horns 
of the spinal cord that contains neurons of the sympathetic 
nervous system between levels T1–L2.
Intermediate mesoderm: Mesodermal cells lateral to the paraxial 
mesoderm.
Interventricular foramen: A gap remaining between the muscular 
interventricular septum and the endocardial cushions.
Interventricular septum: A septum that splits the ventricles into 
left and right.
Intraembryonic cavity: Fluid-filled body cavity the forms within 
the embryo.
Intrauterine growth restriction: A condition where the placenta 
cannot supply the necessary nutrients to the foetus.
Labioscrotal swellings: Folds lateral to the urogenital folds.
Lacunae: An anatomical cavity, space or depression.
Laryngomalacia: Larynx can collapse during breathing.
Lateral plate mesoderm: Mesodermal cells lateral to the interme­
diate mesoderm.
Lens placodes: Areas of the surface ectoderm induced by 
contact with the optic vesicles.
Lens vesicle: Invagination of the lens placode.
Lesser omentum: Develops from the ventral mesentery.
Ligamentum arteriosum: The remnant of the the ductus 
arteriosus.
Ligamentum venosus: The remnant of the ductus venosus.
Liver bud: Also called the hepatic diverticulum, a ventral bud 
from the distal foregut.
Mandibular process: Ventral division of the first pharyngeal 
arch.
Maxillary process: Dorsal division of the first pharyngeal arch.
Median umbilical ligaments: The remnant of the umbilical arties.
Meiosis: The process of cell division in sexually reproducing 
organisms that reduces the number of chromosomes in 
reproductive cells from diploid to haploid, leading to the 
production of gametes.
Membranous interventricular septum: A septum that grows 
inferiorly from the endocardial cushions to the muscular 
interventricular septum completing the interventricular 
septum.
Meromelia: Partial absence of a limb.
Mesencephalon: Part of the neural tube that will become the 
midbrain.
Mesoderm: The middle embryonic germ layer, lying between the 
ectoderm and the endoderm, from which connective tissue, 
muscle, bone and the urogenital and circulatory systems 
develop.
Mesonephric ducts: Also called Wolffian ducts, bilateral tubes 
that form from intermediate mesoderm, become an interme­
diate kidney and parts of the genital system.
Mesonephros: Second kidney to form.
Metanephric cap: Formed from intermediate mesoderm over the 
ureteric bud.
Metanephros: Third kidney to form, will become the adult 
kidney.
Metencephalon: Part of the hindbrain that will become the pons 
and cerebellum.
Mitosis: Division of a single cell into two ‘daughter’ cells, each 
with an identical number of chromosomes as the parent cell.
Morphogen: A substance that governs morphogenesis by 
emanating from a localised source to form a concentration 
gradient during embryonic development, metamorphosis or 
regeneration.
Morphogenesis: The processes that control the organised spatial 
distribution of cells that arise during embryonic development 
and give the shapes of tissues, organs and entire organisms.
Morula: The spherical embryonic mass of blastomeres formed 
before the blastula and resulting from cleavage of the 
fertilised ovum.
Muscular dystrophy: A group of diseases that causes muscular 
wasting.
Muscular interventricular septum: A septum that extends from 
the floor of the ventricles towards the endocardial cushions.
Myelencephalon: Part of the hindbrain that will become the 
medulla oblongata.
Myotome: The dorsal part of the somite that contains muscle 
precursor cells.
Nephrogenic cord: Part of the urogenital ridge, contains cells 
that are the source of most of the urinary system.
Neural crest cells: Cells derived from the ectoderm able to 
migrate extensively and generate many differentiated cell 
types (e.g. neurons, glial cells, the adrenaline-producing cells 
of the adrenal gland, pigmented cells of the epidermis).
Neural crests: Parts of neuroectoderm brought together that 
meet.
Neural folds: Sides of the neural groove.
Neural groove: Depression that forms along the neural plate.
Neural plate: A thick, flat bundle of ectoderm directly overlying 
the notochord that develops in the embryo into the neural 
tube and subsequently the nervous system.
Neural tube: See neural plate.
Neuroepithelia: Specialised cells that line the neurocoele.
Neurohypophysial diverticulum: Also known as the infundibu­
lum, growth from the diencephalon that will become the 
posterior lobe of the pituitary gland.
Neuropores: Open ends of the neural tube.
Neurulation: A morphogenetic process in the embryonic develop­
ment of the vertebrates, by which the neural plate folds into 
the neural tube.
Notochord: A rod of cells constituting the foundation of the 
axial skeleton, around which the segments of the vertebral 
column are formed.
Notochordal plate: Fusion of the notochordal process and the 
underlying endoderm.
Notochordal process: Midline extension of the primitive node.
Oligohydramnios: Reduction in the amount of amniotic fluid.
Omphalocoele: A herniation of the abdominal contents, covered 
by peritoneum and amnion, into the umbilicus.
Oocyte: A cell from which an egg or ovum develops by meiosis; 
a female gametocyte.

112  Glossary
Oogonia: Diploid cells of the ovaries.
Operculum: A lid-like structure of mesenchyme formed from the 
rapid downward growth of pharyngeal arch II.
Optic cup: Double-walled invagination of the optic cup.
Optic stalk: The attachment that remains between the optic cup 
and the forebrain.
Optic vesicles: Bilateral invaginations of the neuroectoderm of 
the forebrain.
Ostium primum: A gap remaining between the septum primum 
and the endocardial cushions.
Ostium secundum: A gap remaining between the septum 
secundum and the endocardial cushions.
Otic placode: Bilateral thickening of ectoderm each side of the 
hindbrain.
Otic vesicle: Also called an otocyst, invagination of the 
otic placode that becomes isolated from the overlying 
ectoderm.
Ovum: The female reproductive cell or gamete of animals; egg.
Palatoschisis: Cleft palate.
Paramesonephric ducts: Also called Müllerian ducts, bilateral 
tubes that form from intermediate mesoderm lateral to the 
mesonephric ducts, become part of the genital system.
Paraxial mesoderm: Collection of mesodermal cells bilateral to 
the neural tube.
Patent ductus arteriosus: Failure of the ductus arteriosus to 
close.
Patent foramen ovale: Failure of the foramen ovale to close.
Pericardioperitoneal canal: Part of the body cavity that connect 
the thoracic cavity with the abdominal cavity.
Pharyngeal arch: Paired mesenchymal bar of cells and neural 
crest cells located in the ventrolateral parts of the head of the 
embryo.
Phocomelia: Proximal portion of a limb shortened.
Placenta praevia: Placenta develops in a low position in the 
uterus, covering part or all of the cervix.
Pleuroperitoneal folds: Membranes that separate the pleural and 
abdominal (peritoneal) cavity.
Pluripotent: Cells that can give rise to most, but not all, of the 
tissues necessary for foetal development.
Polar body: A minute cell produced and ultimately discarded in 
the development of an oocyte, containing little or no 
cytoplasm but having one of the nuclei derived from the first 
or second meiotic division.
Polydactyly: Presence of an extra digit.
Polyhydramnios: Excess amniotic fluid.
Portosystemic shunt: Failure of the ductus venosus to close.
Prechordal plate: Thickened part of the endoderm inferior to the 
buccopharyngeal membrane.
Primary follicle: Cuboidal epithelial cells that surround a primary 
oocyte.
Primary lens fibres: The first fibres to be laid down within the 
lens of the eye.
Primary oocyte: Oocyte during meiosis I.
Primary spermatocytes: Spermatogonia divide by meiosis and 
become secondary spermatocytes.
Primitive node: A round mound of cells at the cephalic end of 
the primitive streak.
Primitive pit: A circular depression in the centre of the primitive 
node.
Primitive streak: A structure involved in initiating gastrulation 
runs as a depression on the epiblastic surface of the bilaminar 
disc, is restricted to the caudal half of the embryo.
Primordial phallus: Structure formed after the genital tubercle 
elongates.
Proliferation: During cell reproduction one cell (the ‘parental’ 
cell) divides to produce daughter cells i.e. by mitosis). This is 
one form of tissue growth.
Pronephros: First transient kidney structure to form, redundant 
in humans.
Pronucleus: The haploid nucleus of a sperm or egg before fusion 
of the nuclei in fertilisation.
Prosencephalon: Part of the neural tube that will become the 
forebrain.
Proliferating zone: An area of cells under the apical ectodermal 
ridge where cells divide rapidly.
Rectourethral (urorectal) fistula: Failure of the urorectal septum 
to form completely, leaving contact between the rectum and 
urethra.
Rectovaginal fistula: Failure of the urorectal septum to form 
completely, leaving contact between the rectum and vagina.
Respiratory distress syndrome:  Also known as hyaline mem­
brane disease, results from a lack of surfactant produced in 
the lungs.
Respiratory diverticulum: Ventral bud from the proximal 
foregut.
Rhombencephalon: Part of the neural tube that will become the 
hindbrain.
Rhombomeres: Eight divisions of the hindbrain, inferior to the 
cephalic flexure.
Rickets: A condition resulting in weakened bones.
Robin sequence: Micrognathia with cleft palate, glossoptosis 
and absent gag reflex.
Round ligament of the liver: Or ligamentum teres hepatis.
Sacrococcygeal teratomas: Primitive streak cells are retained in 
the sacrococcygeal region and develop into tumours.
Sclerotome: Medial part of the somite, forms vertebrae.
Scoliosis: Lateral curvature of the spine.
Secondary follicle: Oocyte surounded by more than one layer of 
follicular epithelial cells.
Secondary spermatocytes: Haploid spermatocytes.
Septum primum: Membranous septum grows down from the 
roof of the atria separating them into left and right atria.
Septum secundum: Membranous septum grows down from the 
roof of the atria to the right of the septum primum.
Septum transversum: A sheet of mesodermal cells located 
between the pericardial cavity and the yolk sac stalk that 
forms a major part of the diaphragm, also involved in 
dividing the thoracic and abdominal cavities.
Shingles: Also called herpes zoster, viral disease that affects one 
dermatome.
Sinovaginal bulb: Outgrowth from the urogenital sinus.
Sinus venosus: Forms the inflow to the heart tube from the 
convergence of the major embryonic veins.
Sister chromatids: Identical copies of DNA.
Situs inversus: All internal organs are asymmetrical.
Somite: Paraxial mesodermal groups of cells forming either side 
of the midline, will form dermis, muscle and vertebrae.
Somitocoele: A lumen that develops in the centre of the somite.

Glossary  113
Somitomeres: Paraxial mesodermal groups of cells forming 
either side of the midline, develop into somites.
Spermatids: Haploid cells formed from secondary spermatocytes 
dividing my meiosis II.
Spermatogenesis: Processes by which a spermatogonia becomes 
a spermatozoa.
Spermatogonia: Diploid germ cells that are stored in the testes, 
divide by meiosis to become primary spermatocytes.
Spermatozoa: Mature sperm ready for fertilisation.
Spermiogenesis: Formation of elongated spermatid, with tail 
and acrosome.
Spina bifida: Failure of the vertebrae is fuse completely.
Splanchnic mesoderm: The internal layer of the lateral plate 
mesoderm.
Stomodeum: A midline ectodermal depression ventral to the 
embryonic brain in the future face and surrounded by the 
mandibular arch.
Subcardinal veins: Longitudinal medial branching of the cardinal 
veins that form anastomoses with the posterior cardinal 
veins.
Sulcus limitans: A groove that divides the dorsal and ventral 
horns of the spinal cord.
Supracardinal veins: Longitudinal branching of the cardinal 
veins located between the cardinal nd subcardinal veins, form 
anastomoses with the posterior cardinal veins.
Syncytial knots: Grape-like nucleated clusters within the 
cytoplasm of the syncytiotrophoblast that occur late in the 
third trimester of pregnancy.
Syncytiotrophoblast: The syncytial outer layer of the 
trophoblast.
Syncytium: A mass of cytoplasm having many nuclei but no 
internal cell boundaries.
Syndetome: Located in the anterior and posterior edges of the 
somites between the cells of the myotome and sclerotome, 
contains tendon precursor cells.
Telecephalon: Part of the forebrain that will become the cerebral 
hemispheres.
Teratogen: Substance causing teratogenesis.
Teratogenesis: The formation of congenital malformations. 
Literally ‘monster making’ (Greek).
Tetralogy of Fallot: A collection of four congenital defects 
including pulmonary stenosis, an overriding aorta connecting 
both ventricles, a ventricular septal defect and hypertrophy of 
the right ventricle.
Thyroglossal duct: The connection between the thyroid gland 
and the tongue.
Totipotent: Cells able to divide and produce all the differentiated 
cells in an organism (stem cell).
Tracheoesophageal fistula: Abnormal connection between 
oesophagus and trachea.
Tracheoesophageal septum: Septum separating the respiratory 
bud and the oesophagus.
Treacher Collins syndrome: A genetic mutation causing the 
incomplete form of mandibulofacial dysostosis.
Trilaminar disc: Ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm layers of 
the developing embryo.
Trophoblast: The outermost layer of cells of the blastocyst that 
attaches the fertilised ovum to the uterine wall and serves as a 
nutritive pathway for the embryo.
Truncus arteriosus: The cranial part of the primitive heart tube, 
becomes the ascending aorta and the pulmonary trunk.
Tubotympanic recess: The future pharyngotympanic tube 
(Eustachian/auditory) formed from the first pharyngeal 
pouch.
Ultimobranchial body: Collection of cells derived from the fifth 
pharyngeal pouch.
Umbilical veins: Two vessels that carry oxygenated blood from 
the placenta to the foetus.
Urachus: Forms from the allantois and becomes the median 
umbilical ligament.
Ureteric bud: Bud from the caudal end of the mesonephric duct.
Urethral plate: The structure created from a groove in the 
urogenital sinus lined with endodermal cells.
Urogenital folds: Also called urethral and clocal folds, mesenchy­
mal folds surrounding the cloacal membrane.
Urogenital membrane: Ventral division of the cloacal membrane 
split by the urogenital septum.
Urogenital ridge: Forms from intermediate mesoderm.
Urogenital sinus: Anterior part of the cloaca when divided by 
the urogenital septum.
Urorectal septum: Mesodermal septum that divides the cloaca.
Uterovaginal primordium: Formed from paramesonephric ducts 
that fuse in the midline at pelvic level.
Vacuole: 1. A small cavity in the cytoplasm of a cell, bound by a 
single membrane and containing water, food or metabolic 
waste.
2. A small space or cavity in a tissue.
Vaginal plate: Fusion of the sinovaginal bulbs.
Ventral floor plate: Ventral bridging area for nerve fibres between 
the ventral horns of the spinal cord.
Ventral mesentery: Develops form the septum transversum.
Ventricular zone: Also called the ependymal layer, comprises 
thickening layers of neuroepithelia.
Vitelline cyst: Also called a omphalomesenteric duct cyst, cyst 
formed in the vitelline duct.
Vitelline stalk: Remaining contact between the gut tube and the 
yolk sac.
Vitelline vessels: Carry blood to and from the yolk sac.
Zona pellucida: The thick, solid, transparent outer membrane of 
a developed mammalian ovum.
Zone of polarising activity: A group of cells in the caudal 
mesenchyme of the limb bud.
Zygote: The cell formed by the union of two gametes, especially 
a fertilised ovum before cleavage.

Embryology at a Glance, First Edition. Samuel Webster and Rhiannon de Wreede. 
114  © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Index
atelectasis 69
atria 58, 59, 60, 61
atrial septa 8, 60, 61
defect 61, 67
atrioventricular canals 59, 60, 108
auricle 96, 97
autoimmune diseases 31
autonomic nervous system 93, 95
autosomes 21
axial skeleton 53
azygos continuation 65
azygos vein 64, 65
basal ganglia 93
basal lamina 41
basal layer, endometrium 31
basal plates 92, 93, 108
Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome 75
bicuspid valve 61
bilaminar disc 30, 31, 108
gastrulation 34, 35
twins 29
bile duct 72, 73
bladder 71, 76, 77, 78
blastocoele 28, 29, 30, 108
blastocyst 8, 17, 28, 29, 30, 31, 108
placenta 32, 33
blastomeres 29, 108
blindness 99
blood–air barrier 69
blood islands 58, 59, 63
blood pressure 33
blood supply 8, 85, 87, 89, 90, 91
gastrointestinal tract 70, 71
urinary system 76, 77
see also circulatory system
body cavities 8, 42, 43
bone marrow 51
bones 36, 37, 50, 51, 52, 53
ear 53, 85, 87, 96, 97
pharyngeal arches 85, 87, 89
ulna 14, 15
bony labyrinth 97
Bowman’s capsule 76, 77
brachiocephalic veins 64, 64
brachydactyly 57
brachyury 35
bradykinin 67
brain 38, 39, 93, 95
circulation change at birth 66, 67
folding of embryo 44, 45
brainstem 93
bronchi 68, 69
bronchial blood circulation 69
bronchial buds 68, 69, 108
bronchial tree 69
bronchioles 68, 69
buccopharyngeal membrane 35, 44, 45, 70, 71, 
108
bulbourethral gland 26, 27
bulboventricular loop 59
bulboventricular sulcus 59, 108
bulbus cordis 58, 59, 61, 108
C cells 83
cadherins 35
caecum 71
caffeine 35
calcitonin 91
calcium 51
supplements 83, 89, 91
calvaria 53
canalicular lung development 68, 69
capacitation 27, 208
cardiac loop 59, 108
cardiac muscle 54, 55
cardinal veins 62, 63, 64, 65, 108
cardiogenic field 59, 108
carpals 14, 15
cartilage 50, 51, 52, 90, 91
caudal, defined 12, 13
caudal fold 44, 45
celiac trunk 65
cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) 35
cell cycle 18, 19
central nervous system 8, 36, 39, 92, 93
centrioles 18, 19, 21
centromeres 18, 19, 21
cerberus 35
cerebral cortex 93
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 93
cerebellum 93
cervical sinus 86, 87, 108
cheiloschisis (cleft lip) 41, 74, 75, 108
chemotherapy 25
chondrocytes 51
chondroitin sulphate-rich proteoglycans 41
chordae tendinae 61
chordin 35
chorion 30, 31, 33, 108
twins 28, 29
chorionic cavity 43
chorionic sacs 28, 29
chorionic villi 32, 33
choroid 98, 99
choroid fissure 98, 99, 108
choroid plexus 93
chromatids 18, 19, 20, 21, 27, 111
chromosomes 18, 19, 20, 21, 27
genital abnormalities 81
homologous 20, 21, 23, 109
Hox genes 47
inversion 19
oogenesis 25
sex 21, 23, 25, 27, 79
spermatogenesis 23
translocation 19
trisomy 19, 21
XXY 21
ciliary body 98, 99
circulatory system 62, 63
changes at birth 66, 67
embryonic veins 64, 65
gastrointestinal tract 70, 71
heart chambers 60, 61
heart tube 58, 59
see also blood supply
Page numbers in italics refer to Figures
abdominal cavity 43
abnormal rotation of the intestine 
75
accessory renal arteries 77
accessory spleen 75
accretion 14, 15, 108
achondroplastic dwarfism 57, 108
acinus 69
acrosome 23, 26, 27, 108
adhesion 31
adrenal glands 82, 83
adrenaline 83
afterbirth 33
age and reduced fertility 25
alar plates 92, 93, 94, 95, 108
albinism 41, 99, 108
alcohol 33, 35
aldosterone 79
allantois 31, 71, 77, 108
folding of embryo 44, 45
alleles 20, 21
alpha-fetoprotein levels 53
alveolar lung development 68, 69
alveoli 68, 69
amelia 57
amnion 29, 30, 31, 108
amniotic bands 15
amniotic cavity 14, 30, 31, 42
folding of embryo 44, 45
gastrulation 34
placenta 32
amniotic sacs for twins 28, 29
ampulla 96, 97
ampulla of Vater 73
anal atresia 75, 108
anal canal 77
anal membrane 79, 108
anaphase 18, 19, 27
meiosis 20, 21
androgen 79
androgen insensitivity syndrome 79
anencephaly 39, 93, 108
angioblasts 58, 59, 63
angiogenesis 63
annular pancreas 75
anorectal canal 70, 71, 108
antibiotics 33
antibodies 33
antiphospholipid syndrome 31
antrum 24, 25, 108
anus 35, 37, 74, 75
imperforate 75
aortic arches 62, 63, 108
aortic stenosis 61, 108
apical ectodermal ridge (AER) 56, 57, 
108
apoptosis 15, 108
appendages (tags) 97
appendicular skeleton 53
apposition 31
arachnoid mater 93

Index  115
cleavage 28, 29, 108
cleft lip ((cheiloschisis) 41, 74, 75, 108
cleft palate (palatoschisis) 41, 53, 74, 75, 85, 111
clitoris 78, 79
cloaca 70, 71, 76, 77
cloacal folds 79
cloacal membrane 35, 70, 71, 79, 108
folding of embryo 44, 45
cloned 29
coarctation of the aorta 63, 108
cochlear aqueduct 97
cochlear duct 96, 97
coeliac artery 70, 71
coelom 45, 108
collagen 41
coloboma 99, 108
common bile duct 73
compact layer, endometrium 31
congenital abnormalities 11, 15, 39, 41
digestive system 74, 75
congenital adrenal hyperplasia 79, 83, 108
congenital cataracts 99, 108
congenital cysts of the lung 69
congenital diaphragmatic hernia 43, 108
congenital digestive system abnormalities 74, 75
congenital facial paralysis 87
congenital glaucoma 99, 108
congenital heart defects 59, 61
congenital hiatal hernia 75, 108
congenital hypoparathyrodism 89, 108
congenital hypopituitarism 83, 108
congenital hypothyroidism 83, 108
congenital scoliosis 47
congenital subglottic stenosis 91, 108
conjoined twins 29
connecting stalk 14, 30
folding of embryo 44, 45
conotruncal defects 61
conotruncal outflow tract 60, 61
conotruncal septum 60, 61, 108
conus arteriosus 60, 61, 108
conus cordis 59, 108
cornea 98, 99
corona radiate 26, 27
coronal plane 12
coronary arteries 63
corpus albicans 25, 108
corpus luteum 24, 25, 31, 33, 108
cortex 80, 81, 82, 83
cortical granule 26, 27, 108
corticoids 33
cortisol 79
cotyledons 32, 33, 108
cranial, defined 12, 13
cranial fold 44, 45
cranial nerves 84, 85, 87, 89, 90, 91, 95
central nervous system 93
ear 97
peripheral nervous system 95
craniosynostosis 53, 108
cranium 52, 53
cricoid cartilage 91
cryopreservation of oocytes 25
cryptorchidism 81, 108
cumulus cells 26, 27
cumulus oophorus 24, 25, 108
curvature of the spine 51, 53
cystica 38
cytokinesis 18, 19, 21
cytomegalovirus (CMV) 97
cytotrophoblast 14, 30, 108
placenta 32, 33
deafness and hearing loss 87, 97
cleft lip and palate 75
Treacher Collins syndrome 85
Waardenburg syndrome 41
decidual cells 30, 31
decidual reaction 33
decidualisation 31, 109
dedifferentiation 15
definitive oocyte 27
deformation, defined 15
dermamyotomes 57
dermatomes 48, 49, 95, 109
limbs 56, 57
dermis 36, 37
dermotomes 48, 49, 109
dermomyotome 48, 49
dextrocardia 59, 109
diabetes 33, 35
diaphragm 42, 43, 73
diaphysis 50, 51, 52, 53
diencephalon 82, 83, 92, 93, 95, 109
differentiation 15, 41, 109
DiGeorge syndrome (Catch22 syndrome) 41, 53, 
91
digestive system 8, 70, 71
associated organs 72, 73
congenital abnormalities 74, 75
see also gastrointestinal tract
digit formation 56, 57
diploid cells 21, 27, 109
oogenesis 25
spermatogenesis 22, 23
dispermy 27
distal, defined 12, 13
dizygotic twins 28, 29
DNA 18, 19, 20, 21, 23
fertilisation 27
fragmentation 25
segmentation 47
signalling 35
DNA synthesis phase 18, 19, 20
dorsal, defined 12, 13
dorsal aortae 62, 63, 109
embryonic veins 64, 65
dorsal mesentery 37, 42, 71, 81, 109
dorsal ramus 95
dorsal roof plate 109
dorsal root ganglia 41, 92, 93, 94, 95
double inferior vena cavae 65, 109
double superior vena cavae 65, 109
Down syndrome (trisomy 21) 19, 21, 97
Drosophila melanogaster 46, 47
drug misuse 33
Duchenne muscular dystrophy 55
ductus arteriosus 63, 90, 91, 109
changes at birth 66, 67
ductus (vas) deferens 22, 23, 26, 27, 78, 79, 
81
ductus reuniens 97
ductus venosus 65, 66, 67, 109
duodenum 71, 73
dura mater 93
dwarfism 53, 57, 108
dysmorphogenesis 15
dystrophin 55
eardrum 97
ears 8, 85, 86, 87, 96, 97
bones 85, 87
E-cadherin 35
ectoderm 34, 35, 36, 37, 109
CNS 92, 93
ears 97
eyes 98
folding of embryo 44, 45
limbs 57
muscular system 54, 55
neural crest cells 37, 40, 41
neurulation 38, 39
pharyngeal arches 85, 86, 88
pituitary gland 83
PNS 95
somites 48, 49
ectopic lung lobes 69
ectopic parathyroid tissue 83, 89
ectopic pregnancy 27
ectopic thyroid tissue 83
ectrodactyly 57, 109
Edwards syndrome (trisomy 18) 21, 75
Ehlers–Danlos syndrome 97
ejaculatory duct 78, 79
embryo, defined 109
embryoblasts 28, 29, 30, 31, 109
embryological and clinical timings 16, 17, 27
embryology, defined 10, 11, 109
embryonic lung development 68, 69
embryonic period 8, 16, 17
embryonic pole 29, 31
encephalocoele 93, 109
endocardial cushions 60, 61, 109
endocardial tube 58
endochondral ossification 50, 51, 53, 57, 85
endocrine system 8, 82, 83
endoderm 34, 35, 36, 37, 109
ears 97
endocrine system 83
folding of embryo 44, 45
gastrointestinal tract 71
heart tube 59
muscular system 54
neural crest cells 40, 41
neurulation 38, 39
pharyngeal arches 85, 86, 88, 89, 91
reproductive system 79
endolymphatic duct 96, 97
endometrial lining 25, 31
endometrium 25, 29, 31, 32, 33, 109
environmental factors 11, 15, 17, 23, 97
enzymes 26, 27, 83
epaxial muscles 49, 55
ependymal layer 93
epiblasts 14, 30, 31, 34, 109
epidermis 36, 37
epididymis 22, 23, 27, 78, 79
epigenetic theory 11
epiglottis 91
epiphyseal growth plates 50, 51, 53
epiphyses 50, 51, 52, 53
epispadias 79, 109
epithelialisation 49
erythroblastosis fetalis 33

ethmoid bone 52, 53
exchange zones 33
exencephaly 39, 109
exomphalos 75
exstrophy 77, 109
extensors 57
external auditory meatus 84, 85, 96, 97, 109
external ear 96, 97
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) 
43
extra-embryonic cavity 43, 109
extraocular muscles 55, 99
extra-uterine pregnancy 27, 109
eyes 8, 98, 99
facial abnormalities 74, 75
facial nerve (CN VII) 87, 97
falciform ligament 71, 73
Fallopian (uterine) tubes 25, 26, 27, 28, 78, 79
fertilisation 8, 11, 16, 26, 27, 109
oogenesis 24
spermatogenesis 23
fibrinoid deposits 33, 109
fibroblast growth factors (FGF) 35, 47, 57
fibronectin 31, 41
fibrous pericardium 42, 43
fimbriae 25, 26, 27
flexors 57
foetal haemoglobin (HbF) 33
foetal period 8, 16, 17
foetus, defined 109
folding of embryo 8, 44, 45, 58, 59
folding of heart tube 58, 59
folic acid 35, 39, 53, 75
follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) 25, 29, 30, 
31
follicles 26, 27, 29, 109
follicular development 24, 25
follicular phase 31
fontanelle 52, 53, 109
foot plates 57
foramen cecum 83, 109
foramen ovale 60, 61, 66, 67, 109
forebrain 93, 98, 99
foregut 14, 70, 71, 74, 75
respiratory system 68, 69
fossa ovalis 66, 67, 109
frontal bones 52, 53
gall bladder 72, 73
gametes 21, 23, 25, 27, 37
gap genes 46, 47
gap junction 109
gas exchange 33
gastrointestinal tract 14, 15, 36, 37, 70, 71
musculature 55
see also digestive system
gastroschisis 43, 45, 109
gastrosplenic ligament 72, 73
gastrulation 8, 34, 35, 109
genes 20, 21
limbs 57
muscular system 55
neural crest cells 41
segmentation 46, 47
signalling 35
genital tubercle 78, 79, 109
germ cell tumours 37
germ cells 37, 80, 81
germ layers 8, 36, 37
glands 36, 37
glioblasts 93
glomerulus 76, 77
glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX) 89
glucose 33
Goldenhar syndrome 87, 109
gonadal dysgenesis 81, 109
gonadal ridge 76, 77, 78, 80, 81, 109
gonadotrophin releasing hormone (GnRH) 25
gonads 78, 80, 81
goosecoid 35
Graafian follicles 24, 25, 31, 109
granulosa cells 24, 25
greater omentum 70, 71, 109
grey matter 92, 93, 94, 95
grey ramus communicans 95
growth factors 35, 109
growth hormone 83
gubernaculum 81, 09
gut tube 37, 69, 70, 71
haemangioblasts 63
haematopoiesis 73
haematopoietic cells 50, 51, 73
haematopoietic stem cells 63
hands 56, 57
haploid cells 20, 21, 27, 109
oogenesis 25
spermatogenesis 22, 23
Hassall’s corpuscles 87
hatching 31
head and neck 8, 55
arch I 84, 85
arch II 86, 87
arch III 88, 89
arches IV-VI 90, 91
heart 62
heart tube 8, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62
folding of embryo 44, 45
muscular system 55
hemiazygos veins 64, 65
hemivertebra 47
hepatic diverticulum 73
hepatic sinusoids 73
hepatocytes 73
herpes virus 35
hillocks 96, 97
hindbrain 93
hindgut 14, 70, 71, 75
HIV 33
homeobox 47
homeodomain 47
homologous chromosomes 20, 21, 23, 109
homologous recombination 21
hormones 79, 81, 82, 83
menstrual cycle 30, 31
oogenesis 25
placenta 33
signalling 15
spermatogenesis 23
horseshoe kidney 77
Hox genes 46, 47, 49, 85
Hox proteins 47
human chorionic gonadotrophin hormone (hCG) 
31, 33
human chorionic somatomammotrophin (hCS) 
33
humerus 14, 52
hyaline membrane disease 69
hyaloid artery 99
hydrocephalus 93, 109
21-hydroxylase 83
hyoid bone 88, 89
hypaxial musculature 49, 55
hyperbilirubinemia 97
hypertrophy 14, 15, 109
hypoblasts 14, 30, 31, 34, 35, 109
hypocalcaemia 91
hypoparathyroidism 83, 91
hypophysial diverticulum 82, 83, 110
hypophysis 82, 83
hypospadias 79, 110
hyposplenism 75, 110
hypothalamus 82, 83, 93
hypoxia 33
ileal diverticulum 74, 75
immunosuppressant cytokines 31
implantation 8, 25, 28, 29, 30, 31, 110
in vitro fertilisation (IVF) 25, 27, 29, 31
incus 53, 85, 87, 96, 97
indifferent stage 79
induction 71, 110
inferior mesenteric artery 65
inferior parathyroid gland 89
inferior vena cava (IVC) 59, 64, 65
changes at birth 66, 67
infundibulum 83
inguinal hernia 81
inner cell mass 29
innervation 49
insulin 73
integrins 35
interior mesenteric artery 70, 71
intermediate horn 93, 110
intermediate mesoderm 35, 49, 54, 77, 81, 110
internal joint ligaments 50, 51
interphase 18, 19, 20, 21
interventricular foramen 60, 61, 110
interventricular septum 60, 61, 110
intraembryonic cavity 42, 43, 110
intramembranous ossification 51, 53, 85
intrauterine devices (IUDs) 31
intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) 33, 110
invasion 31
iridopupillary membrane 98, 99
iris 98, 99
islets of Langerhans 73
jaundice 75, 97
joint formation 50, 51
karyotype 20, 21
kidneys 76, 77
dysfunction 33
Klinefelter syndrome (XXY) 21
Klippel–Feil syndrome 53
Kupffer cells 73
kyphosis 47
labia majora 78, 79
labia minora 78, 79
labioscrotal swellings 78, 79, 81, 110
116  Index

Index  117
lactation 33, 51
lactogen 33
lacunae 32, 110
laminin 31
language 12, 13
large intestine 71
laryngeal nerve (CN X) 90
laryngomalacia 91, 110
larynx 90, 91
lateral, defined 12, 13
lateral folding 44, 45
lateral mesoderm 49
lateral plate mesoderm 35, 54, 55, 59, 110
lateral ventricles 93
left atrioventricular valve 61
left atrium 58
lens placodes 98, 99, 110
lens vesicles 98, 99, 110
lesser omentum 70, 71, 73, 110
Leydig cells 23, 81
ligaments 85, 87
ligamentum arteriosum 67, 110
ligamentum venosus 67, 110
limb buds 14, 15, 55, 56, 57
limbs 54, 55, 56, 57
lips 74, 75
liver 71, 72, 73, 75
liver bud 72, 73, 110
longitudinal folding 44, 45
lordosis 47
lung bud 68, 69, 72, 73
lung collapse 69
lungs 36, 37, 42, 43, 59, 68, 69
blood vessels 63
changes at birth 66, 67
luteal phase 31
luteinising hormone (LH) 25, 30, 31
malformation, defined 15
malleus 53, 85, 87, 96, 97
mammary glands 33
mandible 52, 53, 84, 85
mandibular process 84, 85, 110
mandibulofacial dysotosis 53
mantle layer 92, 93
marginal layer 92, 93
mature vesicular follicles 24, 25
maxilla 52, 53, 84, 85
maxillary process 84, 85, 110
Meckel’s cartilage 85
Meckel’s diverticulum 74, 75
medial, defined 12, 13
medial umbilical ligament 77
median umbilical ligament 67, 77, 110
medulla 82, 83
gonads 80, 81
medulla oblongata 93
meiosis 20, 21, 27, 110
oogenesis 24, 25
spermatogenesis 22, 23
melanin production 41
melanocytes 37, 39, 41, 49
membranous interventricular septum 61, 110
membranous labyrinth 97
membranous viscerocranium 52, 53
Mendelian inheritance 21
meninges 93, 99
neurulation 38, 39
meningitis 97
meningocoele 53
menisci 51
menstrual cycle 16, 17, 25, 27
hormones 30, 31
menstrual phase 31
meromelia 57, 110
mesencephalon 92, 93, 95, 110
mesenchymal cells 50, 51, 57, 61
mesenchymal layer 99
mesenchyme 41, 50, 51, 84, 85
ears 97
limbs 56
muscular system 55
respiratory system 69
mesenteries 70, 71
mesoderm 34, 35, 36, 37, 110
blood vessels 63
body cavities 43
central nervous system 93
ears 97
folding of embryo 44, 45
gastrointestinal tract 71
heart tube 58, 59
muscular system 54, 55
neural crest cells 40, 41
neurulation 38, 39
reproductive system 79, 81
respiratory system 69
segmentation clock 46, 47
skeletal system 51, 53
somites 48, 49
urinary system 77
mesodermal epithelium 81
mesonephric ducts 76, 77, 78, 79, 110
mesonephric tubules 76, 77, 81
mesonephros 76, 77, 110
metanephric cap 76, 77, 110
metanephros 76, 77, 110
metaphase 18, 19, 20, 21
metencephalon 92, 93, 95, 110
microtubules 18, 19, 21
midbrain 93, 95
middle ear 96, 97
bones 53, 85, 87, 96, 97
midgut 14, 70, 71
congenital abnormalities 74, 75
migration 15, 38, 39
neural crest cells 38, 39, 40, 41
miscarriage 31
mitosis 18, 19, 20, 21, 110
fertilisation 27
spermatogenesis 23
zygotes 28, 29
mitotic spindle 18, 19, 21
monozygotic twins 28
morning sickness 17
morphogen 110
morphogen gradient 14, 46, 47
morphogenesis 14, 15, 46, 47, 110
signalling 35
morula 26, 28, 29, 31, 110
mouth 35, 37, 45, 55, 71, 85
congenital abnormalities 74, 75
mRNA 35
Müller tubercle 79
Müllerian ducts 79
multipotent cells 41
muscles 36, 37, 99
pharyngeal arches 85, 87, 89, 91
muscular dystrophy 55, 110
muscular interventricular septum 61, 110
muscular system 8, 54, 55
musculoskeletal systems 8, 56, 57
myelencephalon 92, 93, 95, 110
myelin 95
myelomeningocoele (cystica) 38, 53
myoblasts 49, 54, 55, 57, 59
myocardial cells 58
myocytes 55
myogenesis 55
myotome 48, 49, 54, 55, 110
limbs 56, 57
nephrogenic cord 76, 77, 78, 110
nephrons 76, 77
nerves
pharyngeal arches 85, 87, 89, 91
see also cranial nerves
nervous system 36, 37, 38, 39
central 8, 36, 39, 92, 93
neural crest cells 8, 37, 40, 41, 110
central nervous system 93
endocrine system 82, 83
melanocytes 49
neurulation 38, 39, 40, 41, 61
peripheral nervous system 94, 95
pharyngeal arches 41, 85, 89, 91
skeletal system 51, 52
smooth muscle 55
neural field 39, 110
neural groove 39, 110
neural plate 39, 110
neural tube 38, 39, 40, 41, 110
central nervous system 92, 93
folding of embryo 44, 45
peripheral nervous system 94, 95
somites 48, 49
neuroblasts 93, 95
neurocoele 92, 93
neurocranium 52, 53
neuroectoderm 83, 93, 95, 98
neuroepithelia 93, 110
neurohypophysial diverticulum 82, 83, 110
neurolemmal cells 95
neurones 56, 57
neurons 93, 95, 99
neuropores 8, 39, 41, 110
neurulation 8, 37, 38, 39, 110
central nervous system 93
neural crest cells 38, 39, 40, 41, 61
peripheral nervous system 95
nodal 35
noradrenaline 83
Notch pathway 46, 47
Notch signalling 49
notochord 49, 52, 53, 110
neural crest cells 40
neurulation 38, 39
notochordal plate 39
notochordal process 39, 110
nutrients 33
oblique planes 12
occipital bones 52, 53
oculomotor nerve (CN III) 95

oesophageal atresia 69
oesophagus 71, 73, 74, 75
oestrogen 25, 29, 30, 33, 79, 83
olfactory nerve (CN I) 95
oligohydramnios 77, 110
omenta 70, 71
omphalocoele 43, 45, 74, 75, 110
omphalomesenteric duct cyst 75
oocytes 21, 24, 25, 26, 27, 110
fertilisation 26, 27
germ cells 37
primary 24, 25, 111
secondary 24, 25, 27
oogenesis 8, 24, 25
oogonia 24, 25, 81, 111
operculum 87, 111
optic cup 93, 98, 99, 111
optic lens 98, 99
optic nerve (CN II) 95, 98, 99
optic stalk 93, 98, 99, 111
optic ventricle 98, 99
optic vesicles 98, 99, 111
oral contraceptive pill 25
organ of Corti 97
oropharyngeal membrane 35
ossicles 96, 97
ossification 8, 50, 51, 52, 53
osteoblasts 50, 51
osteoclasts 51
osteocytes 51
osteoid 51
ostium primum 61, 111
ostium secundum 60, 61, 111
otic placode 96, 97, 111
otic vesicle 96, 97, 111
otocyst 97
outer cell mass 29
oval window 96, 97
ovarian arteries 81
ovarian cancer 81
ovarian ligament 81
ovaries 24, 25, 28, 29, 78, 81
ovulation 24, 25, 26, 27, 30
ovum 23, 26, 27, 28, 29, 31, 111
oxygen 69
pair rule genes 46, 47
palatine tonsil 86, 87
palatoschisis (cleft palate) 41, 53, 74, 75, 85, 111
pancreas 72, 73, 75
parafollicular cells 83
paramesonephric ducts 78, 79, 111
paramesonephris tubercle 79
parathyroid gland 83, 88, 89, 91
parathyroid hormone (PTH) 89, 91
paraxial mesoderm 35, 49, 53, 111
muscular system 54, 55
parietal bones 52, 53
Patau syndrome 97
patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) 67, 111
patent foramen ovale (PFO) 67, 111
penile raphe 78, 79
penis 78, 79
pericardial cavity 42, 43, 58, 59
pericardioperitoneal canals 42, 43, 111
period of the egg 17
periosteum 50, 51
peripheral nervous system (PNS) 8, 36, 39, 94, 95
peritoneal cavity 43
pharyngeal arches 37, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 111
blood vessels 62, 63
fifth 63, 85, 90, 91
first 84, 85, 87
fourth 83, 84, 87, 89, 90, 91
muscular system 55
neural crest cells 41, 85, 89, 91
second 84, 86, 87
sixth 69, 84, 90, 91
skeletal system 51, 53
third 84, 87, 88, 89
pharyngeal clefts 84, 85, 87, 89, 91
pharyngeal pouches 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 91
ears 97
pharyngotympanic tube 96, 97
pharynx 71, 90, 91
phocomelia 15, 57, 111
phosphorus 51
photoreceptive layer 99
phrenic nerve 42, 43
pia mater 93
pineal body 83, 93
pits (sinuses) 97
pituitary gland 25, 31, 82, 83, 93
placenta 8, 31, 32, 33, 66, 67
twins 28, 29
placenta accreta 33
placenta increta 33
placenta percreta 33
placenta praevia 31, 111
placental insufficiency 33
pleural cavity 42, 43
pleuropericardial folds 42, 43
pleuroperitoneal folds 42, 43, 111
pluripotent cells 41, 111
pneumonia after birth 69
Poland anomaly 55
polar bodies 24, 25, 111
polycystic kidneys 77
polydactyly 57, 111
polyhydramnios 69, 75, 111
polyspermy 27
polysplenia 75
pons 93
pontine flexure 92
portosystemic shunt 67, 111
portosystemic venous anastomoses 37
preaortic ganglia 95
prechordal plate 35, 111
pre-eclampsia 33
premature birth 16, 17, 29, 69
primary centre of ossification 50, 51, 53
primary follicle 24, 25, 111
primary lens fibres 98, 99, 111
primary oocytes 24, 25, 111
primary spermatocytes 22, 23, 111
primitive circulation 62, 63
primitive follicle 81
primitive node 34, 35, 39, 111
primitive pit 35, 111
primitive sex cords 80, 81
primitive streak 34, 35, 111
primitive ventricle 58, 59
primordial follicle 24, 25
primordial phallus 78, 79, 111
progestational phase 31
progesterone 25, 30, 31, 33
proliferating zone (PZ) 56, 57, 111
proliferation 14, 15, 35, 111
proliferative phase 31
prometaphase 18, 19, 20, 21
pronephros 76, 77, 111
pronucleus 27, 111
prophase 18, 19, 20, 21
prosencephalon 92, 93, 95, 111
prostaglandins 67
prostate gland 26, 27, 76
proteinuria 33
proteins 15
proteoglycans 41
proximal, defined 12, 13
pseudoglandular lung development 68, 69
pulmonary arteries 69
pulmonary blood circulation 69
pulmonary trunk 60, 61
pulmonary veins 59, 69
pyramidal lobe 83
radiation 23, 35
radiotherapy 25
radius 14, 15
Rathke’s pouch 83
rectourethral fistula 74, 75, 111
rectovaginal fistula 74, 75, 111
recurrent laryngeal nerve 90, 91
renal agenesis 77
reproductive system 8, 36, 37, 78, 79
gonads 80, 81
respiratory distress syndrome 69, 111
respiratory diverticulum 73, 111
respiratory system 8, 17, 68, 69
respiratory tracts 36, 37
respiratory tree 68, 69
rete testis 23, 80, 81
retina 36, 37, 39, 98, 99
retinoic acid (vitamin A) 35
reverse rotation of intestine 75
Rhesus (Rh) factors 33
rhombencephalon 92, 93, 111
rhombomeres 85, 91, 94, 95, 111
ribs 53
rickets 51, 111
right atrioventricular valve 61
right atrium 59
Robin sequence 53, 85, 111
rostral, defined 12, 13
rostral cranial neuropore 38
round ligament 67, 81, 111
rubella 35, 97, 99
saccular lung development 68, 69
saccule 96, 97
sacrococcygeal teratomas 35, 111
scala media 96, 97
scala tympani 96, 97
scala vestibule 96, 97
Schwann cells 41, 95
sclera 98, 99
scleratome48, 49, 111
muscular system 54, 55
skeletal system 52, 53
scoliosis 53, 111
scrotal raphe 78, 79
scrotum 78, 79
second polar body 27
118  Index

Index  119
secondary centres of ossification 50, 51, 53
secondary follicles 24, 25, 111
secondary lens fibres 99
secondary oocytes 24, 25, 27
secondary spermatocytes 22, 23, 111
secretory phase 31
segment polarity genes 46, 47
segmentation 8, 46, 47
segmentation clock 46, 47
semicircular canals 96, 97
seminal vesicles 26, 27
seminiferous tubules 23, 78, 81
sensory cells 97
primary 22, 23, 111
secondary 22, 23, 111
septum primum 60, 61, 111
septum secundum 60, 61, 111
septum transversum 42, 43, 71, 73, 111
Sertoli cells 23, 81
sex chromosomes 21, 23, 25, 27, 79
sex cords 80, 81
sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) 23
shingles 48, 49, 111
signalling 15, 35
signalling molecules 35
sinovaginal bulbs 78, 79, 111
sinus tubercle 79
sinus venosus 58, 59, 111
sister chromatids 18, 19, 20, 21, 27, 111
situs inversus 59, 111
skeletal muscle 54, 55
skeletal system 8, 50, 51, 52, 53
skin 48, 49
small intestine 70, 71
smoking 23, 33, 35
smooth muscle 54, 55
somatic mesoderm 52
somites 8, 27, 38, 48, 49, 111
limbs 56, 57
muscular system 54, 55
segmentation 46, 47
somitocoele 48, 49, 111
somitomeres 49, 99, 112
spermatids 23, 112
spermatocytes 22, 23, 37
primary 22, 23, 111
secondary 22, 23, 111
spermatocytogenesis 23
spermatogenesis 8, 22, 23, 81, 112
spermatogonia 22, 23, 81, 112
spermatozoa 21, 22, 23, 112
fertilisation 26, 27
twins 29
spermiogenesis 22, 23, 112
sphenoid bone 52, 53
spina bifida 38, 39, 53, 112
spina bifida cystica 53
spina bifida meningocele 38, 39
spina bifida occulta 38, 39, 53
spinal cord 38, 39, 92, 93, 95
spinal ganglia 93
spinal nerves 92, 93, 95
splanchnic mesoderm 55, 112
splanchnic muscle 54
spleen 72, 73, 75
splenic lobulation 75
splenogonadal fusion 75
splenorenal ligament 72, 73
spongioblasts 93
spongy layer, endometrium 31
spontaneous abortion 35
squint 99
stapedius muscle 97
stapes 53, 87, 96, 97
stem cells 15
sternum 53
steroids 69, 83
stomach 70, 71, 74, 75
stomodeum 84, 85, 112
straight tubules 23
subcardinal veins 64, 65, 112
sulcus limitans 92, 93
superior laryngeal branch 90, 91
superior mesenteric artery 65, 70, 71
superior parathyroid glands 91
superior vena cava (SVC) 64, 65
changes at birth 66, 67
supernumerary kidneys 77
supernumerary ureters 77
supracardinal veins 64, 65
surfactant 99
suspensory ligament 98, 99
sympathetic ganglia 41, 94, 95
sympathetic trunk 94, 95
syncytial knots 33, 112
syncytiotrophoblasts 30, 32, 33, 59, 112
syncytium 59, 112
syndactyly 57
syndetome 49, 55, 112
synovial cells 50, 51
synovial joint 50, 51
synthetic parathyroid hormone supplements 91
systemic lupus erythematosus 31
tectorial membrane 97
telencephalon 92, 93, 95, 112
telophase 18, 19, 20, 21
temazepam 35
temporal bones 52, 53
tendons 43, 49, 54, 55
tensor tympani muscle 97
teratogens 11, 15, 17, 35, 112
limbs 57
skeletal system 53
teratomas 35, 37
testes 22, 23, 26, 78, 79, 80, 81
testicular arteries 81
testicular cancer 81
testicular overheating 23
testosterone 23, 81
tetralogy of Fallot 61, 112
thalamus 93
thalidomide 15, 33, 35, 57
theca externa 25
theca interna 25
thoracic cavity 42, 43
thymus gland 87, 88, 89
thyroglossal duct 83, 112
thyroid gland 83, 88
thyroxine 83
timings of gestation 8, 16, 17
tobacco 23, 33, 35
tongue 82, 83, 85
tongue muscle 55
totipotent 112
toxins 23
toxoplasma 33
trachea 68, 69
tracheoesophageal fistulas 69, 74, 75, 112
tracheoesophageal septum 68, 69, 73, 112
transcription factors 35
transforming growth factor beta (TGF–ß) 35
transitional epithelium 77
transverse planes 12
Treacher Collins syndrome 53, 85, 112
tricuspid valve 61
trigeminal nerve (CN V) 85, 97
trilaminar disc 34, 35, 37, 112
trimesters 16, 17
trisomy 19
trisomy 13 (ear and digestive defects) 75, 97
trisomy 18 (Edward syndrome) 21, 75
trisomy 21 (Down syndrome) 19, 21, 97
trochlear nerve (CN IV) 95
trophoblast 28, 29, 30, 31, 112
placenta 32, 33
truncus arteriosus 58, 59, 60, 61, 63, 112
tubotympanic recess 85, 97, 112
tunica albuginea 81
twins 28, 29
tympanic cavity 96, 97
tympanic membrane 96, 97
type I alveolar cells 69
type II alveolar cells 69
ulna bone 14, 15
ultimobranchial body 83, 91, 112
ultimopharyngeal body 91
ultrasound 35, 45, 53, 55, 75
sex identification of foetus 79
testicular cancer 81
umbilical arteries 63, 65, 66, 67
umbilical cord 32, 70, 71
umbilical veins 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 112
undescended testes (cryptorchidism) 81, 108
urachal cyst 77
urachal fistula 77
urachal sinus 77
urachus 77, 112
ureter 76, 77
ureteric bud 76, 77, 112
urethra 76, 77, 78
urethral plate 79, 112
urinary system 8, 76, 77
urogenital folds 79, 112
urogenital membrane 70, 78, 79, 112
urogenital ridge 77, 112
urogenital septum 79
urogenital sinus 70, 71, 77, 112
urogenital tract 71
urorectal fistula 75
urorectal septum 70, 71, 75, 77, 112
uterine (Fallopian) tubes 25, 26, 27, 28, 78, 79
uterovaginal primordium 78, 79, 112
uterus 25, 31, 78, 79, 81
blastocysts 28, 29
fertilisation 26
implantation 28, 29, 30, 31
placenta 33
utricle 96, 97
utriculosaccular duct 97
vacuole 43, 97, 112
vagina 78, 79

vaginal plate 79, 112
vagus nerve (CN X) 90, 91
valves 61
varicella zoster virus 49
vas (ductus) deferens 22, 23, 26, 27, 78, 79, 
81
vasculogenesis 58, 59, 62, 63
ventral, defined 12, 13
ventral floor plate 92, 112
ventral mesentery 71, 73, 112
ventral ramus 95
ventricles 58, 59, 60, 61
ventricles of the brain 93
ventricular septal defect 61
ventricular zone 92, 93, 112
vertebrae 52, 53
vertebrates 47, 48, 49
vestibule 78, 79
vestibulocochlear apparatus 96, 97
vestibulocochlear nerve (CN VIII) 97
viruses 33
viscerocranium 52, 53
vitamin A 35
vitamin D 51, 83, 89, 91
vitelline arteries 63, 64, 65, 112
vitelline cyst 75, 112
vitelline duct 45, 70, 71, 74, 75
vitelline stalk 112
vitelline veins 62, 63, 64, 65, 112
Waardenburg syndrome 41
wandering spleen 75
waste removal 33
wavefront 46, 47
white matter 92, 93, 94, 95
white ramus communicans 95
Wnt 46, 47
Wolffian ducts 77, 79
XXY (Klinefelter syndrome) 21
yolk sac 14, 30, 31, 32, 37, 38, 42
folding of embryo 44, 45
gastrointestinal tract 70, 71
gastrulation 34
implantation 30, 31
oogenesis 25
placenta 32
spermatogenesis 23
zona pellucida 25, 26, 28, 29, 31, 112
zone of polarising activity (ZPA) 57, 112
zygomatic bones 52, 53
zygotes 8, 17, 27, 28, 29, 37, 112
120  Index
uploaded by [stormrg]

