www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Abortion in the United States, Dorothy E. McBride
Adoption, Barbara A. Moe
Capital Punishment, Michael Kronenwetter
Chemical and Biological Warfare, Al Mauroni
Childhood Sexual Abuse, Karen L. Kinnear
Conﬂicts over Natural Resources, Jacqueline Vaughn
Domestic Violence, Margi Laird McCue
Energy Use Worldwide, Jaina L. Moan and Zachary A. Smith
Euthanasia, Martha L. Gorman and Jennifer Fecio McDougall
Food Safety, Nina E. Redman
Genetic Engineering, Harry LeVine, III
Gun Control in the United States, Gregg Lee Carter
Human Rights Worldwide, Zehra F. Kabasakal Arat
Illegal Immigration, Michael C. LeMay
Intellectual Property, Aaron Schwabach
Internet and Society, Bernadette H. Schell
Mainline Christians and U.S. Public Policy, Glenn H. Utter
Mental Health in America, Donna R. Kemp
Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation, Sarah J. Diehl and James
Clay Moltz
Policing in America, Leonard A. Steverson
Sentencing, Dean John Champion
U.S. Military Service, Cynthia A. Watson
World Population, Geoffrey Gilbert
For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit 
www.abc-clio.com.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society, such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
find the information they need in order to have a better
understanding of the social, political, environmental, and
economic issues facing the world today.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT
A Reference Handbook
Jeffrey B. Bumgarner
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California 
Denver, Colorado 
Oxford, England

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Copyright © 2008 by ABC-CLIO, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Bumgarner, Jeffrey B.
Emergency management : a reference handbook / Jeffrey B.
Bumgarner.
p.
cm. —  (Contemporary world issues)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
978-1-59884-110-7 (hard copy : alk. paper) — 
ISBN 978-1-59884-111-4 (ebook)  
1. Emergency management—United States.
2. Crisis management—
United States.
I. Title. 
HV551.3.B85 2008
363.340973—dc22
2007005642
12
11
10
09
08
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116–1911
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an ebook. 
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
This book is printed on acid-free paper
Manufactured in the United States of America.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
This book is dedicated to my wife Kathy.
As always, thank you very much for your patience. 
And also to my boys: Jack, Alex, and Carl.
My homework is done. I can come out and play now.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Contents
Preface, xiii
1
Background and History, 1
History of Emergency Management and Disaster 
Response, 1
Disaster Response and the Birth of the United States, 2
The U.S. Constitution, 2
The 1920s and 1930s, 5
The 1950s, 5
The 1960s and 1970s, 6
The Federal Emergency Management Agency, 7
The Department of Homeland Security, 8
FEMA’s Reorganization, 10
Deﬁning Disasters, 11
FEMA’s Deﬁnition of Disaster, 12
Types of Disasters and Catastrophes, 13
Fundamentals of Emergency Management, 17
Mitigation, 17
Preparedness, 18
Response, 28
Recovery, 29
References, 32
2
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 33
Sociology of Disasters, 34
Disaster Victimology, 34
Types of Victims, 35
ix

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Victims’ Responses, 37
Providing Psychological First Aid, 39
Impact on First Responders, 42
The Question of Federalism: Who Should Be 
Responsible?, 45
The Public Policy Process, 45
Making Policy Changes, 48
Federal Emergency Management Efforts, 50
State Emergency Management Efforts, 55
Emergency Management by Private 
Organizations, 59
Debates over Emergency Management Resources, 61
Natural Disasters or Terrorism?, 61
Warning Systems, 66
Key City and Nationwide Efforts, 68
References, 70
3
Worldwide Perspective, 73
Emergency Management: A Global Responsibility, 74
The Role of the United Nations, 75
The International Strategy for Disaster Reduction 
(ISDR), 76
Disaster Vulnerabilities by Region, 78
Asia, 78
Africa, 80
Latin America, 82
Europe, 86
Comparative Emergency Management Activities 
and Readiness, 88
China, 89
Australia, 91
India, 92
Trinidad and Tobago, 94
Argentina, 96
Nigeria, 98
Civil Unrest, Ethnic Conﬂict, and Terrorism, 100
References, 102
4
Chronology, 105
x
Contents

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
5
Biographical Sketches, 129
Joe Allbaugh, 129
Clara Barton, 131
Julius W. Becton, Jr., 132
B. Wayne Blanchard, 133
Mabel Boardman, 134
William Booth, 135
Michael D. Brown, 135
James E. Carter, 137
Isaac M. Cline, 138
Michael Chertoff, 139
Rudolph W. L. Giuliani III, 140
Louis O. Giuffrida, 141
James Loy, 142
John W. Macy, Jr., 143
John W. Magaw, 144
Robert Mueller, 145
Clarence Ray Nagin, Jr., 146
Robert D. Paulison, 148
Tom Ridge, 149
Robert T. Stafford, 150
Wallace E. Stickney, 150
William Howard Taft, 151
Gordon F. Vickery, 152
James Lee Witt, 153
6
Data and Documents, 155
Key Executive Orders and Legislation, 155
Creation of the Federal Emergency Management 
Agency, 156
Robert T. Stafford Relief and Emergency Assistance Act 
of 1988, 157
Title I—Findings, Declarations and Deﬁnitions, 157
Title II—Disaster Preparedness and Mitigation 
Assistance, 159
Homeland Security Act of 2002, 166
Title V—Emergency Preparedness and Response, 166
Key Testimony before Congress, 169
Opening Statement of R. David Paulison, 170
The FY2008 FEMA Budget: Building a New FEMA, 170
Contents
xi

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Reforming FEMA: Are We Making Progress?, 190
Statement of George W. Foresman, 190
NPPD Mission and Overview, 192
Preparedness Progress to Date, 195
Closing, 197
7
Directory of Organizations, 199
Private Organizations, 200
Associations and Resource Centers, 207
Government Agencies, 211
United States Government Agencies, 211
State Emergency Management Agencies, 223
International Agencies/Organizations, 233
8
Resources, 237
Summary of Selected Scholarship Relating to Emergency
Management, 237
Books, Government Reports, and Videos, 246
Books, 247
Government Publications, 255
Videos, 260
Glossary, 267
Index, 277
About the Author, 293
xii
Contents

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Preface
L
ike all titles in ABC-CLIO’s Contemporary World Issues
series, Emergency Management: A Reference Handbook offers an
introductory and exploratory examination of an important is-
sue in our time. Emergency management is a vitally essential ac-
tivity, discipline, and profession. The premise of the discipline is
that there is a better way to deal with expected and unexpected
natural and human-caused disasters than simply “winging it”
and muddling through until the crisis abates.
Emergency management offers a better approach—a ratio-
nal approach—for handling the calamitous natural events, un-
fortunate large-scale accidents, and murderous acts of terror and
political violence that come our way. Through sound principles
of mitigation and preparedness, communities and governments
in this country and in others increase their chances severalfold
that when potentially disastrous events do strike, the communi-
ties will endure less damage and suffering than would have been
the case had no predisaster emergency management activities
taken place.
Through sound and rational response procedures and activ-
ities, emergency managers can ensure that the rescue of disaster
victims unfolds in an expeditious and well-equipped manner
and that those with acute physical needs following a disaster
will receive immediate and helpful attention. Further, the ﬁeld of
emergency management offers tried-and-true methods for the
recovery of communities which, despite all preparations, may
have been struck particularly harshly by natural or man-made
ravages. Through emergency management recovery best prac-
tices and established policies, communities might quickly re-
cover to a predisaster status or better, with the restoration of
xiii

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
public services, utilities, and commerce occurring at the earliest
possible outset after being struck.
This book introduces the principles, practices, policies, agen-
cies, and problems associated with the blossoming professional
discipline of emergency management. The book also provides ac-
cess to a wealth of resources for exploring emergency manage-
ment further. It is my hope that readers will find this primer
helpful and informative—and even perhaps inspiring for some
who may envision some element of emergency management and
disaster planning in their own present or future professional
lives.
Jeffrey B. Bumgarner
Texas Christian University
Fort Worth, Texas
xiv
Preface

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
1
Background and History
History of Emergency Management
and Disaster Response
When speaking of emergency management and disaster re-
sponse, it is necessary to distinguish between the activity and the
professional discipline. The discipline of emergency manage-
ment is relatively new. For many years, it had been considered a
subdiscipline of public administration and public safety. More
recently, the field of emergency management has begun to as-
sume an identity of its own—still related to public administra-
tion (just as criminal justice administration is), but nonetheless
demonstrating its own distinct professional skill set.
The activity of emergency management and disaster re-
sponse, by contrast, has been around since the beginning of
recorded history. Although many deﬁnitions exist in the disaster
literature, emergency management can be defined simply as
man’s attempt to identify and deal with potential and actual
large-scale hazards, threats, and disasters. The qualifier “large
scale” is included here because we are speaking of events that
could and do impact many people. A house fire is an emer-
gency—certainly for the occupants involved. It is a crisis, and
public safety personnel must manage the situation. But it is not
necessarily an emergency management event unless perhaps the
ﬁre threatens to spread to the whole block. This is consistent with
David Alexander’s (2002, 1) deﬁnition of an “emergency” in this
context, which he deﬁned as “an exceptional event that exceeds
the capacity of normal resources and organization to cope with
1

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
it.” Emergency management events pose their own unique chal-
lenges over other types of threats and emergencies—as this book
attempts to demonstrate.
Mankind has always faced nature’s obstacles of disease,
famine, ﬂooding, earthquakes, volcanoes, and other avenues to
calamity. In facing these challenges, man has not generally been
inclined to stand still and absorb the blows. For example, Egypt-
ian Pharaoh Amenemhet III of Egypt developed what is thought
to be among the ﬁrst major river control programs. Amenemhet
III, who ruled Egypt from 1817 to 1722 BCE, developed a water
diversion system along the Nile River to redirect ﬂood water into
Lake Moeris, thereby salvaging more than 150,000 acres of land
for agricultural use (Coppola 2007). Similarly, advanced civiliza-
tions such as the Greeks, Romans, Incas, and others applied the
latest technologies and innovations of their day toward avoiding
disasters where possible and reducing their impact when they
occurred.
Disaster Response and the
Birth of the United States
The United States, although not an ancient civilization, has a his-
tory of its own when it comes to emergency management and
disaster response. As far back as 1803, the United States Con-
gress passed the Fire Disaster Relief Act. This legislation pro-
vided financial assistance to the town of Portsmouth, New
Hampshire, which had been decimated by a ﬁre the year before.
In fact, Portsmouth’s Great Fire of 1802 saw 132 buildings de-
stroyed (City of Portsmouth 2006). This federal assistance, which
included a waiver of tariffs and taxes, is generally thought to be
the federal government’s ﬁrst foray into the practice of providing
emergency management assistance.
The U.S. Constitution
The federal government’s involvement in such matters was not
(and is not) without some controversy. The turn of the nine-
teenth century came just a few short years after America’s
founding. The United States had won its independence from
Great Britain in 1781. From 1781 until 1789, the United States
2
Background and History

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
operated under the Articles of Confederation. This gave the na-
tional government virtually no authority as compared to those
sovereign powers possessed by the individual states. A system
with a hopelessly weak national government proved to be un-
tenable, however. Consequently, after much political wran-
gling and compromise, the United States Constitution was
ratified in 1789 and provided for a federal system of govern-
ment, where power is shared between the national government
and the states.
The Constitution was written in such a way as to lay to rest
the concerns of those who feared a strong national government—
particularly in the wake of the United States having just freed it-
self from one. In so doing, the Constitution articulated with some
specificity the responsibilities and powers of the national gov-
ernment, and the particular responsibilities and powers of each
branch of the national government. Further, the 10th Amend-
ment, which was ratiﬁed in 1791, stated:
The powers not delegated to the United States by the
Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are re-
served to the States respectively, or to the people.
So what were (and are) the powers of the federal govern-
ment regarding what is now termed emergency management?
Article 1, Section 8 of the Constitution states that Congress has
the power:
To make all Laws which shall be necessary and proper
for carrying into the Execution the foregoing Powers,
and all other Powers vested by this Constitution in the
Government of the United States, or any Department or
Ofﬁcer thereof.
The above sentence from the Constitution is known as the
“necessary and proper clause.” Much hangs on the interpretation
of that one sentence. The “foregoing Powers” mentioned here
references those speciﬁc powers granted to Congress in Section
8, including but not limited to the power:
to regulate Commerce with foreign Nations and
among the several States and Indian Tribes;
to establish an uniform Rule of naturalization, and
uniform Laws on the subject of Bankruptcies through-
out the United States;
Disaster Response and the Birth of the United States
3

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
to provide for the Punishment of counterfeiting the
Securities and current Coin of the United States;
to define and punish Piracies and Felonies commit-
ted on the high Seas and Offenses against the Law of
nations;
to provide for calling for the Militia to execute the
Laws of the Union, and suppress Insurrections and re-
pel Invasions . . .
Many critics of federal emergency management activities,
then and now, point to the fact that the Constitution says nothing
about providing ﬁnancial or organizational assistance to state or
local governments, nor to individual citizens to deal with disas-
ters. According to this perspective on government, when
Portsmouth, New Hampshire, suffered a calamitous ﬁre, it was
the responsibility of the people of New Hampshire to provide as-
sistance to their fellow citizens, if they so chose.
Defenders of a federal response to local disasters noted that
the Preamble of the Constitution envisions an active federal gov-
ernment where the safety and welfare of its people are con-
cerned. The Preamble states that the people of the United States,
in ordaining the Constitution, seek to “. . . establish justice, in-
sure domestic tranquility, provide for the common defense, pro-
mote the general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty . . .”
for present and future generations of Americans.
If the preamble does in fact represent the purpose of the U.S.
Constitution and the federal government it creates, then the
“necessary and proper clause” seems to suggest Congress has
considerable leeway to pass laws and create agencies that do the
very things the Preamble articulates—namely, establish justice,
keep the peace, and protect the welfare of Americans (Bumgar-
ner 2006).
Although critics of this reasoning contended that the Pream-
ble merely stated the purpose of the Constitution—that it intro-
duced the document and did not serve as a clause of it—the
reasoning supporting a broad interpretation prevailed, thereby
enabling the United States government to provide disaster assis-
tance. Indeed, more than one hundred pieces of legislation were
passed during the nineteenth century that provided aid to local
communities for ﬁres, ﬂoods, hurricanes, earthquakes, and other
natural disasters (FEMA 2006a).
4
Background and History

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
The 1920s and 1930s
In June 1928, the Flood Control Act of 1928 was passed by Con-
gress and signed into law by President Calvin Coolidge. The leg-
islation was a direct result of the Great Mississippi Flood of 1927,
still regarded as the most destructive river ﬂood in American his-
tory. The swollen Mississippi River that year caused ﬂooding in
parts of Arkansas, Illinois, Kentucky, Louisiana, and Tennessee.
In total, 27,000 square miles were ﬂooded after the Mississippi
River broke through levees in more than a hundred places. The
ﬂooding killed more than 250 people and caused $400 million (in
1927 dollars) in property damage. The 1928 legislation was the
nation’s ﬁrst comprehensive ﬂood control act. Prior to this legis-
lation, ﬂood control efforts along the Mississippi had been pri-
marily the responsibility of state and local governments, which
erected levees to contain the river. This legislation authorized the
federal government to perform comprehensive ﬂood control up
and down the Mississippi River by using a system of levees in
conjunction with ﬂoodways, outlet channels, and improved trib-
utary basins. This comprehensive approach also ensured that the
Mississippi River was more reliable for navigation and for the
transportation of goods.
The federal government’s role in disaster preparedness and
relief grew bigger still during the New Deal era of the 1930s.
President Franklin Roosevelt worked aggressively to expand the
reach and activity of the federal government in a variety of ways
in the face of the Great Depression. A number of public works
projects on a grand scale were launched, including projects de-
signed to avert or reduce the impact of natural disasters. The
Flood Control Act of 1936 and subsequent amending legislation
authorized the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to design and con-
struct ﬂood control projects around the country (Arnold 1988).
The 1950s
The 1950s ushered in a new era of emergency preparedness and
management in the United States. With World War II over and
the Cold War with the Soviet Union well under way, the Federal
Civil Defense Act of 1950 was passed. This legislation created
the Federal Civil Defense Agency. It was through this agency
that the federal government provided funding to the states for
Disaster Response and the Birth of the United States
5

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
preparedness activities. Civil defense efforts were primarily
concerned with the threat of nuclear war. However, strategies
were also developed to deal with other man-made and natural
disasters (Light 2004).
In 1950, the U.S. Congress also passed the Federal Disaster
Relief Act into law. The purpose of the act was to enable the fed-
eral government to share ﬁnancially in the responsibility for re-
pairing damaged public facilities after a disaster and help the
states draft their own disaster plans. This legislation reafﬁrmed
that state and local governments were the first line of defense
against disasters. But it also required the federal government to
become involved in disaster response and created a mechanism
for the federal agencies to work with state and local govern-
ments in coordinated relief efforts (Light 2004).
The 1960s and 1970s
The limited organizational infrastructure at the federal level for
dealing with disasters was tested and strained in the 1960s. Hur-
ricanes proved to be particularly menacing. In 1960, Hurricane
Donna hit the Atlantic coast of Florida and then worked its way
up the eastern seaboard. More than 360 people were killed. In
1961, Hurricane Carla hit the Gulf Coast of Texas, killing 46. Hur-
ricane Betsy hit Louisiana in 1965 killing 76 people. In 1969, Hur-
ricane Camille struck Mississippi, killing more than 250 initially
and killing dozens more from ﬂooding once the storm moved in-
land. All of these hurricanes resulted in billions of dollars in
damage and thousands of injuries.
Hurricanes were not the only calamities taking place in the
1960s that required federal intervention. In 1964, an earthquake
measuring 9.2 on the Richter scale struck Prince William Sound
in Alaska, affecting several nearby communities, including An-
chorage. One hundred thirty-one people were killed as result of
this earthquake and subsequent tsunamis in Alaska and along
the western coast of North America—particularly in California.
These disasters and others prompted further federal legisla-
tion. Homeowners were able to access low-cost ﬂood insurance
as result of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968. Addition-
ally, the procedure for federal disaster declarations was estab-
lished with the Disaster Relief Act of 1974. However, the whole
federal disaster preparedness and response program remained
disjointed. There was no agency “on point” for the federal
6
Background and History

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
government when it came to disasters. Rather, more than a hun-
dred federal agencies were involved in disaster preparedness
and emergency management (FEMA 2006a).
By the late 1970s, the call for reform directed at the federal
disaster response community was loud—particularly from state
governments that had grown tired of navigating through the
maze of multiple federal agencies for help whenever disaster
struck. President Jimmy Carter responded by establishing the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) with issuance
of Executive Order 12127 on March 31, 1979. FEMA was not cre-
ated out of whole cloth. Rather, several ofﬁces and agencies were
reorganized to become part of FEMA. Most of FEMA’s organiza-
tional structure and human resources came from the federal gov-
ernment’s three primary disaster agencies of the time: the
Federal Preparedness Agency (a part of the General Services Ad-
ministration), the Defense Civil Preparedness Agency (a part of
the Department of Defense), and the Federal Disaster Assistance
Administration (a part of the Department of Housing and Urban
Development).
The Federal Emergency
Management Agency
President Carter appointed Office of Personnel Management
chief John Macy as the new head of FEMA—a position that re-
ported directly to the president. Macy’s challenge was to create
an organization with its own culture, bureaucratic processes, and
identity. This was no small task given that parts of the new
agency were located in eight different buildings around Wash-
ington DC, and its responsibilities had previously been so com-
partmentalized (Lindell, Prater, and Perry 2006).
The coordination challenges facing FEMA at the onset of its
creation continued into the 1980s, 1990s, and beyond. With the
attack against the World Trade Center and the Pentagon on Sep-
tember 11, 2001, it was clear that emergency management efforts
at the federal level could be called upon to respond to man-made
disasters of the likes and scale not previously seen in the United
States. The unique challenges facing the emergency management
community in scenarios involving terrorism shifted the empha-
sis from preparing for natural disasters to a broader conception
of “homeland security.” Thus, FEMA was a logical inclusion
Disaster Response and the Birth of the United States
7

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
among the twenty-two agencies that were transferred to the U.S.
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) when it was created.
FEMA was then regarded as having an “all hazards” approach
(FEMA 2006a).
The Department of Homeland Security
Just as FEMA was created by a realignment of government agen-
cies, so was DHS. The twenty-two federal agencies that collec-
tively possessed thousands of statutory responsibilities were
transferred to DHS with the passage of the Homeland Security
Act of 2002. The legislation gave the new cabinet-level depart-
ment until March 2003 to implement the reorganization plan.
The agencies transferring to DHS were organized under four ma-
jor directorates within the department. The directorates corre-
sponded broadly to the new statutory responsibilities of DHS.
The twenty-two federal agencies transferred to DHS under their
respective directorates were (U.S. DHS 2006):
Border and Transportation Security Directorate
U.S. Customs Service (Treasury)
Immigration and Naturalization Service (part) (Justice)
Federal Protective Service (General Services Administration
[GSA])
Transportation Security Administration (Transportation) 
Federal Law Enforcement Training Center (Treasury)
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (part)
(Agriculture) 
Ofﬁce for Domestic Preparedness (Justice)
Emergency Preparedness and Response Directorate
Federal Emergency Management Agency (DHS)
Strategic National Stockpile and the National Disaster
Medical System (Health and Human Services)
Nuclear Incident Response Team (Energy)
Domestic Emergency Support Teams (Justice)
8
Background and History

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
National Domestic Preparedness Ofﬁce (Federal Bureau of
Investigation [FBI])
Science and Technology Directorate
CBRN [chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear]
Countermeasures Programs (Energy)
Environmental Measurements Laboratory (Energy)
National BW [biological warfare] Defense Analysis Center
(Defense)
Plum Island Animal Disease Center (Agriculture)
Information Analysis and Infrastructure Protection
Directorate
Federal Computer Incident Response Center (GSA)
National Communications System (Defense)
National Infrastructure Protection Center (FBI)
Energy Security and Assurance Program (Energy)
Independent agencies not falling under a directorate
U.S. Secret Service
U.S. Coast Guard
Many believed the inclusion of FEMA within DHS signaled
a new regard for FEMA’s importance. Emergency management
professionals and academicians had high hopes for FEMA’s
stature and operational resources to grow commensurate with
alignment under this new, important department. After all, what
can possibly deserve more attention and garner more respect
than a department of government (and by extension its compo-
nent agencies) created for the sole purpose of securing the na-
tion’s homeland in the aftermath of the most devastating
terrorist attack in American history?
However, by most accounts, FEMA has not always per-
formed admirably as an organization since joining DHS.
FEMA’s performance during and after Hurricane Katrina,
which struck New Orleans, Louisiana; Biloxi, Mississippi; and
everywhere in between in late August 2005, has been held up as
Disaster Response and the Birth of the United States
9

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
an instant classic example of FEMA losing sight of its mission.
Many have criticized FEMA for departing from its disaster pre-
paredness roots for the allure of antiterrorism planning and
preparation. FEMA’s actions during the Hurricane Katrina crisis
have been characterized as evidence of this misplacement of
purpose. As a result, a number of politicians began to reconsider
FEMA’s proper placement within the larger federal bureaucratic
environment.
FEMA’s Reorganization
During the 109th Congress, several bills were introduced in both
the U.S. House of Representatives and the U.S. Senate that tar-
geted FEMA for mandatory reorganization and reform. Some of
the bills, had they become law, would have removed FEMA from
the Department of Homeland Security and reestablished it as an
independent, cabinet-level agency. However, Congress ulti-
mately settled for less drastic organization reform. On April 1,
2007, the Post-Katrina Emergency Management Reform Act of
2006 took effect.
Among other results, this legislation established FEMA as an
independent agency within DHS with the FEMA director report-
ing directly to the secretary of Homeland Security. Further, several
organizations and functions were transferred out of the Prepared-
ness Directorate and placed under FEMA. These include:
U.S. Fire Administration
Ofﬁce of Grants and Training (renamed Ofﬁce of Grant 
Programs)
Chemical Stockpile Emergency Preparedness Division
Radiological Emergency Preparedness Division
Ofﬁce of National Capital Region Coordination
The Preparedness Directorate was not eliminated altogether.
However, it was renamed the National Protection and Programs
Directorate (NPPD). As a result of the Post-Katrina Emergency
Management Reform Act of 2006, the NPPD houses:
Ofﬁce of Infrastructure Protection
10
Background and History

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Ofﬁce of Cyber Security and Communications
Ofﬁce of Risk Management and Analysis
Ofﬁce of Intergovernmental Programs
US-VISIT program
It is unclear whether these organizational changes at the De-
partment of Homeland Security will create a more efﬁcient and
effective emergency management apparatus within the federal
government, or whether politicians will be satisﬁed in the long
run that enough has been done to bolster this federal responsibil-
ity. FEMA’s role, as well as that of other federal agencies, will be
explored later in this book. However, to appreciate the seemingly
never-ending debate over FEMA’s role, one must minimally un-
derstand the fundamentals of modern emergency management
and the variety of event types facing the discipline.
Deﬁning Disasters
Although a working definition of “disaster” may seem fairly
easy to arrive at, much has actually been written in an ongoing
debate over just what a disaster is. Some who study emergency
management or practice it professionally deﬁne or classify disas-
ters according to the disaster’s origin or cause. For example, one
disaster can be classiﬁed as natural in origin (such as a tornado).
Another disaster might be technological in its origin (a commer-
cial airliner crashing into a residential neighborhood). While
these classiﬁcations are helpful, the problem with thinking about
disasters strictly along these lines is that it fails to account for
mixed origins. If an earthquake causes a dam to break, is the en-
suing ﬂood a naturally or technologically inspired calamity? Of
course, it would be both.
Others in the emergency management community choose to
deﬁne disasters according to their characteristics. The character-
istics of disasters may include:
Length of forewarning
Magnitude of impact
Deﬁning Disasters
11

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Scope of impact
Duration of impact
Predictability of the associated hazard
While relying upon disaster characteristics does help distin-
guish some major catastrophic events from other types of events,
characteristic classification schemes alone do not encompass
every event that most people would consider to be a disaster. A
full airliner that crashes not into a neighborhood but into a re-
mote jungle of an underdeveloped country is a disaster accord-
ing to common sense even if the broader impact is arguably
negligible.
Sociologist Thomas Drabek (1986) identiﬁed six characteris-
tics that differentiate disasters from other emergencies:
Degree of uncertainty
Urgency
Development of an emergency consensus
Expansion of the citizenship role
De-emphasis on contractual and personal relationships
Sudden convergence of people and material at a scene
The last point speaks to the capacity and willingness of lo-
cal governments to marshal resources to an emergency. The
more agencies and personnel required, the greater disaster the
event is.
FEMA’s Deﬁnition of Disaster
The Federal Emergency Management Agency offers the follow-
ing as a comprehensive, workable deﬁnition of a disaster (FEMA
2006b):
A disaster is a non-routine event that exceeds the capac-
ity of the affected area to respond to it in such a way as
to save lives; to preserve property; and to maintain the
social, ecological, economic, and political stability of the
affected region. 
12
Background and History

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
This deﬁnition accomplishes at least three goals. First, it elim-
inates from consideration routine kinds of emergencies, such as
automobile accidents and residential ﬁres. Disasters are unusual,
complex, and difﬁcult to respond to. Standard operating proce-
dures for routine emergencies would not sufﬁce (FEMA 2006b).
Second, the deﬁnition takes into consideration a key element from
Thomas Drabek (1986)—it recognizes the strain on local govern-
ment’s capacity to respond to an event if it is to be considered a
disaster. Finally, the deﬁnition pays homage to the importance of
maintaining the stability of an effected area. Disasters may ad-
versely impact social, ecological, economic, and political environ-
ments. A common house ﬁre most likely will not. True disasters,
whether natural, technological, or social in their origin, have the
ability to wreak great havoc on the societal or ecological order.
Types of Disasters and Catastrophes
Emergency management practitioners and policymakers must
contend with a broad spectrum of disasters and catastrophes. If
one were to consider the calamities of a few hundred years ago
or more, there was little chance of an event happening on a cata-
strophic scale that was anything other than natural in origin
(with the exception of warfare). As technology marched forward
through history, greater and greater opportunities presented
themselves for mankind to have a hand in catastrophic events—
even accidental ones.
David Alexander (2002) created a typology of hazards, sub-
ject to three broad categories: natural hazards, technological haz-
ards, and social hazards. The natural, technological, and social
hazards can be broken down into the following subclasses
(Alexander 2002):
Natural Hazards
1. Geological—includes earthquakes, volcanic eruptions,
landslides, mud slides, rock avalanches, and accelerated
erosion.
2. Meteorological—includes hurricanes, tornados, ice
storms, blizzards, lightening storms, hailstorms, fog,
drought, and snow avalanches.
3. Hydrological—includes ﬂoods and ﬂash ﬂoods.
4. Biological—includes forest and range ﬁres, crop blight,
insect infestation, and disease outbreaks and epidemics.
Deﬁning Disasters
13

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Technological Hazards
1. Hazardous materials (HAZMAT)—includes carcinogens,
mutagens, heavy metals, and other toxins.
2. Dangerous processes—includes structural failure, radia-
tion emissions, reﬁning accidents, and transportation ac-
cidents involving HAZMAT.
3. Devices and machines—includes explosives; unexploded
ordnance; and accidents involving vehicles, trains, and
aircraft.
4. Installations and plants—includes bridges, dams, mines,
reﬁneries, power plants, oil and gas terminals and stor-
age plants, power lines, pipelines, and skyscrapers. 
Social Hazards
1. Terrorist incidents—includes bombings, shootings,
hostage taking, hijacking, and weapons of mass destruc-
tion (WMD) attacks.
2. Crowd incidents—includes riots, demonstrations, crowd
crushes, and stampedes.
3. Warfare—includes unintended civilian casualties (i.e.,
“collateral damage”). 
All of the above hazards are the rightful province of the dis-
cipline of emergency management. However, not all are given
equal attention by emergency managers. This fact stands to rea-
son because the hazards listed above are neither equally likely
nor equally costly. Determining which hazards to pay attention
to, and preparing for the consequences that could follow, are
matters associated with risk assessment.
Stated simply, “risk” is the intersection between probabil-
ity and consequences. If an emergency manager assesses the
risk of mud slides in his or her community, that assessment will
include gauging the probability of mud slides occurring and
the potential consequences if they do occur. For a community
set in hill country, the possibility of a mud slide might be quite
high. Of course, that is only half of the equation when assessing
risk. Although mud slides might be quite likely in one’s town,
geological experts may have confirmed that only a particular
area of the town would be threatened by such slides—an area
of the town that is sparsely populated. The consequences of
such mud slides might be considered low relative to other
14
Background and History

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
types of threats. Therefore, the overall risk associated with
doing little or nothing about mud slides may be relatively low
as well.
A more absurd example would be to consider the risk of an
alien invasion. The consequences of not being prepared for an
aggressive invasion from Mars would be catastrophic. However,
the probability of such an invasion happening is so low as to
make the overall risk of such an attack low—much too low to ex-
pend signiﬁcant resources preparing for it.
The degree to which a community is exposed to an undesir-
able amount of risk (i.e., a high probability of something happen-
ing that brings with it high negative consequences) amounts to
the community’s “vulnerability.” Vulnerability is closely related
to risk, and many people use the two terms interchangeably.
There is a shade of difference, however. “Vulnerability” is “the
measure of the propensity of an object, area, individual, group,
community, country, or other entity to incur consequences of a
hazard” (Coppola 2007, 25). As you will note progressing
through this book, emergency management is all about the sys-
tematic understanding and reduction of vulnerabilities. Emer-
gency managers and other public officials must constantly be
mindful of where the vulnerabilities lie.
As tragic as it would be were a tornado to level a residential
subdivision, it might be more problematic for the community if
the downtown were leveled, along with the local hospital, main
ﬁre station and 911 call center, and city hall. This is because the
second scenario involves damage to critical infrastructure. A
community’s infrastructure consists of systems for the delivery
of water and power, fuel, telecommunications, transportation,
and other key elements for a community to operate.
The International City/County Management Association
(ICMA), in its effort to promote national awareness of the need
for protecting critical infrastructure, developed the following
comprehensive list of key areas that must be considered and tar-
geted by emergency managers and public administrators when
undertaking emergency preparedness efforts (ICMA 2003):
1. Information and Communication
• Computer networks
• Line-based phone systems
• Cell towers
Deﬁning Disasters
15

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
2. Electricity
• Power plants (nuclear and other)
• Step-up and step-down stations
• Transformers
3. Transportation
• Airports
• Highways and bridges
• Ports
4. Petroleum/Chemical
• Oil wells
• Reﬁneries
• Delivery and storage facilities
5. Economic
• Banks
• Financial institutions
• Major corporations
6. Water
• Dams
• Sewage treatment facilities
• Storage and distribution systems
7. Emergency Services
• Fire and police stations
• Emergency operations centers (EOCs)
• Hospitals
8. Critical Government Services
• Mayor’s ofﬁce
• City hall
• Courthouses
While the criticality of the above systems and facilities may
be obvious, less obvious are the answers concerning how they
are to be protected. Further, should resources be expended to
protect or prepare critical infrastructure prior to a disaster so as
to possibly avoid calamity? Or are time and money best spent
learning how to respond to disasters in the most efﬁcient and ef-
fective manner possible (i.e., preparing for the inevitable
calamity)?
The plain answer is that emergency managers must do both,
and more. While there are many facets to the discipline of emer-
gency management, all emergency management activities fall
under one of four core phases.
16
Background and History

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Fundamentals of Emergency Management
Fundamentally, emergency management activities can be di-
vided into four core phases:
1. Mitigation
2. Preparedness
3. Response
4. Recovery
Any time a concept is neatly categorized, a temptation de-
velops to think that the concept is simple and neat. Although
couching emergency management efforts in terms of these four
phases is extremely helpful for understanding emergency man-
agement broadly, it should be noted that the distinctions be-
tween phases are not always clear. In some cases, these phases
overlap with some emergency management activities incapable
of being compartmentalized into one phase or another. With that
caveat in mind, let us examine the four phases of emergency
management.
Mitigation
Two of the phases of emergency management are undertaken in
advance of a disaster or large-scale emergency taking place.
“Mitigation” relates to those activities directed at eliminating or
reducing the degree of long-term risk to human life and property
from natural and technological hazards. Haddow and Bullock
(2006) note that mitigation differs from the other emergency
management functions in that it is concerned with long-term so-
lutions for minimizing risk, as opposed to the more short-term
activities of preparing for emerging hazards, responding to
events, and then recovering from them.
Many activities can be undertaken by emergency manage-
ment officials and their parent governments to reduce the risk
of hazards in the long term. Mitigation activities might include
establishing building codes that improve the chances of struc-
tures remaining standing after an earthquake. Zoning and land
management might be used to ensure that residences are not lo-
cated in flood-prone areas. Relocation funds, tax incentives,
Fundamentals of Emergency Management
17

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
and low-interest loans might be provided to homeowners or
businesses to encourage their moving from areas prone to
floods or wildfires. Publicly subsidized insurance might be of-
fered to (or even required for) the public so that if disaster
strikes, the financial burden to the victims and the taxpayers is
more manageable. Public education campaigns could help citi-
zens be more informed and equipped (and therefore less
needy) should a disaster ever come.
There are many benefits to mitigation. The chief benefit is
that mitigation can indeed save lives and reduce the number of
injuries. Naturally, this is the number one goal of emergency
management and public safety. But a number of other benefits
offer compelling arguments for engaging in mitigation. Through
mitigation, property damage can be reduced or prevented; eco-
nomic losses, social dislocation, and stress can be minimized; the
damage to critical infrastructure and disruptions to key services
can be minimized; the liability of government ofﬁcials (and by
extension, the taxpayer) can be reduced; and a positive political
climate may develop due to the perception that government ex-
ercised wise forethought.
Despite the advantages of mitigation, there are real obstacles
that make serious mitigation efforts difﬁcult to achieve. The very
nature of mitigation involves taking action before a crisis is even
on the horizon. It is difﬁcult, therefore, to sell mitigation to poli-
cymakers, elected ofﬁcials, and the taxpayers when no immedi-
ate beneﬁt is realized. This is especially true given the fact that
mitigation tends to be cost intensive. Those costs are not only in-
curred by government, which may irk taxpayers, but also by
business and industry, which customarily pass on those costs to
consumers. It can cost quite a bit of money to bring an existing
building into compliance with enhanced safety codes. Likewise,
the building of new structures for either residential or commer-
cial use that are subject to new and costly codes and zoning regu-
lations may be impeded. Mitigation, frankly, can have a stunting
impact on economic development and growth that would other-
wise have taken place.
Preparedness
The emergency management phase of preparedness refers to ac-
tivities undertaken in advance of an emergency or disaster to de-
velop operational and logistical capabilities and to facilitate an
18
Background and History

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
effective response should an emergency management event oc-
cur. Effective preparedness efforts require proper planning, the
allocation of sufficient resources, making the training of emer-
gency responders a priority, and engaging in disaster simulation
exercises in order to practice large-scale responses and to iden-
tify vulnerabilities in the response process. Rightly or wrongly,
the preparedness piece of emergency management has really
come to be associated with professional emergency managers as
their primary job duty—especially the coordination of disaster
simulation exercises.
The ICMA (2003) identiﬁed several primary steps for com-
munities to follow in pursuit of their emergency management
preparedness efforts. 
1. Adopt emergency management–related ordinances. Such ordi-
nances give the necessary authority and power to emergency
management officials and help delineate the responsibilities of
these ofﬁcials from the responsibilities and powers of other pub-
lic ofﬁcials, such as the police chief or the ﬁre chief. Through the
passage of clarifying and authorizing emergency management
ordinances, which includes the emergency management plan for
a community, some of the inevitable interdepartmental turf bat-
tles that arise might be settled before a crisis strikes. Emergency
management ordinances also articulate the community’s com-
mitment and protocol of mutual aid with other jurisdictions.
2. Risk assessment. Communities must engage in risk assess-
ment as a part of the preparedness effort. That is, communities
need to identify the realistic hazards and vulnerabilities present
in the community. Certainly, the risks affecting New York City
are not exactly the same as those affecting Amarillo, Texas.
Therefore, risk assessment is unique to the community undertak-
ing it.
3. Emergency operations plan (EOP). The development of the
EOP is a result of the risk assessment. Every EOP must provide
basic information about the disaster response mechanisms in the
community. Beyond that, the plan provides detailed information,
speciﬁc to that jurisdiction’s risks and needs, about how particu-
lar types of disasters and emergencies will be handled. The plan,
for example, might devote one section to articulate how a HAZ-
MAT situation will be dealt with, another section dealing with a
Fundamentals of Emergency Management
19

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
potential terrorist strike, still another dealing with a crisis at any
of the local schools, and so forth. The plan will spell out the roles
of law enforcement, the ﬁre department, the emergency medical
services (EMS), the hospitals, the Red Cross, and other emer-
gency management players—before, during, and after a disaster
strikes.
4. Warning systems. Emergency management preparedness in-
cludes ensuring the existence of warning systems. Ideally, the
warning systems must have some redundancy built into them. In
other words, more than one warning mechanism must be in
place. If television or radio service is interrupted in a tornado,
the tornado siren is still there to signal the alarm. If that siren is
inoperable, there might also be in place a reverse-911 system in
which automatic warnings will be telephoned to everyone in the
threatened community. It is the responsibility of the emergency
manager to evaluate the available options, in light of technology
and resources, to put together a viable and redundant system of
warning mechanisms and then see to it that the system is in place
and operational.
5. Resource identification. To some extent, resource identifica-
tion has already been discussed in that it is an embedded part of
all emergency management functions and, certainly, prepared-
ness functions. Resources are ﬁnite, including money. In a time
of crisis, they can be particularly scarce. But in the midst of a
disaster, monetary considerations generally take a back seat.
The resources that must be employed at the time of a disaster in-
clude personnel, equipment, and supplies. These resources
must be identiﬁed prior to a disaster—during the preparedness
phase—because the chaotic environment during a disaster may
not permit the marshaling of the manpower or equipment
needed in the moment. Emergency managers must assess inter-
nal resources in their possession, external resources that could
be accessed, and what contingencies might arise in an emer-
gency that would require the various resources available. When
Hurricane Katrina struck New Orleans, hundreds of school
buses that were designated for use to evacuate city residents sat
idle because they had no drivers to operate them. During a hur-
ricane is the wrong time to identify bus drivers. Needed human
resources must be identified, alerted, and relied upon prior to
the crisis. Resource identiﬁcation, including the development of
20
Background and History

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
resource backup plans, is a major obligation of emergency man-
agers in their preparedness efforts.
6. Grant acquisition. Local emergency managers must conduct
their jobs within the context of limited budgets, few personnel, and
often insufﬁcient equipment or technology. This clearly poses a
challenge. As a result, the federal government has established a
number of grant programs, administered by FEMA, to help allevi-
ate the resource strain on communities. FEMA offers a number of
grants for communities to secure specialized equipment and train-
ing in the areas of search and rescue, terrorism response (including
WMD), public health and epidemiology, communications systems
improvement, and others. Many of the grant programs have come
under some criticism because they are, for the most part, available
for all communities to participate in. Some communities, such as
New York City, believe the FEMA grants should be more directed
toward those communities most likely to be affected by the type of
disaster relating to the grant. For example, antiterrorism grant
funding is better spent primarily in communities such as New York
City, rather than spreading the funding across the country to in-
clude low probability targets such as Omaha, Nebraska—or at least
so the argument goes. Obviously, a “low-probability target” com-
munity such as Oklahoma City, after suffering through the Murrah
Federal Building bombing on April 19, 1995, would disagree.
FEMA grants available for emergency management purposes,
along with their intended recipients (in parentheses), appear be-
low (FEMA 2006c):
• Assistance to Fireﬁghters Grant (through U.S. Fire Admin-
istration) provides assistance to local ﬁre departments to
protect citizens and ﬁreﬁghters against the effects of ﬁre
and ﬁre-related incidents. (Fire departments and other
ﬁrst responders)
• Chemical Stockpile Emergency Preparedness Program im-
proves preparedness to protect the people of certain com-
munities in the unlikely event of an accident involving
this country’s stockpiles of obsolete chemical munitions.
(States, localities, and tribal governments)
• Community Assistance Program, State Support Services
Element provides funding to states to provide technical
assistance to communities in the National Flood Insur-
ance Program (NFIP) and to evaluate community
Fundamentals of Emergency Management
21

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
performance in implementing NFIP ﬂoodplain manage-
ment activities. (States)
• Community Disaster Loan Program provides funds to any
eligible jurisdiction in a designated disaster area that has
suffered a substantial loss of tax and other revenue. (Lo-
calities)
• Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and
Liability Act supports programs designed to improve ca-
pabilities associated with oil and hazardous materials
emergency planning and exercising. (States, localities,
and tribal governments; U.S. territories; state emergency
response committees)
• Cooperating Technical Partners provides technical assis-
tance, training, and/or data to support ﬂood hazard data
development activities. (States, localities, and tribal gov-
ernments)
• Crisis Counseling provides supplemental funding to states
for short-term crisis counseling services to people af-
fected in presidentially declared disasters. (Individuals
via states)
• Disaster Legal Services provides free legal assistance to
disaster victims. (Individuals via states)
• Disaster Unemployment Assistance Program provides un-
employment beneﬁts and reemployment services to indi-
viduals who have become unemployed because of major
disasters. (Individuals)
• Emergency Food and Shelter Program supplements the
work of local social service organizations within the
United States, both private and governmental, to help
people in need of emergency assistance. (Private-non-
proﬁt community and government organizations)
• Emergency Management Institute provides training and ed-
ucation to the ﬁre service, its allied professions, emer-
gency management ofﬁcials, and the general public. (Fire
departments, other ﬁrst responders, emergency manage-
ment ofﬁcials, and individuals)
• Fire Management Assistance Grant Program assistance for
the mitigation, management, and control of ﬁres on pub-
licly or privately owned forests or grasslands, which
threaten such destruction as would constitute a major
disaster. (States, localities, and tribal governments)
22
Background and History

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
• Flood Mitigation Assistance Program provides funding to
assist states and communities in implementing measures
to reduce or eliminate the long-term risk of ﬂood damage
to buildings, manufactured homes, and other structures
insurable under the NFIP. (States and localities)
• Hazard Mitigation Grant Program provides grants to states
and local governments to implement long-term hazard
mitigation measures after a major disaster declaration.
(States, localities, and tribal governments; certain pri-
vate/nonproﬁt organizations or institutions; authorized
tribal organizations; and Alaska native villages or organi-
zations via states)
• Individuals and Households Grant Program (disaster assis-
tance) provides money or direct assistance to individuals,
families, and businesses in an area whose property has
been damaged or destroyed and whose losses are not
covered by insurance. (Individuals)
• Map Modernization Management Support provides funding
to supplement, not supplant, ongoing ﬂood hazard map-
ping management efforts by the local, regional, or state
agencies. (States and localities)
• National Dam Safety Program provides ﬁnancial assistance
to the states for strengthening their dam safety programs.
(States)
• National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program provides
ﬁnancial assistance to the states for strengthening their
dam safety programs. (States)
• National Fire Academy Education and Training provides
training to increase the professional level of the ﬁre ser-
vice and others responsible for ﬁre prevention and con-
trol. (Fire departments and ﬁreﬁghting personnel)
• National Flood Insurance Program enables property owners
in participating communities to purchase insurance as a
protection against ﬂood losses in exchange for state and
community ﬂoodplain management regulations that re-
duce future ﬂood damages. (States, localities, and indi-
viduals)
• National Urban Search and Rescue (US&R) Response System
provides funding for the acquisition, maintenance, and
storage of equipment, training, exercises, and training
facilities to meet task force position criteria and conduct
Fundamentals of Emergency Management
23

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
and participate in meetings within the National US&R
Response System. (US&R task forces)
• Pre-Disaster Mitigation Program provides funds for hazard
mitigation planning and the implementation of mitiga-
tion projects prior to a disaster event. (States, localities,
and tribal governments)
• Public Assistance Grant Program provides assistance to al-
leviate suffering and hardship resulting from major dis-
asters or emergencies declared by the president. (States,
localities, tribal governments, and private/nonproﬁt or-
ganizations via states)
• Reimbursement for Fireﬁghting on Federal Property provides
reimbursement only for direct costs and losses over and
above normal operating costs. (States, localities, tribal
governments, and ﬁre departments)
• Repetitive Flood Claims Program provides funding to states
and communities to reduce or eliminate the long-term
risk of ﬂood damage to structures insured under the NFIP
that have had one or more claims for ﬂood damages, and
that cannot meet the requirements of the Flood Mitigation
Assistance (FMA) program for either cost share or capac-
ity to manage the activities. (States and localities)
• State Fire Training System Grants provide ﬁnancial assis-
tance to state ﬁre training systems for the delivery of a
variety of National Fire Academy courses/programs.
(State ﬁre training systems)
• Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act provides
funding for training in emergency planning, prepared-
ness, mitigation, response, and recovery capabilities as-
sociated with hazardous chemicals. (Public ofﬁcials, ﬁre
and police personnel, medical personnel, ﬁrst respon-
ders, and other tribal response and planning personnel)
7. Mutual aid agreements. This is yet another piece of prepared-
ness that is directly connected to the scarcity of resources. Local
communities can be overwhelmed by large-scale disasters and
emergencies. However, such events are too infrequent to warrant
permanent staffing and equipment levels sufficient to meet
needs in those times of crisis. This is probably true not only of
Community A, but also Community B, Community C, and every
other community in the region. Consequently, local governments
frequently enter into mutual aid agreements, which obligate one
24
Background and History

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
community to provide assistance to another community when
needed. Mutual aid agreements are legally binding contracts be-
tween jurisdictions. Therefore, the wording for such agreements
must be carefully considered and the circumstances that would
obligate one community to expend resources in helping another
must be thoroughly thought out. Mutual aid agreements can be a
community’s salvation in a time of real emergency. They can
overcome resource scarcity, personnel shortages, and lack of spe-
cific expertise. However, emergency managers, in concert with
their community’s elected ofﬁcials, must iron out key details in
such agreements before a disaster occurs. These details, which
can be controversial at times, include:
• Are the communications systems interoperable, and if
not, what must be done to make them so?
• Who pays the salaries, fuel, and expenses associated with
a mutual aid response?
• Who is in charge of mutual aid responders?
• Who pays line-of-duty beneﬁts if death or injury were to
occur?
• Under what circumstance can a community determine
not to respond to mutual aid request?
The idea of communities—especially mid-size and smaller
ones—helping each other to offset resource scarcity makes a lot
of sense. However, the devil is in the details. It is the job of the
emergency manager, in cooperation with other public safety and
elected ofﬁcials, to work out the speciﬁcs in a way that protects
his or her own community without extending unnecessary liabil-
ity or resource strain to his or her own emergency services.
8. Training and exercises. A key element of preparedness is
training. First responders as well as public safety administra-
tors and emergency managers must know what to do when a
disastrous event occurs. Training of emergency personnel must
include topic areas such as interdepartmental operations, logis-
tics, and the use of the incident command system. Training
must also be designed to include functional topics such as how
to clean up hazardous materials, how to establish a triage sys-
tem for assessing injuries in the field and how to preserve evi-
dence of an enormous crime scene while performing other first
responder duties. In addition to training, emergency managers
Fundamentals of Emergency Management
25

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
engaged in preparedness must also design and implement dis-
aster exercises. This gives the emergency manager and other
decision makers an opportunity to see the fruits of the training
at work. Exercises also afford the chance to identify weak-
nesses, knowledge gaps, and vulnerabilities in the emergency
operation plan and among emergency personnel. Exercises can
be conducted on a large or small scale. Full-scale exercises are
very costly and time consuming, but also very telling. These ex-
ercises are scenario driven and require all personnel and equip-
ment that would be employed in a similar actual emergency to
take part. Functional exercises, by contrast, only require the in-
volvement and personnel and equipment relating to the func-
tion being assessed (for example, patrol officers or a HAZMAT
unit within the fire department). Emergency managers also de-
sign and implement “table top” exercises. These exercises are
the least costly and are generally conducted in the classroom or
office. They involve simply the conception of a disaster sce-
nario narrated on paper and are primarily geared toward pub-
lic safety leadership. Through discussion and written exercises,
public safety leaders can work through a hypothetical scenario
to its conclusion.
9. Public education. The process of educating the public about
what to do in large-scale emergencies is also an element of emer-
gency management preparedness. Through education programs,
public apathy toward the possibility of disasters can be dimin-
ished without causing people to become excessively alarmist.
Education can also impact people’s behavior in a positive way—
hopefully resulting in the reduction of risky behavior (such as
continuing to live in a ﬂoodplain). Further, education will equip
citizens to respond to disasters in a safer, more responsible, and
more helpful manner. Disaster education programs for the public
cover topics such as the causes and consequences of disasters,
how to protect one’s home, where to seek shelter, self-preserva-
tion skills, how disaster warning systems operate, and the role of
government and private agencies when different types of disas-
ters or emergencies arise.
As a part of the education plank of emergency management
preparedness, there has been a concerted effort at the federal level
to disseminate disaster preparedness information to the general
public. FEMA’s public education Web site devoted specifically 
26
Background and History

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
to this purpose, www.ready.gov, serves as a clearinghouse of
information on personal, family, and business preparedness re-
plete with practical tips. There has been a growing chorus from
all levels of government that emergency preparedness is a per-
sonal responsibility (Rainey 2006).
Among the steps that individuals and families can take to
enhance their own ability to cope with disasters are:
Assemble an emergency kit. The emergency kit should in-
clude items that may be needed in the event that one’s home
must be quickly evacuated. The kit should include food
with a long shelf life and bottled water, medical supplies (in-
cluding prescription medicine), a ﬂashlight with extra bat-
teries, blankets, extra clothing, sanitation and hygiene
supplies, and communications equipment (particularly a ra-
dio for receiving updated information amidst a crisis).
Compile vital personal information. Copies of important docu-
ments should be included in one’s emergency kit. Alterna-
tively, backup copies could be sent to family members in
other locations. Key personal documents include medical
records, insurance policies, financial account information,
an inventory of household goods, deeds, telephone num-
bers, extra keys, and cash.
Create a family communications plan. A plan should be devel-
oped for how to contact immediate family members in the
event that a disaster or an emergency occurs when family
members are not all together. Typically, out-of-town rela-
tives can serve as the linking pin between dislocated family
members.
Be disaster aware. Citizens are encouraged to be familiar with
the very types of calamities that are most likely to befall one’s
community. Coastal residents obviously must be prepared to
deal with certain types of emergencies that Midwesterners
will never see (such as hurricanes). Midwesterners, on the
other hand, would do well to understand the conditions in
which tornados thrive and the procedures to follow, whereas
those living in Southern California are less likely to need that
information. 
Fundamentals of Emergency Management
27

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Response
The third phase of emergency management is response. Response
refers to what the government and other organizations do imme-
diately before, during, and after a disaster or terror event occurs.
The response phase involves acute activity intended to save lives
and property and to pave the way for effective recovery.
Damon Coppola (2007) notes that emergencies occur in
three stages. Response activities are tailored according to the
stage of emergency government ofﬁcials ﬁnd themselves in:
1. Prehazard
2. Emergency: Hazard effects are ongoing
3. Emergency: Hazard effects have ceased
During the prehazard stage, an emergency is recognized by
emergency management and public safety ofﬁcials as imminent,
but not yet present. For example, rotation may have been spotted
in a wall cloud, but a tornado has not yet touched down. Or in-
telligence may have been gathered conﬁrming a terror attack is
imminent against a city’s landmark, but it has not yet taken
place. At this stage of an emergency management event, ofﬁcials
have some opportunity to respond in a way that can still save
lives and property. Warnings or evacuation orders could be
given. Law enforcement and ﬁre/rescue units could be alerted
and prepositioned. Hospital emergency rooms could be notiﬁed
so that preparation might be made to treat potential casualties.
Depending on the nature of the impending emergency, there
may even be time to engage in last-minute, ad hoc mitigation
and preparedness measures. This might include sandbagging
vulnerable areas before an expected river breach hours away
(Coppola 2007).
The response phase of emergency management might also
be employed at some level during the emergency while the haz-
ard is ongoing. Depending on the nature of the event, the ongo-
ing phase of an emergency could last seconds, or it could last
hours and even days. When the World Trade Center towers were
struck by hijacked airliners in 2001, emergency management ef-
forts were employed immediately. An EOC was established, mu-
tual aid agreements kicked in, off-duty public safety officials
came in to work, and hospitals geared up. These and other activ-
ities took place while the emergency event was still unfolding
28
Background and History

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
and the danger still loomed. Indeed, hundreds of first respon-
ders (police ofﬁcers, ﬁreﬁghters, and EMS personnel) lost their
lives responding to the Twin Towers while the ﬁres still burned
and continued to weaken the structures—eventually bringing
them down and killing almost everyone who was still in them.
Once the towers came down and the ﬁres were under con-
trol, the hazard effects ceased. This is not to say that no danger
remained. The environment at ground zero remained dangerous
for days—particularly in light of the hazardous materials in the
air. But during this posthazard stage of an emergency, respon-
ders are no longer focusing on the hazard effects, but rather con-
cern themselves with tending to victim needs, rescuing the
trapped and injured, recovering and managing human remains,
and keeping the situation stable (i.e., ensuring that an ongoing
hazardous state does not return).
In some cases, the most appropriate response choice may
simply be to wait for a successive stage of emergency to follow.
In the midst of a tornado, an ambulance crew can do no one any
good if they rush out from shelter to attend to victims and be-
come victims themselves. By leaving shelter, they jeopardize
their own safety, which ultimately affects the ability of the sys-
tem to respond immediately after the threat has passed. In fact,
not only might the ambulance crew be unavailable to rescue oth-
ers but they also may siphon rescue resources that could be used
on other victims at the time of their own rescue.
Recovery
The ﬁnal phase of emergency management is recovery. “Recov-
ery” refers to what the government does in the mid and long
term after an emergency management event. Recovery activities
are intended to restore the community to its condition prior to
the disaster, or even better, improve the condition over what it
was predisaster. Commonly, the federal government plays a
leading role in recovery efforts of large-scale, local disasters. Re-
covery efforts focus on the restoration of services and the recon-
struction of buildings and transportation networks. Long-term
recovery efforts may blend into mitigation efforts as measures
are explored and taken to ensure similar disasters are averted or
at least diminished in impact in the future.
Recovery efforts are directed toward different elements of
society as the circumstances dictate. In a major natural disaster,
Fundamentals of Emergency Management
29

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
such as Hurricane Katrina, considerable public assistance is fre-
quently relied upon by large segments of the citizenry. People
may need housing assistance in the near term, food assistance,
and may need relatively routine but necessary medical attention
or treatment. Emergency management efforts must anticipate
these needs and act upon them during recovery. The recovery
phase also involves efforts to revitalize the local economy and
business sector of a community after a disaster.
In the United States, the federal government plays a signiﬁ-
cant role in the recovery process—for individuals and for busi-
nesses. Historically, in the wake of major disasters, FEMA has
worked closely with the U.S. Department of Agriculture and the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development to provide
food and housing aid to disaster victims. FEMA also works
closely with the U.S. Department of Commerce, the U.S. Depart-
ment of Labor, and the U.S. Small Business Administration to get
businesses up and running again and to get people in an affected
community back to work. Low-interest and no-interest loans,
along with outright cash grants, are the federal government’s
primary means for jump-starting a disaster-stricken commu-
nity’s economic engine. Some critics decry the use of federal tax-
payer money for the purpose of beneﬁting private business and
industry even while accepting the rationale for assisting individ-
ual citizens in need. Proponents of such programs, however,
point out that real people—that is, victims—benefit from eco-
nomic redevelopment and that no quicker way is available to re-
move the need for government assistance than to prop up the
private business sector.
Lindell, Prater, and Perry (2006) note that different disaster
researchers have attempted over time to identify the phases or
stages of disaster recovery. Among the earliest classiﬁcations of
recovery phases was the four-pronged scheme advanced by
Kates and Pijawka (1977). The first prong is the “emergency”
period, which can span from a couple of days to a few weeks.
This is the period immediately following the response phase of
emergency management and constitutes the portion of recovery
that is guided by the EOP which had been activated due to the
emergency.
The “restoration” period follows, which is the time when re-
pairs to the utility services are made, debris is removed, evac-
uees are returned to the community and to their homes (if
available for rehabitation), and the various damaged homes and
30
Background and History

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
buildings are repaired. This period of recovery can take from
weeks to months, depending upon the reparative resources
available.
The third prong of recovery, according to Kates and Pijawka,
is the “reconstruction-replace” period. This period of time,
which can run from months to years, is concerned with the re-
building or replacement of destroyed structures and other capi-
tal possessions. During this period, the focus of recovery efforts
is to return the community’s economy to its predisaster state.
Finally, the “development” prong of recovery is the period
of time, long after the disaster, when the community sees ﬁt to
place the calamity in its proper historical perspective. By this
point in time, efforts have moved away from returning to equal
footing with the predisaster economy. Rather, the community
seeks to improve itself. The losses related to the disaster are com-
memorated through monuments and memorial dates are re-
membered (Kates and Pijawka 1977). But recovery, for the
community, is complete.
While a typology of recovery activities is useful for digesting
the magnitude of the recovery process, the fact is that stages of re-
covery, like the stages of emergency management, are not in actu-
ality so neatly set apart from one another. Phases of emergency
management and the subphases inherent to them bleed together.
The phases of emergency management are interwoven,
overlapping, related, and in continuous motion. David Alexan-
der (2002) describes disasters and the human response to them as
a “disaster wheel” rather than a continuum or other linear depic-
tion. The wheel is suggestive of a cycle, and emergency manage-
ment is indeed a cyclical process. Emergency management does
not exist in a vacuum. Rather, it exists in a living and changing
system. Calamities, natural and man-made, continue to occur.
And even when a disaster fails to strike a community for an ex-
tended period of time, the environment continues to change
(through community growth and development, changing macro-
economic conditions, political and ideological transitions among
public ofﬁcials, etc.), and therefore emergency management re-
quires cyclical recalibration.
Ultimately, emergency management’s malleability is its
saving grace. By virtue of its flexibility and agility, emergency
management as a discipline is designed not only to allow com-
munities to roll with the punches that disasters throw but also to
dodge and weave, and perhaps not get into the ring at all.
Fundamentals of Emergency Management
31

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
References
Alexander, D. 2002. Principles of Emergency Planning and Management.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Arnold, J. 1988. The Evolution of the 1936 Flood Control Act. Washington,
DC: U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
Bumgarner, J. 2006. Federal Agents: The Growth of Federal Law Enforcement
in America. Westport, CT: Praeger.
City of Portsmouth. 2006. “Portsmouth Fire History.” www.cityofports
mouth.com/ﬁres/history.htm.
Coleman, R. J., and J. A. Granito (eds.). 1988. Managing Fire Services.
Washington, DC: International City Management Association.
Coppola, D. 2007. Introduction to International Disaster Management.
Burlington, MA: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Drabek, T. E. 1986. Human System Responses to Disaster: An Inventory of
Sociological Findings. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 2006a. “FEMA His-
tory.” www.fema.gov/about/history.shtm.
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 2006b. “Defining
Disaster.” www.training.fema.gov/EMIWeb/edu/hram.
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 2006c. “FEMA Grant
and Assistance Programs.” www.fema.gov/government/grant/
index.shtm.
Haddow, G. D. and J. A. Bullock. 2006. Introduction to Emergency Manage-
ment. Burlington, MA: Butterworth-Heinemann.
International City Management Association (ICMA). 2003. “Disaster
Preparedness.” IQ Report 30 (November): 1–19.
Kates, R. and D. Pijawka. 1977. “From Rubble to Monument: The Pace of
Reconstruction.” In Reconstruction Following Disaster, ed. J. E. Haas, R. W.
Kates, and M. J. Bowden. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Light, P. 2004. Government’s Greatest Achievements. Washington, DC:
Brookings Institution.
Lindell, M. K., C. S. Prater, and R. W. Perry. 2006. Fundamentals of Emer-
gency Management. Emmitsburg, MD: Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
Rainey, T. 2006. “Emergency Preparedness: A Personal Responsibility—
Your Responsibility.” www.disaster-resource.com.
U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS). 2006. “History: Who Be-
came Part of the Department?” www.dhs.gov/dhspublic.
32
Background and History

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
2
Problems, Controversies,
and Solutions
A
ny activity of government is prone to be shrouded in prob-
lems and controversies. The functions and practices of
government—particularly in democratic countries—are
unendingly up for debate. Why? Because government actions
and inactions have the potential to affect many people (in both
positive and negative ways). As we have seen, emergency man-
agement is generally concerned with events—natural and man-
made—that themselves affect many people. We know that
disasters kill and injure people. This facet of disasters is devas-
tating enough. But in fact, disasters affect society in additional
ways as well. Disasters have a tremendous mental and emo-
tional effect on survivors. Disasters are horrendously expensive
and can cost taxpayers billions of dollars that could have been
spent on other public goods and services. And disasters tax the
human and capital resources of governments.
In this chapter, readers will have an opportunity to consider
some of the problems associated with disaster victimization. Fur-
ther, the chapter explores the merits of different government ap-
proaches and responses to disasters. Indeed, whenever
governments make choices about how to deal with the public
crises of the past, present, and future, controversy necessarily en-
sues. Bureaucratic and political bickering can certainly be very
unpleasant—especially when the real lives and property of vic-
tims and survivors are involved. However, such bickering might
alternatively be viewed in its most favorable light—namely, as a
symptom of a free and dynamic society that cares enough to
33

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
grapple with the various competing issues and constituents asso-
ciated with emergency management.
Sociology of Disasters
Disaster Victimology
Many people see the term “victimology” as a made-up word.
The term has come to be associated negatively with the per-
ceived trend in modern society of “everyone being made a vic-
tim.” But victimology is an actual discipline of study. In
particular, the field of victimology asks the question, Who be-
comes a victim, why, and what can be done about it? Generally,
most who study victimology are criminologists. As a result,
much of what has been written about victimization has been
done so within the context of criminal victimization and criminal
justice. The issue of victim precipitation ﬁgures prominently in
victimology. “Victim precipitation” is the degree to which a vic-
tim’s actions or inactions contribute to his or her victimization.
In criminal justice, a prostitute or a drug dealer who is
robbed by one posing to be a prospective customer might ﬁnd
little sympathy among the general public, despite the very real
victimization that took place. To most, the prostitute or drug
dealer in this scenario contributed signiﬁcantly to his or her vic-
timization by the career choices. An elderly woman walking to
the corner grocery store and mugged in broad daylight would be
much more deserving of sympathy. Although this victim’s ac-
tions may have contributed to conditions making victimization
more likely (such as walking alone or walking at all), the victim
is clearly a more sympathetic ﬁgure in the minds of most people.
Perhaps the victim’s contribution (the decision to walk to the
store alone) was unavoidable given the victim’s lack of personal
transportation, lack of convenient public transportation, and lack
of immediate family living nearby.
Despite the victim’s innocence, real measures might be
taken from the lesson of her victimization. Transit routes that
lead to the grocery store might be established in the area. Gov-
ernment vouchers for taxi service might be provided to the poor
and/or elderly, given their vulnerability to criminal victimiza-
tion. More police ofﬁcers might be deployed in the area.
34
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
The implications for government action in the light of
people’s vulnerability to criminal victimization are akin to the
implications for government action in light of vulnerabilities that
exist for large-scale types of victimization. Whereas the criminal
justice system is responsible for intervening before and after a
criminal victimization episode, the emergency management ap-
paratus bears responsibility for intervention before and after dis-
aster-related victimization. While most of the victimology
literature focuses on victims of criminals, with these victims pos-
sessing greater or lesser degrees of responsibility, the whole of
the discipline of victimology has considerable relevance to emer-
gency management.
Types of Victims
The “father” of victimology is widely thought to be Beniamin
Mendelsohn. Most of his scholarly efforts in the area of victimol-
ogy were concerned with delineating the relationships between
victims of crime and the criminals who committed those crimes.
He also developed a classification scheme aimed at assigning
levels of “blame” to victims for their criminal victimization, that
is, levels of victim precipitation. However, his later work in victi-
mology attempted to broaden the discussion of victimization dy-
namics. Mendelsohn came to believe that the discipline of
victimology had been overly embraced—even commandeered—
by criminology and criminal justice. He believed the alignment
of victimology with criminal justice stunted the otherwise grow-
ing understanding of the dynamics of victimhood—whatever
the causes of victimization may be.
Mendelsohn proposed to rectify this trend by developing a
victim typology that accounts for all types of victims, not just
victims at the hands of criminals. This concept was labeled
“general victimology.” Mendelsohn’s general victimology clas-
sification scheme included five types of victims (Doerner and
Lab 2005):
1. Victim of a criminal
2. Victim of one’s self
3. Victim of the social environment
4. Victim of technology
5. Victim of the natural environment
Sociology of Disasters
35

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
The ﬁrst category of victims refers to the victims that victi-
mology had largely concerned itself with for most of the disci-
pline’s history, those who suffer at the hands of criminals. The
second category, victim of one’s self, focuses on those who com-
mit or attempt to commit suicide or who engage in other types of
behavior that result in the victim’s own suffering. These victims
may have a mental illness, such as depression or Munchausen
syndrome (hurting oneself to gain sympathetic attention) that
propels them to engage in self-destructive behavior.
The third, fourth, and ﬁfth categories may come under the
purview of emergency management, depending upon the scale
of the event and the number of potential or actual victims af-
fected. Victims of the social environment include victims of racial
or sexual discrimination. To be denied a promotion because of
one’s race is tragic for the individual, but it is not a disaster
(which is an emergency management event)—even if repeated
for many individuals many times over across the country on a
daily basis. On the other hand, a race riot in the heart of Los An-
geles or an act of genocide in a country plagued by civil war may
be rightfully characterized as a disaster. Victims of these catastro-
phes (which are victims of the social environment) could beneﬁt
from a proper emergency management response.
Victims of technology are those who are victimized in some
way as a result of society’s reliance upon technology. At an indi-
vidual level, this can include a woman killed in a car accident or
a man electrocuted when attempting to ﬁx an outlet in the house.
But technological victimization can also happen on a cata-
strophic scale such that would require an emergency manage-
ment effort. A HAZMAT or nuclear accident might endanger an
entire community, or an airliner may crash into a densely popu-
lated area. These are examples of catastrophic technological vic-
timizations under Mendelsohn’s general victim typology.
Finally, Mendelsohn’s victims of the natural environment
are more often than not victims of emergency management
events. Even when the victim count is low in an earthquake,
ﬂood, or tornado, the potential for high numbers of victims ne-
cessitates that the episode be treated as a potential catastrophe.
And of course, some natural environment victimizations are by
deﬁnition large-scale disasters. Starvation is not a famine if one
family goes hungry. A disease is not an epidemic if only a couple
of school children are afﬂicted. Rather, these are natural disasters
if thousands or more are affected by them.
36
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Victims’ Responses
What Mendelsohn and victimology scholars realized is that there
are many similar dynamics to serious and perilous victimization,
whether caused by a criminal, an accident, social dislocation, or
nature. Victims across all of these categories experience much of
the same trauma. Those who physically survive these various
events often go through similar healing processes. And public of-
ﬁcials must be prepared to be both proactive and reactive in the
face of potential and actual victimization episodes across
Mendelsohn’s typology. Victimization triggers responses by the
victim and by societal agents. The responses (before and after)
are in proportion to the event—but the dynamics are constant
(much like a 1-pound ball and a 10-pound ball fall to the earth at
the same rate, both being subject to the law of gravity).
Victims confronted with a sudden calamity in their lives ex-
perience a wide range of emotions. First responders during an
emergency management event play an early and important role
in the victim’s recovery process, or lack of recovery, as the case
may be. Later, during the emergency management stage of re-
covery, additional services and mental health resources may be
needed for deployment so that victims have the best opportunity
to achieve a lasting healthy state of mind, despite the acute
trauma they suffered.
Social scientists often think of victims’ reactions in a time of
crisis as existing in phases. Police psychologist Morton Bard
(1990) developed the Crisis Reaction Repair Cycle to conceptual-
ize the emotional experiences of victims over time, starting with
the victimization incident. Although his model was first intro-
duced to explain the relations of victims to serious crimes com-
mitted against them, the principles can be easily applied to
victims of disasters or other emergency management events.
Bard’s Crisis Reaction Repair Cycle consists of three phases
(Bard 1990):
1. Impact phase
2. Recoil phase
3. Reorganization phase
During and immediately following a disaster, victims will
experience the impact phase. It is during this phase that ﬁrst re-
sponders will most likely come into contact with victims. Victims
Sociology of Disasters
37

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
commonly experience a state of “frozenness” and may find
themselves completely overwhelmed by the events taking place
around them. Victims during the impact phase might be charac-
terized as confused, disoriented, numb, or in shock. Victims may
describe themselves as helpless or in disbelief at what has tran-
spired. First responders often will ﬁnd victims unable to commu-
nicate clearly or coherently—which can be very frustrating for
victims and emergency personnel who are trying to get a handle
on just what assistance is needed (for example, whether other
family members may be trapped in the rubble of a home or
where family members were last seen).
After the immediate crisis of the disaster is over, victims en-
ter the recoil phase. During this phase, victims of calamity begin
to adjust to what has happened to them. The recoil phase is gen-
erally associated with a wide range of alternating emotions. Vic-
tims tend to relive what happened to them and their loved ones
during the recoil phase, which can bring about ﬂuctuations be-
tween states of anger and resentment (at God or others), fear,
guilt (for not doing enough to protect loved ones), self-pity, and
other vivid but temporary moods. Social scientists and coun-
selors note that, during the recoil phase, the reparative process
for a victim will depend upon the degree to which that victim ex-
perienced a violation of self. In instances involving serious injury
or the loss of loved ones, the recoil phase can last a year or more.
The reorganization phase is the ﬁnal stage of crisis reaction.
During this phase, victims become more organized; their lives
are largely reassembled. What the victim experienced during the
disaster is assimilated into who they are and takes on proper per-
spective. The victim is no longer deﬁned by the disaster he or she
survived. Rather, the disaster is one more event—signiﬁcant as it
may have been—in the multifaceted life of the victim. Fortu-
nately, during the reorganization phase, victims start to see the
intensity of their phobias and anger recede. This is important for
the mental health of victims as it allows them to invest emotional
energy in other aspects of their lives. Thus, they truly do “move
on.” This is not to say that victims will forget what has happened
to them. Those who live through catastrophic events, and those
who witness the suffering of others firsthand during those
events, are generally never without the memory of what took
place. But the perspective that comes with the reorganization
phase permits victims and survivors to recognize that the disas-
ter is part of their history, not their future. Their future needs
38
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
attending to, and victims who recover healthily from the emo-
tional harm caused by a calamity understand this and live it.
The Crisis Reaction Repair Cycle resembles other models
concerning trauma-induced psychosis. Kubler-Ross (1969) artic-
ulated a widely used four-stage model for explaining grief expe-
rienced when victims lose loved ones or other sentimental
valuables (e.g., one’s lifelong home is destroyed by a tornado).
The ﬁrst stage is shock and denial. During this stage, survivors
tend to deny that the information they have received, or even
witnessed, is true. To keep the denial in place, all other inputs are
closed off or ignored by the minds of grief-stricken survivors.
The second stage in the grief process is anger. During this
stage, according Kubler-Ross, survivors express their frustration
and rage over what has happened. Often, it is the bearer of bad
news, such as the police ofﬁcer or doctor delivering a death noti-
ﬁcation, who receives the brunt of the anger. In fact, victims ex-
periencing this stage of grief have been known to physically lash
out at others. It takes considerable compassion and empathy to
absorb verbal or physical assaults from others experiencing grief.
The third stage in the grief process is isolation. During this
stage, victims tend to isolate themselves from others, including
loved ones. They may also refuse to cooperate with authorities or
demonstrate no interest in receiving assistance from emergency
management ofﬁcials. Emergency managers, when establishing
deadlines for participating in disaster assistance programs, must
take the practical effects of this stage of the grief process into
account.
Acceptance and recovery is the ﬁnal stage of the grief pro-
cess. During this stage, victims realize that life for themselves
and other surviving loved ones must go on. The resemblance of
Kubler-Ross’ stages of grief to the Crisis Reaction Repair Cycle is
not coincidental. These kinds of progressive emotional reactions
have been consistently observed in victims of all types of misfor-
tune for as long as social science has been paying attention. The
labels for emotional stages have been modiﬁed over time, but the
emotions themselves are fairly constant and recurring among
human beings stricken by emergency management events.
Providing Psychological First Aid
First responders, and by extension emergency managers through
the assistance programs and policies put in place, can signiﬁcantly
Sociology of Disasters
39

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
contribute to the emotional and mental recovery of victims during
and after crises. Conversely, these same ﬁrst responders and emer-
gency management professionals can impede the recovery of vic-
tims by failing to understand the emotional dynamics of trauma
and treating victims accordingly.
Different victims react to trauma differently. Some are physi-
cally and emotionally overcome by the events that envelop them;
others face tragedy and loss with stoicism. Clearly, emergency
management efforts to tend to the needs of victims must account
for the fact that the needs of victims will vary. But as a general
rule, ﬁrst responders and other disaster recovery personnel can
take some steps to help usher in the greatest potential for victims
to return to or maintain a healthy emotional state. The Federal
Law Enforcement Training Center (FLETC 1990) has dubbed
these principles “psychological ﬁrst aid.”
Like the Crisis Reaction Repair Cycle, there are three ele-
ments or steps to psychological ﬁrst aid. While they are not nec-
essarily administered in a particular chronological pattern, the
three steps do tend to build upon one another and, to some ex-
tent, correspond to the phases of emotional experience articu-
lated in the Crisis Reaction Repair Cycle. The three steps of
psychological ﬁrst aid are:
1. Safety and security
2. Ventilation and validation
3. Prediction, preparation, and participation
These steps are to be applied situationally as needed, de-
pending on the evident needs of the victim or victims in question.
“Safety and security” refers to eliminating the immediate
threat or threats perceived by victims. Prior to the disaster strik-
ing, the victim had been safe and secure. Now, amidst or in the
wake of the disaster, that sense of security is gone. Restoring a
sense of safety and security corresponds to the actual deliverance
of safety and security. First responders will go a long way toward
returning a sense of safety to ﬂood victims, for example, by ﬁrst
plucking them off the roofs of their ﬂooded houses and getting
them to dry land. Of course, in addition to changing the threat-
ening environment a victim ﬁnds himself or herself in, the actual
physical injuries of victims must also be treated. This too goes a
long way toward replacing a sense of safety that had been obvi-
ously lost when a condition of real peril and untreated injuries
40
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
existed. As it turns out, safety and security can often be reestab-
lished in the minds of victims by the mere presence of rescue
workers. At a community level, victims are reassured by a mas-
sive turnout of rescue and law enforcement personnel in the af-
termath of a disaster. The mere sight of squad cars and rescue
trucks in the vicinity after the disaster’s immediate impact will
likely buoy hearts of the residents.
When ﬁrst responders come into contact with victims, they
should express comforting statements to victims, such as “You
are safe now,” “Everything is going to be all right,” or “Help has
arrived.” It is very important that ﬁrst responders express these
statements with sincerity.
The second step of psychological ﬁrst aid is ventilation and
validation. “Ventilation” occurs when victims are allowed to talk
about how they feel while they talk about what has happened to
them. Often, ﬁrst responders are only concerned with the facts of
the event. After all, it is the “what happened” part that respon-
ders can do something about (whether an injury, the need to be
immediately relocated, etc.). But permitting victims to vent, that
is, to express their feelings—at least insofar as doing so is practi-
cable—will help victims progress toward emotional recovery.
Validation is an extension of the logic behind ventilation. “Vali-
dation,” on the part of rescue workers and other emergency
management personnel who have contact with victims, is simply
the act of informing victims that what they feel is understand-
able and normal under the circumstances. Victims of disasters
experienced abnormal circumstances. Consequently, the other-
wise abnormal feelings and expressions of victims become nor-
mal during chaos. Victims may be aware that the fear, insecurity,
or anger being expressed by them at the time is unreasonable or
irrational. They may feel guilty or embarrassed for having such
reactions. They should be told that their reactions and feelings
are normal for circumstances that lack normalcy.
During the ventilation and validation step of providing psy-
chological first aid, disaster responders must remain nonjudg-
mental. Emergency personnel must understand that what they
are telling the victims—that the victims’ reactions are under-
standable and normal—is true. The victims’ reactions are under-
standable and normal given the circumstances. The fact that the
emergency management responder or official has “seen it all”
and therefore is not affected by the calamity in the same way vic-
tims are does not detract from the validity of what victims feel.
Sociology of Disasters
41

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Mental health professionals caution emergency workers from
telling victims such things as “I know how you feel.” Even if that
statement is true, victims may view it as an insincere, pacifying,
and even patronizing comment that exposes the emergency
worker’s lack of interest in the victim’s situation. Given that vic-
tims are susceptible to suggestion during a traumatic experience,
emergency workers should use that susceptibility to start mov-
ing victims in the right direction mentally. They should suggest
to victims that they are going to be okay, help is available, the cri-
sis will pass, and that things are going to work out.
The ﬁnal step in providing psychological ﬁrst aid to victims
during or after a disaster is prediction, preparation, and partici-
pation. These three “Ps” fundamentally boil down to providing
the victim with an opportunity to regain some control in his or
her life. “Prediction” refers to letting victims know what is going
to happen to them next. “Preparation” refers to the readying of
victims for what emergency workers have just told them is going
to happen next. Finally, “participation” is permitting victims to
be a part of the emergency response and recovery process as
much as possible.
Many victims ﬁnd great beneﬁt in participating in the recov-
ery effort. This might mean joining an ad hoc search and rescue
team made up of civilians in the near term. Or it might mean
campaigning for more community assistance or for better mitiga-
tion and preparedness measures to avoid future calamity in the
long term. These types of activities help victims to act construc-
tively in the aftermath of an otherwise negative and debilitating
experience.
Again, while victims may respond to disasters’ misfortune
in different ways, there is a consensus among mental health pro-
fessionals that emergency management and public safety per-
sonnel can either help or harm a victim’s overall mental
well-being by the words, actions, and mannerisms they employ.
The four phases of emergency management notwithstanding, for
many victims, recovery begins during the response.
Impact on First Responders
Sometimes lost in the discussion concerning disaster victims is
the fact that emergency personnel are often themselves victims.
When a disaster strikes a community, it affects the families of po-
lice officers, firefighters, paramedics, doctors, and nurses as
42
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
much as it does anyone else living in that community. First re-
sponders, utility repair crews, and other disaster response work-
ers suffer through unique challenges as they are obligated to
show up for work during a crisis and must perform for the bene-
ﬁt of others while no doubt worried about the plight of their own
loved ones.
Some emergency management leaders and academicians
have suggested the need for a specialized plan to deal with the
families of emergency workers when a disaster strikes. Within
the context of such a plan, if an evacuation order is given to a lo-
cal community, family members of emergency workers might be
evacuated ﬁrst—not because they deserve special treatment, but
to provide peace of mind to the emergency workers themselves
so that they may remain focused on their responsibilities.
Some studies have shown that the concern about emergency
workers not performing their duties during an emergency is un-
founded. Indeed, most ﬁrst responders in a time of crisis perform
their duties heroically and selﬂessly. While the towers were still
burning in New York City after the September 11, 2001, World
Trade Center attack in 2001, off-duty police ofﬁcers, ﬁreﬁghters,
and emergency medical services personnel rushed to the scene to
help out any way they could. Many of these emergency workers
ultimately lost their lives when the towers collapsed.
But the experience during and immediately after Hurricane
Katrina in August and September 2005 does suggest that this is-
sue be explored and accounted for in emergency management
planning. Before Hurricane Katrina struck, New Orleans had a
police force of approximately 1,600 sworn personnel. As Katrina’s
devastation unfolded, nearly 300 of these ofﬁcers quit their posi-
tions or are believed to simply have failed to show up for work
(Roig-Franzia 2005). Presumably, they instead tended to them-
selves and their families. Those ofﬁcers who did not quit but were
absent without leave (AWOL) during the Katrina crisis were ter-
minated. Some of these ofﬁcers were eventually reinstated to the
force when it was demonstrated that they were not AWOL but
simply unable to show up for work due to the disaster’s impact
on them. As historian Douglas Brinkley (2006) notes, approxi-
mately 890 police ofﬁcers lost their homes during the Katrina dis-
aster and 400 police ofﬁcers had themselves been trapped with
their families by the ﬂooding. Many police ofﬁcers were eventu-
ally rescued from the roofs of their homes and returned to duty
upon their rescue and the assurance of safety for their families.
Sociology of Disasters
43

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
In addition to the common stressors associated with coping
with a disaster that affects everyone in the community, rescue
workers and their supervisors must also manage the stress that
emerges from the trauma of working a disaster and confronting
the misery and suffering of large numbers of victims.
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, stresses
that major disasters represent a serious challenge for emergency
managers in their effort to protect public safety workers engaged
in response and recovery activities. The CDC encourages emer-
gency managers to be aware of the fact that traumatic stress will
affect emergency workers and, for the sake of the health of emer-
gency workers, must be planned for.
Common symptoms that indicate an emergency worker is
experiencing stress associated with his or her disaster responsi-
bilities manifest themselves physically, cognitively, emotionally,
and behaviorally (CDC 2006). Physical symptoms can include
chest pains, difﬁculty breathing, dizziness, and headaches. Non-
physical symptoms that emergency workers may find them-
selves experiencing include bouts of disorientation, memory
problems, poor concentration, anxiety, guilt, grief, depression,
anger, withdrawal, and restlessness. Emergency management
leaders must educate rescue personnel that these types of symp-
toms are common for those engaged in protracted rescue and re-
covery operations. Further, the families of rescue workers must
also be so educated.
The CDC recommends that emergency workers and others
on the front line of disaster operations take a number of action
steps to preserve their own physical, mental, and emotional
health during a time of crisis response and recovery. These in-
clude the use of frequent breaks, maintaining as normal a sleep
schedule as possible, eating and drinking properly, and essen-
tially rolling with the emotional punches that will undoubtedly
come (CDC 2006). Many health professionals and emergency
management planners note that by adhering to the CDC recom-
mendations at the line level and enforcing them at the manage-
ment level, the vital human resource that is the ﬁrst responder
can be preserved for continued, effective rescue operations,
thereby beneﬁting not just the ﬁrst responder and his or her fam-
ily but also the community as a whole.
Of course, the challenge as always is that preserving the to-
tal health of rescue workers in these ways may not always be
44
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
possible given the circumstances of an actual disaster. Whether
advisable or not, rescuers often permit themselves to work
around the clock when confronted with a large-scale emergency.
And frankly their willingness to do so, without a lot of contem-
plation on their part or by their leadership, has often saved
countless lives when nothing mattered more than time and the
availability of manpower. This dilemma of balancing the health
interests of emergency workers against the immediate needs of a
crisis will likely always involve erring on the side of the latter.
The Question of Federalism:
Who Should Be Responsible?
In chapter 1, the issue of the federal government’s responsibility
during a disaster was raised. Many different opinions are held
concerning what the federal government’s role should be, as well
as the roles of state and local government, within the context of
each of the four phases of emergency management. The role of
the federal government in disaster preparedness and response is
a public policy question. Like any public-policy issue, many in-
terests must be accounted for when deciding what courses gov-
ernment will take.
The Public Policy Process
Political scientist Thomas Dye (1998) defines public policy as
whatever governments choose to do or not to do. Governments
can choose to pass particular laws; governments can appropriate
more or less funds for whichever programs they see fit; and,
through their funding, implementation, and enforcement actions,
governments may determine which policies are genuine public
priorities and which policies are in place essentially for show.
So how do some issues command the attention of govern-
ment policy makers and others do not? To answer that question,
one must ﬁrst understand how government’s agenda is set. The
“agenda” for government is the collective of issues on the gov-
ernment’s radar screen that it has determined needs attention
(Bumgarner 2006). Agendas are set through a variety of
processes. Some of the processes are more gradual; others are
more immediate, instantaneous, and acute. Political scientist
The Question of Federalism: Who Should Be Responsible?
45

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
John Kingdon (1984) identified three processes that shape the
government’s agenda: policy concept development, politics, and
problems. “Policy concept development” is the gradual accumu-
lation of knowledge gained by experts in a particular policy area.
Through this process, government policy makers are educated
about a potential policy issue through experience, education,
and exposure to the issue, as well as advocacy and lobbying ef-
forts (often by professional associations, interest groups, and aca-
demicians). Over time, recurring policy proposals eventually
gain traction and become issues government chooses to address.
Kingdon’s second process refers to how political dynamics
affect the agenda. Swings in the national mood, ambiguity in
public opinion, changes in the presidency, and turnover in Con-
gress all affect the policy agenda (Kingdon 1984; Bumgarner
2006).
Finally, actual and felt problems have some sway on the
agenda. This is particularly true with sudden and serious prob-
lems. In 2004, an earthquake in the Indian Ocean created several
tsunamis that struck coastal communities throughout the Asian
subcontinent. Hundreds of thousands of people lost their lives.
Boosting tsunami research and improving upon tsunami warn-
ing systems suddenly became a critical endeavor for the govern-
ments of several countries and the international community. No
further education of policymakers concerning the peril that po-
tentially accompanies tsunamis was needed. The horriﬁc effects
of poor planning and preparedness regarding tsunamis were ev-
ident to anyone with a television or other media outlet access.
Governments needed to step up and act.
Another emergency management example of an acute prob-
lem affecting public policy is that of the terror attacks on Septem-
ber 11, 2001. Government policymakers immediately reacted to
the critical agenda item of the nation’s vulnerability to terror at-
tacks. “The vulnerabilities that policymakers identiﬁed had long
existed, as had terrorism. But now, with the World Trade Center
demolished on national television and thousands of Americans
dead, all of the agenda setters and policy makers busied about to
deal with America’s latest and genuine security crisis” (Bumgar-
ner 2006, 139–140).
Many players are involved in setting the political agenda.
Certainly, elected ofﬁcials are among them, including the presi-
dent of the United States, members of Congress, governors,
members of state legislatures, and other elected officeholders.
46
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Others involved in the agenda-setting process include govern-
ment workers (i.e., the bureaucracy), interest groups, researchers
and scholars, the court systems at the federal and state levels,
and the media (which include television and radio network
news, print journalism, Internet news outlets and blogs, and
even the entertainment industry).
Elected ofﬁcials rely on the media in signiﬁcant ways. In the
United States, government ofﬁcials commonly receive an indica-
tion from the media concerning what is on the minds of the
American people. News media outlets also act as a mechanism
for communication among those in the public policy community.
Further, the media help “educate” policy makers, government
workers, and the general population about what is important
and what is not, as reﬂected by the amount of time devoted to,
and the perspectives used to describe, potential policy issues
(Kingdon 1984).
Once the policy agenda is set—which is to say that the gov-
ernment has determined what policy issues it intends to ad-
dress—the process moves through the remaining public policy
stages: policy formulation, policy adoption, policy implementa-
tion, and policy evaluation. In the policy formulation stage the
decision of what to do about a particular issue is made. Thanks
to the agenda, government ofﬁcials know that something must be
done about devastating tsunamis, for example. Policy formation
then tackles what must be done. After the “what” has been deter-
mined, the policy must be implemented. The importance of the
bureaucracy is particularly evident at this stage of the public pol-
icy process. Elected officials can pass laws and set policy, but
government workers enforce laws and implement policies. Im-
plementation necessarily requires an understanding of a policy.
Government bureaucrats exercise tremendous power simply
through its responsibility to interpret the set policies handed to
them from elected ofﬁcials.
The final stage of the public policy process is evaluation.
During this stage, the effectiveness of a policy, as implemented,
is measured. This involves both procedural and substantive eval-
uation. Procedural evaluation simply explores whether or not
the policy is being properly administered. Officials may learn
through this type of evaluation that more efﬁcient ways of doing
things exist, such as reducing the number of forms one must ﬁll
out to receive aid or eliminating some of the layers of bureau-
cracy between emergency managers setting response strategy
The Question of Federalism: Who Should Be Responsible?
47

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
and first responders at the line level. Substantive evaluation,
however, is also important. This type of evaluation gauges not
how a policy is implemented but whether it should continue to
be implemented at all. A policy may be operating exactly as the
crafters of that policy intended, but its effects due to unforeseen
circumstances are more detrimental than helpful.
In recent months and years, some have criticized the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), its organization, and
its mission as a support agency to state and local governments as
a failure procedurally. For these critics, FEMA is burdened by too
much bureaucracy and procedural impediments for it to do its
job effectively. Others, however, have been more critical of
FEMA substantively. For them, FEMA may be doing its job in a
defensible manner, but its job is ill defined to begin with. As
noted in chapter 1, this criticism became especially loud after
Hurricane Katrina. Many blamed FEMA for the humanitarian
crisis that occurred in New Orleans after the hurricane, levee
breaks, and flooding. FEMA officials reminded the public and
politicians that it was not a ﬁrst-responder organization. But crit-
ics, arguing substance, maintained that it should be. The debate
over the appropriate role for FEMA continues to be argued to-
day. Later in this chapter, FEMA’s current role and authority will
be explained further.
Making Policy Changes 
When it comes to emergency management efforts, change is
never easy. Even when policy makers determine that a change in
direction is appropriate, the philosophical, ideological, political,
and professional loyalties of the various actors in the emergency
management process can generate considerable resistance.
Actually many obstacles prevent public policy changes,
whether speaking of emergency management public policy or
not. Commonly, obstacles to public policy change come from
within the organization or organizations to be affected by the
change. Obstacles to organizational change include:
1. Inertia
2. Misunderstandings
3. Group norms
4. Balance of power
48
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Inertia relates to the thinking that “this is how things have
always been done” and therefore no change is warranted. Re-
lated to inertia is a focus on “sunk costs,” or resources already
expended. Due to the sunk costs to prop up and maintain the sta-
tus quo, many see investing in new ways of doing things as a
waste of what has already been spent.
Misunderstandings and group norms serve as impediments
to policy change through peer dynamics. Misunderstandings
about change occur when an organization’s members fail to un-
derstand the actual purpose of change and so they fill in the
blanks with their own explanations. This is reinforced through
the passing on of false information via the organization’s infor-
mal communication network.
Group norms also rely on peer dynamics—particularly the
dynamic of peer pressure. A sense may exist within the organiza-
tion, or within a power group inside of an organization, that the
group knows what is best for the organization and for the clien-
tele served by the organization, and that policymakers are ex-
ceeding the realm of their knowledge and understanding by
proposing changes. “They haven’t been here working in rubble
during a disaster,” so the thinking might go. Considerable pres-
sure may then be exerted by the group on peers within the orga-
nization to tow that line of thinking. Finally, the obstacle of
balance of power relates to those within an organization who re-
sist change because their own power, prestige, or sphere of inﬂu-
ence would be adversely affected by the change. This is very
common in government agencies. A good example (and common
occurrence) of this is when a city council creates a position for an
emergency management coordinator, who is then met with con-
siderable resistance and noncooperation from the police chief
and ﬁre chief attempting to protect their respective turf.
Organization theorist Kurt Lewin’s (1951) “force ﬁeld analy-
sis” notes that change, including policy change, is bound to be
met with resistance from within and outside an organization.
Therefore, for change in policy to actually take place in an emer-
gency management context, one must either increase the forces
favoring change (such as growing public opinion behind the idea
of a viable emergency management coordinator) or reduce the
forces of resistance (such as getting the fire chief or the police
chief to become less hostile to the idea of an emergency manage-
ment coordinator).
The Question of Federalism: Who Should Be Responsible?
49

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Many in the professional emergency management commu-
nity resent the need for politicking. They would rather focus all
of their non-emergency time on mitigation and preparedness.
But the reality of the American public-policy process at all levels
of government obligates emergency management proponents
and practitioners to jump in the ring and work the system—not
for their own aggrandizement, but for the benefit of those
served by the discipline of emergency management, namely the
community.
Federal Emergency Management Efforts
The primary federal agency involved in the full range of emer-
gency management activities is FEMA. On March 1, 2003, FEMA
ofﬁcially became part of the U.S. Department of Homeland Secu-
rity (DHS). With its move to DHS, mandated by the Homeland
Security Act of 2002, there has been a growing association of
emergency management with the term “homeland security.” As
a result of that association, emergency management is no longer
thought to be just about natural disasters, and homeland security
is no longer thought to be just about counterterrorism. Indeed,
both terms have taken on broader meaning since FEMA’s reorga-
nization under DHS and are often used interchangeably. FEMA’s
50
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
FIGURE 2.1
Force-Field Analysis
{planned change} ==
| CHANGE |
=== {resistance}
(A)
(B)
 For change . . . . increase Force A, or
decrease Force B, or
increase Force A and decrease Force B
Source: Adapted from K. Lewin, Field Theory in Social Science, New York: Harper and Row, 1951.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
move to DHS has significantly contributed to the growing “all
hazards” mind-set in the emergency management community.
Many federal agencies may be involved when a disaster
strikes, but FEMA is the point of contact when it comes to the
federal government’s disaster management functions. Although
it is often noted that FEMA is not a first-responder agency, it
does have responsibilities across all four phases of emergency
management—usually in a support capacity to state and local
governments.
The primary source of FEMA’s authority to operate as the
federal government’s emergency management agency is the
Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act
(PL 100-707). The statute has been codiﬁed into Title 42, chapter
68 of the United States Code. In expressing its rationale for major
federal involvement in emergency management events, Con-
gress declared in that statute (42 USC 5121):
a. The Congress hereby ﬁnds and declares that—
1. because disasters often cause loss of life, human suffer-
ing, loss of income, and property loss and damage; and
2. because disasters often disrupt the normal functioning
of governments and communities, and adversely af-
fect individuals and families with great severity; spe-
cial measures, designed to assist the efforts of the
affected States in expediting the rendering of aid, as-
sistance, and emergency services, and the reconstruc-
tion and rehabilitation of devastated areas, are
necessary.
b. It is the intent of the Congress, by this Act, to provide
an orderly and continuing means of assistance by the
Federal Government to State and local governments in
carrying out their responsibilities to alleviate the suffer-
ing and damage which result from such disasters by—
1. revising and broadening the scope of existing disaster
relief programs;
2. encouraging the development of comprehensive disas-
ter preparedness and assistance plans, programs, ca-
pabilities, and organizations by the States and by local
governments;
3. achieving greater coordination and responsiveness of
disaster preparedness and relief programs;
The Question of Federalism: Who Should Be Responsible?
51

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
4. encouraging individuals, States, and local governments
to protect themselves by obtaining insurance coverage to
supplement or replace governmental assistance;
5. encouraging hazard mitigation measures to reduce losses
from disasters, including development of land use and
construction regulations; and
6. providing Federal assistance programs for both public
and private losses sustained in disasters. 
From the language in the statute, Congress appeared sensi-
tive to the argument that state and local governments must do
much of their own heavy lifting in emergency management ef-
forts. But the statute also expresses Congress’ emphatic intent
that state and local governments not have to do the emergency
management job alone.
The Stafford Act goes on to establish many different speciﬁc
authorities for the president of the United States, FEMA, and
other agencies as the president may determine to marshal, for
disaster preparedness, mitigation, response, and recovery. When
a disaster does strike in the United States, certain actions must be
taken to trigger a federal response. Chieﬂy, the governor of the
affected state must request that the president declare that a major
disaster warranting federal assistance has occurred. According to
the Stafford Act, the procedure is as follows (42 USC 5170):
All requests for a declaration by the President that a
major disaster exists shall be made by the Governor of
the affected State. Such a request shall be based on a
ﬁnding that the disaster is of such severity and magni-
tude that effective response is beyond the capabilities of
the State and the affected local governments and that
Federal assistance is necessary. As part of such request,
and as a prerequisite to major disaster assistance under
this Act, the Governor shall take appropriate response
action under State law and direct execution of the
State’s emergency plan. The Governor shall furnish in-
formation on the nature and amount of State and local
resources which have been or will be committed to alle-
viating the results of the disaster, and shall certify that,
for the current disaster, State and local government
obligations and expenditures (of which State commit-
ments must be a significant proportion) will comply
52
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
with all applicable cost-sharing requirements of this
Act. Based on the request of a Governor under this sec-
tion, the President may declare under this Act that a
major disaster or emergency exists.
When such a federal disaster declaration is made, the fed-
eral government can then step in and provide a wide spectrum
of assistance, including (42 USC 5170a):
1. [federal] personnel, equipment, supplies, facilities, and
managerial, technical, and advisory services in support
of state and local assistance efforts;
2. [coordination of] all disaster relief assistance (including
voluntary assistance) provided by Federal agencies, pri-
vate organizations, and State and local governments;
3. [providing] technical and advisory assistance to affected
State and local governments for—
. . . the performance of essential community services;
. . . issuance of warnings of risks and hazards;
. . . public health and safety information, including dis-
semination of such information;
. . . provision of health and safety measures; and
. . . management, control, and reduction of immediate
threats to public health and safety;
4. [assisting] State and local governments in the distribu-
tion of medicine, food, and other consumable supplies,
and emergency assistance.
FEMA’s organizational structure includes three major divi-
sions: Mitigation, Response, and Recovery. The Mitigation Divi-
sion manages several programs related to mitigation, including
the effort to reduce future losses in residential, commercial, and
public properties, as well as losses of life or injuries, as a result of
natural disasters. As FEMA notes, the goal of the division is to
break the cycle common to disaster-prone areas, which is to suf-
fer damage, reconstruct, and then suffer damage again (FEMA
2006).
The Response Division of FEMA is responsible for provid-
ing the “core coordinated federal operational and logistical dis-
aster response capability needed to save and sustain lives,
minimize suffering, and protect property in a timely and effec-
tive manner in communities that become overwhelmed by nat-
ural disasters, acts of terrorism, or other emergencies” (FEMA
The Question of Federalism: Who Should Be Responsible?
53

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
2006). Although federal response efforts are secondary to and in
support of state and local response efforts, this division tends to
attract the most public attention given its visibility during a time
of crisis.
In an actual disaster situation that is unfolding (or has just
unfolded), the Response Division will coordinate federal re-
sponse efforts. This is not to say that FEMA is the only federal
agency to be deployed during a disaster. On the contrary, many
federal agencies play a part in disaster response as well as recov-
ery. In most cases, the nature of the disaster itself will determine
which other federal agencies will be corralled under the um-
brella of FEMA to provide response (and recovery) assistance. In
addition to FEMA, regular contributors to the response and re-
covery cause include agencies and bureaus within the depart-
ments of Homeland Security (particularly the U.S. Coast Guard
and the Federal Protective Service), Agriculture, Housing and
Urban Development, Health and Human Services, Defense
(DOD), Justice, Commerce, and Energy, as well as the Social Se-
curity Administration, the Small Business Administration, the
General Services Administration, and others. The departments of
Defense and Justice commonly play a key role in response, res-
cue, and civil order maintenance operations given the personnel
and equipment that they can deploy.
FEMA’s Recovery Division is responsible for ensuring that
individuals and communities that are affected by disasters and
other large-scale emergencies are able to return to a level of nor-
malcy with as minimal a level of suffering and service disruption
as possible (FEMA 2006). Several recovery programs are man-
aged through FEMA’s Recovery Division, including (FEMA
2006):
1. Individual assistance programs—provide or coordinate
emergency housing, ﬁnancial assistance, and unemploy-
ment assistance for individuals, families, farmers, and
businesses;
2. Public assistance programs—help states, local communi-
ties, and certain nonproﬁt groups restore and rebuild
public systems and facilities, as well as with debris re-
moval and emergency protective measures;
3. Other speciﬁed programs and functions geared toward
recovery efforts, including the Federal Coordinating
Ofﬁcer Program, Emergency and Disaster Declaration
54
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Processing, and National Response Plan Emergency Sup-
port Functions.
As a result of the Post-Katrina Emergency Management Re-
form Act of 2006, FEMA added the National Preparedness Divi-
sion on March 31, 2007. This division rounds out FEMA’s
commitment to participating in all four phases of emergency
management. The National Preparedness Division focuses on
emergency management policy formulation, contingency plan-
ning, exercise coordination and evaluation, and emergency man-
agement training. The National Preparedness Division has been
tasked with overseeing the subdivision of Readiness, Prevention,
and Planning (RPP) as well as the National Integration Center.
FEMA’s National Integration Center (NIC) maintains the
Nation Incident Management System (NIMS) and the National
Response Plan. The NIC acts as a coordinating organization for
bringing resources from multiple jurisdictions and multiple dis-
ciplines to bear on a major crisis or disaster. In effect, the NIC is
the federal incident command organization. For large-scale dis-
asters, the NIC can be an invaluable resource to local jurisdic-
tions that cannot coordinate the level of organization and mutual
aid needed in the response due to the magnitude of the disaster.
The NIMS process involves the collection of key information
when a disaster does strike so that the appropriate type and
amount of resources can be marshaled. This information in-
cludes the nature of the incident, the scale of the incident, the lo-
cation (including characteristics and surroundings), the dangers
present, the need for evacuation, the presence of unusual circum-
stances (such as the continued threat of explosives), the need for
trafﬁc control, the need for perimeter establishment, the equip-
ment currently available and the equipment needed to meet the
crisis, the type of supplies needed, information about casualties
(injured and killed), and any other information relevant to or-
chestrate a coordinated response (Peak 2007).
State Emergency Management Efforts
Every state in the United States has an agency responsible for car-
rying out emergency management functions before, during, and
after a disaster. Some states maintain independent emergency
management or homeland security agencies. Some states house
the emergency management function within the governor’s
The Question of Federalism: Who Should Be Responsible?
55

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
ofﬁce. Still others have created an emergency management bu-
reau within the state’s department of public safety. Like FEMA,
most state emergency management agencies exist primarily to
provide assistance to local governments and other state agencies
in planning and implementing emergency management pro-
grams and in responding to emergency management events.
State emergency management agencies also act as the primary li-
aison to the federal government and FEMA on all disaster-related
matters occurring within their state.
Organizationally, most state emergency management agen-
cies and FEMA are very similar. Usually, the state agencies have
directorates or divisions devoted to mitigation, preparedness, re-
sponse, and recovery. Similar to the Stafford Act, the various
states have adopted enabling legislation to empower their emer-
gency management agency to perform their disaster relief coor-
dination efforts without the additional burden of navigating
through turf battles (although turf battles tend to materialize
anyway). Additional authorities are conveyed through executive
orders by the governor.
The state of Texas, for example, has empowered the Gover-
nor’s Division of Emergency Management (GDEM) through
chapter 418 of the Texas state code. The legislature declared
through this statute the purpose for the existence of this agency
is to (Texas Code, chapter 418.002):
1. Reduce vulnerability of people and communities of this
state to damage, injury, and loss of life and property re-
sulting from natural or man-made catastrophes, riots, or
hostile military or paramilitary action;
2. Prepare for prompt and efﬁcient rescue, care, and treat-
ment of persons victimized or threatened by disaster;
3. Provide a setting conducive to the rapid and orderly
restoration and rehabilitation of persons and property af-
fected by disasters;
4. Clarify and strengthen the roles of the governor, state
agencies, and local governments in prevention of, prepa-
ration for, response to, and recovery from disasters;
5. Authorize and provide for cooperation in disaster miti-
gation, preparedness, response, and recovery;
6. Authorize and provide for coordination of activities
relating to disaster mitigation, preparedness, response,
and recovery by agencies and ofﬁcers of this state, and
56
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
similar state-local, interstate, federal-state, and foreign
activities in which the state and its political subdivisions
may participate;
7. Provide an emergency management system embodying
all aspects of predisaster preparedness and postdisaster
response;
8. Assist in mitigation of disasters caused or aggravated by
inadequate planning for and regulation of public and
private facilities and land use; and
9. Provide the authority and mechanism to respond to an
energy emergency.
The Texas statute goes on further to articulate specific au-
thorities of GDEM for each of the phases of emergency manage-
ment. The statute also mandates the maintenance of a statewide
emergency management plan, to be administered by GDEM, that
no local emergency management plan can contradict. Given that
local governments, as a general rule, receive their authority from
the state to act autonomously (through home-rule authority),
legislation such as this is necessary to ensure that all government
jurisdictions involved in emergency management operations un-
derstand that the state emergency management agency is not a
toothless tiger.
In addition to state emergency management agencies, other
key emergency management organizations at the state level in-
clude public safety organizations (such as the state police or
highway patrol), the state department of public health, the state
fire marshal’s office, and of course the National Guard (Army
and Air).
The National Guard is a reserve military organization that
primarily belongs to the states. Each state maintains its own state
guard organization. The National Guard falls under a dual com-
mand structure: it answers to both the state and federal govern-
ments. The National Guard can be called up to federal service in
a time of war or national crisis and receives most of its funding
from the DOD. However, National Guard units, when not feder-
ally activated, are subject to call-up by the governor of their state.
Consequently, the National Guard is regularly called upon to as-
sist in response and recovery operations when a disaster strikes.
It provides construction equipment, water treatment capabilities,
and rescue and security services and performs other functions as
needed (sandbagging, operating evacuation vehicles, etc).
The Question of Federalism: Who Should Be Responsible?
57

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Another disaster-related responsibility of the National Guard
is the maintenance and deployment of Weapons of Mass De-
struction Civil Support Teams (WMD-CSTs). In 1996, the Con-
gress passed the Defense against Weapons of Mass Destruction
Act, which required the DOD to become a major player in do-
mestic antiterrorism activities. In particular, the DOD was
charged with the responsibility of sharing its expertise concern-
ing the detection and neutralization of weapons of mass destruc-
tion with civilian governments at the federal, state, and local
level. This legislation, coupled with Presidential Decision Direc-
tive #62 (PDD-62) issued by President Bill Clinton on May 22,
1998, prompted the establishment of WMD-CSTs in ten different
locations around the country.
Organizing the WMD-CSTs under the National Guard seemed
appropriate to the DOD given the National Guard’s dual status
as a state and federal organization. The National Guard already
possessed the kind of channels of communication with state and
local government agencies that the Congress and the president
intended would exist with WMD-CSTs. By 2006, thirty-six
WMD-CSTs existed throughout the United States. The National
Guard and the DOD intend to have no less than one WMD-CST
located in each state and American territory.
The WMD-CSTs are staffed with active duty National Guard en-
listed and ofﬁcer personnel. These servicemen and servicewomen
are highly trained and equipped for the purpose of deploying on a
moment’s notice to an incident anywhere in the nation involving
the suspected use of a WMD—whether chemical, biological, nu-
clear, radiological, or other device. In particular, the job of the
WMD-CSTs is to advise and assist state and local civil authorities
with the detection, monitoring, and assessment of hazardous ma-
terials—particularly those that have been weaponized. Individual
National Guard members assigned to WMD-CSTs each possess
specialties and are located within sections of their WMD-CST.
Team sections include command, administration/logistics, opera-
tions, medical, survey (for monitoring the environment), deconta-
mination, and communications.
Generally when called upon during a disaster, the National
Guard, like other state agencies, will come under the purview of
the state emergency management agency and the emergency
management plan. If a state’s WMD-CST is called upon, the com-
mand and control of the operation could shift to the federal gov-
ernment and the Department of Defense, depending on the true
nature of the emergency.
58
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Emergency Management by Private
Organizations
Many private organizations function as considerable resources to
the emergency management and disaster response effort in the
United States. Chief among these is the American Red Cross. The
American Red Cross was founded by Clara Barton in 1881. Al-
though a private organization, it has a special relationship with
the federal government. In 1905, Congress authorized the Red
Cross to “carry on a system of national and international relief in
time of peace and apply the same in mitigating the sufferings
caused by pestilence, famine, fire, floods, and other great na-
tional calamities, and to devise and carry on measures for pre-
venting the same” (American Red Cross 2006).
The disaster-related duties of the American Red Cross are
many. The organization’s relief efforts speciﬁcally target the im-
mediate needs of disaster victims. This includes providing
people with shelter, clothing, blankets, medical attention, medi-
cine, and even cash. The Red Cross also helps victims to keep or
establish contact with family members outside the disaster area
and provide blood and blood products for victims. Further, the
Red Cross also provides services to other disaster response
workers. The Red Cross regularly deploys mobile food pantries
for the beneﬁt of ﬁrst responders unable to leave a disaster scene
(American Red Cross 2006).
The Red Cross is a key member of the emergency manage-
ment community, whose mission of disaster relief has long been
endorsed by federal law. It also is an organizational member on
several key emergency management councils at the federal and
state levels. Further, the Red Cross maintains a public policy arm
dedicated to advancing sound emergency management princi-
ples and practices through the adoption of laws and government
policies. According to the Red Cross, its policy mission is to “cre-
ate, through effective legislative and regulatory initiatives, a
public policy environment at all levels of government that will
forward the mission and strategic objectives of the American Red
Cross” (American Red Cross 2006). In pursuing this mission, the
Red Cross attempts to fulﬁll the following responsibilities:
1. Representation before Congress and state legislatures for
the coordination and development of policy statements
and testimony;
The Question of Federalism: Who Should Be Responsible?
59

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
2. Coordination of any requests and responses to the execu-
tive and legislative branches;
3. Coordination and development of position statements
before federal advisory committees and other forums;
4. Articulation of Red Cross policy positions before repre-
sentatives of executive branch agencies;
5. Coordination and development of policy positions artic-
ulated by Red Cross staff serving on external task forces
and committees;
6. Advance notice of policy statements made by Red Cross
employees in articles submitted for publication to scien-
tiﬁc journals. 
Clearly, more than any other private organization, the Amer-
ican Red Cross carries considerable clout in the emergency man-
agement community—particularly at the federal level—and
works diligently to use that clout to the benefit of disaster re-
sponse and recovery efforts.
Although the largest, the Red Cross is not the only private
organization to provide disaster relief services. The United States
is blessed with dozens of national charitable organizations, and
thousands of local ones, that devote time, money, and effort to-
ward alleviating suffering during catastrophes.
The Citizen’s Guide to Disaster Assistance, published by
FEMA’s Emergency Management Institute (EMI 2003), lists
many private organizations that ﬁgure prominently in disaster-
relief. Many of these are religious organizations—some are
independent, while others are connected to particular denomina-
tions. However, the services and relief they provide are not con-
tingent upon the faith or religious affiliation of victims.
Descriptions of several of these organizations appear in chapter 7
of this book.
The federal government recognizes the beneﬁt of these and
other organizations and signiﬁcantly relies upon their assistance.
FEMA, as the primary coordination agency for disaster relief ef-
forts, regularly refers victims to these organizations and con-
tracts with them to distribute various types of assistance.
Collaboration between FEMA and relief organizations with reli-
gious afﬁliations and mission statements has been criticized by
some as a breakdown in the principle of separation between
church and state. Advocates for this type of collaboration
60
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
counter that these organizations do not discriminate in who
beneﬁts from their relief efforts and that FEMA would be foolish
not to co-opt the services of committed men, women, and organi-
zations that are passionate about helping others.
Debates over
Emergency Management Resources
Natural Disasters or Terrorism?
One of the great debates taking place in emergency management
circles today is whether the focus of preparedness and response
efforts should favor terrorism or natural disasters. While it is
true that most emergency management agencies claim to have
an “all hazards” approach to catastrophes (meaning they are
prepared to deal with any type of disaster), the fact is that train-
ing and equipment resources are often event speciﬁc. Respond-
ing to a terrorist attack requires many different types of skill sets
for emergency management crews. Some of those skills are simi-
lar to those needed to respond to a natural disaster, but other
skills are very different.
Generally, when emergency management officials address
the threat of terrorism, WMDs are in the forefront of considera-
tion. For many people, the mushroom cloud of a nuclear bomb
comes to mind when ﬁrst imagining the concept of WMD. But
many types of weapons and hazards fall under the rubric of
WMDs. The federal criminal code, Title 18, outlaws the posses-
sion or use of WMDs. Three key sections of Title 18 are used by
the federal government to distinguish WMDs from other types
of weapons. Title 18 of the United State Code, section 2332, de-
ﬁnes a WMD as:
a. any destructive device as deﬁned in section 921 of this
title;
b. any weapon that is designed or intended to cause death
or serious bodily injury through the release, dissemina-
tion, or impact of toxic or poisonous chemicals, or their
precursors;
c. any weapon involving a biological agent, toxin, or vector
(as those terms are deﬁned in section 178 of this title); or
Debates over Emergency Management Resources
61

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
d. any weapon that is designed to release radiation or
radioactivity at a level dangerous to human life.
Title 18, United States Code, section 921 deﬁnes a destruc-
tive device in this way:
The term “destructive device” means—
a. any explosive, incendiary, or poison gas—
(i) bomb,
(ii) grenade,
(iii) rocket having a propellant charge of more than four
ounces,
(iv) missile having an explosive or incendiary charge of
more than one-quarter ounce,
(v) mine, or
(vi) device similar to any of the devices described in the
preceding clauses.
Finally, Title 18, United States Code, section 178 deﬁnes bio-
logical agent, toxin, and vector. That statute reads:
1. the term “biological agent” means any microorganism
(including, but not limited to, bacteria, viruses, fungi,
rickettsiae or protozoa), or infectious substance, or any
naturally occurring, bioengineered or synthesized com-
ponent of any such microorganism or infectious sub-
stance, capable of causing—
a. death, disease, or other biological malfunction in a
human, an animal, a plant, or another living organism
b. deterioration of food, water, equipment, supplies, or
material of any kind; or
c. deleterious alteration of the environment;
2. the term “toxin” means the toxic material or product of
plants, animals, microorganisms (including, but not lim-
ited to, bacteria, viruses, fungi, rickettsiae or protozoa),
or infectious substances, or a recombinant or synthesized
molecule, whatever their origin and method of produc-
tion, and includes—
a. any poisonous substance or biological product that
may be engineered as a result of biotechnology pro-
duced by a living organism; or
b. any poisonous isomer or biological product, homolog,
or derivative of such a substance;
62
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
3. the term “delivery system” means—
a. any apparatus, equipment, device, or means of deliv-
ery speciﬁcally designed to deliver or disseminate a
biological agent, toxin, or vector; or
b. any vector;
4. the term “vector” means a living organism, or molecule,
including a recombinant or synthesized molecule, capa-
ble of carrying a biological agent or toxin to a host.
A WMD event is uniquely challenging for emergency man-
agement and first-responder officials as compared with other
types of disasters. Unlike a natural disaster, a WMD event re-
quires attention to certain law enforcement interests. When the
World Trade Center towers were struck and collapsed, the result
for emergency services was a human tragedy of epic propor-
tions; the result for law enforcement was the largest crime scene
in American history. In fact, when a natural disaster strikes,
FEMA is the lead federal agency. But when an act of terrorism
takes place, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) becomes
the lead federal agency, and all response and recovery operations
are coordinated through it (with FEMA still representing the tra-
ditional emergency management community to the FBI).
Another unique characteristic of WMD events is that they
possibly (but not always) could involve substances with which
ﬁrst responders are not familiar. Lacking a familiarity with less-
than-common hazardous materials can pose a signiﬁcant safety
risk to public safety personnel. As Senator Richard Lugar said in
support of the Defense Against Weapons of Mass Destruction Act
of 1996, “. . . ﬁrst responders cannot become the second round of
casualties if we are to have any hope of saving the victims and
containing results of an attack” (Paratus Associates 2003).
Such a compounded tragedy can only be averted if ﬁrst re-
sponders receive WMD response training, which is precisely
what the statute tasked the federal government to deliver. Given
that emergency management response efforts take place from the
bottom up, not top down, it is insufﬁcient to train only decision
makers and supervisors in the emergency management process.
All line personnel must receive proper training for managing the
crises that they are asked to confront. Unfortunately, time and re-
sources that are spent training for WMD events are time and re-
sources taken away from training for other types of catastrophes
(such as search and rescue or swift-water rescue).
Debates over Emergency Management Resources
63

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Although there are very real differences between a “typical”
disaster and a WMD event, there are also some commonalities.
These include (Paratus Associates 2003):
•
Mass casualties
•
Damage to buildings
•
Evacuation
•
Need for mass sheltering
•
Effect on the economy
•
Public reaction to trauma
Terror groups such as Al Qaeda, which is responsible for the
9/11 attacks against the World Trade Center and the Pentagon,
have clearly stated their intention to secure weapons of mass de-
struction and to use them against Americans on American soil.
Generally, WMDs will fall into one of ﬁve categories, as reﬂected
in Title 18:
1. Biological agents
2. Chemical agents
3. Nuclear devices
4. Radiological dispersion devices (RDDs)
5. Conventional devices
Biological agents include natural poisons (such as ricin),
viruses (such as smallpox), bacteria (such as anthrax), and
plagues. Weaponized biological agents are not new. Ricin, which
comes from the caster bean, has been used for decades by covert
governmental and extragovernmental organizations as a tool of
assassination. In 1984, followers of Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh in
Oregon intentionally contaminated restaurant salad bars with
salmonella. More than 700 people became ill from that attack
(White 2006). In October 2001, less than a month after the 9/11
attacks, several people in the New York and Washington DC ar-
eas and Florida were exposed to anthrax that had been sent to
public ofﬁcials and media personalities through the mail. Hun-
dreds of people were exposed to the anthrax, dozens were in-
fected, and three people died.
Chemical weapons are not new to terrorists either. They
include nerve agents (such as sarin gas), blood agents (such as
hydrogen cyanide—which was used in Nazi gas chambers),
choking agents (including chlorine gas), and vesicant or
64
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
blistering agents, (such as mustard gas—which was used by
both sides during World War I). Perhaps the most famous mod-
ern act of terrorism involving chemical weapons was the sarin
gas attack of the Tokyo, Japan, subway system by the Japanese
religious sect Aum Shinrikyo. On March 20, 1995, members of
this group brought inconspicuous-looking containers onto sub-
way trains in the system and placed them under their seats.
Around 8:00 a.m., they punctured their containers to allow the
gas to seep out. As sarin is odorless and colorless, there was
considerable confusion as to what was causing people to be-
come violently ill on the trains. In all 12, commuters died and
5,500 people were injured from this attack (White 2006).
Despite their capacity for destruction, nuclear devices (i.e.,
nuclear bombs) are seen by most experts as less of a threat than
other WMDs. Working nuclear bombs are very difﬁcult to fabri-
cate. Most terrorism experts believe nuclear material, and even
nuclear weapons, that originated in the former Soviet Union
could potentially be acquired on the black market. Others are con-
cerned about rogue nations with nuclear capabilities, such as
North Korea or Iran, transferring nuclear weapons or technology
to terrorists. This was the very concern that served as the primary
impetus for America’s most recent war with Iraq. However, the
technological savvy required for constructing, smuggling, de-
ploying, and detonating a nuclear device is thought by many ter-
rorism experts to be beyond the reach of most terrorist groups.
The more likely scenario is that a terrorist organization may
acquire radioactive material and disperse it through a conven-
tional explosive device. This is known as a RDD, otherwise
known as a “dirty bomb.” RDDs are not nuclear bombs. Rather,
they are conventional bombs with contaminated radioactive ma-
terial. When a dirty bomb explodes, the initial level of death, in-
jury, and physical destruction will only be as extensive as the
conventional explosives are powerful. However, the dispersion
of the radiological material will cause a widespread area—per-
haps a city block or more—to be deemed uninhabitable due to
high levels of radiation in the environment. Clean-up costs
would be exorbitant and it could take years before people could
safely return to occupy that space.
There is little doubt that the public’s fear of terrorism—
especially after 9/11—is a driving force behind the shift of
emergency management as a discipline toward emphasizing ter-
rorism prevention and response. Approximately 3,000 people
Debates over Emergency Management Resources
65

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
lost their lives in the United States on September 11, and that was
through the use of conventional WMDs (airliners ﬁlled with jet
fuel). Public contemplation of a chemical or biological attack that
could kill thousands more, or of a nuclear attack that could kill
hundreds of thousands, creates an understandable outcry for
readiness in these areas.
But to date, natural disasters have killed far more Americans
than have acts of terrorism, or even large-scale accidents. Tornados
have killed thousands, and hurricanes and ﬂoods have killed tens
of thousands in the United States. Property damage from these
types of events register in the billions of dollars. Many emergency
management professionals believe that state and federal resources
should primarily be targeted toward the threats that actually have
a history of recurring with damaging and deadly results.
Warning Systems
For many years, various government agencies have developed
mechanisms for issuing advisories and warnings relating to nat-
ural hazards. For example, the National Weather Service has de-
veloped a system—in conjunction with state and local ofﬁcials—
to issue watches and warnings relating to tornados, hurricanes,
thunderstorms, and blizzards. The U.S. Geological Survey has
been known to issue warnings concerning active volcanoes (as it
did prior to the Mount St. Helens eruption in 1980) and earth-
quake advisories. Along the same lines, after the 9/11 terror at-
tacks, the federal government created a Homeland Security
Advisory System. Today, the Department of Homeland Security
is responsible for monitoring terror-related threats and other in-
telligence information from around the world and then warning
the public of the level of risk associated with those threats and
pieces of intelligence.
The Homeland Security Advisory System presents five
threat condition levels. Each level is color coded and represents
the assessed level of risk of a terror attack given the information
known to the Department of Homeland Security at the time. The
threat conditions are:
Green: “low”—low risk of terrorist attacks
Blue: “guarded”—general risk of terrorist attacks
Yellow: “elevated”—signiﬁcant risk of terrorist attacks
66
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Orange: “high”—high risk of terrorist attacks
Red: “severe”—severe risk of terrorist attacks
The assignment of threat conditions depends on several par-
ticular variables. When the Department of Homeland Security
receives threat information, it is assessed according to several
questions, including (DHS 2002):
•
To what degree is the threat information credible?
•
To what degree is the threat information corroborated?
•
To what degree is the threat speciﬁc?
•
To what degree is the threat imminent?
•
How grave are the potential consequences of the threat?
There have been times when particular segments of the
United States—such as the commercial aviation industry, compa-
nies in New York City’s financial district, and federal installa-
tions—have been assigned threat condition levels of greater
severity than the general population because of speciﬁc intelli-
gence relating to possible terrorist threats. However, there has
not been any time since the establishment of the Homeland Secu-
rity Advisory System shortly after the 9/11 attacks that any seg-
ment of the country, nor the United States as a whole, has seen a
lower threat condition than yellow, or elevated. Many Homeland
Security and emergency management officials suspect that it
could be many years (if ever) before the United States lowers the
threat level to blue or green.
The Homeland Security Advisory System has fallen under
some criticism since its inception. As the designation for the
United States as a whole has generally remained at the
yellow/elevated condition for months and years on end, even
during a time of war, the utility of the system has been called
into question. Even without the system in place, most Americans
are aware of a general threat of terror attacks. Further, all ac-
knowledge the government’s ability to notify particular indus-
tries or facilities of speciﬁc threats based on speciﬁc intelligence
as it sees ﬁt. Consequently, critics and cynics argue that the only
thing the advisory system accomplishes is the opportunity for
the federal government to deﬂect blame for lack of warning by
being able to say “I told you so” when another terror attack actu-
ally comes to U.S. soil.
Debates over Emergency Management Resources
67

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Key City and Nationwide Efforts
A debate that can easily be considered a close cousin of the con-
trasting interests discussed above is whether federal emergency
management resources should be directed to the disaster and ter-
rorism preparedness efforts of America’s large cities or should be
spread and shared with jurisdictions throughout the country, in-
cluding those in rural areas. Cosmopolitan locales such as New
York City, which is an international city that plays host to the
United Nations and is considered highly representative of the
United States to the rest of the world, believe that homeland se-
curity monies spent in Middle America could be better spent ad-
dressing their needs.
New York City does have a case to be made. It has suffered
multiple terrorist attacks over the years, including the two at-
tacks against the World Trade Center in 1993 and 2001. It has also
experienced at times major levels of civil unrest. Further, New
York has experienced natural disasters, such as deadly heat
waves and related blackouts, blizzards, and bitter cold snaps.
On the other hand, the middle of America has a case to be
made as well. The Oklahoma City metropolitan area, which was
the site of a major terror attack of its own in 1995, has experi-
enced deadly blizzards and ice storms and has absorbed an un-
told number of tornados and violent thunderstorms over the
years, including a powerful group of tornados from a single
storm that struck the metro area in 1999, killing 40 people and in-
juring 675 others. Those tornados also caused more than $1.2 bil-
lion in property damage.
The fact is that every corner of the United States is vulnera-
ble to some threat. As brieﬂy discussed in chapter 1, some places
are more vulnerable to a particular hazard than others. And of
course, not all hazards are equally devastating. These facts high-
light the importance of risk assessment.
When determining as a matter of public policy whether ﬁ-
nite federal and state resources will be expended in particular
hazard-prone areas or expended evenly across the landscape in
proportion to population or other criteria, emergency planners
who advise and recommend policies to decision makers must
consider prevailing trends. Speciﬁcally, changes in disaster fre-
quency and changes in disaster consequences must be evaluated
(Coppola 2007).
68
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
The changes in disaster frequency simply refer to the trend
over time regarding how often particular types of disaster occur.
Oklahoma City, in analyzing the number of tornados it has ex-
perienced over the past decade, may find that climatic trends
have contributed to a steady or increasing number of them.
Through modeling, the city’s emergency planners may deter-
mine that more effort, rather than less, must be expended for
preparing the city for tornados given that, in their estimation,
the threat is not diminishing. In fact, this is precisely why the
state of Oklahoma, after the 1999 tornados, passed legislation re-
quiring tornado shelters for new residential construction and
provided funding to those with existing homes to install such
shelters.
The other trends to be mindful of when assessing risk are
the changes in the consequences of various potential disasters.
As Coppola (2007) indicated, the primary factor that can affect
consequences of hazardous phenomena is human activity. A tor-
nado or wildﬁre in a remote, unpopulated part of the state is no
threat. But as new residents move into areas previously uninhab-
ited, natural phenomena now become hazards to those areas. If a
part of a town becomes increasingly dense in population due to
zoning changes that permit or encourage multihousing units,
then a disaster in that area will have greater consequences than
before the apartments and townhomes were constructed.
If one person were responsible for conducting risk assess-
ment for all regions of the country and then distributed funds ac-
cordingly, there would clearly be winners and losers. But the fact
is that disaster preparedness, mitigation, response, and even re-
covery generally take place at the local and state levels. When
risks are assessed, they are done so within the context of a com-
munity’s own past experiences. Local emergency managers are
not concerned with the hazards faced by jurisdictions in other
states, nor are they expected to be in our system of federalism.
They have a local constituency that they are paid to plan for and
to protect. Consequently, New York City; Oklahoma City; New
Orleans; San Francisco; Minot, North Dakota; Parsons, Kansas;
and every other community across the country will continue to
lobby their elected ofﬁcials and federal and state bureaucrats for
a share of the emergency management resources pie—and they
will all have compelling arguments on their side. No one ever
said distributing ﬁnite emergency management resources among
Debates over Emergency Management Resources
69

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
a seemingly unlimited number of worthy investment options
would be easy—especially when as much as life and death is at
stake.
References
American Red Cross. 2006. “Disaster Services.” www.redcross.org/
services.
Bard, M. 1990. The Three Stages of Crisis Reaction. Glynco, GA: Federal
Law Enforcement Training Center.
Brinkley, D. 2006. The Great Deluge: Hurricane Katrina, New Orleans, and
the Mississippi Gulf Coast. New York, NY: William Morrow/Harper
Collins.
Bumgarner, J. 2006. Federal Agents: The Growth of Federal Law Enforcement
in America. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 2006. “Traumatic In-
cident Stress: Information for Emergency Response Workers.”
www.cdc.gov/niosh/unp-trinstrs.html.
Coppola, D. 2007. Introduction to International Disaster Management.
Burlington, MA: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Doerner, W. G. and S. P. Lab. 2005. Victimology. Cincinnati, OH: Ander-
son Publishing.
Dye, T. 1998. Understanding Public Policy. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pren-
tice-Hall.
Emergency Management Institute (EMI). 2003. Citizen’s Guide to Disaster
Assistance. Emmitsburg, MD: Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Federal Emergency Law Enforcement Training Center (FLETC). 1990.
Psychological First Aid for Victims. Glynco, GA: Federal Law Enforcement
Training Center.
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 2006. “Organization
Structure.” www.fema.gov/about/structure.shtm.
Kingdon, J. 1984. Agendas, Alternatives, and Public Policies. Boston: Little,
Brown.
Kübler-Ross, E. 1969. On Death and Dying. New York: Macmillan.
Lewin, K. 1951. Field Theory in Social Science. New York: Harper and
Row.
Lindell, M. K., C. S. Prater, and R. W. Perry. 2006. Fundamentals of Emer-
gency Management. Emmitsburg, MD: Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
70
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Paratus Associates. 2003. Weapons of Mass Destruction: Federal Terrorism
Response. Buckhannon, WV: Paratus Associates, LLC.
Peak, K. 2007. Justice Administration: Police, Courts, and Corrections Man-
agement. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Roig-Franzia, M. 2005. “New Orleans Fires 51 Police Workers.” Washing-
ton Post, October 29, A6.
U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS). 2002. Homeland Security
Presidential Directive 3: Homeland Security Advisory System. Washington,
DC: White House Ofﬁce of Homeland Security.
White, J. R. 2006. Terrorism and Homeland Security. Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth. 
References
71

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
3
Worldwide Perspective
O
n December 26, 2004, a large earthquake struck off the coast
of Sumatra, Indonesia. The earthquake itself caused signiﬁ-
cant damage to nearby villages and towns and killed hun-
dreds. However, the far greater disaster was yet to come. The
earthquake had triggered a series of tsunamis that struck the
coasts of more than a dozen countries along the Indian Ocean.
Astonishingly, more than 280,000 people lost their lives as a re-
sult of the tsunamis. More than 1.6 million people were left
homeless. Indonesia was hardest hit, with more than 160,000
dead and a half-million left homeless. However, other countries
also suffered astronomical casualty levels. Sri Lanka lost more
than 35,000 people to the tsunamis, and India and Thailand lost
more than 18,000 and 8,000, respectively. This was the most
costly tsunami, in lives and property, in recorded world history.
The United States and other developed countries immedi-
ately pledged support to help the stricken countries to recover.
President George W. Bush quickly offered more than $350 mil-
lion in aid. He then went to Congress to secure $600 million
more. Americans followed the story closely and were horriﬁed at
the level of destruction. Further, many in the West were amazed
to learn that a large number of North American and European
citizens were victims of the tsunamis as well. Some of the hard-
est-hit areas in Indonesia were popular tourist attractions prior
to the disaster. Among Western countries, Sweden was probably
affected the most—losing nearly 500 of its citizens on that day.
Few disasters in recent history have served as such an object
lesson regarding the need for global cooperation and coordina-
tion of emergency management efforts, that is, mitigation,
73

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
preparedness, response, and recovery. This chapter offers readers
an opportunity to develop a rudimentary global perspective and
understanding of disastrous hazards that exist around the world
and explores the actual emergency management efforts taking
place in many different regions of the world.
Emergency Management:
A Global Responsibility
In the United States, it can be tempting to think of emergency
management only from a local perspective. After all, disasters
are local problems. They affect our neighbors, our families, our-
selves. The American system of government, federalism, ﬁxes re-
sponsibility for most government services, including initial
disaster response, at the state and local level. Further, when a
disaster of signiﬁcance occurs in the United States, the American
news media will devote considerable attention to it—often over
several days of coverage. Disasters that happen elsewhere in the
world may also receive media attention in the United States.
However, the coverage is often in passing and frequently fails to
be commensurate with destruction of lives and property that has
occurred.
As the table below reﬂects, the world’s most calamitous dis-
asters tend to happen in parts of the world outside the United
States. In fact, of the top 100 disasters of the twentieth century,
not one of them occurred in North America (excluding epi-
demics that affected the whole world). Fifty-seven of the top 100
occurred on the continent of Asia; 23 occurred in Africa. Only six
occurred in the Western Hemisphere (Disaster Center 2007).
Another factor contributing to a lack of understanding in the
United States of the disaster posture of the various regions
around the world is the inability to relate to many of the disas-
ters that afﬂict other nations and other continents. Contributing
to the disaster-proneness of many corners of the globe is the fact
that these regions consist of many developing countries—often
referred to somewhat derisively as the “Third World.” The lack
of technology, medicine, safety standards, and other features
taken for granted in the West can contribute to a nation’s or re-
gion’s susceptibility to epidemics, famine, and damage from nat-
ural and man-made catastrophic events.
74
Worldwide Perspective

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
The Role of the United Nations
While the hazards, risks, and even consequences of disasters go
unnoticed by many citizens in the United States, Canada, the na-
tions of western Europe, and other developed nations, many or-
ganizations make it their mission to address disasters around the
globe in a constructive and comprehensive way. The United Na-
tions (UN) is one such organization. On December 11, 1987, the
UN General Assembly declared that the 1990s would be the In-
ternational Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction (IDNDR). The
purpose of this program was to encourage countries to take steps
to mitigate the effects of natural disasters through the use of
technology and sound disaster planning and preparation prac-
tices. In a 1989 resolution, the United Nations further determined
that its agencies should work with member countries to improve
warning systems; design and build disaster-resilient structures
and infrastructure; and disseminate technologies used to mea-
sure, predict, and deal with natural disasters.
In the years that followed the proclamation of the IDNDR,
the United Nations has held several international conferences to
promote disaster mitigation and preparedness—especially
among developing countries. For example, in May 1994, it con-
ducted the World Conference on Natural Disaster Reduction in
Yokohama, Japan. During that conference, the United Nations
adopted the Yokohama Strategy and Plan of Action for a more
disaster-resilient world. Importantly, the plan included the
recognition of each nation’s sovereignty and expressed a com-
mitment to honoring that sovereignty. Sovereignty has often
proven to be a stumbling-block issue for many developing
Emergency Management: A Global Responsibility
75
TABLE 3.1 
Share of Twentieth Century’s Top One Hundred Disasters by Region
(Excluding Multiregion Disasters)
Global Region
Number of Top 100
Disasters 
Number of Dead 
Average Number
Killed
Asia 
57 
25,304,000 
443,930 
Africa 
23 
2,190,000 
95,217 
Europe 
9 
11,964,000 
1,329,333 
Latin America
6 
222,000 
37,000 
Source: Disaster Center. “The Most Deadly 100 Natural Disasters of the 20th Century.” www.disastercenter.com.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
countries juggling their own internal and regional politics with
the international community’s desire to help (which can be very
intrusive, depending on the aid program in question). The Yoko-
hama Strategy called for member nations, through their respec-
tive legislative bodies, to improve their preparedness postures
in the face of natural disasters. However, the strategy also recog-
nized the growing interdependence (i.e., globalization) that has
come to characterize the world’s countries. Consequently, the
United Nations set out to promote regional and global coopera-
tion to reduce and mitigate the impact of natural disasters. The
Yokohama Strategy affirmed the importance and preference of
predisaster activities—namely, mitigation and preparedness—
over a reactive approach to disaster management.
The International Strategy for Disaster
Reduction (ISDR)
In 2001, the United Nations began to advance a successor cam-
paign to the IDNDR, the International Strategy for Disaster Re-
duction (ISDR). According to the United Nations, the mission of
the ISDR is to “[build] disaster resilient communities by promot-
ing increased awareness of the importance of disaster reduction
as an integral component of sustainable development, with the
goal of reducing human, social, economic and environmental
losses due to natural hazards and related technological and envi-
ronmental disasters” (ISDR 2001a).
The United Nations ISDR operates under the presumption
that disasters can and do threaten every member nation and
therefore partnerships between nations must be established in
the disaster-reduction effort (i.e., efforts to reduce losses of life,
socioeconomic losses, and environmental damage caused by nat-
ural disasters).
To fulfill its mission, the ISDR (2001a) identifies four pri-
mary objectives that embody the present-day efforts of the
United Nations regarding disaster mitigation and preparedness:
1. Increase public awareness to understand risk, vulnerability,
and disaster reduction globally.
The more people, regional organizations, governments, non-
governmental organizations, United Nations entities, representa-
tives of civil society, and others know about risk, vulnerability,
76
Worldwide Perspective

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
and how to manage the impacts of natural hazards, the more dis-
aster reduction measures will be implemented in all sectors of
society. Prevention begins with information.
2. Obtain commitment from public authorities to implement dis-
aster-reduction policies and actions.
The more decision makers at all levels commit themselves to
disaster-reduction policies and actions, the sooner communities
vulnerable to natural disasters will beneﬁt from applied disaster-
reduction policies and actions. This requires, in part, a grassroots
approach whereby communities at risk are fully informed and
participate in risk management initiatives.
3. Stimulate interdisciplinary and intersectoral partnerships, in-
cluding the expansion of risk reduction networks.
The more entities active in disaster reduction share informa-
tion on their research and practices, the more the global body of
knowledge and experience will progress. By sharing a common
purpose and through collaborative efforts we can ensure a world
that is more resilient to the impact of natural hazards.
4. Improve scientiﬁc knowledge about disaster reduction.
The more we know about the causes and consequences of
natural hazards and related technological and environmental
disasters on societies, the better prepared we will be to reduce
risks. Bringing the scientific community and policy makers to-
gether allows them to contribute to and complement each other’s
work.
Additionally, the United Nations General Assembly man-
dated the ISDR to strengthen the disaster reduction capabilities
of member nations by working to develop and deploy early-
warning systems, as well as to continue to foster international
cooperation for investigating the impact of global climate change
and variability (e.g., El Niño) on the probability and conse-
quences of major natural disasters.
At the United Nations, the implementation of the ISDR is
the joint responsibility of the Inter-Agency Task Force on Disas-
ter Reduction (IATF/DR) and the Inter-Agency Secretariat of the
ISDR (UN/ISDR). Each of these organizations carries out impor-
tant functions within the United Nations’ disaster mitigation
program. In particular, the IATF/DR is responsible for develop-
ing disaster policy for the United Nations. The unit comes under
Emergency Management: A Global Responsibility
77

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
the supervision of the United Nations’ under-secretary general
for Humanitarian Affairs. Currently, the task force is made up of
twenty-ﬁve distinct UN, international, regional, and governmen-
tal organizations. The task force meets semiannually and enlists
the aid of experts in the ﬁelds of management, technology, social
sciences, and natural sciences to craft proposed policies relating
to climate variability, natural phenomena (e.g., drought, ﬂoods),
risk and vulnerability, and early-warning capabilities (ISDR
2001b).
While the IATF/DR spends considerable time generating in-
formation for the international community relating to disaster
preparedness and mitigation, the UN/ISDR expends its own ef-
fort to disseminate information. It serves the United Nations and
the international community as a clearinghouse of information
relating to disaster reduction and disaster awareness. In that ef-
fort, the organization produces articles, promotional materials,
and other publications that integrate relevant research from the
social sciences (including public policy and economics), technol-
ogy, and the natural sciences that inform humanitarian, develop-
ment, and relief practices. As noted in the ISDR’s (2001b)
Framework for Action report, the UN/ISDR serves to promote a
worldwide culture of disaster reduction, which is a tall order in a
world with limited resources and often narrow national interests.
Disaster Vulnerabilities by Region
Asia
For as long as records have been kept, the continent of Asia,
along with the Pacific Rim, has been known to be among the
most disaster-prone regions of the world. Asia, which includes
the world’s two most populous countries—China and India,
with more than a billion citizens each—is beset with all types of
natural and industrial hazards. According to the Asian Disaster
Preparedness Center (ADPC 2006), the average number of
people killed by natural disasters in Asia per year from 1993 to
1997 was 19,078. As startling a number as that is, it is consider-
ably less than the average of 63,435 disaster deaths per year in
Asia from 1988 to 1992. The average number of homeless gener-
ated from disasters each year also declined. From 1988 to 1992,
78
Worldwide Perspective

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
the average was 16,861,685 left homeless; from 1993 to 1997 the
average was 4,250,166. Many point to increased disaster aware-
ness and disaster mitigation programs as at least partially re-
sponsible for the encouraging decline in the annual average of
disaster-related deaths and homelessness.
The most common types of disasters are hydrometeorologi-
cal, according to the ADPC. In other words, water and weather
are key components to Asia’s most common disastrous events. In
particular, windstorms and devastating ﬂoods tend to pose the
greatest and most assured threats to the Asian continent and the
Paciﬁc Rim (ADPC 2006).
Generally, destructive windstorms in Asia are the result of
cyclones and typhoons. Cyclones and typhoons are violent, mas-
sive, rotating tropical storms that originate over the ocean. In the
United States, these storms are referred to as hurricanes, as they
originate in the Atlantic Ocean or Gulf of Mexico. “Cyclones” are
hurricanes that occur in the Indian Ocean, and “typhoons” are
hurricanes that occur in the Paciﬁc Ocean. Throughout the 1990s,
well more than 2,200 disasters were reported in Asia. Of those,
approximately 400 were windstorms. During that decade,
186,000 people were killed from windstorms in Asia. Particularly
vulnerable to cyclones are the countries of India and Bangladesh,
with 15 percent of the world’s cyclones originating in the Bay of
Bengal and striking those two nations (ADPC 2006).
Flooding is the other major natural hazard affecting Asia. In
fact, 83 percent of all disasters striking Asia in the 1990s were
major ﬂoods (IFRC 2000). The annual average damage caused by
ﬂooding in Asia during the 1990s was approximately $240 mil-
lion. In recent years, large-scale flooding has occurred in
Bangladesh, China, Thailand, Vietnam, and Pakistan (IFRC
2000). In addition to deaths, injuries, and the destruction of
homes, ﬂooding seriously jeopardizes many nations’ food sup-
plies by destroying large areas of agricultural land. For example,
in China, when the Yangtze River overﬂowed in 1998, 25 million
hectares of cropland were destroyed (ADPC 2006).
Although predominant in Asia, windstorms and ﬂoods are
not the only types of natural disasters that regularly strike the
Asian continent. Earthquakes, droughts, and volcanoes have also
posed serious threats and have a history of destruction in Asia.
Two-thirds of all large earthquakes occur in the Paciﬁc Rim. Ad-
ditionally, the Himalayan Mountains are located in a seismically
Disaster Vulnerabilities by Region
79

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
active region. Countries in Asia that have suffered through large-
scale, devastating earthquakes in recent years include India,
Pakistan, Nepal, Japan, Papua New Guinea, Indonesia, the
Philippines, China, Turkey, and Afghanistan. In 2005, one of the
most deadly earthquakes in recent history occurred in the Pak-
istan-controlled part of Kashmir. On October 8, 2005, a quake
measuring 7.6 on the Richter scale struck Kashmir, killing 73,000.
An additional 1,400 died in the India-controlled portion of Kash-
mir (ADPC 2006).
According to the World Disasters Report (IFRC 2000), the
decade of the 1990s saw more than twenty major volcanic erup-
tions in Asia. The countries of Japan, the Philippines, and In-
donesia are particularly vulnerable. The Philippines alone has
more than 200 volcanoes in the country, including Mount
Pinatubo on the island of Luzon. This volcano famously erupted
in April 1991, killing 500 people. Although the death toll was rel-
atively small (due to evacuation efforts by the Philippine and
United States governments), the eruption was ten times as pow-
erful as the eruption of Mount St. Helens in Washington in 1980.
Droughts also regularly threaten portions of Asia. While it is
true that some regions within Asia regularly face the problem of
too much water, other parts of Asia have chronically suffered un-
der drought conditions, including portions of India, Pakistan,
Afghanistan, China, and North and South Korea. Recent
droughts in parts of India and Afghanistan have threatened the
water supply for tens of millions of people and have destroyed
countless livestock and crops.
Africa
The continent of Africa is home to 933 million people spread
across ﬁfty-four countries. Many different types of natural and
technological hazards threaten Africa’s inhabitants. Historically,
the primary natural threats are epidemics, drought, ﬂoods, agri-
cultural pests, and bush ﬁres. Some regions in Africa exist under
the additional persistent threats of earthquakes, cyclones, and
volcanic eruptions (Loretti and Tegegn 1996). In fact, in West
Africa, more than 75 percent of the population lives in areas af-
fected at least once every two years by a serious cyclone, ﬂood,
drought, or earthquake (ECOWAS 2006).
80
Worldwide Perspective

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Other threats common to Africa include technological disas-
ters, such as chemical accidents, mining accidents, and other
types of industrial hazards (Loretti and Tegegn 1996). However,
the chief man-made threat in Africa is the widespread conﬂict.
Many countries in Africa are susceptible to extreme political up-
heaval. Civil unrest and revolution frequently interact with trou-
bling natural conditions (such as drought) and compound the
problems. Feeding people without food or medicine in remote
villages is difﬁcult under any circumstance; doing so amidst vio-
lent and genocidal warring factions inside and outside the gov-
ernment is almost impossible. In fact, from 1980 through the
mid-1990s, civil unrest and war caused an estimated 3.7 million
deaths in Africa and billions of dollars per year in damage
(Loretti and Tegegn 1996).
In 2000–2001, approximately 13 percent of the total popula-
tion of Africa was adversely affected by disasters (ISDR 2004a).
However, in addition to a geographic and climatic proneness to
natural disasters, Africa is especially plagued by poverty. Unfor-
tunately for many places within Africa, pervasive poverty and
disasters act as force multipliers for each other. In other words,
when disasters do strike, impoverished conditions are often per-
petuated. Further, the existence of poverty in particular regions
tend to compound the effects of disasters when they strike those
regions.
According to the United Nations’ 2004 report on Africa enti-
tled Africa Regional Strategy for Disaster Risk Reduction, poverty is
on the rise in Africa (especially in sub-Saharan Africa) while it is
declining everywhere else in the world (ISDR 2004a). While
poverty exists in all corners of the globe, international emer-
gency management experts believe that disaster reduction efforts
in Africa, perhaps more than anywhere else, must consider the
impoverished conditions there.
A nation’s degree of wealth is often measured in terms of its
gross domestic product (GDP). The annual GDP is the total mar-
ket value of all goods and services produced in a particular
country over the course of a year. GDP is a comprehensive ﬁgure
that includes a nation’s total consumption, investment, govern-
ment spending, imports, and exports. A nation’s per-capita GDP
simply requires dividing the GDP by the nation’s population. In
2004, Africa’s per capita GDP was $749, whereas the global aver-
age GDP was $5,403. In 2006, the per-capita GDP in the United
Disaster Vulnerabilities by Region
81

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
States was approximately $43,500. Further, approximately half of
all Africans lived in extreme poverty, deﬁned by the United Na-
tions as a per-capita income of less than $1.00 per day. In Africa’s
poorest countries, more than 80 percent of the population live be-
low the poverty line. In 2003, 40 million Africans faced starvation
and 200 million lived in hunger (ISDR 2004a).
When disasters hit countries as poverty stricken as many are
in Africa, the impact can be severe. In addition to the physical
and medical needs that might be acutely required on a large scale
for a particular population, disasters pose a serious resource
problem for the poorer countries in Africa. Scarce resources such
as medicine, food, and money for economic development to be
used for general welfare purposes are often used up prematurely
in the wake of a disaster. Economic losses, in the form of de-
stroyed businesses and destroyed or damaged infrastructure and
communications, further deplete the capacity of Africa’s poorer
countries to generate money needed for disaster relief—much
less disaster mitigation and preparedness.
In the 1970s and 1980s, the most notable natural hazard in
Africa was drought (and famine that accompanied it). In
1984–1985, the country of Ethiopia was hit by a major drought
and famine that affected 8 million people. In total, 1 million
Ethiopians died and 600,000 were moved out of the drought ar-
eas with the help of international relief efforts. In more recent
years, droughts have affected southern parts of Africa particu-
larly hard. In 2004, South Africa suffered its worst drought in
nearly ninety years with 14 million people effected. In the past
few years, droughts have also created major food emergencies in
Burkina Faso, Chad, Ethiopia, Kenya, Niger, Rwanda, Somalia,
Sudan, Tanzania, and Uganda (ISDR 2004b).
Flooding has also been a hallmark of African coastal disas-
ters in recent years. Mozambique in 2001 was pounded by Cy-
clone Dera, which ﬂooded 79,000 hectares of planted agricultural
land, leaving nearly 120,000 farm families without food. Addi-
tionally, ﬂooding in 2003 in Namibia displaced 25,000 rural resi-
dents of Caprivi.
Latin America
Latin America is generally defined as those countries in the
Americas where Spanish or Portuguese is spoken. This includes
Mexico and the countries of Central America, South America,
82
Worldwide Perspective

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
and the Caribbean. Twenty Latin American countries have a
combined population of approximately 550 million. Natural dis-
asters in Latin America have played a major role in the history
and development of the Western Hemisphere. Historians gener-
ally believe that a severe and protracted drought caused the
demise of the Mayan civilization (Hodell, Curtis, and Brenner
1995).
From 1970 to 1999, Latin America suffered through many
signiﬁcant disasters. During that period of time, Latin America
averaged more than thirty major disasters per year, resulting in
an average annual death toll of 7,500 people (Charveriat 2000).
Disasters during that period also had a direct impact on the GDP.
In many major disasters, the losses suffered in Latin American
countries—in terms of damage to private and public property
and to countries’ infrastructure—had tremendous adverse ef-
fects on GDPs. For example, when Jamaica was struck by a hurri-
cane in 1988, that country’s total losses amounted to a full 28
percent of its GDP. Also that year, Nicaragua was struck by a
hurricane and suffered losses totaling nearly 33 percent of its
GDP. Dealing with humanitarian crises is always a challenge, but
disaster planners in developing countries, including in Latin
America, must be mindful of the horriﬁc toll that major disasters
can place on a nation’s economy. In fact, one study of thirty-ﬁve
disasters in Latin America showed that the GDP growth rates in
the affected countries declined as a result of twenty-eight of the
thirty-ﬁve disaster events. Of those twenty-eight, the actual GDP
declined (not just the growth rate) as a result of thirteen of those
disasters (Charveriat 2000).
Latin America is very diverse topographically. As a region
of the world, Latin America has it all: oceans, mountains, tropi-
cal climates, harsh winter climates, rain forests, wetlands,
plains, volcanoes, and fault lines. In 1970, an earthquake hit
Peru and killed 67,000 people. Another earthquake hit
Guatemala in 1976, killing 23,000. In 1985, the Columbian vol-
cano Nevado del Ruiz erupted and killed 22,000. In 1999, a ma-
jor flood occurred in Venezuela, killing approximately 30,000
people (CRED 2000). Indeed, the capacity of nature to cause se-
rious calamities in Latin America is great, and the means at na-
ture’s disposal to do so are many.
From a global perspective, Latin America can properly be
construed collectively as a region of the world in the Western
Hemisphere. However, the disaster experiences of Central
Disaster Vulnerabilities by Region
83

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
America, South America, and the Caribbean do differ. From
1970 to 1999, 50 percent of Latin American disasters occurred in
South America. Central America accounted for 28 percent of the
disasters, and the Caribbean accounted for 22 percent. The dis-
asters in South America appear to have been more costly in lives
than in other parts of Latin America. Among those killed in
Latin American disasters, 65 percent died in South America—
well beyond the continent’s proportional share of 50 percent.
Similarly, Central American disasters claimed more lives than
their countries’ percentage of total Latin American disasters
would predict—33 percent of Latin American disaster fatalities.
The Caribbean fared the best with only 2 percent of all Latin
American disaster fatalities occurring there (CRED 2000). 
Clearly, these figures are in part a reflection of where the
people are. South America constitutes an entire continent and is
home to more than 370 million people. Mexico has about 100
million residents; Central America has about 41 million. The
Caribbean is home to a little under 40 million people. In light of
the distribution of the Latin American population, the low
number of deaths in the Caribbean as a percentage of total
Latin American disaster-related deaths is not too surprising.
However, an additional factor to be mindful of is the type of
disasters that the different regions within Latin America are
subject to. Large-scale earthquakes and floods in South and
Central America have potential to impact a broader geographic
area and draw in a farther-flung group of people through a sin-
gle cataclysmic event.
The impact of disasters on human lives in each of Latin
America’s regions can be considered in ways other than as per-
centages of the whole. For example, the number of people killed
and affected by disasters can be considered as a percentage of
that region’s population. The table below summarizes the num-
bers of deaths and affected people as percentages of the South
American, Central American, and Caribbean populations, re-
spectively, from 1970 to 1999. Additionally, the percentage of the
land mass affected by disasters in each of the three regions is also
considered, along with the damage from disasters as a percent-
age of GDP. In each of these measures, excluding deaths, the
Caribbean fares far worse than the other two regions of Latin
America (Charveriat 2000).
84
Worldwide Perspective

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
As suggested previously, Latin America possesses consider-
able breadth in the types of disasters that befall it. From 1970 to
1999 in South America, nearly 50 percent of all disasters were
ﬂooding related. Earthquakes and landslides have also ﬁgured
prominently in South American disaster history. Wind-related
disasters account for only 7 percent of South America’s total dis-
aster experience. By contrast, more than half of the Caribbean’s
disasters are wind related—that is, hurricanes. Central America’s
(and Mexico’s) disaster experience is more varied than the other
parts of Latin America. In Central America, 31 percent of its dis-
asters were ﬂoods, 26 percent were hurricanes, 19 percent were
earthquakes, and 8 percent were volcanoes (Charveriat 2000).
The distribution of disaster types across Latin America from 1970
to 1999 is presented in table 3.3 below (CRED 2000).
From 1970 to 1999, earthquakes were responsible for 53 per-
cent of the total fatalities despite the fact that they represented
only 13 percent of the disasters. This was due to the fact that
earthquakes have a high death-to-occurrence ratio (950 deaths
per earthquake). Flooding caused 21 percent of Latin American
disaster-related deaths. Windstorms, such as hurricanes, caused
11 percent of the deaths. Volcanic eruptions caused 10 percent of
disaster-related deaths. Again, although infrequent in occur-
rence, volcanoes proved to be deadly overall due to a high death-
to-occurrence ratio—approximately 500 deaths per eruption
(Charveriat 2000).
Disaster Vulnerabilities by Region
85
TABLE 3.2
Disaster Exposure Indicators in Latin America, 1970–1999 
Region
Occurrence (per
Thousand km2)
Share of
Population
Killed (per
Million
Habitants)
Share of
Population
Affected (per
Thousand
Habitants)
Cumulative
Damages as
Share of 1998 
Gross Domestic
Product (GDP)
South America
0.3%
431.1 
322.9 
3.9%
Central America
1.2%
555.1 
147.7 
7.1%
Caribbean 
10.1%
3.8 
486.4 
43.3%
Source: C. Charveriat, Natural Disasters in Latin America and the Caribbean: An Overview of the Risk,
Washington, DC: Inter-American Development Bank, 2000.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Europe
The global regions of Asia, Africa, and Latin America all have
significant populations living in developing countries. Europe,
by contrast, is a continent full of countries that collectively and
individually are already developed socioeconomically and tech-
nologically. Europe today has 810 million people living in its
ﬁfty-two countries. As a whole, Europe is one of the wealthier re-
gions of the world, with a collective GDP of nearly $16 trillion.
As a result, the impacts that disasters have on Europe tend to be
similar in degree as those that afﬂict the United States. Disasters
tend to create acute problems in Europe—but problems that are
quickly and adequately handled with whatever resources are de-
termined necessary to meet a disaster’s challenges.
However, while poverty can be a force multiplier for the ad-
verse effects of disasters, no corner of the world—wealthy or
poor—is immune from disastrous events altogether. Europe, for
all its wealth, is no exception. Between 1998 and 2002, natural
and technological disasters affected more than 7 million Euro-
peans and caused an estimated 60 billion euros worth of dam-
age to insured properties (and billions more to uninsured
property). Natural disasters and technologically calamitous
events that have hit Europe in recent years are varied and in-
clude ﬂoods, windstorms, wildﬁres, droughts, heat waves, bliz-
zards, landslides, snow avalanches, earthquakes, oil spills,
86
Worldwide Perspective
TABLE 3.3
Disasters by Type as a Percentage of All Disasters in Latin America
Disaster Type
Percentage of Total Disasters
Flood 
38 
Windstorm 
22 
Earthquake 
13 
Landslide 
10 
Drought 
6
Volcanic Eruption
5
Wildfire 
3 
Other 
3 
Source: Center for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters. EM-DAT: The OFDA/CRED International Database  
1900–1999. Louvain, Belgium: Universite Catholique de Louvain, 2000.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
mining accidents, and other large-scale industrial accidents
(EEA 2003). The breadth of disaster types is reflective of the
breadth of topography and climate that characterizes Europe.
For many Americans, thinking about the continent of Europe
conjures up images of particular European countries with which
the United States has had frequent or noteworthy dealings over
the span of American history, including the United Kingdom,
Ireland, France, Germany, Italy, and Spain. But of course, there
are dozens more countries in Europe besides these. Europe
stretches from Spain and Portugal in the west to as far east as
Russia’s Ural mountain range. Europe also includes the Scandi-
navian and Baltic countries in the north and a number of
Mediterranean and Balkan countries in the south.
During the twenty-ﬁve-year period of 1975 to 2000, Europe
experienced 840 natural disasters. Like many parts of the world,
Europe is particularly vulnerable to flooding and windstorms.
Also in that period, more than 50 percent of Europe’s major dis-
asters fell into one of these two categories. Specifically, wind-
storms accounted for 27 percent of the continent’s disasters;
ﬂooding accounted for 26 percent. Earthquakes also played a sig-
niﬁcant role in the total disaster ﬁgure, representing 16 percent of
disasters in Europe during that time. Europe’s earthquakes were
concentrated in the Mediterranean Sea region of the continent,
particularly affecting Italy, Turkey, and Greece.
In total, an estimated 18,000 people were killed as a result of
Europe’s disasters from 1975 to 2000. An additional 27 million
Europeans were affected by disasters. As mentioned in the dis-
cussion about Latin America, earthquakes tend to have a high ca-
sualty ratio associated with each incident. In Europe,
earthquakes caused 46 percent of disaster-related fatalities. The
percentage breakdown of all disaster-related deaths in Europe
during this time frame, as well as the respective shares of disas-
ter-related damage by disaster type, is presented in the table be-
low (ADRC 2002).
In addition to accounting for more than half of all disasters
in Europe from 1975 to 2000, flooding and windstorms caused
more than 70 percent of disaster-related property damage. The
fact that the death toll for these two disaster types is relatively
low (24 percent of all deaths) is indicative of two factors: (1) the
lower death-to-occurrence ratios generally associated with mete-
orological disasters and (2) the advanced level of mitigation and
emergency preparedness, including the employment of early
Disaster Vulnerabilities by Region
87

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
warning systems, that typifies disaster readiness in developed
regions of the world.
Europe, as one of the world’s leading industrial regions, is
also vulnerable to technological or man-made disasters. From
1998 to 2002, Europe experienced several technological disasters,
including oil spills, chemical spills, large-scale explosions, large-
scale building collapses, and large fires. During that four-year
period, Germany alone experienced three major industrial explo-
sions and a large chemical spill. France experienced two major
building collapses, a large industrial ﬁre, and a large explosion.
The single explosion in France during that period was one of Eu-
rope’s worst industrial accidents in recent memory. A fertilizer
plant in the southern part of the city of Toulouse, France, ignited
and caused an explosion that killed 30 people and wounded
2,000 others. More than 3,000 buildings and homes in the sur-
rounding area were destroyed or severely damaged (EEA 2003).
Comparative Emergency Management
Activities and Readiness
Earlier chapters have provided a basic explanation of the formal
emergency management apparatus in the United States. This
88
Worldwide Perspective
TABLE 3.4 
European Disaster Deaths and Property Damage, 1975–2000
Disaster Type
Percentage of All
Disasters
Percentage of
Disaster Deaths
Percentage of
Disaster Damage
Windstorm
27 
10 
15 
Drought 
3 
0 
7 
Earthquake
16 
46 
19 
Wildfire
8 
1 
1 
Flood
26 
14 
56 
Extreme Temperature
10 
20 
1 
Landslide
5 
6 
1 
Volcanic Eruption
2 
0 
0 
Epidemic
3 
3 
0 
Source: Asian Disaster Reduction Center. “Number of Disasters in Europe by Type, 1975–2000.” www.adrc.or.jp.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
apparatus includes the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
other federal agencies, state and local governments, and non-
proﬁt organizations such as the American Red Cross and the Sal-
vation Army. In the United States, which operates under the
federalism model of government and has many emergency man-
agement participant agencies and organizations, a constant ten-
sion exists relating to the assignment of emergency management
responsibilities and the contradictory expectations regarding re-
sponse and recovery that government officials and the public
tend to have and revisit after each major disaster.
Interestingly, most other countries of the world experience
some of the same tensions. Although federalism in the United
States is unique in that great emphasis is placed on the tradition
and legality of states rights (and therefore state responsibilities),
most countries around the world similarly place the primary
function of emergency management—especially response—on
the state/provincial and local governments. This preserves the
role of the federal emergency management apparatus in most
countries as merely supportive and augmentative by nature. It
also preserves some measure of political cover if state and local
ofﬁcials err in some way during the disaster response effort.
What follow in this section of the book are snapshots of the
emergency management apparatus and processes in place in se-
lected countries around the world. While the list of countries,
and the information provided about them, is by no means ex-
haustive, the following section does provide a springboard for
comparative evaluations of the emergency management and dis-
aster response communities in various countries and regions of
the globe.
China
The People’s Republic of China is inhabited by more than 1.3 bil-
lion people. Each year, disasters affect more than 200 million Chi-
nese citizens. Consequently, emergency management efforts
figure prominently in the scope of government activities in
China. Of course, all aspects of life in China ﬁgure prominently
with the government as China remains a totalitarian, Commu-
nist Party–controlled country with a highly centralized national
government. While China has relaxed its control over some en-
trepreneurial and business activities within its borders, the na-
tion remains politically and institutionally monolithic. Hence,
Comparative Emergency Management Activities and Readiness
89

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
there is no controversy over who is responsible for emergency
management in China—it is the national government.
Despite the limited political or legal recourse Chinese citi-
zens have were their government to do little or nothing about
disaster preparedness and relief, the Chinese government has
actually been very proactive in advancing the discipline of
emergency management within its own borders, as well as
around the world. In fact, since the 1980s, China has been a
world leader in exploring and developing best practices in
emergency management.
The emergency management function in China rests with
the Ministry of Civil Affairs. This agency is responsible for orga-
nizing and coordinating disaster relief efforts, disseminating dis-
aster 
preparedness 
information, 
and 
prioritizing 
and
distributing disaster relief funds to those in need when disaster
strikes. In May 2003, China hosted a conference on emergency
planning and disaster relief. As a result of the conference, the
Ministry of Civil Affairs developed a new emergency plan. The
plan serves as a template for provincial and municipal govern-
ment officials to follow in drafting their own emergency plans
for more localized disastrous events (ADRC 2006). Of course, all
local plans must be approved by the central government.
The Chinese Ministry of Water Resources also is involved in
disaster planning. As ﬂoods are one of the primary natural haz-
ards in China, the Ministry of Water Resources, in concert with
the Ministry of Civil Affairs, has developed a manpower pro-
gram that can be tapped in a time of crisis. When needed, the
Water Resources ministry can draw from 370 different groups
who can respond to a ﬂood emergency and hopefully minimize
the losses in lives and property. Additionally, China has passed
several laws that articulate land-use provisions that mitigate
damage from ﬂoods and earthquakes—particularly in key urban
centers. China has also passed regulations that specify just who
will respond to any given disaster, as well as what will be done
in the wake of a destructive earthquake (ADRC 2006).
In recent years, China has passed some controversial laws
relating to emergency management. After the severe acute respi-
ratory syndrome outbreak in 2003 and the bird ﬂu in 2005, China
toughened its penalties for local government ofﬁcials who fail to
act in a way that brings an emergency under control. In essence,
China in the eyes of some has criminalized incompetence (PDO
2006). Other controversial legislation that has been proposed in
90
Worldwide Perspective

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
China includes a law that levies signiﬁcant ﬁnancial penalties on
any media outlets that falsely report on disaster response activi-
ties or in some other way violates disaster regulations (CMP
2006). As it is up the to government to decide what is a false re-
port, many critics from outside of China see this type of legisla-
tion as stiﬂing even constructive criticism, which could be used
to inform better practices in the future.
Australia
In Australia, the Attorney General’s Department is responsible
for coordinating emergency management efforts throughout the
country. The published mission statement of the Australian at-
torney general is to “[achieve] a just and secure society” by pur-
suing two speciﬁc and somewhat interrelated outcomes: (1) an
equitable and accessible system of federal civil justice and (2) co-
ordinated federal criminal justice, security, and emergency man-
agement activity for a safer Australia (EMA 2006).
Some professional emergency managers would be a little
dismayed at Australia’s placement of the emergency manage-
ment function in such close proximity to the criminal justice sys-
tem and under the supervision of the nation’s chief law
enforcement officer—the attorney general. However, to the ex-
tent that emergency management is seen as a piece of homeland
security, the location of the emergency management function
within Australia’s government structure makes sense.
Within the Attorney General’s Department, the emergency
management agency—known as Emergency Management Aus-
tralia—falls under the National Security and Criminal Justice
Group. Emergency Management Australia is one of several divi-
sions in the National Security and Criminal Justice Group; other
divisions include the Criminal Justice Division, the Security and
Critical Infrastructure Division, the Protective Security Coordi-
nation Centre, AusCheck (which performs government-spon-
sored background checks), and the International Crime
Cooperation Division.
In Australia, similar to the United States, the prime responsi-
bility for the protection of life, property, and the environment
within the nation’s borders belongs to the states and territories.
Even so, the Australian national government declares a strong
commitment to fulfilling a key supporting role in helping the
states and territories develop greater capacity for handling
Comparative Emergency Management Activities and Readiness
91

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
disasters and other emergency management events, as well as
providing assistance in the form of critical resources (manpower,
equipment, leadership) when the states or territories are unable
to manage a situation because of the event’s scope and reach.
Also similar to the United States and the Federal Emer-
gency Management Agency, the Australian government through
Emergency Management Australia maintains an “all hazards”
approach to disasters and homeland security. A large premium,
therefore, is placed on activities that foster multiagency and
multijurisdictional coordination and cooperation. Some of the
other federal government agencies that play a role in the com-
prehensive all-hazards emergency management effort include
the Australian Maritime Safety Authority; the Bureau of Meteo-
rology; Geoscience Australia; the Department of Transport and
Regional Services; the Department of Health and Ageing; and
Agriculture, Fisheries, and Forestry—Australia. All of these fed-
eral agencies have a seat at the emergency management table in
Australia and are actively involved in mitigation, preparedness,
response, and recovery efforts with Emergency Management
Australia.
India 
By any measure, India’s 1.2 billion residents live in one of the
most disaster-prone countries in the world. As such, the govern-
ment of India has pursued an aggressive emergency manage-
ment program featuring all four key elements of the discipline:
mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery. At the national
level, India’s Ministry of Home Affairs, Disaster Management
Division, is responsible for emergency management and disaster
planning.
Like many other countries with strong state or provincial
governments, India’s national policy on emergency manage-
ment and disaster relief is to generally defer to India’s state gov-
ernments. However, the central government of India has also
staked out a strong role when major disasters strike—a role that
involves supporting the state and local relief efforts after a dis-
aster by providing physical and ﬁnancial resources. The degree
of assistance provided by the central government is contingent
upon the nature and magnitude of the disaster in question and
the amount of resources deemed necessary to alleviate acute
suffering.
92
Worldwide Perspective

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
When a disaster occurs and is of such signiﬁcance that the
Indian central government becomes involved, the government
responds at two levels: primary relief efforts and secondary ef-
forts. The primary relief efforts by the national government in In-
dia include (NDMI 2007):
Forecasting and operation of warning system
Maintaining uninterrupted communication
Publicizing warnings of impending calamity and disaster-
preparedness and relief measures through television, radio,
and newspapers
Providing transportation assistance to facilitate evacuation
and movement of essential commodities and petroleum
products
Ensuring availability of essential commodities at reasonable
prices, particularly the commodities through the Public Dis-
tribution System
Ensuring availability of medicines, vaccines, and drugs
Preserving and restoring physical communication links
Investing in infrastructure
Mobilizing ﬁnancial resources
Secondary functions of India’s central government just prior
to, during, and after a disaster include:
Flood/inﬂow forecasts from the Central Water Commission
Relief, rehabilitation, and restoration through military aid to
civil authorities
Contingency planning for crops, cattle preservation nutri-
tion, and health measures
Technical and technological inputs for provision of drinking
water
Technical assistance in water budgeting and water manage-
ment for various uses
Coordination of the activities of the state agencies and vol-
untary agencies
Comparative Emergency Management Activities and Readiness
93

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
As food supplies are commonly affected by the myriad dis-
asters that affect India, the Agricultural Ministry also plays a key
role in the relief effort after disaster strikes. Speciﬁcally, the Agri-
culture Ministry’s Department of Agriculture and Cooperation is
the “point” agency within the Indian government responsible for
ensuring safe and adequate food supplies to those suffering or in
need after a disaster.
Recognizing the multifaceted nature of most disasters, the
government of India has established the Nation Crisis Manage-
ment Committee (NCMC), the purpose of which is to plan for
the implementation of effective relief efforts in the wake of major
disasters. The members of the committee include the secretaries
of the ministries of Home Affairs, Health, Power, Petroleum &
Natural Gas, Water Resources, and Defense. Also among the
NCMC’s membership are the secretaries from the departments
of Agriculture & Cooperation, Urban Employment & Poverty Al-
leviation, Roads Transports & Highways, Telecom Services,
Rural Development, Shipping, Drinking Water Supply, and Food
& Public Distribution. The NCMC operates organizationally un-
der the auspices of the Ministry of Home Affairs and is served by
professional and administrative staff from that ministry.
India’s Home Affairs Ministry has worked extensively with
state, district, and municipal/village governments throughout
the country. In the past few years, India has pushed state govern-
ments to develop their own emergency management agencies in
order to facilitate greater involvement by the states in disaster
planning and relief. The government of India also works with In-
dia’s business community. Key partners for the Ministry of Home
Affairs include India’s professional associations for construction
contractors, engineers, and architects—all for the purpose of pro-
moting the construction of disaster-resilient buildings and infra-
structure inside of India. Although India consistently suffers
significantly at the hands of nature every year in the form of
earthquakes, windstorms, ﬂoods, and other calamities, the num-
bers of people and properties lost to disaster would be far greater
each year but for the efforts of India’s Ministry of Home Affairs.
Trinidad and Tobago
The Republic of Trinidad and Tobago is a small, multi-island
country in the Caribbean with about 1.3 million residents. Like
much of the Caribbean, Trinidad and Tobago have been
94
Worldwide Perspective

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
pummeled throughout history with tropical storms and hurri-
canes. Damage from the wind, storm surges, and ﬂooding have
the potential to be overwhelming for the small country. In 1988,
Trinidad and Tobago established the National Emergency Man-
agement Agency (NEMA). This organization was preceded by
the National Emergency Relief Organization (NERO). NEMA
represented a paradigm shift in emergency management efforts
for Trinidad and Tobago. While NERO had been primarily a dis-
aster relief organization, NEMA was established to serve as a
comprehensive emergency management agency. As such, NEMA
added the elements of the mitigation and preparedness to the
preexisting response and recovery mission for the national gov-
ernment. That having been said, the nation of Trinidad and To-
bago places the primary responsibility for first-responder
activities during and after a disaster in the lap of the police, ﬁre,
and emergency medical services.
NEMA’s mission is (NEMA 2002) “To coordinate a network
of agencies and individuals within the country to direct their ef-
forts to the maximum preservation of life and the protection of
property in times of disaster.” The national government does not
consider NEMA to be a “line” agency; further, NEMA cannot ac-
complish its mission without the assistance of the traditional
ﬁrst-responder agencies.
Trinidad and Tobago is not the only small country in the
Caribbean. In 1991, the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago, along
with ﬁfteen other Caribbean nations, entered into a consortium
in order to pool resources, provide mutual aid, and generally re-
alize an economy of scale in their collective emergency manage-
ment efforts. This consortium is called the Caribbean Disaster
Emergency Response Agency (CDERA). The CDERA is gov-
erned by a board of directors and a council, the latter of which is
the supreme policymaking body of CDERA. Trinidad and To-
bago’s minister of National Security and director of NEMA serve
as members of the council and board, respectively.
In addition to coordinating disaster relief activities generally
inside Trinidad and Tobago, NEMA also is tasked with perform-
ing the following functions (NEMA 2002):
1. Monitoring hazard mitigation programs and evaluating
the effectiveness with which hazard mitigation activities
are being implemented by the appropriate governmental
and nongovernmental organizations
Comparative Emergency Management Activities and Readiness
95

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
2. Reviewing internal agency plans for responding to nat-
ural and technological hazards
3. Preparing inventories of personnel, equipment, and sup-
plies that would be needed in emergencies 
4. Undertaking training and simulation exercises
5. Compiling, reviewing, and providing support for the
completion and/or updating of the component plans for
oil spills, hazardous materials spills, industrial disasters,
aircraft disasters, and maritime disasters
6. Establishing an emergency operations center (EOC),
which would house dedicated telephone lines and
equipment to be used in emergency situations (the EOC
is a facility for providing centralized operation, coordi-
nation, and control of emergency/disaster response and
relief operations)
7. Developing/conducting public information, education,
and training programs for emergency management
8. Producing (directly through its own staff or by using the
technical expertise ofother agencies) data, maps, and
other technical material that establish the nature of risk
and vulnerability on an area basis. 
These tasks are consistent with the obligations of all
CDERA member nations. CDERA hopes to achieve some level
of standardization and professionalization within each member
country so that emergency management efforts are uniform, ef-
fective, and as comprehensive as possible. This ensures that no
member country is a greater risk, and therefore the recipient of
greater assistance (save for the hand of God), than any other in
the consortium.
Argentina
The country of Argentina, located in South America, is large in
land mass—spanning more than a million square miles. It is
home to 40 million people and a broad spectrum of topography,
including the Andes Mountains in the west, part of Antarctica in
the south, a lengthy coastline on the Atlantic Ocean in the east,
and both lush and arid lands in its interior. Argentina is gener-
ally considered to be one of the most developed countries in
South America. Even so, as many as half of all Argentineans live
in poverty. Most of the nation’s population lives in urban areas.
96
Worldwide Perspective

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Estimates indicate that 75 percent of Argentineans live in the
country’s eight major cities, including 40 percent in the Buenos
Aires metropolitan area alone.
The breadth of Argentina’s geography contributes to the fact
that Argentina is vulnerable to numerable geological and meteo-
rological hazards. Additionally, Argentina has a history of occa-
sionally experiencing high-profile terrorist attacks. In 1992,
Islamic terrorists detonated a bomb at the Israeli Embassy in
Buenos Aires, killing twenty-nine. In 1994, the Argentine Israeli
Mutual Association building in Buenos Aires was targeted by a
terrorist bomb. That explosion killed 86 and wounded 300. The
response to these bombings and other disasters in the 1990s
demonstrated Argentina’s need for a comprehensive emergency
management strategy (which previously had been lacking).
In 1996, the government of Argentina passed legislation es-
tablishing the Federal Emergency System (Sistema Federal de
Emergencias, or SIFEM). SIFEM was placed under the leadership
of the president of Argentina. One of SIFEM’s ﬁrst actions as an
agency was to bring together professionals from the police and
ﬁre services, the military, the Health Ministry, and National Civil
Protection. These officials met regularly and began to lay the
groundwork for a national emergency response plan. Addition-
ally, Argentina’s major cities began to follow suit by developing
emergency management protocols of their own. Cities that de-
veloped local emergency management plans and were trained to
those plans included Buenos Aires, La Plata, Cordoba, Rosario,
Mendoza, Trelew, Comodoro Rivadavia, Rio Grande, and Bahia
Blanca (Marcelo et al. 2003).
In the past few years, Argentina has moved quickly to up-
grade its emergency medical services capacity to deal with large-
scale disasters and terrorist attacks. For example, SIFEM has
worked with the emergency medical community to develop
training for personnel who may deal with large-scale mass casu-
alty events. Additionally, emergency medical facilities in Ar-
gentina’s large cities have been undergoing upgrades and
systems of emergency response and triage have been developed.
Further, much like that which occurs in the United States and
other developed countries, Argentina has moved to a training
and assessment model that involves large-scale disaster drills.
These drills involve multiple agencies and personnel, including
emergency medical services (EMS), police, and fire personnel.
Private EMS organizations have also been invited to participate
Comparative Emergency Management Activities and Readiness
97

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
in the drills and to develop coordinated responses and relief ef-
forts with those undertaken by the government (Marcelo et al.
2003).
In addition to the partnerships involving first-responder
agencies, pieces of the public health system in Argentina have
also collaborated with one another in preparation for possible
epidemic outbreaks or the use by terrorists of weapons of mass
destruction. Private hospitals have entered into cooperative
agreements with the government to provide hospital beds in the
event that public hospital beds become full. Further, since the at-
tacks of September 11, 2001, in the United States, the Ministry of
Health and SIFEM have combined their efforts to provide train-
ing on the use and effects of weapons of mass destruction for
hospital and public health personnel.
In many respects, Argentina is a stalwart example of success
and modernity in Latin America. However, the sometime tumul-
tuous political climate in Argentina, as well as the formerly miss-
ing sense of urgency or realization of a gap in the country’s
emergency management response capacity, has contributed to a
stunted growth of the discipline of emergency management in
Argentina and the development of institutions to promulgate the
discipline—at least until recently. However, through the efforts
of SIFEM and the successes that have emerged from the collabo-
rative and planning-oriented approach to disasters and terror at-
tacks, the country has truly moved in a direction that will foster a
greater appreciation for, and use of, emergency management
techniques and principles in the future.
Nigeria
The Federal Republic of Nigeria is a country of more than 
130 million people located on the west coast of Africa. Nigeria’s
system of government operates under a federal governmental
structure. There are thirty-six states, and the institutions of gov-
ernment are modeled after those present in the United States.
The population in Nigeria is extremely diverse, consisting of 250
distinct ethnic groups and several religious traditions. However,
Islam and Christianity dominate the country, with 50 percent of
the population being Muslim and 40 percent being Christian.
Nigeria, like the rest of Africa, is susceptible to natural disas-
ters. In 1976, the Nigerian government created the National
Emergency Management Relief Agency, primarily to respond to
98
Worldwide Perspective

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
large-scale disasters and to coordinate the relief efforts during
and after those events occurred. In 1999, the National Emergency
Management Agency (NEMA) was created by NEMA Act 12 of
1999. This legislation established NEMA as Nigeria’s federal dis-
aster management agency. Under the law, NEMA is responsible
for research, forecasting, disaster planning, search and rescue,
and providing relief and rehabilitation to areas affected by seri-
ous disasters.
NEMA operates out of six regions, or zones, in Nigeria.
From these six zonal ofﬁces, NEMA coordinates emergency man-
agement activities with the state emergency management agen-
cies, which exist in each of the thirty-six Nigerian states. NEMA
also collaborates with more than 700 local disaster planning com-
mittees. NEMA’s speciﬁc responsibilities are detailed in the 1999
enabling legislation. These responsibilities include (Audu-Bida
2006):
1. Disaster preparedness and mitigation
2. Notifying, activating, mobilizing, and deploying staff
and setting up the necessary facilities for response
3. Evaluating and assessing disaster damage and requests
4. Managing disaster management funds
5. Providing public information and enlightenment
6. Formulating policies/guidelines for Disaster Manage-
ment in Nigeria
7. Liaising with state emergency management committees,
regional and international bodies and nongovernmental
organizations to assess, monitor, and where necessary
distribute relief materials to disaster victims. 
NEMA is organized into operational and administrative
units. The operational units include the Department of Planning,
Research, & Forecasting; the Department of Search and Rescue;
and the Department of Relief and Rehabilitation. Additionally,
NEMA houses department of training and ﬁnance/administra-
tion. In recent years, NEMA has pursued its missions of mitiga-
tion and preparedness through several activities and
innovations. These include the development of a national disas-
ter response plan, greater collaboration with security agencies,
conducting and assessing simulation exercises, the development
of a national disaster mission control center (an EOC), the use of
geographic information systems to map hazards and plan for
Comparative Emergency Management Activities and Readiness
99

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
disasters, strategic stockpiling of key supplies, the development
of a helicopter search and rescue program, the ﬁelding of mobile
clinics, the development of a water treatment facility to be em-
ployed for disaster relief, and the development of an interopera-
ble communications system that can be used throughout the
country (Audu-Bida 2006).
NEMA has also developed plans for the use of Nigeria’s
Armed Forces during major disasters. Nigeria’s constitution per-
mits the military forces of the country to be used to aid the civil
authorities in restoring order and services after a disaster with
the approval of the National Assembly. In addition to the Armed
Forces, NEMA partners with several other federal agencies to en-
sure an effective emergency management response before, dur-
ing, and after a time of crisis. These agencies include the
ministries of Transport, Works, Environment, Internal Affairs,
Defense, Water Resources, Housing and Urban Development,
Health, and Police (Audu-Bida 2006).
Nigeria’s NEMA is commonly exalted as an example of a
professional and proactive emergency management organiza-
tion, located in the heart of the developing world, which is mak-
ing a genuine difference in protecting the lives and property of
its constituents. NEMA’s labors to pursue hazard reduction and
disaster mitigation in Nigeria, Africa, and the world at large will
ensure that Nigeria continues to play a leading role in interna-
tional emergency management policy formation.
Civil Unrest, Ethnic Conﬂict,
and Terrorism
The focus of this chapter has up to now been on the natural haz-
ards that exist around the globe. As is evident, such hazards are
many and are severe in many of the developing nations and re-
gions of the world. Indeed, the severity and frequency of large-
scale natural disasters impede the very political, economic, and
technological development that might actually mitigate these
threats if the developments were permitted to progress unim-
peded without the weight of calamity on its shoulders. The cycle
is certainly vicious.
However, there are other hazards that, although not unique
to non-Western parts of the world, nonetheless seem to prevail
100
Worldwide Perspective

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
there with greater frequency and consequence than in the West.
These hazards include those associated with civil unrest, ethnic
conﬂict, and terrorism.
One of the starkest of examples of civil unrest and conﬂict
causing disastrous levels of suffering is the genocide which has
occurred in Darfur, Sudan. Since 2003, ongoing conﬂict between
the Sudanese government–backed Janjaweed militia and two
antigovernment rebel groups has resulted in the deaths of
400,000 noncombatant Sudanese villagers and nomads. More
than 2.5 million Sudanese have been displaced from their homes.
Although the conﬂict exists within the context of what could be
called a civil war, the suffering of innocent civilians in the Sudan
certainly rivals and even exceeds the level of suffering common
to the world’s most deadly natural disasters.
In the case of Darfur, most people on all sides of the conﬂict
are Muslim. However, they differ in the tribal heritage and eth-
nicity. In other parts of the world, conﬂicts with catastrophic con-
sequences are rooted in religious and territorial differences. For
example, Muslims, Hindus, and Sikhs have been battling over
the religious and political afﬁliation of Kashmir in the northern
part of the Indian Subcontinent for 500 years. In fact, the conﬂict
goes back even prior to the founding of Sikhism when Muslims
from Afghanistan began to arrive and conquer Hindu villages in
India around 1000 CE. The countries of India (predominantly
Hindu) and Pakistan (predominantly Muslim) have remained in
a near-perpetual state of war over the territory of Kashmir. In-
deed, the two countries have fought two conventional all-out
wars because the Kashmir question, including one in 1947 imme-
diately upon the securing their respective independence from
Great Britain (White 2006).
In recent years, Hindu populations in Kashmir and in India
proper have been targets of large-scale acts of violence by Kash-
miri insurgents politically aligned with Pakistan. Bombings and
massacres against government officials and civilians have cre-
ated unique challenges for those involved in emergency manage-
ment. In particular, establishing an emergency management
infrastructure and response capability in an area so prone to reg-
ular violent attacks is extremely difficult as Indian emergency
management ofﬁcials and agencies are themselves viewed as vi-
able targets for the insurgency.
Although the attacks of September 11, 2001, in the United
States collectively accounts for the single largest terrorist attack
Civil Unrest, Ethnic Conﬂict, and Terrorism
101

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
in the history of the Western world, the unfortunate fact is that
the entire globe is chronically plagued with conﬂicts resulting in
catastrophic civilian casualties. The massacre of more than 344
people (including more than 180 children) at an elementary
school in Beslan, North Ossetia, Russia, by Chechen rebels in
September 2004 was an act of political violence. But more imme-
diately at the time, it was a catastrophic emergency management
event. So many children killed. So many families in that commu-
nity suffered the loss of loved ones. The aftermath of that ordeal
was characterized by chaos and a strain on local ﬁrst-responder,
military, and medical resources. This was Russia’s 9/11.
In fact—sadly—in country after country (developed and de-
veloping), people and their governments are experiencing their
own 9/11. The March 2004 bombings of Madrid’s commuter
trains, killing 191 and wounding more than 2,000, is said by
many to be Spain’s 9/11. The July 2005 bombings of under-
ground trains and a bus in London, killing 52 and injuring ap-
proximately 700 is said to be the United Kingdom’s 9/11. While
the adoption of an all-hazards approach to emergency manage-
ment may be criticized by some in the United States as an overre-
action to the relatively minor and generally infrequent threat of
terrorism and political violence, a global perspective of emer-
gency management suggests that public officials would be re-
miss were they to fail to give due diligence to the hazard of
political violence and its immense potential (and track record)
for destruction.
References
Asian Disaster Preparedness Center (ADPC). 2006. “Disasters in Asia
and the Paciﬁc: An Overview.” www.adpc.net.
Asian Disaster Reduction Center (ADRC). 2002. “Number of Disasters
in Europe by Type 1975–2000.” www.adrc.or.jp.
Asian Disaster Reduction Center (ADRC). 2006. “Disaster Emergency
Management in China.” www.adrc.or.jp.
Audu-Bida, A. V. M. 2006. “Brieﬁng on Implementation of the Hyogo
Framework of Action 2005–2015: Building the Resilience of Nations and
Communities to Disasters.” Presentation to the UN/ISDR in Geneva,
Switzerland, July 19, 2006.
102
Worldwide Perspective

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Center for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED). 2000.
EM-DAT: The OFDA/CRED International Disaster Database 1900–1999.
Louvain, Belgium: Universite Catholique de Louvain.
Charveriat, C. 2000. Natural Disasters in Latin America and the Caribbean:
An Overview of the Risk. Washington, DC: Inter-American Development
Bank.
China Media Project (CMP). 2006. “Media Clause of Proposed Emer-
gency Management Law Raises Hackles at Southern Metropolis Daily.”
cmp.hku.hk.
Disaster Center. 2007. “The Most Deadly 100 Natural Disasters of the
20th Century.” www.disastercenter.com.
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). 2006. Policy for
Disaster Risk Reduction. Abuja, Nigeria: ECOWAS.
Emergency Management Australia (EMA). 2006. “Australian Govern-
ment Role in Emergency Management.” www.ema.gov.au.
European Environment Agency (EEA). 2003. Mapping the Impacts of Re-
cent Natural Disasters and Technological Accidents in Europe. Copenhagen,
Denmark: European Environment Agency.
Hodell, D. A., J. H. Curtis, and M. Brenner. 1995. “Possible Role of Cli-
mate in the Collapse of Classic Maya Civilization.” Nature 375 (6530):
391–393.
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
(IFRC). 2000. World Disasters Report. Geneva, Switzerland: International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (ISDR). 2001a. “Mission
and Objectives.” www.unisdr.org.
International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (ISDR). 2001b. “Frame-
work for Action.” www.unisdr.org.
International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (ISDR). 2004a. Africa Re-
gional Strategy for Disaster Risk Reduction. Geneva, Switzerland: Inter-
Agency Secretariat of the ISDR.
International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (ISDR). 2004b. Environ-
mental Protection and Disaster Risk Reduction: A School Guide. Geneva,
Switzerland: Inter-Agency Secretariat of the ISDR.
Loretti, A., and Y. Tegegn. 1996. “Disasters in Africa: Old and New Haz-
ards and Growing Vulnerability.” World Health Statistics Quarterly 49
(3–4): 179–184.
References
103

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Marcelo, M., R. Cohen, D. Mafei, M. Ballesteros, and L. Espinosa. 2003.
“Terrorism in Argentina.” Journal of Prehospital and Disaster Medicine
18 (2): 53–56.
National Disaster Management India (NDMI). 2007. “National Policy.”
www.ndmindia.nic.in.
National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA). 2002. “About
NEMA.” nema.gov.tt.
People’s Daily Online (PDO). 2006. “China Mulls Emergency Manage-
ment Law.” June 24, english.people.com.cn.
White, J. 2006. Terrorism and Homeland Security. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
104
Worldwide Perspective

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
4
Chronology
I
n the history of the United States, many signiﬁcant events con-
tributed to the development of emergency management and
disaster response and recovery. The following timeline makes
no claim to represent all important developments in emergency
management, nor all significant disasters that touched large
numbers of American lives. Rather, what follows merely repre-
sents selected events in chronological order that contributed to
the discipline of emergency management, including several key
natural and man-made disasters that helped shaped the laws,
policies, and practices of emergency management.
1803
What is generally thought to be the ﬁrst piece of fed-
eral legislation directed toward disaster relief is
passed. The Congressional Act of 1803, passed by the
7th Congress of the United States, provides tax relief
for merchants and citizens affected by the Great Fire
of 1802 in Portsmouth, New Hampshire. The ﬁre de-
stroyed 132 buildings in the city of Portsmouth.
1871
From October 8 to October 10, the city of Chicago
suffers a calamitous fire that begins on the city’s
West Side and consumes a swath of Chicago three
miles long and a third of a mile wide. Approximately
300 people are killed and 100,000 are left homeless as
a result of the fire. The property damage totals
nearly $200,000,000 in 1871 dollars. In an example of
a Herculean effort geared toward disaster recovery,
the city begins to rebuild immediately. By 1875, little
105

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
evidence of the ﬁre remains. It is generally believed
that the fire began in a shed behind the home of
Chicago residents Patrick and Catherine O’Leary,
who lived at 137 De Kovan Street. However, the
story that the ﬁre was started by the O’Learys’ cow,
alleged to have kicked a lantern over, is just legend.
Ironically, the O’Leary home is spared the ravages of
the ﬁre.
Also on October 8, a ﬁre starts just outside the small
town of Peshtigo, Wisconsin, which is located to the
north of Green Bay. It is very dry that year in the up-
per Great Lakes region and the forest ﬂoors are dense
with dried pine needles and other natural debris. No
one knows how the fire starts. Lightening is not
thought to have played a role. Some speculate it
might have been a spark from a passing train. The
Peshtigo fire consumes 1,875 square miles of forest
and destroys twelve towns. Most sobering, between
1,200 and 2.400 lives are lost, making it the deadliest
ﬁre in U.S. history. Despite the huge death toll in Wis-
consin, the simultaneous ﬁre in Chicago grabs more
attention in the media and the culture. As a result, the
Great Peshtigo Fire is sometimes dubbed “the For-
gotten Fire.”
1881
In the summer of 1881, the Association of the Ameri-
can Red Cross was founded by Clara Barton; it
would later come to be known simply as the Ameri-
can Red Cross. The American Red Cross was pre-
ceded by the International Red Cross, founded by
Henry Dunant in 1863 in Geneva, Switzerland. The
mission of the International Red Cross had been to
provide battleﬁeld relief to combatants and civilians
during war. Barton, who had participated in provid-
ing aid to U.S. Civil War combatants, sought to estab-
lish the Red Cross movement in the United States. In
1881, she and twenty-two of her friends and associ-
ates founded the association in Washington DC. The
American Red Cross was not limited to war-time re-
lief efforts as the International Red Cross was. Rather,
106
Chronology
1871
(cont.)

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Barton successfully sought for her organization to
provide aid to those in need both during war and
peace time.
1889
On May 31, the community of Johnstown, Pennsylva-
nia, is destroyed after heavy rainfall contributes to
the breach of the decades-old South Fork Dam. The
dam is located 14 miles upstream and held back the
reservoir Lake Conemaugh. The lake is 450 feet
higher in elevation than the town of Johnstown. After
torrential rains on May 31, the streets of Johnstown
begin to flood from the overflowing Conemaugh
River, which runs through the town. Then, during
the afternoon, the South Fork Dam breaks and 20
million gallons of water rush downstream into John-
stown. The wall of water is as high as 70 feet. More
than 2,200 people die in the ﬂood, which also causes
$21 million in property damage. Clara Barton and the
American Red Cross spend ﬁve months in Johnstown
after the ﬂood providing relief to victims. The John-
stown flood is the first major disaster to which the
American Red Cross responds.
1896
On May 27, a tornado known as the St. Louis Cyclone
of 1896 strikes the city in the most deadly and de-
structive natural disaster in the history of the St.
Louis area. Both the cities of St. Louis, Missouri, and
East St. Louis, Illinois, are seriously damaged and
suffer hundreds of casualties. Approximately 8,800
buildings are destroyed or damaged. The conﬁrmed
dead total 255, with hundreds more injured or miss-
ing. The tornado causes $10,000,000 of property dam-
age in 1896 dollars.
1900
On September 8, a hurricane in the Gulf of Mexico
unexpectedly hits the city of Galveston, Texas. Galve-
ston is located on a small island about two miles off
the Texas mainland and 50 miles southeast of Hous-
ton. In 1900, Galveston has 37,000 residents. The
storm hits the city with heavy rains, surging tides,
and 140 mile-per-hour (mph) winds. The hurricane
Chronology
107

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
kills more than 6,000 residents and destroys approxi-
mately 3,600 buildings. The property damage totals
$20,000,000 in 1900 dollars. One of the more tragic
subplots amidst the larger tragedy is the story of the
Sisters of Charity Orphanage. When the storm begins
to strike the island, ten nuns and ninety young chil-
dren tie themselves together in what is thought to be
the safest and strongest of the orphanage’s dormitory
buildings. The storm eventually lifts the dormitory
off its foundation, which then collapses on the nuns
and the children, thus trapping them in the rising
tide. All ten nuns and eighty-seven of the children
die. Only three boys survive at the orphanage.
1905
The United States Congress issues a charter to the
American Red Cross, replacing a more limited char-
ter issued in 1900. The 1905 charter, which is still in
effect today, ofﬁcially declares that the American Red
Cross is recognized by the federal government as the
primary organization for providing relief and com-
fort to members of the American armed forces and
for serving as a means of communication between
military personnel and their families. Further, the
charter identifies the American Red Cross as the
“federal instrumentality” for providing national and
international disaster relief.
1906
On April 18, an earthquake strikes San Francisco
and surrounding areas. The quake shakes for 45–60
seconds, tumbling buildings and starting a city-
wide fire. More than 3,000 people die as a result of
the earthquake, and 225,000 of the area’s 400,000
residents are made homeless. More than 28,000
buildings are destroyed. The property loss is esti-
mated to be about $80,000,000 from the earthquake
and $320,000,000 from the subsequent fire, both in
1906 dollars. The United States Army plays a major
response and recovery role after the disaster. 
The Army sets up several refugee camps, or tent
cities, around the area, including at the Presidio
Army installation.
108
Chronology
1900
(cont.)

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
1918
In 1917, the United States joins World War I taking
place in Europe. Consequently, hundreds of thou-
sands of American soldiers and sailors are sent over-
seas. By 1918, the war is winding down. Returning
servicemen apparently bring back from Europe an ill-
ness that plagued soldiers of every country ﬁghting
in the European theater—the Spanish ﬂu. Americans
ﬁrst begin to get sick in the port city of Boston. The
disease quickly spreads into the Midwest and then
throughout the country. The American Red Cross
had become adept at tending to American soldiers in
Europe who had been stricken by the flu. In the
United States, Red Cross workers put those same
skills to work in large cities all across the country. In
many cases, their job is simply to make rounds
throughout urban neighborhoods and remove the
dead bodies. Well over 500,000 Americans die from
the Spanish flu by 1919. Worldwide, 25–50 million
people die and more than 500 million are infected.
1925
On March 18, a single, large tornado tracks over 200
miles through parts of Missouri, southern Illinois,
and southern Indiana. It is known as the Great Tri-
State Tornado. The tornado is on the ground for
three-and-a-half hours straight. The width of the fun-
nel ranges intermittingly from a quarter mile to a full
mile. The tornado completely destroys or severely
damages ten towns among the three states. A total of
15,000 homes are destroyed and 695 people are
killed. Another 2,000 people are injured by the storm.
The Great Tri-State Tornado is considered the most
destructive tornado, by several measures, in Ameri-
can history.
1928
The Flood Control Act of 1928 is passed by Congress
in June and signed into law by President Calvin
Coolidge. The legislation authorizes the federal gov-
ernment to play a lead role in flood control efforts
along the Mississippi River. This law emerges after
the Great Mississippi Flood of 1927, which is re-
garded as the most destructive river ﬂood in Ameri-
Chronology
109

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
can history. That ﬂood inundates parts of Arkansas,
Illinois, Kentucky, Louisiana, and Tennessee and kills
more than 250 people. The Flood Control Act of 1928
is the nation’s ﬁrst comprehensive ﬂood control act.
Prior to this legislation, ﬂood control efforts along the
Mississippi were the responsibility of state and local
governments, which erected levees to contain the
river.
1932
On January 22, legislation is passed by Congress to
establish the Reconstruction Finance Corporation
(RFC). President Herbert Hoover proceeds to sign the
legislation into law. The primary purpose of this in-
dependent federal agency is to lend money to banks,
which would then in turn lend money to the public at
favorable rates to stimulate the economy. However,
the RFC also is made responsible for distributing fed-
eral dollars after a disaster. In this sense, the RFC is
one of the ﬁrst disaster response agencies at the fed-
eral level.
1934
The U.S. Bureau of Public Roads, which had existed
since 1918, is given authority to provide funding for
highways and bridges damaged by disasters. This is
one of the early examples of a federal agency being
delegated permanent statutory authority to respond
to disasters.
1936
On April 5–6, an outbreak of seventeen tornados
wreaks havoc across parts of Mississippi, Alabama,
and Georgia, including the cities of Tupelo, Missis-
sippi, and Gainesville, Georgia. An F5 tornado
(261–318 mph winds) strikes Tupelo during the
evening of April 5. The next morning, an F4 tornado
(207–260 mph winds) from the same storm system
strikes Gainesville. More than 430 people die as a re-
sult of the tornado outbreak, with most of the deaths
occurring in Tupelo and Gainesville (more than 200
deaths in each city).
On June 20, Congress passes the Flood Control Act of
1936. This legislation expands the federal government’s
110
Chronology
1928
(cont.)

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
authority from earlier flood control acts and estab-
lishes that the Army Corps of Engineers will be re-
sponsible for building reservoirs to mitigate ﬂooding.
This legislation also requires that a signiﬁcant analysis
be done before any project is undertaken to ensure
that the costs do not outweigh the beneﬁts.
1947
On April 16, a fire starts in the cargo hold of the
French cargo ship SS Grandcamp, which is docked
and being loaded in the port city of Texas City, Texas.
The vessel holds more than 2,000 tons of ammonium
nitrate. The ﬁre cannot be contained, and eventually
the Grandcamp explodes. The explosion and subse-
quent fires kill nearly 600 people. Approximately
3,500 people are injured. The property damage in
1947 dollars totals at least $100 million. The explosion
rocks the entire community of Texas City. A full third
of the city’s homes are destroyed or so damaged that
they must be condemned.
1950
In December, President Harry Truman creates the
Federal Civil Defense Administration (FCDA) by Ex-
ecutive Order 10186. Congress quickly codiﬁes Tru-
man’s executive order by passing into law the
Federal Civil Defense Act of 1950. This legislation
addresses the real possibility of conventional or nu-
clear war taking place on United States soil. The
FCDA is given responsibility to coordinate prepara-
tion efforts with newly established state and local
civil defense agencies (especially by stockpiling key
materials and developing community warning sys-
tems). The history of the Emergency Broadcast Sys-
tem can be traced to this legislation and the federal
and state/local civil defense organizations that
sprout as a result of it.
1960
On September 9, Hurricane Donna strikes the Florida
Keys after pummeling Puerto Rico and the Bahamas.
The hurricane continues to track north up the coast of
Florida and the Carolinas. It remains a category 
3 hurricane all the way to Long Island, New York.
Then the storm continues into New England as a
Chronology
111

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
category 2 storm, dumping several inches of rain
everywhere in the storm’s path. Hurricane Donna
kills 50 in the United States and 107 in Puerto Rico.
An additional 114 are killed elsewhere in the
Caribbean. The storm causes nearly $400 million in
property damage in the United States.
1961
On September 11, Hurricane Carla strikes the Texas
cities of Port O’Connor and Port Lavaca as a category
5 storm. Several damaging tornados also spawn as a
result of the storm. All told, the Texas coast sustains
$300 million in property damage and the deaths of
forty-three people.
1964
In the early evening of March 27, which is Good Fri-
day, an earthquake lasting three to five minutes
strikes Alaska’s Prince William Sound between the
cities of Anchorage and Valdez. The earthquake’s
magnitude is 9.2. Anchorage and other towns on
Alaska’s southern coast are severely damaged. Sev-
enty-ﬁve homes, several schools, the airport control
tower, and many other buildings in Anchorage are
destroyed as a result of the earthquake and the re-
sulting liquefaction of the ground. However, most of
the 131 people who are killed in Anchorage and else-
where die as a result of the tsunami caused by the
earthquake. In fact, the tsunami reaches as far away
as Hawaii and the California coastline. Sixteen
people die in California and Oregon as a result of the
tsunami, including ten deaths in Crescent City, Cali-
fornia. The earthquake and tsunami cause $311 mil-
lion in damage.
1965
On September 9, Hurricane Betsy hits the city of New
Orleans after crossing over the Florida Keys into the
Gulf of Mexico two days earlier. The hurricane
causes more than $1 billion in damage in 1965 dollars
(making it the first hurricane to damage $1 billion
worth of property in U.S. history). The hurricane is
also to blame for the deaths of seventy-five people.
Much of the damage results from storm surge push-
ing the waters of Lake Pontchartrain over the levees
112
Chronology
1960
(cont.)

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
that were in place at the time. After the storm, Con-
gress authorizes the Army Corps of Engineers to
build a ring of higher levees (16 feet) around New
Orleans. The height of the levees proves later to be
inconsequential with Hurricane Katrina in 2005, as
the levees were not topped, but breached.
1967
The U.S. Coast Guard transfers from the Treasury De-
partment to the newly created Transportation De-
partment. This is, in part, a recognition that the Coast
Guard’s primary mission has long before shifted
from a revenue cutter service to a maritime safety
and disaster service agency. In 2003, the recognition
of the Coast Guard’s role in securing the homeland of
the United States becomes the agency’s point of em-
phasis as it moved to the U.S. Department of Home-
land Security.
1968
The National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, and
amendments, is passed in the devastating wake of
hurricanes Carla and Betsy, which struck in recent
past years. The act leads to the creation of the Na-
tional Flood Insurance Program. The purpose of the
legislation is to reduce federal expenditures for ﬂood-
related disasters and for ﬂood control. This is accom-
plished by providing a source of ﬂood insurance for
individual homeowners and businesses and by en-
couraging state and local governments to adopt
sound ﬂoodplain management practices. The legisla-
tion bars the federal government from providing
flood insurance in communities that have not
adopted or are not enforcing ﬂoodplain management
regulations that minimize the exposure of residents
and businesses to ﬂood risks.
1969
On August 17, Hurricane Camille strikes the Missis-
sippi Gulf coast. The sustained winds of the hurri-
cane are estimated to be nearly 200 mph. An estimate
of sustained winds is all that meteorologists are able
to offer because all wind-measuring equipment is de-
stroyed. As with most hurricanes, the damage results
from many factors: storm surges, heavy rains, and
Chronology
113

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
winds. Much of Camille’s damage comes from heavy
rains as it moves inland. In some parts of Virginia,
the storm produces 20-inch downfalls of rain. In to-
tal, 256 people die as a result of Hurricane Camille,
including 143 on the Mississippi coast and 113 in Vir-
ginia from flooding. Camille causes $1.4 billion in
property damage.
1971
On February 9, around 6:00 a.m., the San Fernando
Valley in Southern California is struck by an earth-
quake measuring 6.6 on the Richter scale. Such an
earthquake is considered moderate to large in magni-
tude; however, this particular earthquake caused so
much damage that it is considered one of California’s
most calamitous earthquakes. In total, sixty-five
people die and more than $500 million of property
damage results from the quake. Three hospitals are
severely damaged. The Veterans Administration hos-
pital in the city of San Fernando collapses entirely, re-
sulting in forty-nine of the sixty-ﬁve deaths.
1972
On June 19, Hurricane Agnes hits the Florida pan-
handle from the Gulf of Mexico as a category 1 hurri-
cane. The storm then moves inland, through Georgia
and over the Carolinas as a tropical storm. The storm
continues up the American coastline, moving over
New York and then New England from June 22 to
June 25. The hurricane and tropical storm Agnes does
little damage in the way of winds. However, it pro-
duces large amounts of rainfall along its path, caus-
ing signiﬁcant ﬂooding. In total, 122 die in the United
States as a result of the storm. Agnes causes $2.1 bil-
lion in property damage.
1973
The U.S. Congress passes the Flood Disaster Protec-
tion Act. President Richard Nixon signs the bill into
law on December 31. This legislation extends the
logic of the National Flood Insurance Program to all
federal agencies that provide development funds. In
particular, this legislation bars federal agencies from
providing ﬁnancial assistance for purchasing or con-
structing buildings in the ﬂoodplains of communities
114
Chronology
1969
(cont.)

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
not enrolled in the National Flood Insurance Pro-
gram. The law also compels federally insured lenders
to require ﬂood insurance on all structural properties
found in special ﬂood hazard areas (SFHAs) if those
properties are being purchased with the lender grant
or loan monies. An SFHA is any land that has at least
a 1 percent chance of ﬂooding (i.e., located in a 100-
year ﬂoodplain).
1974
Only a year after the passage of ﬂood insurance re-
form, the U.S. Congress passes the Disaster Relief Act
of 1974. On May 22, President Richard Nixon signs
the legislation into law. This legislation establishes
the protocols for presidential disaster declarations. In
signing the bill, President Nixon notes that he has de-
clared more than 180 major disasters in forty-two
states during his time thus far in ofﬁce. He views this
legislation, in tandem with the Flood Disaster Protec-
tion Act, as the dawning of a “New Federalism” (i.e.,
federal, state, and local government partnerships) in
disaster preparedness and response.
1975
The National Fire Academy (NFA) is established as a
training mechanism of the U.S. Fire Administration
(USFA). The USFA and the NFA are a part of the Fed-
eral Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and
are located in Emmitsburg, Maryland.
1977
Due to a growing concern about earthquakes, Con-
gress passes the Earthquake Hazards Reduction Act
of 1977. This legislation creates the National Earth-
quake Hazard Reduction Program (NEHRP). The
goals of the NEHRP are to develop and implement
effective practices and policies for earthquake loss re-
duction; to develop and improve techniques for re-
ducing seismic vulnerability of facilities and systems;
to develop and improve seismic hazards identifica-
tion methods and their use; and generally to improve
the understanding of earthquakes and their effects.
1979
On March 28, the Three Mile Island nuclear power
plant near Middletown, Pennsylvania, experiences
Chronology
115

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
mechanical failure that results in a partial meltdown
of the nuclear core in reactor number 2 at the plant.
The reactor is destroyed. For a period of time during
the crisis, many are concerned that the core will
breach the containment facility and that large
amounts of radiation and a ﬁre or explosion (such as
later occurred at the nuclear power plant north of
Chernobyl, Ukraine, in 1986) will threaten the nearby
communities, including the state capitol of Harris-
burg. To the relief of everyone, the melted core re-
mains contained at the facility. However, some
radiation is released into the air a couple of days after
the accident. The health effects of this release remain
in dispute today. Most scientists believe that the
amount of radiation is too small to cause anyone
harm. However, some claim that the radiation release
caused increases in cancer and other ailments for res-
idents in the area. The averted disaster of Three Mile
Island puts the dangers (real and perceived) of nu-
clear reactors front and center in the minds of the
public. The NIMBY effect (“not in my backyard”) af-
ter this accident makes it difficult for the nuclear
power industry to ﬁnd communities willing to have
nuclear reaction facilities nearby. The accident also
results in safety changes for nuclear power plants
and a more intrusive regulatory approach by the Nu-
clear Regulatory Commission.
President Jimmy Carter issues Executive Order
12127 on March 31, thereby creating the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. This order comes
as a response to complaints from state and local gov-
ernments that the disaster assistance provided by
the federal government is too fragmented. At the
time, more than a hundred federal agencies possess
disaster relief responsibilities (depending on the
type of disaster). The creation of FEMA by President
Carter is an attempt to centralize the federal govern-
ment’s disaster mitigation, preparedness, response,
and recovery efforts.
116
Chronology
1979
(cont.)

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
1980
On May 18, at 8:32 a.m. the volcano Mount St. Helens
in the state of Washington erupts. Mount St. Helens is
located in the Cascade Mountain Range approxi-
mately 100 miles south of Seattle and 50 miles north
of Portland, Oregon. The mountain was showing
signs of life as an active volcano in the months lead-
ing up to the eruption. The U.S. Geological Survey
establishes a restricted area for miles around the
mountain to ensure the safety of those living, work-
ing, or recreating nearby. In the weeks just before the
eruption, the seismic activity of Mount St. Helens di-
minishes considerably. Many in the surrounding
rural community believe the danger has passed and
some choose to ignore the prohibition against camp-
ing or working in the restricted zones. The eruption
of Mount St. Helens kills ﬁfty-seven people and de-
stroys 250 homes, dozens of bridges, and nearly 200
miles of highway. More than 250 square miles of for-
est is destroyed or severely damaged. In total, the
eruption causes more than $1 billion in property and
timber damage. As a result of the blast and debris
avalanche, the mountain’s elevation is reduced to
8,364 feet from 9,677 feet. The Mount St. Helens dis-
aster is the deadliest and most expensive volcanic
eruption in United States history. It also represents
one of the ﬁrst major disasters for FEMA to manage
after being created by executive order only one year
earlier.
1988
Congress passes the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief
and Emergency Assistance Act. This legislation es-
tablishes the current system for introducing federal
assistance to state and local governments during a
natural disaster. The law empowers the president to
establish the domestic disaster assistance program
and gives FEMA tasking authority over 28 other fed-
eral and nongovernmental agencies officially in-
volved in disaster relief. It also codifies the current
procedures for presidential declarations of disaster or
emergency.
Chronology
117

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
In September, Hurricane Hugo pounds several U.S.
territories before finally hitting the coast of South
Carolina. On September 15, as a category 4 hurricane,
Hugo travels over the Leeward Islands. It strikes St.
Croix and the U.S. Virgin Islands on September 18.
Hugo hits Puerto Rico on September 19 and then ﬁ-
nally strikes just north of Charleston, South Carolina,
on September 22. Twenty-one people die in the
United States and ﬁve others die in the Virgin Islands
and Puerto Rico. Hurricane Hugo causes a total of $7
billion in damage on the U.S. mainland and $1 billion
in Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands.
1989
On October 17, just after 5:00 p.m., an earthquake
measuring 6.9 on the Richter scale strikes Loma Pri-
eta Peak in the Santa Cruz Mountains about 10 miles
northeast of the city of Santa Cruz, California. The
earthquake, which lasts 15 seconds, seriously dam-
ages Santa Cruz and other nearby communities. But
the quake is also felt more than 50 miles away in San
Francisco and Oakland. In fact, most of the damage
and injuries from this earthquake occur in the Bay
Area and are a result of the liquefaction of soil used
to ﬁll in Bay Area waterfront property over the years
and upon which buildings and roads were built. The
earthquake kills sixty-three people and injures nearly
3,800. Forty of the deaths occur on the double-decked
Nimitz Freeway when segments of the upper level
collapse on the lower level. The relatively low loss of
life is often credited to the fact that few people in the
Bay Area were out and about at the time of the
quake, despite occurring during rush hour, due to the
World Series game that was about to begin between
the San Francisco Giants and the Oakland A’s at Can-
dlestick Park. The quake causes an estimated $6 bil-
lion in property damage.
1992
On August 24, Hurricane Andrew (a category 4 hur-
ricane) strikes the Atlantic coast of south Florida
and continues across the peninsula into the Gulf of
Mexico. Andrew continues from there as a category
3 hurricane and strikes the coast of Louisiana on
118
Chronology
1988
(cont.)

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
August 26. Notably, Homestead Air Force Base and
the town of Homestead, Florida, are severely dam-
aged in the wake of this storm. Hurricane Andrew
causes twenty-three deaths in the United States 
and $26.5 billion in property damage—mostly in
Florida.
1993
On February 26, a little after noon, a car bomb is de-
noted in the parking garage below Tower One (the
north tower) of the World Trade Center. Islamic ter-
rorists had ﬁlled the back of a rental van with a bomb
fabricated by using urea nitrate and fuel oil. The ter-
rorists’ intentions are to destroy Tower One’s founda-
tion, causing it to topple into Tower Two, thus
knocking them both down in the process. This does
not happen. However, 6 people die in the blast and
more than 1,000 are injured—primarily from smoke
inhalation. Multiple departments work the rescue
scene, including the Port Authority of New York and
New Jersey; New York’s fire, emergency manage-
ment services, and police departments; the New York
State Police; the Federal Bureau of Investigation; the
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms; FEMA;
and other state and federal agencies. The event is the
nation’s ﬁrst act of Middle East terrorism committed
on American soil. It is also the largest crime scene in
U.S. history to date. This is one the ﬁrst incidents re-
quiring federal law enforcement and the federal
emergency management community to iron out their
respective agendas at the scene. The delineations of
responsibility between these two interests would
later be more clearly articulated through executive
orders and legislation.
In June a series of river ﬂoods in the Midwest result
in 534 counties across nine states being declared ma-
jor disasters. The ﬂooding kills ﬁfty people and dam-
ages or destroys 55,000 homes. Property losses total
$15 billion. The states directly affected by the Great
Floods of 1993 are North Dakota, South Dakota, Ne-
braska, Kansas, Minnesota, Iowa, Missouri, Wiscon-
sin, and Illinois.
Chronology
119

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
1994
On January 17, at 4:30 a.m., an earthquake strikes the
Los Angeles area with a magnitude of 6.7. Although
considered to be only a moderate earthquake in mag-
nitude, it is among the most costly earthquakes in
United States history. The quake kills 57 people and
injures 9,000. It causes $44 billion in damage (more
than $800 billion in replacement value on taxable
property). The quake renders 25,000 homes uninhab-
itable and moderately damages 22,000 more. Many
freeways, parking garages, and buildings collapse
during the quake. The death toll likely would be sig-
nificantly higher if the earthquake occurred just an
hour or two later.
1995
On April 19, a rental truck filled with explosives is
parked in front of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Build-
ing in downtown Oklahoma City. Moments later, the
truck explodes, collapsing a full third of the building
into rubble. Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols—
men involved with the antigovernment militia move-
ment—are eventually captured and convicted for the
plot. McVeigh is determined to be the actual bomber
and is sentenced to death. The bomb blast and subse-
quent collapse of part of the building results in 168
deaths and 800 injuries. Many of the deaths and in-
juries are small children present in a day care center
inside the building. In the minutes and hours after
the bombing, multiple agencies at all levels of gov-
ernment arrive on scene to render aid. Hospitals are
mobilized to take in the wounded. FEMA activates
several of its Urban Search and Rescue units (665
members total) to assist in the rescue and recovery ef-
fort. All told, 12,000 people participate in the rescue
and recovery operations. The massive coordination
effort associated with the response to this event, as
with the World Trade Center attack in 1993, conﬁrms
the appropriateness of an all-hazards approach for
FEMA and the emergency management community.
On June 21, President Bill Clinton issues Presidential
Decision Directive #39 (PDD-39). This PDD relates to
U.S. policy on counterterrorism and articulates the
120
Chronology

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
respective roles of certain federal agencies when con-
fronting terror-related incidents. PDD-39 designates
the U.S. State Department as the lead federal agency
on matters relating to international terrorism. The
Federal Bureau of Investigation is designated the
lead federal agency for domestic terrorism and for
crisis management of terror incidents occurring in
the United States. The Federal Emergency Manage-
ment Agency is designated as the lead federal agency
for consequence management in the aftermath of a
terror incident inside the U.S. In particular, FEMA’s
role is to protect public health and safety, restore es-
sential government services, and provide emergency
relief to government, businesses, and individuals af-
fected by the consequences of terrorism.
1996
In June, the Defense against Weapons of Mass De-
struction [WMDs] Act of 1996 (also known as “Nunn-
Lugar-Domenici II”) is passed. The legislation covers
a wide range of issues concerning WMDs, including
interdiction issues, policies, control and disposition
of WMD material, and other issues. The legislation
also speaks to domestic preparedness for WMDs. In
that vein, the law directs the president of the United
States to enhance federal capabilities to prevent and
respond to WMD events. It also directs the president
to provide greater support to state and local emer-
gency agencies. The secretary of Defense is specifi-
cally tasked with training and advising federal, state,
and local agencies on WMDs. The Department of De-
fense (DOD) is also to be responsible for providing
applied assistance in detecting, monitoring, protect-
ing, and decontaminating WMD material inside the
United States. To this end, the DOD is authorized to
establish a WMD hotline and create emergency re-
sponse teams—generally within the National Guard.
On October 12, the National Dam Safety Program Act
of 1996 is signed into law by President Bill Clinton as
part of the larger Water Resources Development Act
of 1996. The purpose of the law is to make improve-
ments to safety and security around America’s dams
Chronology
121

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
by providing grants to state agencies responsible for
dam safety, funding research to enhance technologies
that contribute to safety as dams are constructed and
rehabilitated, to establish training programs for dam
safety inspectors, and to create a national inventory
of dams. The program is geared toward the preven-
tion of dam failure and minimizing the risk of dams
as targets of terror.
1997
In April and May, the Red River Valley experiences
signiﬁcant ﬂooding from a swollen Red River due to
ground saturation and heavy snow melt. The Red
River Valley stretches from Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada, down through the upper Midwest of the
United States—particularly along the border be-
tween North Dakota and Minnesota. Located along
the Red River are the cities of Grand Forks and Fargo,
North Dakota, and East Grand Forks and Moorhead,
Minnesota. It is the most severe flooding in the re-
gion since 1826. The cities of Grand Forks and East
Grand Forks are the most affected. The two cities are
separated by the Red River and the flood reaches
more than three miles inland in both directions.
Damage to these communities totals $2 billion. Re-
markable news footage emerges from Grand Forks
showing the entire downtown as flooded while the
Grand Forks Herald newspaper building is on ﬁre at
the same time. Happily, no deaths are attributed di-
rectly to the Red River Flood of 1997.
1999
On September 16, Hurricane Floyd strikes the North
Carolina coast near Cape Fear. Floyd, which was a
category 4 hurricane when it pounded the Bahamas
three days earlier, is only a category 2 when it hits the
United States. Floyd becomes a tropical storm upon
landfall and works its way north into the Mid-At-
lantic states. Most of Floyd’s damage comes from
ﬂooding due to heavy rains and large storm surges.
Estimates are that Hurricane Floyd causes $3–6 bil-
lion in damage. Fifty-six people lose their lives, pri-
marily due to ﬂooding.
122
Chronology
1996
(cont.)

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
2000
On October 30, President Bill Clinton signs into law
the Disaster Mitigation Act of 2000, which amends
the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief Act of 1988. The
law creates a predisaster mitigation program and re-
inforces the desirability of investing resources into
mitigation efforts rather than enduring more signiﬁ-
cant costs after disasters strike. Some of the act’s pro-
visions include funding for predisaster mitigation
activities, development of multihazard maps for
mapping risk, establishment of mitigation planning
requirements for state and local governments partici-
pating in federal programs, and assignment of more
responsibility in the management of the Hazard Miti-
gation Grant Program to the states.
2001
The Fire Prevention and Assistance Act is passed as
a result of a long-standing concern by lawmakers
that the nation’s first responders—especially those
in rural and volunteer ﬁre departments—are under-
trained and underequipped. The legislation estab-
lishes a competitive grant program for fire
departments around the country to tap into so that
gaps in training and equipment can be filled. The
problems besetting the nation’s ﬁre departments and
EMS first responders are deemed especially critical
by lawmakers after the 9/11 terror attacks take
place. Funding for the program in 2002 was triple
the funding levels of 2001.
During the morning of September 11, terrorists do
what others were unable to accomplish in 1993—they
bring down both World Trade Center towers. Four
major airliners are hijacked during flights out of
Boston; Washington DC; and Newark, New Jersey;
by nineteen terrorists (four or ﬁve per plane). Among
each of the hijacking crews are conspirators with
flight training who take control of their respective
airliners. Each of the two World Trade Center towers
and the Pentagon in Washington DC are struck with
a single airliner apiece. The fourth jet, apparently
heading for a target in Washington DC, crashes in
Chronology
123

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
rural Pennsylvania when passengers try to take back
control of the airliner. The most devastating damage
occurs in New York City at the World Trade Center.
Both towers collapse within about an hour and a half
of being struck by the airliners. Building 7 of the
World Trade Center also collapses. This building, al-
though small by comparison to the Twin Towers, is
itself a forty-seven-story structure. In fact, all seven
buildings of the World Trade Center complex are de-
stroyed that day—primarily due to the collapse of
the Twin Towers. Approximately 3,000 people die
from the attacks on September 11, 2001, including
hundreds of first responders who are in the two
World Trade Center towers when they collapse. The
attacks cause $95 billion worth of property damage
in New York City alone. The 9/11 attacks constitute
the most devastating and costly terror attack in
world history.
2002
On March 11, President George W. Bush signs Home-
land Security Presidential Directive #3, which creates
the Homeland Security Advisory System. The system
uses color coding to indicate threat conditions (relat-
ing to the likelihood of terrorist attacks) facing the
United States or some community or industry within
the country. Protocols are also established for protec-
tive agencies to follow as the threat condition
changes. The lowest threat level is green, followed by
“guarded” (blue), “elevated” (yellow), “high” (or-
ange), and “severe” (red).
On November 25, President George W. Bush signs
into law the Homeland Security Act of 2002. This leg-
islation, which is passed as a direct result of the ter-
rorist attacks on September 11, 2001, is the largest
reorganization of the federal government since the
creation of the Department of Defense ﬁfty years ear-
lier. The law creates the Department of Homeland Se-
curity (DHS), which is composed of twenty-two
disparate federal agencies, including the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. Through this legis-
lation and the placement of FEMA within DHS, the
124
Chronology
2001
(cont.)

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
connection between the discipline of emergency
management and the broader notion of homeland se-
curity is shored up.
2003
On January 24, Tom Ridge is sworn in as the ﬁrst sec-
retary of Homeland Security. Ridge was serving as
the head of the White House Ofﬁce of Homeland Se-
curity—the predecessor to the Department of Home-
land Security—where he was responsible for
developing and coordinating a comprehensive na-
tional strategy for guarding against terror attacks in
the United States. Members of Congress believe this
responsibility cannot be met through an ofﬁce of the
White House, as Ridge had no budgetary authority
nor any other means to compel unaligned agencies to
work together. Consequently, DHS is created and
given actual statutory authority to accomplish the
mission.
On February 28, President George W. Bush issues
Homeland Security Presidential Directive #5. In this
directive, the president reiterates that the attorney
general (and the Justice Department’s Federal Bureau
of Investigation under him or her), continue to be the
lead government ofﬁcial responsible for the criminal
investigation of terrorist acts and threats. However,
the directive also equates “crisis management” with
“consequence management.” Both responsibilities
are now designated to the U.S. Department of Home-
land Security (of which FEMA was now a part under
the Homeland Security Act of 2002). DHS and FEMA
are declared responsible for coordinating all federal
operations within the United States relating to the
preparation for, response to, and recovery from ter-
rorist acts and other major disasters.
On March 1, the Department of Homeland Security
begins to exercise operational control over the agen-
cies transferred into the new cabinet-level organiza-
tion. DHS, for continuity’s sake, enters into several
memoranda of understanding with the legacy de-
partments from which their new agencies came. In
Chronology
125

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
doing so, DHS ensures that the personnel and ﬁnance
functions relating to the component parts of DHS
will continue by the former parent organizations of
those component parts until DHS can build up its
own infrastructure and support services.
2005
On August 23, Hurricane Katrina forms over the Ba-
hamas and moves toward Florida. It crosses the
southern Florida peninsula as a category 1 hurri-
cane. Once in the Gulf of Mexico, Katrina gains
strength and momentum. On August 29, Hurricane
Katrina strikes the Louisiana and Mississippi coast-
line as a category 3 hurricane. Storm surges cause
tremendous damage in coastal cities such as Bay St.
Louis, Mississippi; Biloxi, Mississippi; Gulfport,
Mississippi; and Mobile, Alabama. However, the
most notable damage occurs in New Orleans and
neighboring parishes when the levees protecting the
city from Lake Pontchartrain break. Water pours
into the city, flooding 80 percent of New Orleans.
More than 1,800 people lose their lives during the
hurricane or from the flooding that follows shortly
after. The scale of the damage is something emer-
gency managers in the United States had not seen
before. Further, a humanitarian crisis quickly mate-
rializes after the storm passes. Hundreds of thou-
sands of people are without shelter, food, and water
until relief workers can get those commodities into
the damaged areas. FEMA is sharply criticized, as
are state and local officials, for failing to provide re-
lief in a timely manner. FEMA director Michael
Brown, who was initially praised by President Bush
for doing a good job, comes under considerable crit-
icism by members of Congress and the media. He is
eventually forced to resign. Hurricane Katrina’s
property damage totals more than $81 billion, mak-
ing it the most expensive natural disaster in Ameri-
can history.
On August 30, Homeland Security Secretary Michael
Chertoff initiates the National Response Plan (NRP)
126
Chronology
2003
(cont.)

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
as a result of Hurricane Katrina. The NRP is designed
to permit the Department of Homeland Security to
assume primary responsibility for relief efforts after a
natural disaster, terrorist attack, or other large-scale
emergency. The NRP recognizes that state and local
governments have the primary responsibility for dis-
aster preparedness and response. However, when it
is clear that state and local agencies are unable to ad-
equately meet the challenges of a particular emer-
gency, the NRP permits the federal government to
take the lead. Pursuant to the NRP, the Department
of Homeland Security coordinates and provides as-
sistance to individuals, families, and businesses to
meet basic needs, as well as provides infrastructure
and recovery support to communities as a whole, in-
cluding the provision and coordination of emergency
and protective services.
2006
On October 4, President George W. Bush signs into
law the Post-Katrina Emergency Management Reform
Act. The act becomes effective March 31, 2007. This
legislation is initiated in Congress as a direct result of
perceived ineptness and bungling of the Hurricane
Katrina disaster by the Federal Emergency Manage-
ment Agency and the Department of Homeland Secu-
rity. The act removes FEMA from the Preparedness
Directorate and elevates it to an independent agency
within the Department of Homeland Security. The
FEMA director is made to report directly to the Secre-
tary of Homeland Security. Additionally, several func-
tions and agencies are transferred to FEMA, including
the U.S. Fire Administration and the new Office of
Grant Programs (formerly the Office of Grants and
Training). Further, a division of National Preparedness
is created and located within the FEMA organizational
structure. What is left of the Preparedness Directorate
after FEMA’s removal is renamed the National Protec-
tion and Programs Directorate and is assigned the 
task of infrastructure, cyberspace, and communica-
tions protection, as well as managing the US-VISIT
program.
Chronology
127

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
2007
On July 18, the U.S. Department of Homeland Secu-
rity announces homeland security grant totals of
$1.7 billion for the 2007 fiscal year. These awards are
intended to help states, territories, and urban areas
enhance their abilities to prevent, respond to, and
recover from terrorist acts and other large-scale
disasters. Nearly $411 million of the total is
awarded to the nation’s six metropolitan areas
deemed to be at highest risk for terrorist attacks:
New York City, Washington DC, Los Angeles, San
Francisco/Oakland, Houston, and Chicago.
128
Chronology

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
5
Biographical Sketches
I
n this chapter, brief biographical sketches are provided for
persons who directly contributed to the profession, practice,
or understanding of emergency management and disaster
planning. Some of those listed are professional emergency
managers and political appointees who directly affected the
field of emergency management in their work lives. Some are
politicians who played a major role in shaping emergency man-
agement policies and laws in the United States. Still others in-
clude individuals who played roles in particular disasters as
they unfolded.
The list of personalities in this chapter should not be con-
strued as a complete list of all individuals who have affected the
profession and practice of emergency management in signiﬁcant
ways. There are too many disasters in America’s history, too
many disaster-related organizations, too many stories of hero-
ism, and too many examples of political leadership related to
emergency management to recount all who played a part in the
discipline’s development. However, this chapter offers a starting
point in understanding the type of individuals who have shaped
emergency management during America’s relatively short—and
the discipline’s even shorter—history.
Joe Allbaugh (b. 1952)
Joe Allbaugh was born in Blackwell, Oklahoma, in 1952. He has
long been active in Republican Party politics. At the age of
twelve, he volunteered for the presidential campaign of Barry
129

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Goldwater. He served as a paid staffer for Oklahoma senator
Henry Bellmon.
Allbaugh received a bachelor’s degree in political science
from Oklahoma State University and worked on several political
campaigns during his career. He worked for the Reagan-Bush
campaign in 1984 as well as the gubernatorial campaign of
Henry Bellmon in 1986. In 1994, Allbaugh worked for George W.
Bush in his quest for the Texas governorship. When Bush de-
feated Ann Richards for governor, Allbaugh was hired as Gover-
nor Bush’s chief of staff. In 1999, Allbaugh became campaign
manager for Bush’s presidential bid.
When President Bush entered the White House in 2001,
Allbaugh was nominated for the position of director of the Fed-
eral Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The Senate con-
firmed him in February 2001. Allbaugh served as FEMA
director from 2001 to 2003. Although he served only two years,
he was a high-profile director during a period in which FEMA
garnered a lot of attention. Allbaugh at times was controversial.
He came under some criticism (and praise) from others for sug-
gesting that taxpayers should not necessarily be required to bail
out disaster victims who suffer repeated flood damage and are
unwilling to relocate to less risk-prone areas. However, he also
championed the emergency management cause. He took issue
with proposed budget cuts to the National Flood Insurance
Program advanced by the Bush administration, noting that the
cuts would adversely affect FEMA’s ability to respond to disas-
ters.
In May 2001, FEMA’s mission was ofﬁcially expanded to in-
clude “homeland defense.” This expanded mission meant that
FEMA would clearly take the lead in dealing with effects of ter-
ror attacks inside the United States. Under the rubric of the ex-
panded mission, FEMA played a critical and highly visible role
in the response effort after the attacks of 9/11.
Allbaugh resigned from the position of FEMA director in
2003. After leaving government service, he and his wife started a
consulting ﬁrm, much like his predecessor, James Lee Witt, had.
After Hurricane Katrina struck the Gulf Coast in 2005, All-
baugh’s company helped coordinate private-sector reconstruc-
tion efforts. In particular, he consulted with private companies
on how to navigate through the myriad government-sponsored
relief and reconstruction programs.
130
Biographical Sketches

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Clara Barton (1821–1912)
Clara Barton was born in Oxford, Massachusetts, on Christmas
Day in 1821. She began her long career as a pioneer in relief work
in 1861. At that time she was working for the U.S. Patent Ofﬁce
in Washington DC. On April 19, 1861, only one week into the
Civil War, Union soldiers clashed with pro-South citizens in the
city of Baltimore during a riot motivated by anti-Union senti-
ments. Four soldiers and nine civilians were killed, and many
more were injured on both sides. Barton organized a relief effort
for the wounded soldiers, and from this time forward, she con-
tinued working on relief efforts until her retirement in 1904.
Barton spent the entire Civil War providing aid and comfort
to wounded soldiers. She was given a general pass by the Union
Army to travel with Army ambulances. In addition to meeting
physical needs of soldiers, Barton was instrumental in helping
the families of soldiers. In particular, she began a program to lo-
cate soldiers (or their remains) who were missing in action. She
also served as the superintendent of nurses under the command
of Union General Benjamin Butler.
After the Civil War, Barton traveled to Europe. In 1870,
while traveling for what was intended to be an extended vaca-
tion, she became involved with the International Red Cross and
helped provide aid to soldiers during the Franco-Prussian War.
The International Red Cross operated under a ﬂag of neutrality
and provided aid to wounded soldiers on both sides of the con-
ﬂict. The war in Europe ended in 1871, and eventually Barton re-
turned to the United States. In 1881, Barton and several close
friends and associates founded the American Red Cross. Unlike
the International Red Cross at the time, the American Red Cross
was not to be limited to providing relief to wounded combatants
in war. Rather, Barton envisioned a Red Cross in the United
States that would minister to the physical and emotional needs
of all sorts of victims, including regular citizens caught up in the
way of a disaster. Despite the broader mission of the American
Red Cross, Barton still had a heart for wounded soldiers. In that
capacity, she successfully lobbied the United States Senate to rat-
ify the Geneva Convention in 1882. This treaty obligated the sig-
natory countries to protect and care for captive and wounded
enemy soldiers in wartime.
Biographical Sketches
131

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
As head of the American Red Cross, Barton personally and
actively participated in the relief efforts for many major Ameri-
can disasters, including the Johnstown Flood of 1889 and the
Galveston hurricane of 1900. Under Barton’s leadership, the
American Red Cross received a charter from the U.S. Congress in
1900 officially designating the organization as responsible for
carrying out the provisions of the Geneva Convention in the
United States.
Given the American Red Cross’ official relationship to the
United States government, many people expressed misgivings
about Barton serving as the organization’s “president for life.”
Others took issue with her management style and viewed her
handling of the American Red Cross finances to be sloppy. In
1904, Barton gave in to pressure and resigned as president of the
American Red Cross. She lived out her retirement in Glen Echo,
Maryland, just outside Washington DC. She died in 1912 at the
age of 90.
Julius W. Becton, Jr. (b. 1926)
Julius Becton was born in Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania, in 1926. In
1944, he joined the U.S. Army Air Corps and attended Officer
Candidate School (OCS). He graduated OCS in 1945 and began
his lengthy military career as an Army ofﬁcer. As a soldier, he re-
ceived many honors and decorations during his rise to the rank
of lieutenant general, including the Distinguished Service Medal,
two Silver Stars, two Legion of Merit medals, and two Purple
Hearts. By the time he had retired from the Army, General Bec-
ton had served in three wars: World War II, the Korean War, and
the Vietnam War. During his service in the Army, Becton com-
pleted his college education. He received a bachelor’s degree in
mathematics from Prairie View A & M University in Texas. He
also received a master’s degree in economics from the University
of Maryland.
Upon his retirement from the Army, Becton served as the di-
rector of the Ofﬁce of Foreign Assistance, which was part of the
U.S. Agency for International Development. Then in 1985, Becton
was appointed by President Ronald Reagan to serve as the direc-
tor of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Becton served
in that capacity from 1985 to 1989 and was FEMA’s ﬁrst African-
American director. Becton’s honorable and distinguished career,
132
Biographical Sketches

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
along with his impeccable character, enabled him to repair
FEMA’s damaged credibility within the federal political commu-
nity in the wake of a scandal involving the former FEMA director,
Louis Giuffrida.
After FEMA, Becton continued his public service career.
From 1989 to 1994, he served as president of Prairie View A & M
University. In 1996, he became the superintendent of the Wash-
ington, DC public schools, where he earned high marks during
his short tenure for reforming the management structure of the
school system. Becton retired from that position in 1998.
B. Wayne Blanchard (unknown)
Few individuals can claim as much credit for the development of
a profession as Wayne Blanchard can for the development of pro-
fessional emergency management. Blanchard, a career public
servant, is the director of the Higher Education Project within the
Federal Emergency Management Agency’s Emergency Manage-
ment Institute in Emmitsburg, Maryland. Blanchard received a
bachelor’s degree in political science from the University of
North Carolina in Charlotte in 1974. From there, he went to the
University of Virginia and was awarded a master’s degree in in-
ternational affairs in 1976 and a Ph.D. in government and foreign
affairs in 1980. He began working at FEMA in May 1980. Blan-
chard has been at FEMA throughout most of the agency’s exis-
tence. He has served across several organizational units at
FEMA, including the National Preparedness Directorate; the
State and Local Programs Support Directorate; and the Ofﬁce of
Emergency and Public Information, the Preparedness, Training
and Exercises Directorate.
Blanchard has been assigned to FEMA’s Emergency Man-
agement Institute since 1994. In recent years, Blanchard has
taken the lead role within FEMA to promote a professional
model of emergency management. As a part of this process,
Blanchard and the Emergency Management Institute have pro-
moted the startup of dozens of college undergraduate and grad-
uate programs in emergency management and homeland
security. Further, they have developed model emergency man-
agement curricula and have shaped the core educational and
training requirements for professionals in the field. Blanchard
has also been instrumental in encouraging academic research
Biographical Sketches
133

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
through grant money so that a core body of knowledge for the
profession of emergency management is developed—a process
well under way today. Blanchard has actively promoted the cer-
tiﬁed emergency manager (CEM) program and has contributed
to the development of emergency management’s primary profes-
sional association—the International Association of Emergency
Managers. Blanchard himself received CEM certiﬁcation in 1993.
Blanchard has received several awards and much recognition for
his federal service and service to the profession, including the
FEMA Director’s Meritorious Service Award. He has partici-
pated in the relief efforts of several disasters, including Hurri-
cane Andrew in 1992, the Midwest Floods of 1993, and the
Northridge earthquake in 1994.
Mabel Boardman (1860–1946)
Mabel Boardman was born in Cleveland, Ohio, in 1860. Al-
though born into a socialite family, Boardman spent much of
her adolescent years providing welfare services for underprivi-
leged children. During the Spanish-American War, she became
a recruiter for nurses. Boardman was an early admirer of Clara
Barton, president of the American Red Cross, and in 1903,
Boardman was appointed to the executive committee of the
Red Cross. Her influence in the organization was considerable.
In her capacity as a member of the executive committee, Board-
man became unhappy with the leadership of Clara Barton. In
1903, she began to push for Barton’s ouster, which occurred in
1904. To many in the organization, Boardman was the obvious
choice to replace Barton as chair of the Red Cross, but she re-
fused the position. Rather, retired Rear Admiral William Van
Reypen became chair, and Boardman held onto the title of
“leading volunteer.” Although she remained active with Amer-
ican Red Cross until 1944, the period when she exercised the
most leadership of and influence on the organization was from
1905 to 1917. Under her leadership, informal as it was, the Red
Cross developed programs in public health nursing, first aid
training, the Christmas Seals fight against tuberculosis, and ex-
panded disaster relief efforts. Boardman resigned from the
American Red Cross governing committee in 1944 after more
than forty years of dedicated service to the organization. She
died in 1946.
134
Biographical Sketches

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
William Booth (1829–1912)
Although the Salvation Army is one of most visible charitable or-
ganizations in the United States and plays a significant role in
providing disaster relief, the organization is British at its roots, as
was its founder. William Booth was born in Nottingham, En-
gland, in 1829. During his early teenage years, he began to pub-
licly express his Christian faith—even boldly preaching on street
corners. As a young adult, Booth joined the Methodist Church in
England and sought to become an ordained minister. In 1855, he
married his wife, Catherine Mumford. Booth and Catherine trav-
eled around England during his ministry as a Methodist minis-
ter. Booth was particularly interested in preaching gospel to
London’s poor. He began a ministry on London’s East Side
called the Christian Mission. In 1878, the ministry changed its
name to the Salvation Army. Booth was an inspiring and fire-
brand preacher. More and more people began to join Booth’s
movement as “soldiers” in the Salvation Army, waging war
against sin and poverty.
The Salvation Army resembled a military organization in
more ways than just its name. Ordained ministers in the Salva-
tion Army wore uniforms and were “commissioned officers,”
with Booth as the general. Despite initial opposition by the
Church of England, the Salvation Army grew. Its welcoming
arms to the poor and suffering helped the organization to ﬂour-
ish in England and in other countries, including the United
States. In fact, at the time of Booth’s death in 1912, the Salvation
Army had a presence in ﬁfty-eight countries. Based on its belief
in a biblical mandate to minister especially to the needy, the Sal-
vation Army has long been a partner to other organizations in
providing disaster relief. For the Salvation Army, relief includes
the meeting of acute physical, material, emotional and spiritual
needs. While some have criticized the Salvation Army for adher-
ing to its blatantly Evangelical identity, the organization has
never discriminated among the people to whom it ministers.
Michael D. Brown (b. 1954)
Michael Brown was born in Guymon, Oklahoma, in 1954. He re-
ceived a bachelor of arts degree in public administration from
Biographical Sketches
135

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Central State University in 1978. Brown went on to obtain a law
degree from Oklahoma City University in 1981. During his time
in college, he served as an administrative assistant to the city
manager of Edmond, Oklahoma. In that capacity, he worked es-
sentially as the city manager’s emergency services coordinator.
He worked for the City of Edmond from 1975 to 1978. From 1980
to 1982, while in law school, Brown worked as staff director for
the Senate Finance Committee in the Oklahoma state legislature.
From 1982 to 1988, he served as chairman of the board of the Ok-
lahoma Municipal Power Authority. He also practiced law pri-
vately. From 1989 to 2001, Brown was the Judges and Stewards
Commissioner for the International Arabian Horse Association.
In January 2001, Brown joined FEMA as the agency’s general
counsel. He was a long-time friend of FEMA director Joe All-
baugh, who hired Brown. In September 2001, Brown was named
acting deputy director of FEMA. President George W. Bush nom-
inated him to this post in March 2002 and the Senate conﬁrmed
him months later. In August 2002, President Bush appointed
Brown to the Transition Planning Ofﬁce for the new Department
of Homeland Security. His responsibility was to lead the transi-
tion for the Emergency Planning and Response Division of
FEMA. Brown also directed the National Incident Management
System Integration Center, the National Disaster Medical Sys-
tem, and the Nuclear Incident Response Team. In January 2003,
Brown was nominated by President Bush to be director of
FEMA. He was sworn into that position the following April.
Brown served as the FEMA director until he resigned on Septem-
ber 12, 2005, amidst public displeasure at his handling of the
Hurricane Katrina crisis.
Brown has been criticized on many fronts. The most serious
criticism relates to alleged incompetence and mismanagement in
handling the relief efforts following Hurricane Katrina. Many
have said that FEMA, with Brown at the head, was slow to
respond to the disaster. Brown’s comments to some news re-
porters suggested he knew less about the state of the posthurri-
cane crisis than did the general public who was watching the
situation unfold on television. FEMA was also criticized for fail-
ing to corral resources at its disposal, including the offer of
equipment and manpower from state and local governments
around the country, for the relief effort. Further, Brown was per-
sonally criticized for padding his resume. News reports sug-
gested that many of the positions and accomplishments listed on
136
Biographical Sketches

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
his resume were exaggerated or untrue. Even in resignation,
Brown defended the content of his resume as accurate and char-
acterized the media reports about his background and his perfor-
mance at FEMA as slanted and inaccurate.
James E. Carter (b. 1924) 
Although American presidents have played a role in developing
the profession and practice of emergency management since
Thomas Jefferson supported legislation to provide relief to
Portsmouth, New Hampshire, after a citywide ﬁre in 1803, a few
presidents stand out for their speciﬁc contributions to the disci-
pline. President Jimmy Carter is chief among them. James
“Jimmy” Carter was born in Plains, Georgia, in 1924. Carter at-
tended the United States Naval Academy and graduated in
1946. He served as an active duty submarine officer for seven
years before returning to Plains and the family peanut farming
business. In 1962, Carter began his political career. He was
elected to the Georgia State Senate as a Democrat, where he
served until 1966. He then returned once again to the family’s
agricultural business. In 1970, Carter ran for Georgia’s gover-
norship, relying on populist themes. He emphasized his farm-
ing background and the fact that he was a churchgoer like other
Georgians. Carter was even a Sunday School teacher. He was
elected governor in 1971 and served in that office until 1976
when he ran for and was elected president of the United States.
In January 1977, Carter took ofﬁce as the 39th American presi-
dent and served until January 1981.
Many events of significance happened during the Carter
presidency, one of which was the creation of the Federal Emer-
gency Management Agency. On March 31, 1979, Carter issued Ex-
ecutive Order 12127, bringing FEMA into existence. Carter had
been sensitive to complaints from state and local government ofﬁ-
cials that federal disaster aid efforts were too fragmented. As a
former governor, he personally knew this to be true. Before the
executive order, more than a hundred federal agencies had disas-
ter relief responsibilities. By creating FEMA, Carter tried to cen-
tralize and consolidate the federal government’s emergency
management efforts. Clearly, FEMA is one of President Carter’s
lasting legacies. When President Reagan assumed ofﬁce in 1981,
several agencies were on the potential chopping block because of
Biographical Sketches
137

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Reagan’s desire to cut government. However, FEMA thrived and
even received enhanced statutory authority in 1988. Carter is
credited with having the vision to pull disparate disaster agencies
and resources together in what had become a fairly regular func-
tion of the federal government—emergency management.
Isaac M. Cline (1864–1955)
Isaac Cline was born in 1864 in Monroe County, Tennessee. He
attended Hiwassee College at the age of sixteen and studied
mathematics, the sciences, and classical languages. In 1882, Cline
joined the U.S. Army Signal Corps to become a meteorologist.
(At the time, the U.S. Weather Bureau was organizationally a
part of the Army Signal Corps. The Weather Bureau was trans-
ferred to the Department of Agriculture in 1892.) Cline’s ﬁrst as-
signment in the Weather Bureau was at the weather station in
Little Rock, Arkansas. While there, he attended and completed
medical school part time, earning a medical doctor degree from
the University of Arkansas. In 1885, Cline was promoted to head
the weather station in Fort Concho, Texas. Shortly after, he was
transferred to the Abilene, Texas, weather station. In Abilene,
Cline met and married his wife, Cora May Bellew. In 1889, he
was transferred to Galveston, Texas, to head the weather station
there. Cline’s younger brother, Joseph, joined him in Galveston
as a junior meteorologist. Ever the student, Cline continued his
higher education and received a Ph.D. in philosophy and sociol-
ogy from AddRan University (now Texas Christian University)
in 1896.
By all accounts, Isaac Cline was a very good meteorologist.
He is credited with being the ﬁrst meteorologist to develop a reli-
able method for forecasting freezing weather when he was in
northern Texas. He also developed a ﬂood warning system for
the Brazos and Colorado Rivers. However, he was publicly skep-
tical of the possibility of a hurricane ever doing any signiﬁcant
damage to the city of Galveston. In fact, because Cline was so re-
spected as a weather forecaster, city leaders determined it was
unnecessary to build a protective seawall.
On September 8, 1900, Galveston was hit by a hurricane that
destroyed the city. More than 6,000 people died, including Cline’s
wife. Many have blamed Cline for the city’s lack of preparedness
for the hurricane. However, Cline did issue a hurricane warning
138
Biographical Sketches

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
in the hours before the hurricane struck. In fact, as Cline told the
story, he ran up and down the beaches of Galveston before the
storm to warn people to get to high ground. Some historians dis-
pute that claim. After the hurricane, Cline moved his three chil-
dren to New Orleans, where he served as the chief meteorologist.
There Cline remained with the Weather Bureau until 1935. Cline
became an art collector in retirement and even opened a gallery in
the French Quarter of New Orleans in 1936. He remained active
in the art community until his death on August 3, 1955.
Michael Chertoff (b. 1953)
Michael Chertoff was born in Elizabeth, New Jersey, in 1953. As a
young adult, he attended Harvard University and graduated
with a bachelor’s degree in 1975. Chertoff went on to study law
at Harvard Law School, from which he graduated magna cum
laude in 1978. Chertoff served as a law clerk for U.S. Supreme
Court Justice William Brennan from 1979 to 1980. After that, he
worked in private practice for three years. In 1983, Chertoff be-
came a federal prosecutor first in New York City and then in
New Jersey. In 1990, Chertoff was appointed by President George
H. W. Bush to be the United States Attorney for the District of
New Jersey. He served in that position until 1994. Chertoff
worked in private practice from 1994 to 2001. However, he was
not a stranger to the political scene, as one of his clients was the
U.S. Senate’s Whitewater Committee, which was investigating
President Bill Clinton. In 2001, Chertoff returned to full-time
government service as the Department of Justice assistant attor-
ney general in President George W. Bush’s administration. In
2003, President Bush nominated Chertoff to be an appellate
judge for the Third Circuit Court of Appeals. Chertoff was con-
ﬁrmed by the Senate in June 2003. In 2005, Chertoff left the bench
to become the Department of Homeland Security’s second secre-
tary. He was conﬁrmed and sworn in as secretary of Homeland
Security on February 15, 2005, following Tom Ridge’s resignation
on February 1, 2005.
Chertoff came under criticism from the emergency manage-
ment community after Hurricane Katrina. Many critics claimed
that Chertoff was too focused on efforts to guard against terror-
ism and that he viewed traditional disaster preparedness and re-
sponse as a mundane and less important element to homeland
Biographical Sketches
139

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
security. Like his FEMA director at the time of Hurricane Katrina,
Michael Brown, Chertoff appeared to many to be uninformed
about the disaster. Chertoff was quoted in the media as saying
that no one had predicted a disaster of the magnitude that was
Katrina. However, FEMA itself had previously identiﬁed the de-
struction of New Orleans by a hurricane as one of the three most
likely catastrophes to strike the United States.
Because of the perceived poor performance of FEMA as a
part of the Department of Homeland Security, and because of
FEMA’s struggle for resources within this department, which is
headed by a former law enforcement ofﬁcial and is thought to be
more focused on law enforcement and counterterrorism efforts
than its other responsibilities, many in Congress and in the emer-
gency management and public administration communities
have called for FEMA’s removal from the Department of Home-
land Security. They would prefer that FEMA return to its former
status as an independent, stand-alone agency.
Rudolph W. L. Giuliani III (b. 1944)
Rudolph Giuliani was born in Brooklyn, New York, in 1944. He
grew up in a working-class family, which included police offi-
cers, firefighters, and even criminals. In fact, Giuliani’s father,
Harold, had been convicted of robbery once and spent time in
prison. Giuliani attended Manhattan College in the Bronx and
graduated with a bachelor’s degree in 1965. He then attended
New York University School of Law and received his law degree
in 1968. After clerking for a federal judge, Giuliani joined the U.S.
Attorney’s Office in 1970 as a prosecutor. He rose through the
ranks and became chief of the narcotics unit in 1973. By 1975,
Giuliani had garnered attention from politicians in Washington.
He was named associate deputy attorney general. From 1977 to
1981, Giuliani worked in private practice as an attorney. He re-
sumed his government career in 1981 when he became associate
attorney general in President Ronald Reagan’s administration. In
1983, President Reagan appointed him to be the United States At-
torney for the Southern District of New York. In that position, he
led the prosecutions of several high-proﬁle criminals, including
Wall Street insiders and members of organized crime. He earned
a reputation as a tough, no-nonsense, law-and-order prosecutor.
In 1989, Giuliani returned to private practice. He also ran for
140
Biographical Sketches

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
mayor of New York City as a Republican against Democrat
David Dinkins. Giuliani lost this race, but ran again in 1993. He
won that election and served as mayor of New York City until
January 2002.
By all accounts, Giuliani was a successful mayor. The city
prospered under his leadership. Crime went down signifi-
cantly—largely due to Giuliani’s sometimes controversial strat-
egy of having the police aggressively address petty offenses and
offenders (known as “broken windows” policing). But his most
signiﬁcant challenge in ofﬁce as mayor came toward the end of
his ﬁnal term—managing the crisis on September 11, 2001. Giu-
liani has been given credit for exercising remarkable leadership,
resolve, and calm that day and the days that followed. He was
even popularly dubbed “America’s Mayor” because of his role in
reassuring the nation, which became closely identiﬁed with New
Yorkers after the terror attacks. Giuliani also exercised hands-on
leadership during the rescue and recover efforts after 9/11,
spending considerable time in the emergency operations com-
mand center on scene. First responders, who had lost many com-
rades at the World Trade Center, expressed great appreciation for
Giuliani’s empathy, concern, and hard work on their behalf.
Louis O. Giuffrida (unknown)
Louis Giuffrida was the ﬁrst permanent director of FEMA under
President Ronald Reagan. When President Reagan entered ofﬁce
in 1981, he appointed Bernard Gallagher as acting FEMA director
from January to April. From April to May 1981, John McConnell
served as acting FEMA director. Then ﬁnally, in May 1981, Presi-
dent Reagan’s nominee for the post was installed—Louis Giuf-
frida. Giuffrida was confirmed by the Senate and served as
FEMA director from 1981 to 1985. 
Giuffrida graduated with a bachelor of arts degree from the
University of Connecticut in 1947. He went on to receive a mas-
ter of arts degree from Boston University. Prior to his federal
civil service career, Giuffrida had served a full career in the
United States Army. He retired from active duty as a colonel in
1971 but maintained his commission as an ofﬁcer in the Califor-
nia National Guard. From the Army, Giuffrida was tapped by
then Governor Ronald Reagan of California to organize the Cal-
ifornia Specialized Training Institute. This training school was
Biographical Sketches
141

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
established to train state employees in emergency management
practices and police tactical procedures—especially for coun-
terterrorism activities. Giuffrida also served Governor Reagan
as an advisor on terrorism and emergency management. During
this time, Giuffrida was also promoted to the rank of general in
the National Guard.
Giuffrida was confirmed as FEMA’s director on May 18,
1981. He was responsible for many FEMA initiatives and devel-
oped many FEMA civil defense programs—not surprising given
his military background and expertise. Giuffrida is also credited
with developing FEMA’s Continuity of Government program,
which ensures that the essential functions of government would
continue to operate in the event of a nuclear war or other major
calamity.
Despite his effective leadership at FEMA, Giuffrida was
forced to resign as FEMA director in 1985 due to scandal. In par-
ticular, it was learned that Giuffrida had improperly spent public
money to build a private residence on the campus of FEMA’s
Emergency Management Institute in Emmitsburg, Maryland.
James Loy (b. 1942)
James Loy was born in Altoona, Pennsylvania, in 1942. He en-
tered the United States Coast Guard Academy in 1960, graduat-
ing in 1964. Eventually, he also earned two master’s
degrees—one from Wesleyan University and another from the
University of Rhode Island. Loy served as a career, active duty
ofﬁcer in the Coast Guard. During the Vietnam War, Loy served
in command of a Coast Guard patrol boat in Vietnam’s water-
ways. His service in Vietnam resulted in several medals and
commendations, including the Bronze Star. After the Vietnam
War, Loy rose through the ranks of the Coast Guard; he served
on several cutters in both the Paciﬁc and Atlantic oceans and was
awarded the command of major cutters during his career.
In May 1998, Loy, now an admiral, was appointed to be the
commandant of the Coast Guard. He served in this capacity un-
til May 2002. Thus, Loy was commandant of the Coast Guard
when the terror attacks of September 11, 2001, occurred. He was
widely praised after 9/11 for quickly dispatching personnel 
and materiel to the city of New York and other ports of entry
142
Biographical Sketches

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
immediately after the terror attacks. He was seen as one of the
best examples of a calm and collected emergency management
or public safety official.
Loy retired from the Coast Guard in 2002 to become the un-
der-secretary of Transportation Security. This appointment made
Loy the head of the newly created Transportation Security Ad-
ministration, which was part of the Department of Transportation
(as the Coast Guard had been prior to the Homeland Security Act
of 2002 and its implementation in 2003). On December 4, 2003,
Loy was sworn in as the deputy secretary of the Department of
Homeland Security. Loy’s entire career was devoted to homeland
security—and particularly transportation safety and security.
During his career, Loy managed the Coast Guard’s participation
in countless disaster response and recovery missions. He also re-
ﬁned the Coast Guard’s port security mission after 9/11. Further,
he helped shepherd the ﬂedgling Transportation Security Admin-
istration during its formative years and while in search of clarity
of mission amidst major governmental restructuring under the
Homeland Security Act of 2002. Loy retired from government ser-
vice in March 2005.
John W. Macy, Jr. (1917–1986)
John Macy was born in Chicago in 1917. He attended Wesleyan
University and received a B.A. in 1938. Macy then moved to
Washington, DC, and began studies at American University. He
also began his long career in public service, ﬁrst as an intern with
the National Institute of Public Affairs and then as an administra-
tive aid for the Social Security Board. From 1940 to 1943, he
served as a personnel specialist and then assistant director of
civilian personnel for the War Department in Chicago and Wash-
ington, DC. In 1943, Macy enlisted in the United States Army and
served during World War II in the Pacific. In 1946, he left the
Army at the rank of captain and returned to the War Department
as a civilian employee—this time as director of civilian personnel.
From 1947 to 1951, Macy served as the organization and
personnel director for the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission in
Los Alamos, New Mexico. From 1951 to 1953, Macy was the spe-
cial assistant to the under-secretary of the U.S. Army. From 1953
to 1958, Macy served as the presidential-appointed executive
Biographical Sketches
143

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
director of the U.S. Civil Service Commission. In 1958, he left
government service to become the executive vice-president of
Wesleyan University but returned in 1961 as director of the Civil
Service Commission upon the request of President John F.
Kennedy. In 1969, Macy became head of the Corporation for
Public Broadcasting. From 1972 to 1979, Macy ran the Council of
the Better Business Bureau. His long track record as a public ser-
vant and administrator prompted President Jimmy Carter to
nominate him as the ﬁrst Senate-conﬁrmed director of the Fed-
eral Emergency Management Agency. 
Macy had worked for the Eisenhower, Kennedy, and John-
son administrations; he knew government civil service rules
and regulations inside and out. President Carter saw him as an
ideal individual who could bring various federal agencies and
subagencies together to build a cohesive emergency manage-
ment agency in FEMA. Although he had no emergency ser-
vices experience, his government experience and ability to
navigate political and bureaucratic pitfalls made him an entic-
ing choice for FEMA. Macy served as FEMA director from 1979
to 1981.
John W. Magaw (unknown) 
John Magaw is a career public servant who spent most of his
government service in federal law enforcement. He was born in
Columbus, Ohio. He received a bachelor’s degree in education
from Otterbein College in Westerville, Ohio. In 1959, Magaw be-
gan his law enforcement career as a state trooper with the Ohio
Highway Patrol. In 1967, Magaw joined the United States Secret
Service as a special agent. He rose through the ranks of the Secret
Service and became the deputy special agent in charge of the
vice-presidential protective division in Washington DC. He also
served as special agent in charge of the Washington DC ﬁeld of-
ﬁce. By 1992, Magaw was placed in charge of all protective oper-
ations for the president and his family. Magaw served as director
of the Secret Service from 1992 to 1993. In 1993, President Clinton
appointed Magaw to be director of the Bureau of Alcohol, To-
bacco, and Firearms. He served in that position from 1993 to
1999. In 1999, Magaw moved over to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, where he served as the senior advisor for
terrorism preparedness to the FEMA director. Magaw was
144
Biographical Sketches

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
responsible for planning and coordinating FEMA’s domestic ter-
rorism preparedness programs.
When President George W. Bush entered office in January
2001, Magaw was appointed as acting director of FEMA. He
served as FEMA director for one month until President Bush’s
nominee—Joe Allbaugh—was conﬁrmed by the U.S. Senate. In
January 2002, Magaw was appointed and conﬁrmed as the un-
der-secretary of the Department of Transportation in charge of
the newly created Transportation Security Administration (TSA).
TSA was created shortly after the 9/11 terror attacks for the pur-
pose of improving safety and security within the transportation
industry—especially the airline industry. Magaw left govern-
ment service in June 2002.
Robert Mueller (b. 1944)
Robert Mueller was born in New York City in 1944 and grew up
near Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. He attended Princeton Univer-
sity as an undergraduate student. He graduated from Princeton
in 1966. Only a year later, he earned his master’s degree in inter-
national relations from New York University. After college,
Mueller joined the United States Marine Corps as an ofﬁcer. He
served in Vietnam and was the recipient of the Bronze Star, a
Purple Heart, two Navy Commendation Medals, and the Viet-
namese Cross of Gallantry. After serving on active duty for three
years, Mueller returned to higher education. He earned a law de-
gree from the University of Virginia in 1973. Mueller then pro-
ceeded to practice law in San Francisco.
Mueller started as an attorney in private practice, but in
1976 he became a prosecutor with the U.S. Attorney’s Ofﬁce for
the Northern District of California. Mueller eventually was pro-
moted to chief of the criminal division. In 1982, he transferred to
the U.S. Attorney’s Ofﬁce in Boston. Once in Boston, he left gov-
ernment service for a partnership in a local law ﬁrm. However,
in 1989, Mueller reentered federal service as an assistant to the
attorney general, who was Richard Thornburgh at the time. In
1990, Mueller became head of the Criminal Division of the U.S.
Justice Department. In that capacity, he oversaw the prosecutions
of Panamanian leader Manuel Noriega and organized crime ﬁg-
ure John Gotti, and led most of the investigation of the Pan Am
103 terrorist bombing over Lockerbie, Scotland.
Biographical Sketches
145

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
In 1993, Mueller again left government for a partnership in a
Boston law ﬁrm. However, in 1998, Mueller was appointed the
United States Attorney for the Northern District of California in
San Francisco. During the first part of 2001, Mueller served as
acting deputy attorney general of the United States. Finally, in
July 2001, Mueller was nominated by President George W. Bush
to become the director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI). His nomination was conﬁrmed by the U.S. Senate in early
August 2001.
Mueller was on the job as FBI director for approximately one
month when the terror attacks of 9/11 occurred. Even before
9/11, Mueller had publicly campaigned for his desire to modern-
ize the FBI—particularly its computer system. The technological
deficiencies and organizational inefficiencies at the FBI, which
Mueller inherited, would later prove to have played a role in the
FBI’s inability to detect or prevent the terror attacks that took
place on September 11, 2001—resulting in the largest crime scene
and largest criminal investigation in world history. Mueller con-
tinued to preside over the FBI during the creation of the Depart-
ment of Homeland Security. He successfully preserved the FBI’s
responsibility as the lead agency for counterterrorism and coun-
terespionage investigations, despite the call from some in Con-
gress to remove those functions from the FBI.
Clarence Ray Nagin, Jr. (b. 1956)
Although a number of mayors have played key roles in disaster
response around the country, Mayor Ray Nagin of New Orleans
has become one of the most visible and recognizable local gov-
ernment ofﬁcials to the emergency management community. Na-
gin was born on June 11, 1956, in New Orleans and grew up
there. He attended Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama,
and received a bachelor’s degree in accounting in 1978. Later, he
attended Tulane University and received a master of business
administration degree in 1994. In 2002, Nagin was elected mayor
of New Orleans. Prior to holding public ofﬁce, he had been an
executive for Cox Communications.
Nagin ﬁrst appeared on the national scene when Hurricane
Katrina struck New Orleans. On August 26, 2005, the National
Hurricane Center predicted that Katrina, which was tracking to-
ward New Orleans from the Gulf of Mexico, would likely
146
Biographical Sketches

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
become a category 4 hurricane. In the wake of this prediction,
Nagin encouraged residents of the city of New Orleans to evacu-
ate. However, he did not issue a mandatory evacuation order at
that time. On August 28, 2005, the hurricane reached category 4
strength. At this strength level, it was believed that a direct hit on
New Orleans could result in the topping or breaching of the lev-
ees. Nagin then issued a mandatory evacuation order, which was
the ﬁrst in the city’s history. The Superdome in downtown New
Orleans was declared to be a haven of last resort for those unable
to leave the city. When Katrina made landfall, it did so about 15
miles east of New Orleans. Consequently, the city was spared
more serious wind damage than might have occurred had it been
a direct hit. However, within a couple of hours after landfall, the
levees around New Orleans were breeched and waters from
swollen Lake Pontchartrain rushed into the city’s neighbor-
hoods. Before it was over, 80 percent of the city was ﬂooded.
Soon after the storm, a humanitarian crisis emerged. Many
people were trapped in their homes without food, water, or a
way to escape the flooded city. Thousands of others were
trapped downtown at the Superdome and convention center.
Food and water were scarce there as well, as was security. News
reports sometimes referred to stranded residents as “refugees.”
The crisis persisted for days until National Guard troops, Coast
Guard reinforcements, and mutual aid providers from other
states arrived to assist in the posthurricane evacuation. Nagin
complained on September 1, 2005, that the federal response to
the disaster was too slow. He compared it to the response for
New York City on 9/11 and wondered out loud if there was a
racial component to the apparent lack of urgency. Homeland Se-
curity Secretary Michael Chertoff responded by noting the fed-
eral government’s purpose in disasters is to assist state and local
governments. Chertoff reiterated that the primary responsibility,
power, and authority to evacuate citizens from a city belong to
city and state ofﬁcials.
By the time the crisis abated, the hurricane and ﬂooding had
caused the deaths of nearly 2,000 people and caused more than
$80 billion in property damage. Despite his quickness to point
out the ﬂaws in the federal government’s response, Nagin him-
self came under criticism for his part in the disaster. In particular,
many blame Nagin for not properly evacuating the city and for
failing to follow the evacuation plan that was in place. In the run-
up to the storm, Nagin permitted hundreds of buses to sit idle
Biographical Sketches
147

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
when the city’s emergency plan called for their use to move resi-
dents out. Nagin was also later criticized for referring to New
Orleans as a “chocolate” city that should be chocolate again—re-
ferring to the need to keep New Orleans a majority African
American city. Despite his critics, Nagin was reelected as mayor
in 2006. Controversy still shrouded Nagin one year after the hur-
ricane. In responding to criticism that suggested clean-up opera-
tions were taking too long one year later, Nagin said, “You guys
in New York can’t get a hole in the ground fixed, and its five
years later. So let’s be fair.”
Robert D. Paulison (b. 1947)
Robert Paulison was born in Miami, Florida, in 1947. He earned a
bachelor’s degree from Florida Atlantic University and later at-
tended graduate school at the John F. Kennedy School of Govern-
ment at Harvard University. Paulison became a career public
servant. He entered public service as a ﬁreﬁghter for the Miami-
Dade Fire Department. Paulison advanced through the ranks of
the fire service and became the Miami-Dade fire chief in 1992.
Paulison’s department had considerable experience with large-
scale emergencies. The Miami-Dade Fire Department was tasked
with the clean-up after Hurricane Andrew in 1992. The depart-
ment also handled the tragic crash of ValuJet 592 over the Ever-
glades in 1996. After more than thirty years of service as a
ﬁreﬁghter, Paulison was appointed the head of the U.S. Fire Ad-
ministration in late September 2001. Interestingly, Paulison was a
Democrat appointed during a Republican administration, but his
professional credentials made him a compelling choice for the
position.
In early 2003, Paulison released an advisory encouraging
American households to prepare themselves for disasters by
stocking up on certain supplies, including water, food, ﬁrst–aid
items, plastic sheeting, and duct tape (for sealing doors and win-
dows in the event of a chemical terror attack). The Bush adminis-
tration became the brunt of many jokes—particularly, that the
government’s plan to protect America’s homeland hinged on
duct tape. Later in 2003, Paulison was appointed by President
Bush to be director of the National Preparedness Division of the
Emergency Preparedness and Response Directorate within the
newly created Department of Homeland Security. In September
148
Biographical Sketches

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
2005, Paulison was appointed as the acting director of the Fed-
eral Emergency Management Agency. He was ﬁnally conﬁrmed
by the Senate in May 2006.
Tom Ridge (b. 1945)
Tom Ridge was born in Munhall, Pennsylvania, in 1945. He
earned a bachelor’s degree from Harvard University in 1967. He
began law school at Dickinson School of Law (now part of Penn-
sylvania State University). However, during his ﬁrst year in law
school he was drafted into the United States Army. He served in
the Vietnam War as a staff sergeant and was highly decorated.
After his tour of duty, he returned to Pennsylvania in 1970 and
resumed his legal studies. Ridge received his law degree from
Dickinson School of Law in 1972.
In 1982, Ridge began his political career. After serving as an
assistant district attorney in Erie, Pennsylvania, he ran for Con-
gress. Ridge served six consecutive terms as a Republican mem-
ber of the House of Representatives. In 1994, Ridge successfully
ran for the governorship of Pennsylvania, and he was elected
governor in 1998. After the terror attacks on September 11, 2001,
President George W. Bush created within the White House the
Ofﬁce of Homeland Security. President Bush asked Tom Ridge to
serve as director. Ridge was often referred to as the Homeland
Security Czar. His job was to develop and coordinate a national
strategy to protect the United States against terrorist attacks.
Ridge accepted the president’s call to service and resigned from
the governorship in October 2001.
In 2003, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security came
into existence as a result of the Homeland Security Act of 2002.
Ridge was nominated and confirmed as the first secretary of
Homeland Security. Instead of managing a small staff of White
House employees, Ridge now managed one of the largest cabinet
agencies—created by combining twenty-two agencies and
180,000 employees under the department organizational um-
brella—in the U.S. government. Although not without glitches,
Ridge led the new department in its time of considerable transi-
tion. The creation of the Department of Homeland Security was
the largest reorganization of the federal government since the cre-
ation of the Department of Defense a half-century before. Among
other initiatives, Ridge oversaw the creation of a comprehensive
Biographical Sketches
149

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
response and recovery division within the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. Ridge served as the secretary of Homeland
Security until February 1, 2005.
Robert T. Stafford (1913–2006)
Robert Stafford was born in Rutland, Vermont, in 1913. He grad-
uated from Middlebury College in 1935 and from Boston Univer-
sity’s law school in 1938. Stafford became a local prosecutor in
Rutland County, serving in that capacity from 1938 to 1942.
Stafford served as a commissioned officer in the United States
Navy and Naval Reserve during World War II and the Korean
War, respectively. During the 1950s, he became active in Vermont
politics as a Republican. He served as the state’s attorney general
from 1955 to 1957 and as lieutenant governor from 1957 to 1959.
Stafford became the governor of Vermont in 1959 and served that
ofﬁce until his election to the U.S. Congress in 1961. He served as
a member of the House of Representatives from 1961 to 1971, at
which time he was appointed to ﬁll a Senate vacancy after the
death of Vermont Senator Winston Prouty. Stafford served as a
United States senator from Vermont from 1971 until his retire-
ment from elected service in 1989. While in the Senate, he served
as chairman of the Committee on Environmental and Public
Works. Stafford died in his hometown of Rutland in 2006.
Stafford is known in emergency management circles as the
sponsor of key legislation that propelled the federal emergency
management apparatus. As chair of the Senate Committee on En-
vironmental and Public Works, the business of federal emer-
gency management efforts, disaster relief, and infrastructure
protection was squarely within his purview of authority. To
emergency managers, Stafford is most known for the Robert T.
Stafford Disaster Assistance and Emergency Relief Act of 1988.
This legislation provided the Federal Emergency Management
Agency with its statutory authority to engage in federal disaster
response activities.
Wallace E. Stickney (b. 1934)
Wallace Stickney was a career civil servant who eventually
served as the director of the Federal Emergency Management
150
Biographical Sketches

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Agency under President George H. W. Bush. Stickney was born
in Salem, New Hampshire, in 1934. He attended New England
College and was awarded a bachelor’s degree in 1959. He also
completed graduate education at Northwestern University and
Harvard University, receiving master’s degrees from both of
those institutions. Early in Stickney’s public service career, he
worked in local government. In fact, he served as the town engi-
neer for the City of Salem. From there, he became the commis-
sioner of the Southern Rockingham Regional Planning
Commission. He also conducted environment impact studies for
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
In 1983, Stickney was appointed as special assistant for envi-
ronmental affairs for Governor John Sununu of New Hampshire.
He served in that capacity until 1985, at which time Stickney be-
came the commissioner of the New Hampshire Department of
Transportation. Stickney’s connection to John Sununu would
eventually lead to a federal appointment. Sununu served as Pres-
ident Bush’s White House chief of staff. Stickney was nominated
and conﬁrmed as the director of the Federal Emergency Manage-
ment Agency in 1990. He assumed control of FEMA at a time
when the Cold War was thawing. Until that time, FEMA main-
tained a significant civil defense posture. However, with the
threat of nuclear or total war diminished, FEMA’s emphases
would need to adjust. Stickney, as an engineer and bureaucrat,
rather than a militarist or an ideologue, shepherded FEMA into
this new era and new way of thinking about the emergency man-
agement threats to the United States. Stickney served as the di-
rector of FEMA until January 1993.
William Howard Taft (1857–1930)
William Howard Taft was a remarkable American public servant.
He is the only individual to ever serve as both president of the
United States and chief justice of the United States Supreme
Court. Taft was born in Cincinnati, Ohio, in 1857. He was a
lawyer by profession. Taft attended Cincinnati Law School and
received his bachelor of law in 1880. Taft went on to become a
prosecutor and judge in Hamilton County, Ohio.
Taft was a Republican and was the beneficiary of several
political appointments. In 1890, Taft was appointed the solicitor
general of the United States by President Benjamin Harrison. In
Biographical Sketches
151

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
1892, President Harrison appointed Taft to the federal 6th Cir-
cuit Court of Appeals. In 1901, President William McKinley ap-
pointed Taft as the first civilian governor for the newly
acquired U.S. territory, the Philippines. In 1904, President
Theodore Roosevelt selected Taft to be the secretary of War.
In 1909, Taft became the 27th president of the United States.
He was not reelected however. In 1921, Taft was appointed the
chief justice of the United States Supreme Court by President
Warren Harding. Taft remained the chief justice until his retire-
ment in February 1930. He died a month later.
In addition to his broad political career, Taft maintained a
close connection to the American Red Cross. In fact, Taft was a
close friend of Mabel Boardman, who was a stalwart member of
the Red Cross leadership. He was also a board member of the
American Red Cross at the time the organization secured its ofﬁ-
cial charter from Congress in 1905. Taft served as president of the
American Red Cross from 1906 to 1913 and as its chairman from
1915 to 1919. In 1913, Taft resigned as president of the American
Red Cross so that Woodrow Wilson, who had been elected to the
United States presidency, could assume role of honorary presi-
dent of the Red Cross. This began the practice of designating the
U.S. president in office as the honorary head of the American
Red Cross—a practice that still continues today.
Gordon F. Vickery (1920–1996)
Gordon Vickery was born in Ruthton, Minnesota, in 1920. Dur-
ing his childhood, his family moved to Snohomish, Washington.
While still in high school, he volunteered for the Snohomish Fire
Department. In 1941, Vickery moved to Seattle with his new
wife, Frances. In 1946, Vickery joined the Seattle Fire Depart-
ment. Vickery excelled as a ﬁreﬁghter and leader in the depart-
ment. He quickly rose through the ranks. In 1963, Vickery
became the chief of the Seattle Fire Department. He stayed in
that position until his retirement from the department in 1972.
During his tenure as chief of the department, he implemented
many reforms and initiatives that served as models for the ﬁre-
ﬁghting profession nationwide. Vickery was well known for his
efforts to bring into the department women and racial minorities.
When he became chief, the Seattle Fire Department had one
African American firefighter. By 1972, the department had 100
152
Biographical Sketches

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
minorities in ﬁreﬁghting positions. Vickery also is known in the
profession for his establishment of the Medic One program,
among the ﬁrst paramedic programs in the United States. It pri-
marily targeted heart attack patients by providing physician-as-
sisted care from highly trained paramedic ﬁreﬁghters. Initially,
the program involved a physician riding with two paramedics.
Eventually, the model evolved into having a physician commu-
nicate with paramedics via mobile radio.
In 1972, after Vickery retired, he was appointed to be the
head of Seattle City Light, the city’s publicly owned power com-
pany. He served in that capacity until 1979, when he was ap-
pointed by President Jimmy Carter to head the U.S. Fire
Administration. He served in that capacity for ﬁve years. During
his tenure, he established the U.S. Fire Academy, developed an
advanced fire prevention education program, developed a na-
tional fire incident reporting system, and lobbied Congress for
mandatory smoke detectors and sprinklers in public buildings.
Importantly, Vickery also was appointed by President Carter as
the acting head of the newly created Federal Emergency Man-
agement Agency. He served as acting FEMA director from April
to July, 1979.
James Lee Witt (b. 1944)
James Lee Witt was born in Paris, Arkansas, in 1944. Witt grew
up in Arkansas and began his own construction business in 1968.
Witt entered public service at the county level. At the age of
thirty-four, he was elected as a county judge in Yell County,
Arkansas. He was reelected to that post six times. In 1988, Gover-
nor Bill Clinton of Arkansas designated Witt to head the state’s
Office of Emergency Services. This agency was responsible for
coordinating emergency management activities within the State
of Arkansas. When Bill Clinton became president of the United
States in January 1993, Witt was nominated to be the director of
the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Witt was con-
ﬁrmed by the Senate in January 1993 and served as the FEMA di-
rector during the entirety of President Clinton’s two terms in
ofﬁce (1993–2001).
Witt served as FEMA director during an important and ac-
tive period of time for the agency. President Clinton elevated
FEMA to a cabinet-level agency. Additionally, prior to Witt’s
Biographical Sketches
153

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
arrival, FEMA had come to be viewed in Washington, DC as one
of the federal agencies serving as political dumping grounds. In
other words, the FEMA leadership cadre had long and consis-
tently been replete with political appointees who received their
appointments as political favors. During Witt’s service as direc-
tor, this reputation for FEMA was dramatically altered. Instead,
FEMA came to be known under Witt as a professional emergency
management agency that effectively provided and coordinated
disaster assistance and relief.
Many factors contributed to Witt’s success as a FEMA direc-
tor. He served for eight years in that capacity, giving him the op-
portunity to make organizational and cultural changes within
the FEMA bureaucracy. In that time, he was able to ﬂatten the or-
ganizational structure of FEMA. Witt was also the ﬁrst FEMA di-
rector to have experience as an emergency management director
(in his case, in the state of Arkansas). Witt put an end to the prac-
tice of patronage appointments. Instead, FEMA senior executives
under Witt, like Witt himself, were required to possess experi-
ence and training in emergency management or related areas.
After leaving the FEMA directorship, Witt established the con-
sulting ﬁrm James Lee Witt Associates, LLC. This organization
provides consulting services to state and local governments on
emergency management and disaster preparedness issues. In
2005, the ﬁrm was hired by the State of Louisiana to oversee re-
construction efforts after Hurricane Katrina.
154
Biographical Sketches

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
6
Data and Documents
T
he purpose of this chapter is to permit readers to gather key
facts and data about the function of emergency manage-
ment in the United States by providing excerpts from gov-
ernment authorizations and other published statements that
articulate the federal government’s emergency management
role. In particular, portions of key executive orders, legislation,
and Congressional testimony are provided, which speak to the
responsibilities, corresponding authorities, and challenges fac-
ing federal emergency management officials and organizations
in the United States today.
Key Executive Orders and Legislation
In this section, readers will have the opportunity to review the
text of key executive orders and legislation that have authorized
and guided the delivery of federal emergency management ac-
tivities in the United States in the past three decades. Specifi-
cally, the 1979 Executive Order 12127 (which created FEMA),
portions of the Stafford Relief and Emergency Assistance Act of
1988 (which granted FEMA statutory authority), and portions of
the Homeland Security Act of 2002 are reprinted below. The
Stafford Act is an especially lengthy piece of legislation. Many
important elements of the law have been left out of the excerpt
below due to length constraints. Elements covered by the act but
not provided below include various criteria defining federal
mitigation efforts, as well as provisions of the law that permit
155

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
156
Data and Documents
the federal government to grant individual and household aid
(food, shelter, unemployment assistance, funeral assistance) to
those impacted by disasters.
Creation of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency
Executive Order 12127, issued March 31, 1979.
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and
laws of the United States of America, including Section 304 of Reorgani-
zation Plan No. 3 of 1978, and in order to provide for the orderly activa-
tion of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, it is hereby
ordered as follows:
1–101. Reorganization Plan No. 3 of 1978 (43 FR 41943), which es-
tablishes the Federal Emergency Management Agency, provides for the
transfer of functions, and the transfer and abolition of agencies and of-
ﬁces, is hereby effective.
1–102. The Director of the Ofﬁce of Management and Budget shall,
in accord with Section 302 of the Reorganization Plan, provide for all
the appropriate transfers, including those transfers related to all the
functions transferred from the Department of Commerce, the Depart-
ment of Housing and Urban Development, and the President.
1–103. (a) The functions transferred from the Department of Com-
merce are those vested in the Secretary of Commerce, the Administrator
and Deputy Administrator of the National Fire Prevention and Control
Administration (now the United States Fire Administration (Sec. 2(a) of
Public Law 95–422)), and the Superintendent of the National Academy
for Fire Prevention and Control pursuant to the Federal Fire Prevention
and Control Act of 1974, as amended (15 U.S.C. 2201 et seq.), but not in-
cluding any functions vested by the amendments made to other acts by
Sections 18 and 23 of that Act (15 U.S.C. 278f and 1511). The functions
vested in the Administrator by Sections 24 and 25 of that Act, as added
by Sections 3 and 4 of Public Law 95–422 (15 U.S.C. 2220 and 2221), are
not transferred to the Director of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency. Those functions are transferred with the Administrator and re-
main vested in him. (Section 201 of the Plan.) (b) There was also trans-
ferred from the Department of Commerce any function concerning the
Emergency Broadcast System which was transferred to the Secretary of
Commerce by Section 5B of Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1977 (42 FR
56101; implemented by Executive Order No. 12046 of March 27, 1978).
(Section 203 of the Plan.)

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
1–104. The functions transferred from the Department of Housing
and Urban Development are those vested in the Secretary of Housing
and Urban Development pursuant to Section 15(e) of the Federal Flood
Insurance Act of 1956, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2414(e)), and the National
Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended, and the Flood Disaster Pro-
tection Act of 1973, as amended (42 U.S.C. 4001 et seq.), and Section
520(b) of the National Housing Act, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1735d(b)), to
the extent necessary to borrow from the Treasury to make payments for
reinsured and directly insured losses, and Title XII of the National
Housing Act, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1749bbb et seq., and as explained in
Section 1 of the National Insurance Development Act of 1975 (Section 1
of Public Law 94–13 at 12 U.S.C. 1749bbb note)). (Section 202 of the
Plan.)
1–105. The functions transferred from the President are those con-
cerning the Emergency Broadcast System which were transferred to the
President by Section 5 of Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1977 (42 FR
56101; implemented by Executive Order No. 12046 of March 27, 1978).
(Section 203 of the Plan.)
1–106. This Order shall be effective Sunday, April 1, 1979.
Robert T. Stafford Relief and
Emergency Assistance Act of 1988
As codified into Title 42, United States Code, chapter 68 (selected
excerpts)
Title I—Findings, Declarations and Deﬁnitions
5121. Congressional Findings and Declarations 
A. The Congress hereby ﬁnds and declares that—
1. Because disasters often cause loss of life, human suffering, loss
of income, and property loss and damage; and
2. Because disasters often disrupt the normal functioning of gov-
ernments and communities, and adversely affect individuals and fami-
lies with great severity; special measures, designed to assist the efforts
of the affected States in expediting the rendering of aid, assistance, and
emergency services, and the reconstruction and rehabilitation of devas-
tated areas, are necessary.
B. It is the intent of the Congress, by this Act, to provide an orderly
and continuing means of assistance by the Federal Government to State
and local governments in carrying out their responsibilities to alleviate
the suffering and damage which result from such disasters by—
Robert T. Stafford Relief and Emergency Assistance Act of 1988
157

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
1. Revising and broadening the scope of existing disaster relief
programs;
2. Encouraging the development of comprehensive disaster pre-
paredness and assistance plans, programs, capabilities, and organiza-
tions by the States and by local governments;
3. Achieving greater coordination and responsiveness of disaster
preparedness and relief programs;
4. Encouraging individuals, States, and local governments to pro-
tect themselves by obtaining insurance coverage to supplement or re-
place governmental assistance;
5. Encouraging hazard mitigation measures to reduce losses from
disasters, including development of land use and construction regula-
tions; and
6. Providing Federal assistance programs for both public and pri-
vate losses sustained in disasters.
5122. Deﬁnitions 
As used in this Act—
1. “Emergency” means any occasion or instance for which, in the
determination of the President, Federal assistance is needed to supple-
ment State and local efforts and capabilities to save lives and to protect
property and public health and safety, or to lessen or avert the threat of
a catastrophe in any part of the United States.
2. “Major disaster” means any natural catastrophe (including any
hurricane, tornado, storm, high water, winddriven water, tidal wave,
tsunami, earthquake, volcanic eruption, landslide, mudslide, snow-
storm, or drought), or, regardless of cause, any ﬁre, ﬂood, or explosion,
in any part of the United States, which in the determination of the Pres-
ident causes damage of sufﬁcient severity and magnitude to warrant
major disaster assistance under this Act to supplement the efforts and
available resources of States, local governments, and disaster relief or-
ganizations in alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering
caused thereby.
3. “United States” means the ﬁfty States, the District of Columbia,
Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the Com-
monwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
4. “State” means any State of the United States, the District of Co-
lumbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and
the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
5. “Governor” means the chief executive of any State.
6. The term “local government” means—
A. A county, municipality, city, town, township, local public au-
thority, school district, special district, intrastate district, council of gov-
ernments (regardless of whether the council of governments is
incorporated as a nonproﬁt corporation under State law), regional or
158
Data and Documents

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
interstate government entity, or agency or instrumentality of a local
government;
B. An Indian tribe or authorized tribal organization, or Alaska Na-
tive village or organization; and
C. A rural community, unincorporated town or village, or other
public entity, for which an application for assistance is made by a State
or political subdivision of a State.
7. “Federal agency” means any department, independent estab-
lishment, Government corporation, or other agency of the executive
branch of the Federal Government, including the United States Postal
Service, but shall not include the American National Red Cross.
8. “Public facility” means the following facilities owned by a State
or local government:
A. Any ﬂood control, navigation, irrigation, reclamation, public
power, sewage treatment and collection, water supply and distribution,
watershed development, or airport facility.
B. Any non-Federal-aid street, road, or highway.
C. Any other public building, structure, or system, including those
used for educational, recreational, or cultural purposes.
D. Any park.
9. “Private nonproﬁt facility” means private nonproﬁt educational,
utility, irrigation, emergency, medical, rehabilitational, and temporary
or permanent custodial care facilities (including those for the aged and
disabled), other private nonproﬁt facilities which provide essential ser-
vices of a governmental nature to the general public, and facilities on
Indian reservations as deﬁned by the President.
Title II—Disaster Preparedness and
Mitigation Assistance
5131. Federal and State Disaster Preparedness Programs 
A. Utilization of services of other agencies. The President is authorized
to establish a program of disaster preparedness that utilizes services of
all appropriate agencies and includes—
1. Preparation of disaster preparedness plans for mitigation, warn-
ing, emergency operations, rehabilitation, and recovery;
2. Training and exercises;
3. Postdisaster critiques and evaluations;
4. Annual review of programs;
5. Coordination of Federal, State, and local preparedness pro-
grams;
6. Application of science and technology;
7. Research.
B. Technical assistance for the development of plans and pro-
grams. The President shall provide technical assistance to the States in
Robert T. Stafford Relief and Emergency Assistance Act of 1988
159

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
developing comprehensive plans and practicable programs for prepara-
tion against disasters, including hazard reduction, avoidance, and miti-
gation; for assistance to individuals, businesses, and State and local
governments following such disasters; and for recovery of damages or
destroyed public and private facilities.
C. Grants to States for development of plans and programs. Upon
application by a State, the President is authorized to make grants, not to
exceed in the aggregate to such State $250,000, for the development of
plans, programs, and capabilities for disaster preparedness and preven-
tion. Such grants shall be applied for within one year from the date of
enactment of this Act [enacted May 22, 1974]. Any State desiring ﬁnan-
cial assistance under this section shall designate or create an agency to
plan and administer such a disaster preparedness program, and shall,
through such agency, submit a State plan to the President, which
shall—
1. Set forth a comprehensive and detailed State program for prepa-
ration against and assistance following, emergencies and major disas-
ters, including provisions for assistance to individuals, businesses, and
local governments; and
2. Include provisions for appointment and training of appropriate
staffs, formulation of necessary regulations and procedures and con-
duct of required exercises.
D. Grants for improvement, maintenance, and updating of State
plans. The President is authorized to make grants not to exceed 50 per
centum of the cost of improving, maintaining and updating State disas-
ter assistance plans, including evaluations of natural hazards and de-
velopment of the programs and actions required to mitigate such
hazards; except that no such grant shall exceed $ 50,000 per annum to
any State.
5148. Nonliability of Federal Government 
The Federal Government shall not be liable for any claim based upon
the exercise or performance of or the failure to exercise or perform a
discretionary function or duty on the part of a Federal agency or an
employee of the Federal Government in carrying out the provisions of
this Act.
5150. Use of Local Firms and Individuals 
In the expenditure of Federal funds for debris clearance, distribution of
supplies, reconstruction, and other major disaster or emergency assis-
tance activities which may be carried out by contract or agreement with
private organizations, ﬁrms, or individuals, preference shall be given,
to the extent feasible and practicable, to those organizations, ﬁrms, and
individuals residing or doing business primarily in the area affected by
such major disaster or emergency. This section shall not be considered
160
Data and Documents

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
to restrict the use of Department of Defense resources in the provision
of major disaster assistance under this Act. In carrying out this section,
a contract or agreement may be set aside for award based on a speciﬁc
geographic area.
5151. Nondiscrimination in Disaster Assistance 
A. Regulations for equitable and impartial relief operations. The Presi-
dent shall issue, and may alter and amend, such regulations as may be
necessary for the guidance of personnel carrying out Federal assistance
functions at the site of a major disaster or emergency. Such regulations
shall include provisions for ensuring that the distribution of supplies,
the processing of applications, and other relief and assistance activities
shall be accomplished in an equitable and impartial manner, without
discrimination on the grounds of race, color, religion, nationality, sex,
age, or economic status.
B. Compliance with regulations as prerequisite to participation by
other bodies in relief operations. As a condition of participation in the
distribution of assistance or supplies under this Act or of receiving as-
sistance under this Act, governmental bodies and other organizations
shall be required to comply with regulations relating to nondiscrimina-
tion promulgated by the President, and such other regulations applica-
ble to activities within an area affected by a major disaster or
emergency as he deems necessary for the effective coordination of relief
efforts.
5152. Use and Coordination of Relief Organizations
A. In providing relief and assistance under this Act, the President may
utilize, with their consent, the personnel and facilities of the American
National Red Cross, the Salvation Army, the Mennonite Disaster Ser-
vice, and other relief or disaster assistance organizations, in the distrib-
ution of medicine, food, supplies, or other items, and in the restoration,
rehabilitation, or reconstruction of community services housing and es-
sential facilities, whenever the President ﬁnds that such utilization is
necessary.
B. The President is authorized to enter into agreements with the
American National Red Cross, the Salvation Army, the Mennonite Dis-
aster Service, and other relief or disaster assistance organizations under
which the disaster relief activities of such organizations may be coordi-
nated by the Federal coordinating ofﬁcer whenever such organizations
are engaged in providing relief during and after a major disaster or
emergency. Any such agreement shall include provisions ensuring that
use of Federal facilities, supplies, and services will be in compliance
with regulations prohibiting duplication of beneﬁts and guaranteeing
nondiscrimination promulgated by the President under this Act, and
such other regulation as the President may require.
Robert T. Stafford Relief and Emergency Assistance Act of 1988
161

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
5170. Procedure for Declaration 
All requests for a declaration by the President that a major disaster ex-
ists shall be made by the Governor of the affected State. Such a request
shall be based on a ﬁnding that the disaster is of such severity and mag-
nitude that effective response is beyond the capabilities of the State and
the affected local governments and that Federal assistance is necessary.
As part of such request, and as a prerequisite to major disaster assis-
tance under this Act, the Governor shall take appropriate response ac-
tion under State law and direct execution of the State’s emergency plan.
The Governor shall furnish information on the nature and amount of
State and local resources which have been or will be committed to alle-
viating the results of the disaster, and shall certify that, for the current
disaster, State and local government obligations and expenditures (of
which State commitments must be a signiﬁcant proportion) will comply
with all applicable cost-sharing requirements of this Act. Based on the
request of a Governor under this section, the President may declare un-
der this Act that a major disaster or emergency exists.
5170a. General Federal Assistance 
In any major disaster, the President may—
1. Direct any Federal agency, with or without reimbursement, to
utilize its authorities and the resources granted to it under Federal law
(including personnel, equipment, supplies, facilities, and managerial,
technical, and advisory services) in support of State and local assistance
efforts;
2. Coordinate all disaster relief assistance (including voluntary as-
sistance) provided by Federal agencies, private organizations, and State
and local governments;
3. Provide technical and advisory assistance to affected State and
local governments for—
A. The performance of essential community services;
B. Issuance of warnings of risks and hazards;
C. Public health and safety information, including dissemination
of such information;
D. Provision of health and safety measures; and
E. Management, control, and reduction of immediate threats to
public health and safety; and
4. Assist State and local governments in the distribution of medi-
cine, food, and other consumable supplies, and emergency assistance.
5173. Debris Removal 
A. Authorization for use of Federal assistance and grants to State or lo-
cal government. The President, whenever he determines it to be in the
public interest, is authorized—
162
Data and Documents

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
1. Through the use of Federal departments, agencies, and instru-
mentalities, to clear debris and wreckage resulting from a major disas-
ter from publicly and privately owned lands and waters; and
2. To make grants to any State or local government or owner or op-
erator of a private non-proﬁt facility for the purpose of removing debris
or wreckage resulting from a major disaster from publicly or privately
owned lands and waters.
B. State or local government authorization; indemniﬁcation of Fed-
eral government. No authority under this section shall be exercised un-
less the affected State or local government shall ﬁrst arrange an
unconditional authorization for removal of such debris or wreckage
from public and private property, and, in the case of removal of debris
or wreckage from private property, shall ﬁrst agree to indemnify the
Federal Government against any claim arising from such removal.
C. Rules relating to large lots. The President shall issue rules which
provide for recognition of differences existing among urban, suburban,
and rural lands in implementation of this section so as to facilitate ade-
quate removal of debris and wreckage from large lots.
D. Federal share. The Federal share of assistance under this section
shall be not less than 75 percent of the eligible cost of debris and wreck-
age removal carried out under this section.
5184. Community Disaster Loans 
A. In General. The President is authorized to make loans to any local
government which may suffer a substantial loss of tax and other rev-
enues as a result of a major disaster, and has demonstrated a need for ﬁ-
nancial assistance in order to perform its governmental functions.
B. Amount. The amount of any such loan shall be based on need,
shall not exceed 25 per centum of the annual operating budget of that
local government for the ﬁscal year in which the major disaster occurs,
and shall not exceed $5,000,000.
C. Repayment. 
1. Cancellation. Repayment of all or any part of such loan to the
extent that revenues of the local government during the three full ﬁscal
year period following the major disaster are insufﬁcient to meet the op-
erating budget of the local government, including additional disaster-
related expenses of a municipal operation character shall be cancelled.
2. Condition on continuing eligibility. A local government shall not
be eligible for further assistance under this section during any period in
which the local government is in arrears with respect to a required re-
payment of a loan under this section.
D. Effect on other assistance. Any loans made under this section
shall not reduce or otherwise affect any grants or other assistance under
this Act.
Robert T. Stafford Relief and Emergency Assistance Act of 1988
163

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
5185. Emergency Communications 
The President is authorized during, or in anticipation of an emergency
or major disaster to establish temporary communications systems and
to make such communications available to State and local government
ofﬁcials and other persons as he deems appropriate.
5186. Emergency Public Transportation 
The President is authorized to provide temporary public transportation
service in an area affected by a major disaster to meet emergency needs
and to provide transportation to governmental ofﬁces, supply centers,
stores, post ofﬁces, schools, major employment centers, and such other
places as may be necessary in order to enable the community to resume
its normal pattern of life as soon as possible.
5191. Procedure for Declaration 
A. Request and declaration. All requests for a declaration by the Presi-
dent that an emergency exists shall be made by the Governor of the af-
fected State. Such a request shall be based on a ﬁnding that the situation
is of such severity and magnitude that effective response is beyond the
capabilities of the State and the affected local governments and that
Federal assistance is necessary. As a part of such request, and as a pre-
requisite to emergency assistance under this Act, the Governor shall
take appropriate action under State law and direct execution of the
State’s emergency plan. The Governor shall furnish information de-
scribing the State and local efforts and resources which have been or
will be used to alleviate the emergency, and will deﬁne the type and ex-
tent of Federal aid required. Based upon such Governor’s request, the
President may declare that an emergency exists.
B. Certain emergencies involving Federal primary responsibility.
The President may exercise any authority vested in him by section 502
or section 503 [42 U.S.C. section 5192 or section 5193] with respect to an
emergency when he determines that an emergency exists for which the
primary responsibility for response rests with the United States because
the emergency involves a subject area for which, under the Constitution
or laws of the United States, the United States exercises exclusive or
preeminent responsibility and authority. In determining whether or not
such an emergency exists, the President shall consult the Governor of
any affected State, if practicable. The President’s determination may be
made without regard to subsection (a).
5192. Federal Emergency Assistance 
A. Speciﬁed in any emergency, the President may—
1. Direct any Federal agency, with or without reimbursement, to
utilize its authorities and the resources granted to it under Federal law
164
Data and Documents

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
(including personnel, equipment, supplies, facilities, and managerial,
technical and advisory services) in support of State and local emer-
gency assistance efforts to save lives, protect property and public health
and safety, and lessen or avert the threat of a catastrophe;
2. Coordinate all disaster relief assistance (including voluntary as-
sistance) provided by Federal agencies, private organizations, and State
and local governments;
3. Provide technical and advisory assistance to affected State and
local governments for—
A. The performance of essential community services;
B. Issuance of warnings of risks or hazards;
C. Public health and safety information, including dissemination
of such information;
D. Provision of health and safety measures; and
E. Management, control, and reduction of immediate threats to
public health and safety;
4. Provide emergency assistance through Federal agencies;
5. Remove debris in accordance with the terms and conditions of
section 407 [42 U.S.C. section 5173];
6. Provide assistance in accordance with section 408 [42 U.S.C.
section 5174]; and [(Pub.L. 106–390, section 206(b), October 30, 2000)]
7. Assist State and local governments in the distribution of medi-
cine, food, and other consumable supplies, and emergency assistance.
B. General. Whenever the Federal assistance provided under sub-
section (a) with respect to an emergency is inadequate, the President
may also provide assistance with respect to efforts to save lives, protect
property and public health and safety, and lessen or avert the threat of a
catastrophe.
5193. Amount of Assistance 
A. Federal share. The Federal share for assistance provided under this
title [42 U.S.C. sections 5191 et seq.] shall be equal to not less than 75
percent of the eligible costs;
B. Limit on amount of assistance;
1. In general, except as provided in paragraph (2), total assistance
provided under this title [42 U.S.C. sections 5191 et seq.] for a single
emergency shall not exceed $5,000,000.
2. Additional assistance. The limitation described in paragraph (1)
may be exceeded when the President determines that—
A. Continued emergency assistance is immediately required;
B. There is a continuing and immediate risk to lives, property, pub-
lic health or safety; and
C. Necessary assistance will not otherwise be provided on a timely
basis.
Robert T. Stafford Relief and Emergency Assistance Act of 1988
165

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
3. Report. Whenever the limitation described in paragraph (1) is
exceeded, the President shall report to the Congress on the nature and
extent of emergency assistance requirements and shall propose addi-
tional legislation if necessary.
Homeland Security Act of 2002
As codiﬁed in Title 6 United States Code, Chapter 1 (selected excerpts)
Title V—Emergency Preparedness and
Response
Sec. 501. Under Secretary for Emergency Preparedness and Response
There shall be in the Department a Directorate of Emergency Prepared-
ness and Response headed by an Under Secretary for Emergency Pre-
paredness and Response.
Sec. 502. Responsibilities
The Secretary, acting through the Under Secretary for Emergency Pre-
paredness and Response, shall include—
(1) Helping to ensure the effectiveness of emergency response
providers to terrorist attacks, major disasters, and other emergencies;
(2) With respect to the Nuclear Incident Response Team (regard-
less of whether it is operating as an organizational unit of the Depart-
ment pursuant to this title)—
(A) Establishing standards and certifying when those standards
have been met;
(B) Conducting joint and other exercises and training and evaluat-
ing performance; and
(C) Providing funds to the Department of Energy and the Environ-
mental Protection Agency, as appropriate, for homeland security plan-
ning, exercises and training, and equipment;
(3) Providing the Federal Government’s response to terrorist at-
tacks and major disasters, including—
(A) Managing such response;
(B) Directing the Domestic Emergency Support Team, the Strategic
National Stockpile, the National Disaster Medical System, and (when
operating as an organizational unit of the Department pursuant to this
title) the Nuclear Incident Response Team;
(C) Overseeing the Metropolitan Medical Response System; and
(D) Coordinating other Federal response resources in the event of
a terrorist attack or major disaster;
166
Data and Documents

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
(4) Aiding the recovery from terrorist attacks and major disasters;
(5) Building a comprehensive national incident management sys-
tem with Federal, State, and local government personnel, agencies, and
authorities, to respond to such attacks and disasters;
(6) Consolidating existing Federal Government emergency re-
sponse plans into a single, coordinated national response plan; and
(7) Developing comprehensive programs for developing interoper-
ative communications technology, and helping to ensure that emer-
gency response providers acquire such technology.
Sec. 503. Functions Transferred
In accordance with title XV, there shall be transferred to the Secretary
the functions, personnel, assets, and liabilities of the following entities:
(1) The Federal Emergency Management Agency, including the
functions of the Director of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency relating thereto;
(2) The Integrated Hazard Information System of the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, which shall be renamed
‘FIRESAT’;
(3) The National Domestic Preparedness Ofﬁce of the Federal Bu-
reau of Investigation, including the functions of the Attorney General
relating thereto;
(4) The Domestic Emergency Support Teams of the Department of
Justice, including the functions of the Attorney General relating thereto;
(5) The Ofﬁce of Emergency Preparedness, the National Disaster
Medical System, and the Metropolitan Medical Response System of the
Department of Health and Human Services, including the functions of
the Secretary of Health and Human Services and the Assistant Secretary
for Public Health Emergency Preparedness relating thereto;
(6) The Strategic National Stockpile of the Department of Health
and Human Services, including the functions of the Secretary of Health
and Human Services relating thereto.
Sec. 504. Nuclear Incident Response
(a) IN GENERAL—At the direction of the Secretary (in connection with
an actual or threatened terrorist attack, major disaster, or other emer-
gency in the United States), the Nuclear Incident Response Team shall
operate as an organizational unit of the Department. While so operat-
ing, the Nuclear Incident Response Team shall be subject to the direc-
tion, authority, and control of the Secretary.
(b) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION—Nothing in this title shall be
construed to limit the ordinary responsibility of the Secretary of Energy
and the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency for or-
ganizing, training, equipping, and utilizing their respective entities in
the Nuclear Incident Response Team, or (subject to the provisions of
Homeland Security Act of 2002
167

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
this title) from exercising direction, authority, and control over them
when they are not operating as a unit of the Department.
Sec. 505. Conduct of Certain Public Health-Related Activities
(a) IN GENERAL—With respect to all public health-related activities to
improve State, local, and hospital preparedness and response to chemi-
cal, biological, radiological, and nuclear and other emerging terrorist
threats carried out by the Department of Health and Human Services
(including the Public Health Service), the Secretary of Health and Hu-
man Services shall set priorities and preparedness goals and further de-
velop a coordinated strategy for such activities in collaboration with the
Secretary.
(b) EVALUATION OF PROGRESS—In carrying out subsection (a),
the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall collaborate with the
Secretary in developing speciﬁc benchmarks and outcome measure-
ments for evaluating progress toward achieving the priorities and goals
described in such subsection.
Sec. 506. Deﬁnition
In this title, the term ‘Nuclear Incident Response Team’ means a re-
source that includes—
(1) Those entities of the Department of Energy that perform nu-
clear or radiological emergency support functions (including accident
response, search response, advisory, and technical operations func-
tions), radiation exposure functions at the medical assistance facility
known as the Radiation Emergency Assistance Center/Training Site
(REAC/TS), radiological assistance functions, and related functions;
and
(2) Those entities of the Environmental Protection Agency that per-
form such support functions (including radiological emergency re-
sponse functions) and related functions.
Sec. 507. Role of Federal Emergency Management Agency
(a) IN GENERAL—The functions of the Federal Emergency Manage-
ment Agency include the following:
(1) All functions and authorities prescribed by the Robert T.
Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5121
et seq.).
(2) Carrying out its mission to reduce the loss of life and property
and protect the Nation from all hazards by leading and supporting the
Nation in a comprehensive, risk-based emergency management
program—
(A) of mitigation, by taking sustained actions to reduce or elimi-
nate long-term risk to people and property from hazards and their
effects;
168
Data and Documents

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
(B) of planning for building the emergency management profes-
sion to prepare effectively for, mitigate against, respond to, and recover
from any hazard;
(C) of response, by conducting emergency operations to save lives
and property through positioning emergency equipment and supplies,
through evacuating potential victims, through providing food, water,
shelter, and medical care to those in need, and through restoring critical
public services;
(D) of recovery, by rebuilding communities so individuals, busi-
nesses, and governments can function on their own, return to normal
life, and protect against future hazards; and
(E) of increased efﬁciencies, by coordinating efforts relating to mit-
igation, planning, response, and recovery.
(b) FEDERAL RESPONSE PLAN—
(1) ROLE OF FEMA—Notwithstanding any other provision of this
Act, the Federal Emergency Management Agency shall remain the lead
agency for the Federal Response Plan established under Executive Or-
der No. 12148 (44 Fed. Reg. 43239) and Executive Order No. 12656 (53
Fed. Reg. 47491).
(2) REVISION OF RESPONSE PLAN—Not later than 60 days after
the date of enactment of this Act, the Director of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency shall revise the Federal Response Plan to reﬂect
the establishment of and incorporate the Department.
Sec. 508. Use of National Private Sector Networks in Emergency
Response
To the maximum extent practicable, the Secretary shall use national pri-
vate sector networks and infrastructure for emergency response to
chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear, or explosive disasters, and
other major disasters.
Key Testimony before Congress
After the perceived ineffective and even bumbling response of the federal
government following the disaster that was Hurricane Katrina, many
state and local government ofﬁcials around the country, as well as mem-
bers of Congress, have called for signiﬁcant overhaul and reform at the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). Persistent attempts
through the Congressional hearing process have been made to ﬁx blame
for FEMA’s mishaps on the George W. Bush presidency and to lay the
groundwork for organizational restructuring. Presented below are ex-
cerpts of testimonies before Congress presented by R. David Paulison,
Key Testimony before Congress
169

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
FEMA director, and George W. Foresman, under-secretary for Prepared-
ness, U.S. Department of Homeland Security. Both testimonies were pre-
sented to Congress in early 2007. In their own ways, each speaks to the
FEMA reform movement that has gathered considerable steam since
Hurricane Katrina in 2005 and respond, in some instances, to criticisms
FEMA and the Department of Homeland Security perceived to be unjust.
They also address what FEMA is doing organizationally to comply with
the Post-Katrina Emergency Management Reform Act of 2006. Finally,
they address the major budget priorities of the federal government insofar
as emergency management and disaster planning are concerned.
Opening Statement of
R. David Paulison
Director, Federal Emergency Management Agency
Under Secretary for Federal Emergency Management
U.S. Department of Homeland Security
Testimony before the U.S. House of Representatives
Committee on Appropriations
Subcommittee on Homeland Security
Friday, March 9, 2007
[Author’s Note: Words appearing in bold so appear in the pub-
lished statements]
The FY2008 FEMA Budget: Building a New
FEMA
. . . Before I get into the details of the proposed budget, I want to make
clear FEMA’s role and responsibilities when disaster strikes because
there is a misconception among Americans as to what we can and are
statutorily authorized to do. After last month’s Florida tornados, one lo-
cal paper opined that FEMA should be on the ground within hours, not
days. This is simply not practical. FEMA will be there quickly, but it is
local and State ﬁrst responders who are—by deﬁnition—the “ﬁrst re-
sponders” and who will lead the immediate response efforts; not a Fed-
eral agency that does not and cannot have an ofﬁce in every city. This is
just one example of unrealistic or uninformed expectations encountered
in emergency management at the national level.
So what does FEMA do?
170
Data and Documents

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
I. FEMA’s Mission
FEMA’s mission is to help protect the nation from disasters. We help
America mitigate against, prepare for, respond to, and recover from all-
hazards disasters.
FEMA cannot and does not do this alone. The National Response
Plan (NRP) is the map to Federal, tribal, State and local activities before,
during and after a disaster. It is developed with the assistance of and
implemented in coordination with 26 Federal departments and agen-
cies as well as our tribal, State and local partners.
On the ground, our tribal, State and local partners are the ﬁrst re-
sponders in any disaster. To paraphrase former Speaker Tip O’Neil, “All
Disasters Are Local.” FEMA will bring in or arrange for additional re-
sources and staff to respond as appropriate and requested to assist in
the recovery. But we do not act alone. Individuals and our partners at
all levels of government must be part of the effort. Indeed, the National
Response Plan is built on the assumption that incidents should be man-
aged at the lowest possible geographic, organizational, and jurisdic-
tional level possible.
Each individual citizen and family has a role to play in their own
response.
In the past, senior DHS and FEMA leaders have, essentially, been
mocked for the regular emphasis we placed on telling people to prepare
themselves and their homes. We have repeatedly stressed the need to
have water, rations, battery powered radios and other emergency goods
on hand and to develop a family plan for evacuation. FEMA needs to
get back to this basic message. When roads are ﬂooded, bridges de-
stroyed and the environment is, frankly, dangerous, people need to re-
member the old Boy Scout motto: “Be Prepared.”
I will give you a personal example. I am from Florida and, not to
anyone’s surprise, hurricanes often hit near my home. So each year, be-
fore the season starts, my family and I put in a supply of water, canned
and packaged food, ﬂashlights, a radio, batteries and other essential
supplies so that if our area is again hit, we are prepared to survive until
services are restored. Except in extreme circumstances, such as when a
victim’s home has been completely destroyed, why do we often see
people get in line for food and drinking water? Like in the story of the
grasshopper and the ant, those who do not prepare for the hardship
ﬁnd themselves hoping the government or someone else will step up to
the plate and provide them with what they need when a little prepara-
tion could have left them better equipped to handle such a predictable
situation.
There will always be some who are physically or ﬁnancially un-
able to make these preparations—and this is where government must
move quickly to ﬁll the gap. However, most Americans need to be edu-
cated on the steps they can take to avoid relying on the government for
short term essentials.
Opening Statement of R. David Paulison
171

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Ladies and gentlemen, too many Americans still do not plan for
disaster.
According to a poll conducted for a major news magazine last
summer, only 16% of Americans say they are “personally ‘very well’
prepared should a natural disaster or public emergency strike their
community.” More than half said they had taken no preparations such
as those recommended by former Secretary Ridge and which my family
makes every year. Even those who lived through Katrina personally are
not learning all they could from their experience, with 24% saying they
are not prepared for another disaster. [Author’s note: This statistic
comes from a Time Magazine poll conducted by telephone between Au-
gust 9–10, 2006 among a national random sample of 1,003 adults, age 18
and older throughout America].
FEMA’s next responsibility is to provide support to ﬁrst respon-
ders, tribal, State and local ofﬁcials and individuals when a disaster
hits—not to replace them or to take on all responsibilities.
I am often amazed at the expectations some Americans have of
FEMA.
When I was in Florida on February 3 after the tornados struck, a
reporter asked me when FEMA would have staff on site to help rebuild
homes. This is not what Congress and the American people have tasked
us to do. FEMA staff does not travel the country rebuilding homes. We
are not in the construction business. We can sometimes supplement an
individual ﬁnancially when insurance, personal or State resources are
not sufﬁcient. It is critical to understand that FEMA’s role is to provide
a starting point for recovery.
In another example, a reporter asked when checks would arrive to
those in need. I noted, to her surprise, that only about 400 residents had
applied for help as of the third day after the disaster. We can only help
people that we know need help. Individuals must ask FEMA for ﬁnan-
cial assistance. We saw what happened when this policy was ignored
and funds were handed out during Katrina without demanding ade-
quate accountability—waste, fraud and abuse. As an aside, during the
response in Florida it took, on average, less than four days from the
time of the application before individuals received ﬁnancial support.
FEMA’s primary mission is to serve as the lead federal coordinator
for federal response efforts. The NRP serves as the planning mechanism
by which this occurs. FEMA’s coordination mission acknowledges
through the NRP that various Emergency Support Functions rely on the
leadership, collaboration and expertise of many federal partners. Rather
than operationally control federal responses, FEMA works to manage
the system by which this occurs.
FEMA has our work cut out for us in accomplishing our mission.
This budget is a big step in providing us with the tools needed to ac-
complish our mission and meet this challenge.
172
Data and Documents

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
As we consider the President’s budget in the light of FEMA’s mis-
sion, I would like to discuss with you the past, present and future of
FEMA and how this budget will help make us an agency that is better,
stronger, faster than before.
II. FEMA’s Past—Lessons Learned, Changes Made
It has often been said that “those who do not learn from the past are
doomed to repeat it.” FEMA has learned from the past and is prepared
to move forward.
Before Katrina and Rita, FEMA focused on preparing our own re-
sources to respond to a disaster. We did not focus on preparing commu-
nities to make plans and preparations before disasters strike nor on the
role of tribal, State and local governments afterwards. This was a mis-
take that will not be repeated.
The 2005 hurricane season was a wake-up call to FEMA and emer-
gency managers across the country. As President Bush said that Sep-
tember, “This government will learn the lessons of Hurricane Katrina.
We are going to review every action and make necessary changes so
that we are better prepared for any challenge of nature, or act of evil
men, that could threaten our people.”
Before Disaster Strikes
To begin with, FEMA is better focused on improving our training and
preparation before an event.
In recent years we have developed and expanded our cadre of pol-
icy experts who are an integral part of planning and preparedness be-
fore a disaster strikes. We will discuss this greater focus on
preparedness when we look at FEMA’s present and future. But in addi-
tion to bringing in new people in recent years to improve our policies,
we have already implemented changes in certain programs that high-
light this new awareness.
One example of recent activity that will leave us better prepared
for the next disaster is the Pre-Disaster Mitigation Grant Program. In
FY 2006 we distributed more than $108 million in FY 2003 through FY
2006 funds through this program to tribal, State, territorial and local
governments for implementing cost-effective mitigation planning and
projects before disasters occur. These nationally competitive grants sup-
port a range of activities that will reduce the overall risk to people and
property while also reducing reliance on future Federal funding.
We have also made signiﬁcant reforms that respond to speciﬁc
challenges that arose during Katrina.
Communications
The ﬁrst area needing immediate attention was the breakdown in
communications that occurred in 2005, both between the Federal
Opening Statement of R. David Paulison
173

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
government and our partners at the State and local levels, as well as be-
tween Federal agencies. Information sharing was probably the single
largest point of failure during Katrina.
But over the past two years we have taken major steps to make
sure this breakdown does not happen again.
In 2006, we completed the upgrades and renovations needed to
create a state-of-the-art National Response Coordination Center. This
gives us a central location where all Federal agencies meet during a dis-
aster to coordinate our response under the NRP. During Katrina, we not
only had a failure in our communications with people in the ﬁeld—a
contact that was needed for us to have situational awareness of what
was happening on the ground—but we also failed to coordinate with
our partners across the Federal government. This center has a seat at
the table for each of the 26 agencies that are part of the NRP as well as
secure links to key ofﬁces around the country and the capability to
bring State and local ofﬁcials into the conversation. I invite you to visit
the center, which is here in the Capitol area, and see ﬁrst-hand the pri-
ority we have placed on cooperation and communication.
In 2006, FEMA’s Ofﬁce of National Security focused on the multi-
year task of building an Integrated Public Alert and Warning System
(IPAWS). Last year we successfully completed the Digital Emergency
Alert System pilot and worked with the Association of Public Televi-
sion Stations deploying the system to all PBS afﬁliates around the coun-
try. In addition, FEMA helped stand up two new Emergency Alert
System Primary Entry Point radio stations—located in Mississippi and
Alabama—and 15 hurricane region stations were provided with satel-
lite links to improve their communications during disasters. When this
project is completed over the next ﬁve years, it will greatly enhance our
nation’s emergency communications capabilities.
We have made our communications and outreach to tribal, State
and local ofﬁcials a high priority of our new leadership. Our expanded
regions will build strong ties on the ground. I am committed to reach-
ing out when an event appears imminent or as soon as it strikes.
Let me highlight two examples of how this focus on better com-
munications is already paying off.
During the 2006 hurricane season, we were fortunate to have a dry
run of our improved system when Hurricane Ernesto threatened our
coast. I was in touch with each governor and emergency manager in at-
risk States as it progressed, the National Hurricane Center was in-
cluded in these discussions, and we were in constant contact and ready
to act had Ernesto made landfall. Every State and local ofﬁcial I have
spoken with since then has expressed their gratitude for this line of
communication. In addition we had ofﬁcials from the United States
Northern Command, known as NORTHCOM, from the Department of
174
Data and Documents

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
the Defense involved in this process—the ﬁrst time such ofﬁcers have
been part of such calls.
More recently, following the Florida tornados that struck in Febru-
ary, I was frequently on the phone with Governor Crist and other
Florida ofﬁcials—addressing their concerns and advising them of our
plans. The day after the tornados hit, I was personally on the scene to
make sure we were responding to local needs and to ensure there were
no miscommunications with our State and local partners.
Logistics
A second area of weakness identiﬁed in 2005 that we have focused on
in recent years is logistics.
We need to have our logistics ready to go. Local distribution is a
State and local responsibility. But we need to know where supplies are
and be able to deliver them to the right place, at the right time, and in
the right quantity when our assistance is requested.
In 2006, FEMA dramatically increased the nation’s stockpiles of re-
lief supplies. Today we have four times the emergency meals and ice,
and two and a half times the amount of water that were available in
2005. We can supply 1 million people for at least one week.
But this stockpile is of little use if we cannot deliver it when and
where it is needed. We have improved communications with our dri-
vers and invested in greater technology for tracking their location. In
2006, FEMA implemented the ﬁrst phase of the Total Asset Visibility
program in two regions to provide enhanced visibility, awareness and
accountability over disaster relief supplies and resources. This program
assists in both resource ﬂow and supply chain management.
Technology could not have done this by itself, of course. We have
focused on improved supply chain management and improved prepara-
tions. Today we have better management systems involving shorter sup-
ply lines and a deeper ability to use the supplies we have prepositioned.
We have a better understanding of what will be needed in different types
of emergencies and are prepared to make better use of the supplies in
our regional depots. We have pre-established contracts to supplement
our needs, so that paperwork does not delay aid from arriving when
needed. In short, we have taken a page from the book of our nation’s
best business practices and are truly working smarter and harder.
This new system works. Under the program we placed approxi-
mately 20,000 GPS units in our trucks and with our supplies. With im-
proved communications and management we were able to locate
needed supplies and get them moving quicker. When I was in Florida
following the tornados, I was able to log on to a lap-top in my car and
see in real time the supplies moving into the State and see when they
would arrive. This was information that could then be immediately
Opening Statement of R. David Paulison
175

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
shared with State and local ofﬁcials who were determining their own
needs and resources and could then plan for the arrival and distribu-
tion of these supplies.
Continuity of Operations (COOP)
Another key lesson learned from Katrina, Rita and Wilma was that the
Federal, State, local, and tribal governments must be ready to provide
essential functions and services to the citizens during times of crisis.
FEMA plays a central role in the Federal government’s planning
and preparation for ensuring the continuity of government operations
during a national disaster.
In 2006, FEMA’s Ofﬁce of National Security Coordination conducted
“Forward Challenge 06,” the largest full-scale interagency COOP exercise
in history. “Forward Challenge 06” involved over 50 departments and
agencies deploying to alternate sites for a 30-hour period. In addition, 32
COOP tabletop exercises were conducted, seven of which were designed
to assist Federal COOP program managers with preparing for a pan-
demic inﬂuenza environment. FEMA delivered over 80 COOP manager’s
train-the-trainers courses, resulting in over 2,403 individuals trained and
certiﬁed and reaching all 30 major departments and agencies as well as
551 smaller Federal, State, local and tribal organizations.
Reducing Waste, Fraud and Abuse
FEMA recognized that in the past we sometimes focused on getting the
aid out quickly and sometimes did not include sufﬁcient accountability
to the distribution of funds. This has changed.
Allowing a Government Accounting Ofﬁce report and our own in-
ternal review of the problems encountered post-Katrina and Rita,
FEMA has worked to proactively implement more stringent controls
concerning fraud and abuse. These reforms include:
–Deployment in October 2005 of a new Internet registration appli-
cation that disallows any duplicate registrations;
–Adding identity prooﬁng to the call center registration applica-
tion in February 2006 so that all Individual and Households Program
(IHP) registrations are subjected to the same stringent criteria that in-
cludes veriﬁcation of social security numbers;
–Amending automated scripts to ensure no scripted payments are
sent to applicants who fail identity prooﬁng;
–Sending all applications taken on the call center application from
August 2005 until February 2006 to FEMA’s data contractor for identity
prooﬁng to identify any potentially fraudulent applications;
–Data-marking any applications in FEMA’s database that fail iden-
tity prooﬁng so they may be ﬂagged for review and denied automated
payment;
176
Data and Documents

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
–Real-time interaction between the FEMA Service Representative
and the applicant during registration to ensure that the data entered
that resulted in a failed identity check is correct before accepting the ap-
plication;
–Adding veriﬁcation of Occupancy and Ownership with a data
contractor to the registration process for every disaster victim starting
in June 2006. This will allow FEMA to ensure that an applicant lives at
the address that they claimed before automating any payments to that
address;
–Working with FEMA’s data contractor to ﬂag any addresses that
are not residential addresses in order to prevent automated payments
without an on-site inspection veriﬁcation of address and residency;
–Flagging at risk social security numbers to identify potential
fraud;
–Engaging with the Social Security Administration to determine
whether or not they can add value to FEMA’s existing identity veriﬁca-
tion process; and
–Developing state of the art software that may maintain data on
applicants in mobile homes and communicate real-time data to case-
workers and the auto-determination system in order to prevent poten-
tial overpayment.
In addition to the above, FEMA is continuing to identify and pro-
cess recoupment of improper payments and has improved our system
to make it much more resistant to future fraud by the unscrupulous
few, while being careful not to create an undue burden on the deserving
victims of disasters. Through the challenges presented from Hurricanes
Katrina and Rita, FEMA has learned how to better respond to such cata-
strophic disasters. Should such an event occur again, the lessons
learned will enable us to say with more conﬁdence that we are doing all
we can under our authorities to serve disaster victims in their greatest
time of need, while ensuring the conﬁdence of the American taxpayers
of FEMA’s ﬁscal integrity.
Improved planning and preparations, stronger communications,
better management of logistics, revised COOP plans and a renewed fo-
cus on reducing fraud and abuse are just some of the key accomplish-
ments and adjustments that we have made in response to the lessons
learned from Katrina.
III. Today and Tomorrow: A “New FEMA”
In the military, they often say you should not prepare to ﬁght the last
war. You need to look at new ideas before a situation arises. Similarly,
we cannot allow our preparations to only focus on events in the past.
Our actions must lean forward and we must be on the cutting edge of
emergency preparedness.
Opening Statement of R. David Paulison
177

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Today
In recent months we have concentrated on improvements in a few key
areas:
First, we have improved our disaster operations, including opera-
tional planning, hazard mitigation, and logistics. As I have already
mentioned, we saw these work in 2006 and earlier this year.
Next, we have improved disaster assistance, including case man-
agement and customer service to disaster victims. Again, our response
in Florida shows our improvements in this area as we had mobile units
that could register victims on the scene within days. In fact, it took less
than 48 hours to make funds available to our ﬁrst applicant for aid.
Finally, we have put renewed emphasis on our business processes,
including how we execute basic operations such as ﬁnancial manage-
ment, procurement, acquisition, IT, and human resources. As we dis-
cuss the budget, you will see that the President has also recognized the
importance of a strong organizational base that the rest of the agency
can rely on when they are busy responding to external events.
In conjunction with these reforms, we have also taken larger, orga-
nizational steps to prepare this organization for the future.
Earlier this year DHS and FEMA announced a reorganization that
reﬂects the mandate established by Congress in last fall’s Post-Katrina
Emergency Management Reform Act of 2006.
I am pleased to say that we did not attempt to simply meet the re-
quirements you set forth, but instead took this opportunity to reevalu-
ate the ofﬁces under FEMA and DHS, and in particular the
Preparedness Directorate. Together we developed a comprehensive re-
organization that will both provide FEMA with a stronger structure and
better align our functions with other Federal agencies.
The Post-Katrina Emergency Management Reform Act of 2006
transfers, with the exception of certain ofﬁces listed in the Act, func-
tions of the Preparedness Directorate to the new FEMA. This transfer
includes:
–The United States Fire Administration (USFA)
–The Ofﬁce of Grants and Training (G&T)
–The Chemical Stockpile Emergency Preparedness Program
(CSEPP)
–The Radiological Emergency Preparedness Program (REPP)
–The Ofﬁce of National Capital Region Coordination (NCRC)
As part of the reorganization we will create a new Directorate of
National Preparedness within FEMA. This division will include exist-
ing FEMA programs and several legacy Preparedness Directorate pro-
grams. It will focus on policy, contingency planning, exercise
coordination and evaluation, emergency management training and haz-
ard mitigation with respect to the CSEPP and REPP. National Prepared-
ness will oversee two divisions: Readiness, Prevention and Planning
178
Data and Documents

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
(RPP), and the National Integration Center (NIC). Readiness, Preven-
tion and Planning will be the central ofﬁce within FEMA handling pre-
paredness policy and planning functions. The National Integration
Center will maintain the National Incident Management System
(NIMS), the NRP, and will coordinate activities with the USFA.
Also under this new organization, the Ofﬁce of Grants and Train-
ing will be moved to the new FEMA and become part of the new Pre-
paredness Directorate. The Training and Systems Support Divisions of
the Ofﬁce of Grants and Training will be transferred to the NIC. The
Ofﬁce of the Citizen Corps within the Ofﬁce of Grants and Training
will be transferred into the FEMA Ofﬁce of Readiness, Prevention and
Planning.
Additional headquarters positions created at FEMA by the Post-
Katrina Act include a Disability Coordinator, residing in the FEMA Of-
ﬁce of Equal Rights, a Small State and Rural Advocate, a Law
Enforcement Advisor to the Administrator and a National Advisory
Council.
Tomorrow
This new organization, when combined with the changes made in the
wake of Hurricane Katrina, will result in a “New FEMA” that is better,
stronger, faster and more nimble. With these immediate reforms and
the reorganization already under way, my senior team and I have de-
veloped a vision for this “New FEMA” that will set us on the path to
becoming the agency that America expects and deserves.
To regain the trust and conﬁdence of the American people, we will
transform FEMA into the nation’s preeminent emergency management
agency. To do this, we must:
Strengthen core capabilities, competencies and capacities. Fostering a
national emergency management system and implementing a cohesive
national preparedness system must begin by strengthening the founda-
tional building blocks of a weakened but venerable agency. The Nation
needs a strong FEMA; but that cannot be achieved without purposeful
new investments.
Build strong Regions. The Region is the essential ﬁeld echelon of
FEMA that engages most directly with State partners and disaster vic-
tims to deliver frontline services. It is the Region that can build and
nurture State and local capabilities across the spectrum of prepared-
ness, response, recovery and mitigation. And it is the Region that will
lead the Federal response to incidents across the spectrum of all-haz-
ards events. The New FEMA will rely on strong Regions to regain the
trust and conﬁdence of Governors, mayors, leaders in the private sector
and the citizens of our homeland.
Strengthen our partnership with States. Response to disasters and
emergencies is primarily a State and local effort. To build and support
Opening Statement of R. David Paulison
179

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
an effective National system of emergency management, FEMA must
have effective partnerships with State and local governments.
Professionalize the national emergency management system. The Na-
tion’s ability to marshal an effective response to disasters requires the
right people with the right skills. We will work with our partners to
build a nationwide system of trained and certiﬁed experts skilled in all
hazards emergency management—starting right here in FEMA.
Focusing on core capabilities and the partnerships and people that
comprise the Nation’s preparedness and emergency management sys-
tem will enable us to:
Marshal an effective national response. We will respond more quickly
and effectively, bringing the right people and resources from across
Federal departments and agencies to bear when and where they are
needed.
Deliver service of value to the public. We will provide timely, compas-
sionate and less bureaucratic disaster assistance to hasten the recovery
of individuals and communities while minimizing the opportunity for
waste, fraud and abuse.
Reduce vulnerability to life and property. We will work with our part-
ners to prepare, plan, and mitigate before disaster strikes, and leverage
those opportunities to reduce risk and the actual loss of life and prop-
erty. After a disaster, we will work with our state and local partners to
rebuild stronger based on proven mitigation measures.
Instill public conﬁdence. FEMA will demonstrate mission effective-
ness and efﬁciency, in proper balance, to regain the trust, faith and con-
ﬁdence of the American public. Organizationally, no asset should be
more prized, or more dear when lost, than the conﬁdence of the public
we serve. We will work with our many partners to build an Agency the
Nation can once again look to with pride.
Therefore, with keen focus and discipline, we will build FEMA’s
operational core competencies:
1. Incident Management
2. Operational Planning
3. Disaster Logistics
4. Emergency Communications
5. Service to Disaster Victims
6. Continuity Programs
7. Public Disaster Communications
8. Integrated Preparedness
9. Hazard Mitigation
These core competencies must be grounded in an ethos that em-
ploys a business approach to achieving desired results. This approach
will enable wise decisions backed by ﬁnance, budget, human resource
and information systems support capabilities designed and scaled to
180
Data and Documents

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
enhance FEMA’s mission success. We recognize how far we have to go
to truly achieve this Business Approach to Achieving Desired Results,
but we will not shrink from the work it will require. To attain an analyt-
ical and requirements based approach to managing the business of the
Agency, we will:
Develop integrated data systems that leverage proven hardware,
software and middle ware to meet the needs of FEMA’s important mis-
sion and help give the Agency’s management and line staff the tools
they need to get the job done and do it well.
Establish program analysis and project management capabilities at
decision points of the Agency, and institutionalize a results oriented, re-
turn-on-investment management culture.
Build an efﬁcient acquisition process that adheres to policies,
proven standards, systems and procedures, supported by a balanced
workload distribution, and instills proﬁcient contract management as a
key skill-set within the Agency. This is crucial to our ability to accom-
plish as much pre-event procurement as possible, ensuring that when
an event occurs all that remains is the order to activate the assets and
resources we need.
Reform FEMA’s major management and administrative activities,
including human capital, ﬁnance and budget, space management, per-
sonal property management, planning, recruitment and hiring.
Lastly, to achieve enduring success as the Nation’s Preeminent
Emergency Management Agency, we must Shape the Workforce that
will take FEMA to a new level of competency and professionalism. To
do this we must assess and transform the Agency’s over reliance on
contractors and reserve workforce in order to strengthen the Agency’s
force structure, achieve the right mix of skills and know-how, and strike
the right balance of permanent, reservist and temporary personnel.
Incorporating Preparedness into the New FEMA
FEMA is focused on incorporating the concept of preparedness into all
its programs and making the protection and preparedness missions an
integral part of a new, coherent Agency organization in support of a
National Preparedness System. We do not intend to simply attach the
preparedness assets to the existing FEMA structure and conduct busi-
ness as usual plus some additional preparedness activities. Given the
desire to take advantage of this opportunity to develop a whole new or-
ganizational approach, we have established an interagency Senior
Leadership Team to provide vision and direction to the incorporation of
FEMA and preparedness assets and functions into the “New FEMA,”
and have set up a number of interagency functional teams to address
the major transition management issues. We are also reaching out for
consultation and collaboration to other DHS components; the Federal
interagency community; Congress; the White House; key emergency
Opening Statement of R. David Paulison
181

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
management, law enforcement and preparedness organizations; the
policy community; and State, local and private sector leaders. We antic-
ipate completing the administrative actions needed to integrate FEMA
and preparedness organizationally by March 31, 2007, while full inte-
gration of FEMA and preparedness functions will be an ongoing effort
over the months following. Our approach to the creation of the “New
FEMA” is designed to:
–Incorporate lessons learned and best practices into the new orga-
nization with a focus on core competencies to build a strong foundation
for maximum effectiveness from the start;
–Ensure a uniﬁed approach to the incorporation of protection, pre-
paredness, response, recovery and mitigation principles in foundational
doctrines and documents such as the NRP, NIMS, the National Pre-
paredness Goal, and the Target Capabilities List.
–Develop strong partnerships with other DHS components, the
Federal interagency community, and State, local and private sector
leaders in support of a comprehensive approach to protection, pre-
paredness, response, recovery and mitigation efforts incorporating per-
formance-based operating principles.
–Emphasize increased ability to address terrorist and other man-
made acts as well as natural disasters—a risk-based all-hazards ap-
proach.
–Strengthen the culture of customer service, reinforced by best in
class business practices for internal and external delivery of service.
–Support development of a more robust national emergency man-
agement system and an expanded and coordinated “Culture of Pre-
paredness” building on the efforts of U/S Foresman and helping the
Nation address the multitude of challenges we face.
–Build strong regions as the essential ﬁeld component that en-
gages most directly with State and local partners and disaster victims to
both increase State and local capabilities and respond to incidents when
they occur.
The President is dedicated to providing FEMA with the re-
sources to make this vision a reality.
IV. A New and Improved Budget for a New and Improved FEMA
An Overview
This is truly a historic budget proposal that will make it possible to ful-
ﬁll the mission that the President, Congress and the American people
have called upon FEMA to perform.
It is an unprecedented budget. FEMA has never had this level of
support, authority or funding to truly expand and professionalize
FEMA’s workforce. With the resources in this budget we will build a
182
Data and Documents

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
world class organization that can respond to disasters without day-to-
day operations suffering as a result.
To start, the Operations, Planning and Support budget for FEMA
will increase by nearly $141.6 million to $667.6 million. This is nearly
a 27% increase in FEMA’s base operating budget over FY07 levels.
This is the funding that makes New FEMA possible.
The reorganization, which this budget does account for, transfers
the National Disaster Medical System out of FEMA and into the De-
partment of Health and Human Services, while bringing new ofﬁces
into the FEMA organization. FEMA’s budget also includes ﬂood insur-
ance and other programs. Considering these changes, the overall bud-
get for operations and programs will increase $579 million to over
$5.8 billion—an increase of 11%.
This amount does not include the various grant programs admin-
istered, co-administered or coordinated by the Ofﬁce of Grants and
Training in conjunction with other Federal agencies. Some of these
grants are reduced while others are increased. When all such programs
are included, and increases and decreases put together, FEMA will
have budget authority over more than $9 billion—an increase of $329
million or nearly 4%.
Speciﬁc Programs Beneﬁt From Increased Funding
The budget includes an increase of $100 million for FEMA’s Vision Ini-
tiatives, including stafﬁng increases, new technologies, and targeted in-
vestment in equipment and supplies that will support emergency
management efforts across preparedness, mitigation, protection, re-
sponse, and recovery.
As part of the $100 million increase for the Vision Initiative, over
$21 million in additional funding will be allocated for Incident Manage-
ment. FEMA’s ability to marshal an effective response to disasters must
be based on a professional, national network of emergency managers
skilled in incident management. FEMA will work with our State and as-
sociation partners to establish common standards for training and certi-
ﬁcation of the nation’s emergency management personnel and provide
better support to State and local emergency management organizations.
In addition to being a facilitator and standard-bearer for the profession
of emergency management, FEMA will become a leader and model of
effective implementation of incident management skills and practices.
The requested funding will be used to expand and strengthen profes-
sional emergency management certiﬁcation, education, training, and
career development; actively administer national response doctrine;
strengthen FEMA’s incident management capability to ensure 24/7 op-
erational awareness and strengthen FEMA’s regional operations and
partnerships; and establish National Rapid Support and Response
Opening Statement of R. David Paulison
183

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Team and Regional Rapid Support and Response Teams comprised of
full-time support and response experts on 24/7 alert status.
Also under the Vision Initiative is nearly $6 million in new fund-
ing for Operational Planning. When I became Director of FEMA I was
shocked to learn that we had only one full-time and one-part time em-
ployee working on operational plans at FEMA. To rectify this immedi-
ate deﬁciency, FEMA asked for and received help from DHS and other
partners who temporarily assisted us in this area. Today we propose to
take up this responsibility ourselves. FEMA Operational Planners will
assist State and local jurisdictions in developing speciﬁc operational
plans that will guide their response activities. The funding requested
will support FEMA’s ability to work with States through its ten regional
ofﬁces to ensure the development of coordinated and integrated State-
Federal operational plans and operational planning capabilities. These
planning efforts will include response and recovery elements that will
be integrated with State hazard mitigation plans. These jointly devel-
oped plans will form the basis for conducting joint Federal-State train-
ing and exercises, thus promoting a more robust, multi-level capability
to quickly respond to notice or no-notice events. As part of this effort,
FEMA will work at all levels to promote training in and the develop-
ment of operational planning capability at State and local levels. FEMA
will also engage with Federal, regional, and State partners to build inci-
dent speciﬁc catastrophic plans.
I have discussed the lessons learned from Katrina about logistics
and our initial corrections to address this issue. The Vision Initiative
plan includes over $6 million in new funding for Disaster Logistics. To
fully meet its dual responsibilities as both national coordinator and di-
rect provider of assets, teams, commodities, and other Federal capabili-
ties, FEMA must adopt new approaches to disaster logistics
management that will require an innovative balance of manpower,
processes, strategic partnerships, and technology. The funding re-
quested will build this Disaster Logistics competency, enabling FEMA
to establish a Logistics Directorate, led by a senior team of experienced
logisticians with the ability to access and coordinate strategic partner-
ships with both the Department of Defense and the private sector.
These partnerships will provide integrated logistics solutions that focus
on the full, end-to-end supply chain to ensure efﬁcient and effective
management of the ﬂow of assets, teams, equipment, and supplies to
meet disaster requirements. FEMA will continue implementation and
enhancements of a 21st century system to plan, identify, and track as-
sets—from mobilization, to arrival, demobilization, and departure.
As previously noted, Communications was a major problem dur-
ing Katrina that we have worked to correct. The Vision Initiative in-
cludes $12.4 million for Emergency Communications. FEMA will serve
as the integrated operational link and a major advocate for disaster
184
Data and Documents

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
emergency communications at the national level, working closely with
the DHS Ofﬁce of Emergency Communications and the State and local
ﬁrst responder community. The requested funding will enhance
FEMA’s ability to engage across the Federal level and with States and
other partners to establish and facilitate consistent disaster emergency
communications standards including establishing a template of essen-
tial emergency communications capabilities. FEMA will also build its
capability to provide emergency communications services before, dur-
ing, and immediately after an event, including supporting State ofﬁces
of emergency communications and ensuring the integrity of the ﬁrst re-
sponder network.
On top of this, nearly $1 million will be set aside for Public Disaster
Communications. FEMA will assume a leadership position as coordina-
tor of all hazards messaging to the American public during peacetime
and disasters, leading the national campaign for greater personal and
community preparedness. Speciﬁcally, the funding requested will sup-
port FEMA’s efforts to strengthen interagency incident communications
systems and capabilities to ensure coordinated public information ef-
forts across all hazards. By working one-on-one with State, local, and
major urban area jurisdictions to build knowledge and capability for
public information efforts and conducting planning, training, and exer-
cises to ensure integrated crisis communication strategies and messag-
ing FEMA will facilitate public discourse, outreach, and adoption of a
national culture of personal preparedness and mitigation that will have
a direct impact on reducing the loss of life and property. Through effec-
tive public communications and outreach programs, FEMA will ensure
the general public is provided with and has access to vital disaster pre-
paredness and planning information including those with special needs
and multilingual and multicultural populations. To improve communi-
cations directly with the States as they improve their preparedness with
Federal assistance, we will allocate more than $1.26 million to create Re-
gional Grant Advocates. The Region is the essential ﬁeld echelon of
FEMA that engages most directly with State partners for all FEMA ser-
vices to include grants guidance and technical assistance. The requested
funding will support regional grant advocates for each State who will
provide direct day-to-day interaction and support to the States on grant
issues. Grant Advocates will facilitate the provision of technical assis-
tance closer to the client, strengthen our partnership with States and Ur-
ban Area Security Initiative (UASI)—designated cities, and provide
greater grant accountability. By placing dedicated grant advocates
within each regional ofﬁce, FEMA will build and nurture State and local
capabilities across the spectrum of preparedness, response, recovery, and
mitigation utilizing the preparedness grant programs.
Improved customer service to the public is also a critical part of
New FEMA. An additional $4.4 million will be allocated to service
Opening Statement of R. David Paulison
185

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
disaster victims. Every disaster victim and affected community should
expect FEMA to provide rapid, compassionate, and readily accessible
disaster assistance that is easily understandable and consistently ap-
plied for individuals and across States and regions from one disaster to
another. Through the requested funding, FEMA will improve the Indi-
vidual Assistance (IA) and Public Assistance (PA) programs through
the application of simpliﬁed and transparent processes, advanced tech-
nologies, and stronger and more interactive relationships with States,
other government agencies, the private sector, and other providers of
assistance. FEMA will dramatically improve its ability to deliver
speedy, situation-appropriate, and accurately targeted disaster assis-
tance to individuals, including those with disabilities or limited English
proﬁciency, and communities through its IA and PA programs. Speciﬁc
efforts will include making FEMA assistance programs easier to under-
stand, improving the oversight of IA and PA programs to reduce waste,
fraud, and abuse, maintaining a national debris removal registry, and
improving national and international donations management.
While we have made great strides in improving our COOP pro-
gram, the initiative includes more than $25.6 million for additional
Continuity Programs. As the lead agency for the nation’s continuity
programs, FEMA must direct, guide, and assist all Executive Branch
Departments and Agencies and their 300,000+ ofﬁces nationwide; pro-
vide guidance to the Legislative and Judicial Branches of Government,
all 50 States, the territories, tribes, and local jurisdictions; and coordi-
nate continuity program response and recovery assistance to all Federal
Executive Branch and other government jurisdictions during major
emergencies and disasters. The funding requested will allow FEMA to
carry out these authorities, and enable FEMA to maintain an opera-
tional readiness posture and program capability that can respond to
any national security event, and execute robust test, training, and exer-
cise programs. FEMA will assess Executive Branch continuity programs
to ensure enduring Constitutional government and continuity of essen-
tial Federal Executive Branch operations, and will fulﬁll requirements
of Executive Order 13407 in establishing an Integrated Public Alert and
Warning System (IPAWS) that incorporates new and emerging tech-
nologies and maintaining a dependable and effective means of commu-
nicating with the public through the Emergency Alert System (EAS).
The Vision Initiative also recognizes that while we can’t always
avoid disasters, we can reduce the cost and impact they have through
more effective mitigation. We will use $1.2 million of these funds for
Hazard Mitigation, the most proactive and successful method for re-
ducing the physical, ﬁnancial, and emotional losses caused by disasters.
FEMA’s hazard mitigation efforts consist of three objectives: risk analy-
sis, risk reduction, and ﬂood insurance. These objectives work in
186
Data and Documents

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
tandem in enabling the Nation’s at-risk population to reap the rewards
of good hazard mitigation practices:
–Creation of safer communities—reducing loss of life and
property;
–Recovering more rapidly from ﬂoods and other disasters; and
–Reducing the ﬁnancial impact on States, local and tribal commu-
nities, and the national treasury.
Speciﬁcally, the requested funding will allow FEMA to continue its
coastal mapping activity to improve the accuracy of ﬂood hazard maps;
provide data to State and local ofﬁcials for evacuation planning; sup-
port efforts to address vulnerabilities associated with the Nation’s at-
risk dams; and provide technical assistance for conducting risk
assessments to evaluate all hazards impacts on communities. In addi-
tion, FEMA will work to create safer communities by supporting and
proactively enhancing the capability of States and local communities to
reduce their risk from natural hazards by supporting the implementa-
tion of cost-effective, long-term hazard mitigation measures through
the Agency’s ﬁve Hazard Mitigation Assistance grant programs.
Finally, as I’ve already noted, we need a ﬁrm base on which to
build this organization. More than $20.8 million will be spent under this
initiative to create a Business Approach to Achieving Desired Results.
As FEMA strives to build the above core competencies, we must enable
wise business decisions backed by ﬁnance, budget, human resource,
and information systems support capabilities designed and scaled to
enhance FEMA’s mission success. The requested funding will allow
FEMA to develop integrated data systems that leverage proven hard-
ware, software, and middle ware; establish program analysis and pro-
ject management capabilities at decision points within the agency; build
an efﬁcient acquisition process that adheres to policies, proven stan-
dards, systems, and procedures; and reform FEMA’s major manage-
ment and administrative activities, including human capital, ﬁnance
and budget, space management, personal property management, plan-
ning, recruitment, and hiring.
As part of the professionalization of staff, the budget proposal in-
cludes the transfer of $48 million from the Disaster Relief Fund to the
Operations, Planning and Support account to convert more of FEMA’s
Cadre of On-Call Response Employee (CORE) positions with 4-year
terms into permanent full-time employees. The transfer allows the con-
tinued move to bring key CORE employees on-board so that we do not
have to take key personnel from their regular duties during a crisis—
thus leaving other jobs undone. While we will continue to hire CORE
employees for speciﬁc recovery efforts, we will now have an expanded
pool of talented and experienced individuals that can be put on-site
during a disaster immediately and for as long as it takes. This funding
Opening Statement of R. David Paulison
187

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
transfer is in addition to the funds allocated under the Vision Initiative
for improved operations and procedures.
The proposed FY08 Budget includes increases for other 
programs, too.
For the Disaster Relief Fund, there is a $213.5 million increase
within FEMA over last year’s base level to $1.7 billion. In addition, the
Budget proposes a transfer of $200 million in excess disaster funds from
the Small Business Administration, for a total of $1.9 billion for the Dis-
aster Relief Fund. This base level is set using historical models for dis-
aster funding needs. Should a major event occur, the President, the
Secretary and I will not abandon disaster victims but will either ﬁnd
additional funds or seek supplemental appropriations from Congress.
Under the budget, the National Flood Insurance Fund expects to
collect premium and fee revenues of more than $2.8 billion, which is
$215 million over the FY07 projections, due to signiﬁcant increases in
the number of policyholders. In a normal year, ﬂood insurance is self-
sustaining. However, the National Flood Insurance Program suffered
signiﬁcant losses during the 2005 hurricane season and FEMA estimates
the total payouts will exceed $21 billion when all claims are settled. To
pay off claims from 2005, FEMA had to borrow funds from the U.S.
Treasury which it must pay back with interest. The ﬂood insurance pro-
gram will continue to be challenged to pay both expected future claims
and the interest that is approaching $800 million per year. FEMA and
the Administration are committed to working with the Congress in
identifying and implementing reforms to the National Flood Insurance
Act that will strengthen its ability to meet ﬁnancial obligations and
other program objectives.
Some Programs Will See Reductions
While FEMA, on the whole, is receiving a major inﬂux of new funds,
there are some programs that are budgeted below the FY 2007 Appro-
priated Level.
Consistent with prior Administration requests, the budget in-
cludes $300 million for Assistance to Fireﬁghter Grants. The FY 2008 re-
quest will fund hundreds of grants, focusing on those applications that
enhance the most critical capabilities of local response in the event of a
terrorist attack or major disasters. Since the AFG program began in FY
2001, Congress has appropriated over $3.6 billion to fund these grants
to ﬁre departments and other ﬁrst responders, with FY 2006 funding
still being distributed and the FY 2007 grant application process just be-
ginning. As such, the Administration believes this is an appropriate
level for the FY 2008 grants given the availability of signiﬁcant amounts
of funding for ﬁrst responder preparedness missions from other DHS
grant programs such as the Urban Areas Security Initiative and the
State Homeland Security Grant Program.
188
Data and Documents

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Finally, the FY 2008 request includes several decreases in funding
for programs that transferred out of FEMA or changes in grant alloca-
tions that reﬂect a move towards placing more funding in programs
that are better coordinated with State and local homeland security
strategies and are allocated on the basis of risk.
What This Means for Other Grants
Since 2001, the Federal government has allocated more than $16 billion
in State and local homeland security preparedness funding, but over $5
billion in grant funds from prior ﬁscal years remain unexpended by
State and local partners. The FY 2008 budget request includes $2.2 bil-
lion to support State and local grant programs, provide technical assis-
tance funding, provide Assistance to Fireﬁghters grants, and support
training programs to Federal, tribal, State and local partners under
FEMA. This clearly shows this Administration’s commitment to help-
ing tribal, State and local governments cope with the initial costs associ-
ated with a higher state of readiness. In addition, FEMA will be
co-administering the $1.0 billion Public Safety Interoperable Communi-
cations (PSIC) grant program with the Department of Commerce.
When one combines the $5.8 billion in operations, the $2.2 billion
in non-disaster FEMA grant programs and the $1.0 billion for interoper-
ability grants, you will see the $9 billion that is proposed for FEMA’s
mission—$329 million more than was appropriated in FY 2007 when
new grants and reduced grants are all considered.
The PSIC funding is not captured as part of the FY08 request as it
was appropriated per the Deﬁcit Reduction Act of 2005 from antici-
pated spectrum auction. However, the funding will add to the total
level of grant funding that will be made available to State and local
governments.
V. What It All Means
At the end of the day, what does a New FEMA with a larger budget, a
reorganized structure and improved capabilities mean for the American
Public?
The FY 2008 Budget will result in a FEMA that is in touch with
America, ready to respond and user friendly.
Should a disaster appear imminent or even strike without warn-
ing, we will be prepared to alert State and local ofﬁcials. Numerous
lines of communication will be open through ground lines and satellite
hook-ups, both directly to our partners and through the media to a
greater audience. FEMA senior and regional staff will be in constant
contact with our partners in State and local government as well as our
colleagues here at FEMA and throughout the Federal government. We
will pre-position equipment and supplies and we will know what we
have and where it is. Items will be moved to disaster scenes even before
Opening Statement of R. David Paulison
189

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
a request or a declaration is made, so that if they are needed, they are at
hand. If they are not there when a disaster is designated, we will know
where they are in real-time and how long help will take to arrive.
When the immediate threat has passed, FEMA will be on the
ground almost immediately to help with recovery. Mobile facilities will
arrive to register victims so that an assessment can be made quickly
and resources allocated where needed. We will be able to help more
people more quickly and with greater protection against waste, fraud
and abuse.
With help and encouragement from the New FEMA, the American
people will be better prepared. Fewer individuals will be in dire need
as the public learns to make preparations at home as well as evacuation
plans to avoid foreseen dangers.
Planning and preparation for disasters will also improve as State
and local ofﬁcials and ﬁrst responders receive hands-on assistance from
FEMA staff. The public will have greater conﬁdence in the abilities of
their tribal, State and local ofﬁcials as they see more and more of their
leaders trained and certiﬁed in emergency management, and more and
more of their ﬁrst responders receiving similar and expanded training
that meets their own needs.
In short, the New FEMA will be better, stronger, faster than before.
And FEMA will be ready to take a leadership role where needed, pro-
vide support where appropriate and be on-hand across the country be-
fore and after any major event.
Thank you for your time today and I look forward to answering
your questions.
Reforming FEMA:
Are We Making Progress?
Statement of George W. Foresman
Under Secretary for Preparedness
U.S. Department of Homeland Security
February 28, 2007
[Author’s Note: Words appearing in bold so appear in the pub-
lished statements]
Written testimony presented to the U.S. House of Representatives
Subcommittee on Emergency Communications, Preparedness and
Response & Subcommittee on Management, Investigations, and
Oversight
190
Data and Documents

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
. . . Secretary Chertoff and the Department continue to progress in
many areas to manage our full environment of 21st century risk. Our
mission is straightforward and guided by ﬁve goals:
Goal 1. Protect our Nation from Dangerous People 
Goal 2. Protect our Nation from Dangerous Goods 
Goal 3. Protect Critical Infrastructure 
Goal 4. Build a Nimble, Effective Emergency Response System and
a Culture of Preparedness 
Goal 5. Strengthen and Unify DHS Operations and Management
. . . The risks that we face come in many forms. Recent attention to
the lessons of the August ‘06 British Air plot and Hurricane Katrina re-
mind us of the wide range of hazards we face. These were headline
grabbing events. Equally important but maybe lesser known are situa-
tions where vulnerabilities of infrastructure and information technol-
ogy systems have manifested themselves.
In an interconnected and interdependent global economy, manag-
ing risk requires adaptability to a wide range of individual scenarios.
These scenarios unite to create a very complex risk environment when
it comes to protecting America. The risk environment is dynamic and
DHS’s approach to managing this risk environment must be equally
dynamic.
This approach is focused on the most signiﬁcant risks, we apply
resources in the most practical way possible to prevent, protect against,
and respond to manmade and natural hazards. That means making
tough-minded assessments, and recognizing that it is simply not possi-
ble to eliminate every threat to every individual in every place at every
moment.
The Department manages risk across a broad spectrum transcend-
ing borders and multiple hazards. Discipline is required to assess
threats, review vulnerabilities, and weigh consequences; we then have
to balance and prioritize our resources against those risks so that we
can ensure that our Nation is protected.
Throughout our Nation’s history, natural disasters have served as
lessons for how to prepare for and respond to the next earthquake, tor-
nado, ﬂood, or hurricane.
Decades of experience in dealing with a sheer number of natural
disasters globally, has provided sufﬁcient data to understand their risk.
By contrast, there have been far fewer terrorist events globally making
our comprehension of risk less substantial.
DHS is focused on those possible terrorist events that pose the
greatest potential consequences to human life and to the continuity of
our society. At the top of that list is the threat of weapons of mass de-
struction. Weapons of mass destruction are weapons that, if used, could
have a devastating effect on this country. Preventing the introduction
and use of those weapons has to be the number one focus in the years
to come.
Reforming FEMA: Are We Making Progress?
191

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
We also must continue to guard against inﬁltration of this country
by international terrorists who have the capability and intent to cause
damage to the functioning of this country by engaging in multiple
deadly attacks on people and our economy. And the illustration of this
kind of a scenario is the plot in London that was uncovered last sum-
mer. Had it been successful, it would have cost the lives of thousands of
people and had the potential to have raised a signiﬁcant blow against
the functioning of our entire system of international trade and travel.
But even as we look at these dangerous threats, we have to be
mindful of something else: the potential for home-grown acts of terror-
ism. We have to recognize that there are individuals who sympathize
with terrorist organizations or embrace their ideology, and are prepared
to use violence as a means to promote a radical, violent agenda. To min-
imize this potential emerging threat, we have to work across Federal,
State and local jurisdictions to prevent domestic radicalization and
terrorism.
Risk is interdependent and interconnected—across communities to
nations and must be managed accordingly. For example, a port closure
or multiple port closures will not only have an impact on that port area,
but also impact manufacturing facilities thousands of miles away that
depend on the timely delivery of materials. One of the best examples of
this interdependency is petroleum reﬁnery capacity along the Gulf
Coast following Hurricane Katrina. The day before Hurricane Katrina,
Houston, Texas produced 25 percent of the Nation’s petroleum. The
day after Hurricane Katrina, with the facilities closed along the Gulf
Coast, Houston was forced to produce 47 percent of the nation’s petro-
leum. These examples demonstrate how signiﬁcant supply chain inter-
dependencies are in managing a full range of risk. So we understand
that managing risk requires us to look at a broad continuum across a
wide geographical area.
The National Protection and Programs Directorate must be pre-
pared to meet these challenges.
NPPD Mission and Overview
The NPPD will comprise the Ofﬁce of Infrastructure Protection (IP), the
Ofﬁce of Cyber Security and Communications (CS&C), the United
States Visitor and Immigrant Status Indicator Technology (US-VISIT)
program, the Ofﬁce of Intergovernmental Programs, and the Ofﬁce of
Risk Management and Analysis. This new Directorate will allow the
Department to serve as a focal point in enhancing the protection of
America by interlacing key programs based on risk.
Currently, there are multiple components within DHS working in-
dependently to reduce our comprehensive risk. Three of these compo-
nents will be located in NPPD—IP, which addresses physical risks;
192
Data and Documents

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
CS&C, which addresses cyber risks; and US-VISIT, which addresses hu-
man risks. All three of these ofﬁces use the same approach in reducing
risk by utilizing data gathering, data analysis, and dissemination of in-
formation to operators.
The overarching responsibilities of NPPD are to enhance the pro-
tection of national assets, key resources, and people by countering
threats whether they are physical, cyber or human. This will be accom-
plished by advancing the Department’s risk-reduction mission and
through identiﬁcation of threats and vulnerabilities to infrastructure
and people. In addition, NPPD will synchronize risk-mitigation strate-
gies and Departmental doctrine for protecting America.
The NPPD responsibilities include:
–Promoting an integrated national approach to homeland security
protection activities and verifying the approach and strategy via pro-
gram metrics to assess performance and outcomes against mission
goals;
–Protecting people and the Nation’s critical infrastructure;
–Ensuring operable and interoperable systems and networks to
support emergency communications through a full spectrum of
conditions;
–Promoting cyber security;
–Standardizing risk management approaches applied across the
Department to ensure polices, programs, and resources are driven by a
consistent methodology; and
–Enhancing the security of citizens and people traveling to the
United States through the use of biometric capabilities.
NPPD will serve the public through these major program
activities:
Infrastructure Protection (IP): IP is focused on securing the na-
tion’s critical infrastructure through the identiﬁcation of threats, conse-
quences, and vulnerabilities and through the development of
mitigation strategies. Additionally, this activity provides the primary
defense against attacks on our nation’s critical infrastructure and key
resources through robust real-time monitoring and incident response.
Cyber Security and Communications (CS&C): CS&C defends the
Nation against virtual or cyber attacks, and incorporates cyber security,
promotes operable and interoperable communications for emergency
communications. CS&C identiﬁes cyber-based threats, vulnerabilities,
and the consequences of successful attacks. It also ensures the availabil-
ity and interoperability of information technology (IT) and Communi-
cations through the National Communications System (NCS) and the
Ofﬁce of Emergency Communications (OEC).
As part of CS&C, the OEC will work closely with NCS, FEMA,
other DHS components, and our Federal, State, local, and tribal part-
ners to improve emergency interoperable communications nationwide.
Reforming FEMA: Are We Making Progress?
193

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
The OEC consolidates the Interoperable Communications Technical As-
sistance Program and the Integrated Wireless Network program to bet-
ter integrate the Department’s emergency communications planning,
preparedness, protection, crisis management, and recovery capabilities
across the Nation.
United States Visitor and Immigrant Status Indicator Technol-
ogy (US-VISIT): Through its deployment of biometric capture and
watch list matching capabilities to State Department visa-issuing posts
worldwide, U.S. air, land, and sea ports of entry, and U.S. Citizenship
and Immigration Services (USCIS) immigration beneﬁt ofﬁces within
the U.S., US-VISIT supports safe and legitimate travel to the United
States. It helps prevent document fraud and identity theft that threaten
the integrity of the immigration process and the safety of foreign visi-
tors. US-VISIT also provides key information to law enforcement, bor-
der ofﬁcials, and other decision makers about persons they may
encounter in the line of duty, thus protecting their safety and that of
U.S. citizens.
Risk Management and Analysis Ofﬁce: The Risk Management
and Analysis Ofﬁce will lead the Department’s efforts to establish a
common framework to address the overall management and analysis of
homeland security risk. This program will develop a coordinated, col-
laborative approach to risk management that will allow the Depart-
ment to leverage and integrate risk expertise across components and
external stakeholders.
The Ofﬁce of Intergovernmental Affairs: Handles communica-
tions and coordination activities among State, local, and tribal disci-
plines across the spectrum of issues confronting all 22 agencies and
components of DHS. Daily activities regularly involve contact with, for
example, the Coast Guard, Transportation Security Administration, Se-
cret Service, Customs and Border Protection/Border Patrol, USCIS,
FEMA—the entire gamut of service providers at DHS—on a host of is-
sues that impact our State and local partners. The Ofﬁce of Intergovern-
mental Affairs will liaise with the Secretary, senior DHS leadership and
their counterparts across the Nation at the State, local, tribal and territo-
rial levels.
National Protection Planning Ofﬁce (NPPO): The NPPO will de-
velop doctrine for synchronization of national and regional-level pro-
tection plans and actions across Federal, State, local, and private sectors
regarding the assessment of both physical and cyber critical infrastruc-
ture and key resources. It will develop and coordinate performance
metrics to measure progress in reducing the risk to critical infrastruc-
ture and key resources. The NPPO will work with other DHS compo-
nents to synchronize approaches to methodology and develop doctrine
for DHS-wide operational planning. This ofﬁce will perform cross-sec-
tor analysis, such as understanding the potential cascading effects from
194
Data and Documents

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
one sector to another, and recommending approaches to reduce im-
pacts. In addition the NPPO will work across jurisdictions and across
borders.
Preparedness Progress to Date
Mr. Chairman, I understand the importance of this Subcommittee hav-
ing the most current, up-to-date information and I would like to high-
light for you some important progress made by the Preparedness
Directorate as we transition into the NPPD.
Risk Analysis for Grants Process: The Department has made re-
ﬁnements to the data inputs for the risk methodology, taking into ac-
count expert judgment, and feedback from Federal, State, and local
partners—all with the goal of better understanding risk associated with
populations and critical infrastructure.
For example, for critical infrastructure, we looked at nine different
variables for each of 260,000 assets in 48 asset classes in FY 2006; and in
FY 2007 drew upon a comprehensive national process involving States
and sector-speciﬁc agencies to arrive at a much more concise list of
2,100 nationally critical assets, streamlining the risk analysis used in the
grants determination process.
The National Infrastructure Protection Plan (NIPP): The NIPP is
a comprehensive risk management framework that clearly deﬁnes criti-
cal infrastructure protection roles and responsibilities for all levels of
government, private industry, nongovernmental agencies and tribal
partners. Seventeen Sector Speciﬁc Plans have been completed and are
currently being reviewed by the Department as part of the NIPP
progress.
Chemical Regulation Authority: DHS was given the authority by
Congress to implement risk-based security standards for chemical facil-
ities that present high levels of security risk. This new authority will al-
low the Department to recognize the signiﬁcant investments that
responsible facilities have made in security, and the ability to ensure
that high-risk facilities have adequate safeguards in place.
Buffer Zone Protection Plans: In 2006, 58 percent of identiﬁed
critical infrastructure had implemented Buffer Zone Protection (BZP)
Plans, up signiﬁcantly from our FY 2005 percentage of 18 percent. The
Department worked in collaboration with State, local, and tribal entities
by providing training workshops, seminars, technical assistance and a
common template to standardize the BZP plan development process.
Cyber Security and Communications (CS&C): DHS’ CS&C is
aligning to form a cohesive organization to ensure the security, re-
siliency, and reliability of the Nation’s cyber and communications infra-
structure in collaboration with multiple public and private sectors,
including international partners. Under CS&C the Department has
Reforming FEMA: Are We Making Progress?
195

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
expanded its focus on critical cyber exercising, grants, and management
activities.
Interoperability: In December, DHS released the ﬁndings of the
national baseline survey, which was the ﬁrst-ever nationwide assess-
ment of interoperability across our country. We engaged more than
22,000 State and local law enforcement, ﬁre response, and emergency
medical service agencies in developing the baseline. The results of the
survey show that two-thirds of ﬁrst responder agencies report using
communications interoperability to some degree in their operations.
While this is promising, the results also demonstrate that while the nec-
essary technology is largely available, much work needs to be done in
the areas of governance, standard operating procedures, training and
exercises, and usage. In addition, this baseline survey:
–Determined the capacity for interoperable communications
among law enforcement, ﬁre, and EMS agencies across the Nation;
–Established a process and mechanism to facilitate regular mea-
sures of communications interoperability;
–Generated data to help emergency response agencies make bet-
ter-informed decisions about how to most effectively allocate resources
for improving communications interoperability; and
–Gathered information to inform future efforts for education, in-
centives, and planning needed to continue improving interoperability
capabilities across the country.
Tactical Interoperable Communication Scorecards: DHS issued
scorecards for the 75 largest Urban/Metropolitan Areas. These score-
cards measured the ability of Urban/Metropolitan Areas to provide tac-
tical (within one hour) communications capabilities to ﬁrst responders.
This process included the creation of a Tactical Interoperable Communi-
cations Plan peer evaluation, full-scale exercise, and after action reports.
Key ﬁndings include:
–Policies for interoperable communications are now in place in all
75 urban and metropolitan areas;
–Regular testing and exercises are needed to link disparate sys-
tems effectively to allow communications between multi-jurisdictional
responders (including State and Federal); and
–Cooperation among ﬁrst responders in the ﬁeld is strong, but for-
malized governance (leadership and strategic planning) across regions
has lagged.
The Nationwide Plan Review: DHS completed visits to 131 sites
(50 States, 6 territories, and 75 major urban areas) and reviewed the dis-
aster and evacuation plans for each. These reviews will allow DHS,
States and urban areas to identify deﬁciencies and improve catastrophic
planning.
Collaboration with the Private Sector: DHS has engaged the pri-
vate sector on a number of preparedness and risk mitigation strategies:
196
Data and Documents

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
International Cooperation: Partnerships with the World Bank,
World Economic Forum, and United Nations on forums focused on
public-private partnerships in disaster risk reduction. DHS also en-
gaged with key allies on cyber security information sharing, as well as
other multilateral and international standards organizations such as the
Asia Paciﬁc Economic Cooperation, Organization of Economic Cooper-
ation and Development, and International Telecommunication Union,
to raise awareness about cyber security and telecommunications stan-
dards.
Ready.gov Business: DHS collaborated with the business commu-
nity on Emergency and Business continuity planning, and on private
sector preparedness.
Chief Information Ofﬁce: Last year the Preparedness Directorate
was faced with the department-wide challenge of bringing all of the IT
systems within the Directorate into compliance with Federal Informa-
tion Security Management Act (FISMA) requirements. The effort to
reach FISMA compliance required a full-scale remediation effort to
achieve security certiﬁcation and accreditation for the complete inven-
tory of Preparedness systems. The Preparedness FISMA grade went
from being just 8 percent compliant in June 2006, to 99 percent compli-
ant in October 2006.
This type of progress is signiﬁcant, but I think we all agree that
there is more to do—as we all desire a safer, more secure America. Or-
ganizational changes within the Department withstanding, this mis-
sion remains unchanged.
Change is never easy and one thing that we intuitively know
about this environment that we ﬁnd ourselves in today is it is anything
but static. We are building on the signiﬁcant momentum realized and
progress achieved, to promote the ideals of what the Department was
established to do—provide for the protection of America and those who
live within its borders.
Closing
Mr. Chairman, events such as Hurricane Andrew, the Midwest Floods,
the bombings of the World Trade Center and Murrah Federal Building,
and more recently September 11th and Hurricane Katrina have granted
professionals across the Federal interagency community, as well as at
State, and local levels an immense amount of experience in managing
response and recovery efforts.
Traditionally, response and recovery involves dealing with deﬁned
aspects of an emergency, such as location, size and scale of damage,
number of people involved, facilities and infrastructure affected.
Prevention and protection present a much more nebulous and im-
precise environment.
Reforming FEMA: Are We Making Progress?
197

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Therefore, it necessitates an approach to securing our nation that
includes the broadest range possible for the full 21st century continuum
of risk. NPPD’s strategic risk management responsibility encompasses
a large spectrum of risk, which includes both economic ramiﬁcations
and risk to human life. It is not conﬁned to physical borders or corpo-
real infrastructure.
And at the end of the day—whether our threat comes from our en-
emies abroad or at home, or from nature, the American people expect
that local, State, and Federal government and the private sector are go-
ing to cooperate to deal with the challenges that confront them. These
early stages of coordinating the expansive spectrum of risk for protect-
ing the Nation will help to catalyze a national transformation for how
we prepare America for the risks of the 21st century.
198
Data and Documents

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
7
Directory of Organizations
E
mergency management is a relatively new profession. With
the transition of any discipline from an activity or function
into a profession in its own right, the creation of a literature
base must necessarily occur. In the previous chapter, a very small
sample of contributions to the growing literature and theory base
was highlighted. However, another feature of emerging profes-
sions is the growth of associations and other organizations asso-
ciated with the profession.
In this chapter, readers are provided a glimpse of some of
the many organizations, associations, and government agencies
that have come to be signiﬁcantly involved in emergency man-
agement and disaster response activities. The list of organiza-
tions presented in this chapter serves two purposes. The first
purpose is to allow the reader to come away convinced that the
discipline of emergency management exists on a broad playing
field. Indeed, many organizations spend considerable time
thinking about emergency management practices and respond-
ing to emergency management events. Further, not all organiza-
tions concerned with emergency management and disaster
response are government entities. This chapter, by virtue of pre-
senting emergency management organizations, likewise presents
the wide range of approaches to managing the consequences of
disasters in the United States (and elsewhere in the world).
The second purpose of this chapter is to provide readers with
a large number of potential sources of information. Each of the or-
ganizations, associations, and agencies presented in the following
pages are introduced with their contact information, including
Web pages. By exploring the Web sites of these organizations, or
by contacting them directly, one can glean almost overwhelming
199

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
200
Directory of Organizations
amounts of information about emergency management, home-
land security, and disaster relief. This chapter is intended to serve
as a useful springboard for conducting further research into the
discipline’s practices, principles, and players.
Private Organizations
The Citizen’s Guide to Disaster Assistance, published by FEMA’s
Emergency Management Institute (EMI 2003), lists many pri-
vate organizations that figure prominently in disaster relief.
Many of these organizations are religious organizations—some
are independent, while others are connected to particular de-
nominations. However, the services and relief they provide are
not contingent upon the faith or religious affiliation of victims.
A selected sample of these organizations, along with contact
information and brief descriptions (per FEMA’s Citizen’s Guide)
about their respective disaster relief activities, are provided
below.
Adventist Community Services (ACS)
12501 Old Columbia Pike
Silver Spring, MD 20904
Phone: (301) 680-6438
www.communityservices.org
The ACS receives, processes, and distributes clothing, bedding,
and food products during major disasters to victims in need. It
utilizes mobile distribution units ﬁlled with bedding and pack-
aged clothing that are presorted according to size, age, and gen-
der. The ACS also provides emergency food and counseling and
participates in the cooperative disaster child care program.
American Radio Relay League, Inc. (ARRL)
225 Main Street 
Newington, CT 06111-1494
Phone: (860) 594-0200
www.arrl.org/
The ARRL is a national volunteer organization of licensed radio
amateurs in the United States. The ARRL-sponsored Amateur

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Radio Emergency Services provides volunteer radio communica-
tions services to federal, state, county, and local governments, as
well as to voluntary agencies. ARRL members volunteer not only
their services but also their privately owned radio communica-
tions equipment.
American Red Cross
2025 E Street NW 
Washington, DC 20006 
Phone: (202) 303-8635
www.redcross.org/
The American Red Cross is a relief organization that relies pri-
marily on volunteers. The mission of the American Red Cross is
to aid victims of disaster and help people and communities “pre-
vent, prepare, and respond to emergencies.” The American Red
Cross operates under a Congressional Charter, which grants the
organization the lead role in America’s humanitarian responses
to disasters at home and internationally. Further, the American
Red Cross also provides assistance to members of the United
States Armed Forces stationed abroad and monitors America’s
compliance with the Geneva Convention regarding the humane
treatment of prisoners of war.
Catholic Charities USA Disaster Response
Ofﬁce of Disaster Response Catholic Charities USA
1731 King Street 
Alexandria, VA 22314 
Phone: (703) 236-6253
www.catholiccharitiesusa.org
Catholic Charities USA is an organization that coordinates the
social service agencies operated locally by the 175 Catholic dioce-
ses in the United States. The Disaster Response section of
Catholic Charities USA provides assistance to communities in or-
der to address the crisis and recovery needs of disaster victims
and affected families. Catholic Charities agencies emphasize on-
going and long-term recovery services for individuals and fami-
lies, including temporary housing assistance for low-income
families, counseling programs for children and the elderly, and
special counseling for disaster relief workers.
Directory of Organizations
201

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Christian Disaster Response (CDR)
P.O. Box 3339 
Winter Haven, FL 33885-3339
Phone: (863) 967-4357
www.cdresponse.org
The CDR cooperates with other disaster relief organizations, in-
cluding the American Red Cross and the Salvation Army, to en-
able participating local Christian church members to become
effective volunteers for assignment on national disasters. The
CDR provides disaster assessments, ﬁxed/mobile feeding facili-
ties, and in-kind disaster relief supplies. It also collects and
stockpiles donated goods, including food, clothing, and medi-
cine. To this end, the CDR maintains regional centers located
throughout the United States.
Church of the Brethren Emergency Response
601 Main Street 
P.O. Box 188 
New Windsor, MD 21776 
Phone: (410) 635-8737
www.brethrendisasterresponse.org/
The Church of the Brethren Emergency Response ministry pro-
vides cleanup and debris removal from damaged or destroyed
homes and personal property. Volunteers are trained through the
Cooperative Disaster Child Care Program to establish child care
centers following major disasters. Child-care providers guide
children through activities that help them to act out their fears,
anger, and confusion following a disaster. Several religious de-
nominations support this program.
Church World Service (CWS) Disaster Response
475 Riverside Drive, Suite 700 
New York, NY 10115 
Phone: (212) 870-3151
www.churchworldservice.org
The CWS assists disaster survivors through inter-religious part-
ner organizations in the United States and worldwide on behalf
of its 32 member communions plus afﬁliated agencies. CWS Dis-
aster Response is composed of consultants who help convene
202
Directory of Organizations

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
local churches and religious organizations to coordinate re-
sponses to various needs during the recovery phase of a disaster.
Episcopal Relief and Development
Ofﬁce of Disaster Response and Preparedness
815 Second Avenue 
New York, NY 10017 
Ph: (800) 334-7626, ext. 6360
www.er-d.org
Episcopal Relief and Development responds to domestic disas-
ters principally through its network of nearly a hundred U.S.
dioceses and more than 8,200 parishes. It also sends immediate
relief grants for basic needs such as food, water, medical assis-
tance, and ﬁnancial aid within the ﬁrst ninety days following a
disaster. Extended recovery activities are implemented through
rehabilitation grants, which offer the means to rebuild structures,
replant ruined crops, and counsel traumatized calamity victims.
The Episcopal Church works primarily through Church World
Service in providing its disaster-related services.
International Relief Friendship Foundation (IRFF)
30 Seminary Drive, Room 228
Barrytown, NY 12507
Phone: (845) 758-4509
www.irff.org/
The IRFF has the goal of assisting agencies involved in respond-
ing to the needs of a community after disaster strikes. When a
disaster occurs, the IRFF mobilizes a volunteer group from uni-
versities, businesses, youth groups, women’s organizations, and
religious groups. The IRFF also provides direct support and
emergency services immediately following a disaster such as
blankets, food, clothing, and relief kits.
Lutheran Disaster Response (LDR)
8765 W. Higgins Road 
Chicago, Illinois 60631 
Phone: (800) 638-3522, ext. 2719
www.ldr.org
The LDR provides for immediate disaster response (to both nat-
ural and technological disasters), long-term rebuilding efforts,
Directory of Organizations
203

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
and preparedness planning through synods, districts, and social
ministry organizations. The disasters to which the LDR responds
are those in which the needs outstrip available local resources.
The LDR provides for the coordination of 6,000 volunteers annu-
ally. In addition, it supplies crisis counseling services, support
groups, mental health assistance, and pastoral care through its
accredited social service agencies.
Medical Teams International (MTI)
14150 SW Milton Court 
Tigard, OR 97224
Phone: (503) 624-1000
www.medicalteams.org/
The MTI (formerly Northwest Medical Teams International) pro-
claims a mission of reﬂecting the love of Christ to people affected
by disaster, conﬂict, and poverty. To this end, the organization re-
sponds to disaster situations by enlisting volunteers as needed to
the stricken areas and sending money and supplies for cleaning
and reconstruction.
Mennonite Disaster Services
1018 Main Street 
Akron, PA 17501
Phone: (717) 859-2210
www.mds.mennonite.net
The MDR assists disaster victims by providing volunteer person-
nel to clean up and remove debris from damaged and destroyed
homes and personal property and to repair or rebuild homes. A
particular emphasis is placed on assisting those who are less able
to help themselves, such as the elderly and handicapped.
National Emergency Response Team (NERT)
1058 Albion Road 
Unity, ME 04988 
Phone: (866) NERTUSA
www.nert-usa.org/
The NERT exists to meet basic human needs, such as shelter,
food, and clothing, during times of crisis and disaster. It provides
emergency mobile trailer units (EMTUs), which are self-con-
tained, modest living units for up to eight to ten people, to places
204
Directory of Organizations

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
where disasters occur. When EMTUs are not in use, they serve as
mobile teaching units in community emergency preparedness
programs.
Nazarene Disaster Response (NDR)
756 NC Hwy 45 
South Plymouth, NC 27962 
Phone: (252) 793-6400
www.ncm.org/min_ndr.aspx
The NDR provides clean-up and rebuilding assistance, especially
to the elderly, disabled, widowed, and others who may not be
able to help themselves. In addition, a national crisis counseling
coordinator works through the recovery phase by assisting with
the emotional needs of disaster victims.
The Points of Light Foundation
1400 I Street NW, Suite 800 
Washington, DC 20005 
Phone: (202) 729-8169
helpindisaster.org
The Points of Light Foundation (and its Volunteer Center Na-
tional Network) coordinates spontaneous, unaffiliated volun-
teers so that needs of the local community and other disaster
response agencies can be met with an organized response. The
Points of Light Foundation maintains a network of affiliated lo-
cal volunteer centers, which can be used for the coordination
effort.
REACT International
5210 Auth Road, Suite 403 
Suitland, MD 20746
(301) 316-2900
www.reactintl.org/
REACT International provides emergency communication facili-
ties for other disaster relief agencies through its national network
of Citizens Band radio operators and volunteer teams. REACT
International teams are encouraged to become part of their local
disaster preparedness plan. Furthermore, they are encouraged to
take first-aid training and to become proficient in emergency
communications in times of disaster.
Directory of Organizations
205

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
The Salvation Army USA
615 Slaters Lane 
Alexandria, VA 22313 
Phone: (703) 684-5526
www.salvationarmyusa.org/
The Salvation Army USA provides emergency assistance, includ-
ing mass mobile feeding, temporary shelter, counseling, missing
person services, medical assistance, and distribution of donated
goods including food, clothing, and household items. It also pro-
vides referrals to government and private agencies for special
services. The Salvation Army USA is the American afﬁliate of the
worldwide Salvation Army, which is an evangelical Christian re-
lief organization headquartered in the United Kingdom.
Southern Baptist Disaster Relief
North American Mission Board
4200 North Point Parkway 
Alpharetta, GA 30022-4176 
Phone: (800) 462-8657, ext. 6432
The Southern Baptist Disaster Relief program provides more
than 200 mobile feeding units staffed by volunteers who are able
to prepare and distribute thousands of meals each day. Southern
Baptist Disaster Relief commonly provides disaster childcare by
deploying one or more mobile child care units. The program also
assists with clean-up activities, temporary repairs, reconstruc-
tion, counseling, and bilingual services.
UJC Federations of North America
United Jewish Communities 
P.O. Box 30 
Old Chelsea Station 
New York, NY 10113 
Phone: (212) 284-6671
www.ujc.org/
The UJC organizes direct assistance, such as ﬁnancial and social
services, to Jewish and general communities in the United States
following disaster. It also provides rebuilding services to neigh-
borhoods and enters into long-term recovery partnerships with
residents.
206
Directory of Organizations

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Volunteers of America
1660 Duke Street 
Alexandria, VA 22314-3421 
Phone: (800) 899-0089
www.voa.org/
Volunteers of America provides initial disaster-response services
aimed at meeting the critical needs of disaster victims. This in-
cludes such efforts as making trucks available for transporting
victims and supplies to designated shelters. Volunteers of Amer-
ica also collects and distributes donated goods and provides
mental health care for survivors of disasters.
World Vision
P.O. Box 9716, MS 316 
Federal Way, WA 98063-9716 
Phone: (253) 815-2229
www.worldvision.org/
World Vision trains and mobilizes community-based volunteers
in major response and recovery activities. It also provides con-
sulting services to local, unaffiliated churches and Christian
charities involved in locally designed recovery projects. Finally,
World Vision collects, manages, and organizes community-based
distribution for donated goods in the wake of disasters occurring
in the United States or elsewhere in the world.
Associations and Resource Centers
American Civil Defense Association (ACDA)
11576 S. State Street, Suite 502 
Draper, UT 84020
Phone: (800) 425-5397
www.tacda.org/
The mission of the ACDA is to provide information, tools, and re-
sources to American citizens in order to further a comprehensive
understanding of preparedness strategies and techniques and to
promote self-reliant and proactive approaches to protecting them-
selves and their families from man-made or natural disasters.
This is done by providing members with education and training
Directory of Organizations
207

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
about coping with disasters, providing products and services to
equip members for preparedness, and serving as a conduit for
connecting to other disaster preparedness organizations.
Association of State Floodplain Managers
2809 Fish Hatchery Road 
Madison, WI 53713 
Phone: (608) 274-0123
www.ﬂoods.org
The Association of State Floodplain Managers is a professional
association made of those who are involved in ﬂoodplain man-
agement, ﬂood hazard mitigation, preparedness and warning ef-
forts relating to flooding, and flood recovery. The association
seeks to assist government entities as well as the general popula-
tions of communities facing the hazard of flooding to reduce
their risks associated with ﬂoods by adopting sound ﬂoodplain
use and development policies. According to the association, its
speciﬁc goals are to reduce the loss of life and property damage
that results from ﬂooding; preserve the natural and cultural char-
acteristics of the nation’s ﬂoodplains; promote ﬂood mitigation
efforts; and help governments and people generally to avoid tak-
ing actions that exacerbate ﬂooding. The association’s Web site
provides a wealth of information to ﬂoodplain managers, other
government officials, academicians, and others about sound
ﬂoodplain uses, ﬂood insurance, ﬂood mitigation, preparedness,
response, recovery, and state and national ﬂood programs.
Center for Homeland Security and Defense
Naval Postgraduate School
Public Affairs Ofﬁce–Code 004 
1 University Circle 
Monterey, CA 93943
Phone: (831) 656-2356
www.chds.us/
The Center for Homeland Security and Defense is an academic
and applied research and information center sponsored jointly
by the Naval Postgraduate School and the U.S. Department of
Homeland Security. Its purpose is to be the premier provider of
graduate- and executive-level education in homeland security
studies. The center seeks to train military leaders, high-level
local and state government officials, and academicians and
208
Directory of Organizations

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
executive-level practitioners involved in homeland security ef-
forts. The center also produces a peer-reviewed journal, Home-
land Security Affairs, to disseminate information on the latest
studies and ﬁndings concerning the provision of homeland secu-
rity in the United States.
Disaster Preparedness and Emergency Response 
Association (DERA)
P.O. Box 797
Longmont, CO 80502
www.disasters.org/index.htm
The DERA was founded in 1962 as a nonproﬁt organization that
brought together professionals, volunteers, and organizations ac-
tive in all aspects of emergency management and disaster re-
sponse. The organization provides professional support,
resource sharing, and networking opportunities. The DERA also
becomes active in disaster response by coordinating members
with a variety of talents to be deployed for disaster response and
recovery efforts and by acting as a clearinghouse for information,
personnel, equipment, and other resources when disasters strike.
Disaster-Resource.com
P.O. Box 15243
Santa Ana, CA 92735
Phone: (714) 558-8940
www.disaster-resource.com/
The Disaster Resource Guide is a web-based clearinghouse of in-
formation for emergency managers and disaster planners in gov-
ernment and private industry. The site includes links to
emergency management publications (articles, newsletters, and
journals), products and services, and agencies and organizations
afﬁliated with the mission of emergency management.
International Association of Emergency Managers (IAEM)
201 Park Washington Court 
Falls Church, VA 22046-4527
Phone: (703) 538-1795
www.iaem.com/
The IAEM is a nonprofit organization committed to promot-
ing the goals of saving lives and protecting property during
Directory of Organizations
209

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
emergencies and disasters. The IAEM fulfills its goals by pro-
viding education and training, as well as networking opportu-
nities for emergency management professionals. As a leading
professional association for emergency managers and disaster
planners, it has developed a code of ethics for emergency man-
agers who are members. This code includes the exhortation that
members act in such a way that builds public confidence in the
profession of emergency management. Like other professional
associations, the IAEM also produces emergency management–
related publications and maintains a job database for profes-
sional positions in the discipline.
Natural Hazards Center
University of Colorado 
1243 Grandview Avenue 
Boulder, CO 80309
Phone: (303) 492-6818
www.colorado.edu/hazards/
The Natural Hazards Center at the University of Colorado–Boul-
der was established to communicate the growing base of knowl-
edge concerning hazards mitigation and disaster preparedness,
response, and recovery. The center adopts an all-hazards and in-
terdisciplinary framework for emergency management practices.
The Natural Hazards Center provides funding, equipment, and
personnel for researching hazard mitigation, preparedness, re-
sponse, and recovery. 
National Emergency Management Association 
P.O. Box 11910 
Lexington, KY 40578 
Phone: (859) 244-8000
www.nemaweb.org/
The National Emergency Management Association (NEMA) is a
professional association for state emergency management direc-
tors. The NEMA professes a three-part mission: to provide lead-
ership and expertise to the nation in comprehensive emergency
management, to serve as a vital resource for emergency manage-
ment information and assistance, and to advance the quality no-
tion of continuous improvement in emergency management
through partnerships, innovations, and collaborative policy
formulation.
210
Directory of Organizations

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Ready.gov
Ready Campaign 
U.S. Department of Homeland Security 
Washington, DC 20528
Phone: (202) 282-8000
www.ready.gov/
Ready.gov is a readiness campaign developed and implemented
by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. The campaign ed-
ucates individuals, families, and businesses about how to be pre-
pared for natural disasters and man-made calamities, such as
acts of terrorism. The Web page also includes a link to a chil-
dren’s section (ReadyKids), where interactive games and anima-
tion deliver messages of safety and preparedness.
Government Agencies
What follows is a brief introduction and contact information for
selected national and international government and quasi-gov-
ernment agencies possessing emergency management and disas-
ter planning responsibilities. This is by no means an all-inclusive
list of agencies with emergency management functions. Indeed,
such a list could by itself occupy most of the content of this book.
Rather, the agencies selected are intended to be a starting point
for readers to collect information about some of the primary ofﬁ-
cial emergency management public agencies.
United States Government Agencies
Emergency Management Institute (EMI)
16825 S. Seton Ave.
Emmitsburg, MD 21727
training.fema.gov/
The EMI, which is a part of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, is one the nation’s leading providers of emergency
management training for federal, state, and local officials, as
well as members of the public who have some emergency man-
agement responsibilities within their organizations. The EMI de-
livers training through distance education formats (online,
video, and correspondence) as well as through traditional 
Directory of Organizations
211

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
in-residence training at the EMI training facility in Emmitsburg,
Maryland. Course topics include all facets of mitigation, pre-
paredness, response, and recovery, as well as train-the-trainer
programs so that graduates will return to their regions and con-
tinue to provide high-quality and professional emergency man-
agement training to their colleagues who may be unable to
attend EMI courses. The EMI also serves as a clearinghouse for
information available through other sources. For example, from
the EMI Web page, one can link to literally dozens of college and
university programs that deliver emergency management and
homeland security degrees. The EMI’s Higher Education Project
also hosts an annual conference relating to higher education and
emergency management. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
500 C Street SW 
Washington, DC 20472
Phone: (800) 621-FEMA
www.fema.gov
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) is the lead
federal agency in the United States for emergency and disaster
management matters. FEMA was created by an executive issued
from President Jimmy Carter in 1979. Through that order, ele-
ments from dozens of disparate federal agencies that had some-
thing to do with emergency management and disaster response
were combined into the new FEMA organization. FEMA’s statu-
tory authority was ultimately granted by the Robert T. Stafford
Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act of 1988.
FEMA was an independent federal agency until it became a
part of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security on March 1,
2003. FEMA has more than 2,600 full-time permanent employees
located in Washington, DC and throughout the United States.
FEMA also maintains a roster of 4,000 additional personnel who
are available for call-up and deployment when a disaster strikes.
FEMA is organized into four main divisions: Mitigation, Recov-
ery and Response, and National Preparedness.
FEMA’s Mitigation Division was established in 1993. This
division manages the National Flood Insurance Program as well
as several other programs intended to eliminate or reduce future
212
Directory of Organizations

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
losses for families, businesses, and governments from natural
and man-made disasters. The Mitigation Division is divided into
three branches: Risk Analysis Branch, Risk Reduction Branch,
and Risk Insurance Branch. The function of identifying and deal-
ing with the risks associated with various hazards is the collec-
tive responsibility of these three branches.
The Recovery Division is responsible for helping individu-
als and communities impacted by disasters to return to normal
operations with as little disruption in service as possible. Several
division programs have been established to fulﬁll this mission.
The programs include: Individual Assistance (providing or coor-
dinating the delivery of emergency housing, ﬁnancial assistance,
and unemployment assistance for individuals, families, farmers
and businesses); Public Assistance (helping states, local commu-
nities and nonproﬁt organizations restore and rebuild public in-
frastructure, as well as aid with debris removal and emergency
protective measures); the Federal Coordinating Ofﬁcer Program;
emergency and disaster declaration processing; and the Long-
Term Community Recovery responsibilities found in the Na-
tional Response Plan.
The Response Division is responsible for coordinating oper-
ational and logistical activities of the federal government after an
emergency management event occurs. The division establishes
and follows procedures for augmenting overwhelmed state and
local community resources after disasters for the purpose of sav-
ing lives, protecting property, and minimizing the overall suffer-
ing which takes place as a result of disasters.
FEMA’s National Preparedness Division was created by the
Post-Katrina Emergency Management Reform Act of 2006. This
division oversees the Readiness, Prevention, and Planning sub-
division and the National Integration Center (NIC), which main-
tains the National Incident Management System (NIMS) and the
National Response Plan. Additionally, it will coordinate the ac-
tivities of the U.S. Fire Administration.
Additionally, some units within the organization exist pri-
marily for the benefit of external audiences. This includes
FEMA’s Emergency Management Institute which plays a very
signiﬁcant role in training state and local emergency managers
and ﬁrst responders in the best practices for dealing with large-
scale disastrous events.
Directory of Organizations
213

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Federal Protective Service (FPS)
National Capital Region
Building 74 E., Room 110 
Southeast Federal Center 
Third and M Streets, SE 
Washington, DC 20407 
Phone: (202) 690-9632
www.ice.gov/about/fps/contact.htm
The Federal Protective Service is a part of the Bureau of Immigra-
tion and Customs Enforcement (ICE) within the U.S. Department
of Homeland Security. Prior to its relocation to DHS under the
Homeland Security Act of 2002, the FPS was part of the U.S. Gen-
eral Services Administration. The FPS has a primary role of pro-
tecting the nation’s 8,800 federal buildings, courthouses, and
other civilian installations. Under the Homeland Security Act of
2002, the jurisdiction of FPS has statutorily expanded to poten-
tially include protection of the nation’s critical infrastructure as
FPS resources permit. The FPS employs several hundred law en-
forcement officers and contacts with several thousand security
ofﬁcers to provide the security function at FPS-protected facili-
ties. Security planning efforts include accounting for both nat-
ural and man-made hazards. Hazards affecting federal facilities
include civil unrest and riots, as was seen in Los Angeles in 1992
after the ﬁrst trial of police ofﬁcers involved in the Rodney King
incident, and the wide range of natural disasters that affect all fa-
cilities in a given community equally, as well as incidents such as
the bombing of the Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City
in 1995. The FPS works closely with the Federal Emergency Man-
agement Agency and other emergency management– and secu-
rity-related agencies to ensure disaster and terrorism resilience in
federal facilities.
An additional emergency management function of the FPS
is to provide police protection for FEMA ofﬁcials and resources
deployed to disaster scenes. In this regard, the FPS commonly
plays the role of a reassuring police presence after disasters
where local law enforcement otherwise may still be struggling to
fulﬁll its order-maintenance responsibilities.
National Guard Bureau
1411 Jefferson Davis Highway 
Arlington, VA 22202-3231
214
Directory of Organizations

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Phone: (703) 607-2584
www.ngb.army.mil/
The National Guard Bureau, or the National Guard, is the na-
tion’s oldest military organization. The National Guard’s her-
itage is rooted in the colonial militias prior to America’s
independence, and the state militias after America achieved na-
tionhood. The National Guard has always maintained a dual
posture as both a state agency and a federal agency. Federally,
members of the National Guard are subject to call up to federal
service, just as others in the military reserves are. In recent years,
members of National Guard were called to active duty in sup-
port of domestic security operations after the terror attacks of
September 11, 2001, as well as to ﬁght in various foreign wars, in-
cluding the first Gulf War, Kosovo, Bosnia, Afghanistan, and
then second war against Iraq.
The National Guard is comprised of two major elements: the
Army National Guard and the Air National Guard. When called
up federally, the Army and Air National Guard serve under the
control of the United States Army and United States Air Force, re-
spectively. The Army National Guard consists primarily of ground
forces. Units within the Army National Guard resemble those
found in the U.S. Army and include infantry, military police, logis-
tics, intelligence, engineers, etc. Like the United States Army, the
Army National Guard also maintains a ﬂeet of attack and support
helicopters, including rescue and medivac helicopters. Army Na-
tional Guard troops are commonly deployed during and after nat-
ural disasters to provide ground and air rescue personnel, military
police for security, logistics personnel with water treatment and
other necessary equipment, and medical personnel.
The Air National Guard provides air support to their host
states and for the federal government during a time of disaster. Ad-
ditionally, the Air National Guard’s ﬁghter wings provide 100 per-
cent of the interceptor force protecting the continental United States.
The operation tempo of Air National Guard units dedicated to
ﬁghter wings has increased signiﬁcantly since the attacks of 9/11.
The largest deployment ever of National Guard troops to a
natural disaster occurred in 2005 after Hurricane Katrina, fol-
lowed quickly by Hurricane Rita. In total, 50,000 Army and Air
National Guard members were deployed to the Gulf Coast and
collectively rescued more than 17,000 civilians who were facing
imminent danger at the time of their rescues.
Directory of Organizations
215

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
14th Street and Constitution Avenue, NW 
Room 6217 
Washington, DC 20230 
Phone: (202) 482-6090
www.noaa.gov/
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
is a federal agency located with the U.S. Department of Com-
merce. The purpose of the agency is to study and monitor the
Earth’s oceans and atmosphere and to share that information
with various constituencies, including the American public.
NOAA engages in applied research and reporting in four
key areas: ecosystems, climate, weather and water, and com-
merce and transportation. With regard to ecosystems, NOAA
monitors the use of natural resources—particularly coastal and
marine—to ensure the sustainability of those resources within
human and natural contexts. NOAA also is a lead agency in the
United States for studying the Earth’s climate. Phenomena such
as El Niño are closely monitored so that governments and other
constituents can plan accordingly for the impact such phenom-
ena may bring.
Most notably, NOAA is responsible for studying and fore-
casting the weather. The National Weather Service is an agency
within NOAA and is responsible for assessing current and future
threats posed by severe weather conditions. Various units within
the National Weather Service monitor thunderstorms and tor-
nado activity, hurricanes, winter storms, and other acute weather
phenomena that present threats to life and property.
Finally, NOAA specifically serves those engaged in com-
merce and transportation by providing timely weather, climate,
and ecosystem information to ensure that individual and com-
mercial transportation are safe and efﬁcient and that transporta-
tion activities comport with environmentally sound principles
and practices.
U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID)
Disaster Assistance Information Center 
Ronald Reagan Building 
Washington, DC 20523-1000 
Phone: (202) 712-4320
www.usaid.gov/
216
Directory of Organizations

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
The United States Agency of International Development (USAID)
was created by executive order in 1961. At that time, USAID was
tapped to be the lead American agency for distributing humani-
tarian and development assistance under the Foreign Assistance
Act. The precedent for using federal funds to support other na-
tions in need can be traced back to the Marshall Plan after World
War II. Under that plan, instead of punitively penalizing the Axis
powers after defeat, the United States provided funds and other
support to quickly rebuild the infrastructure of its former ene-
mies. In doing so, the United States created considerable good-
will and formed lasting alliances with countries with which it
had just been at war.
Similarly today, the United States distributes aid to develop-
ing countries with two purposes in mind. First, the United States
government hopes to further America’s national interests by
spreading the “good news” of democracy and free markets
around the globe. Second, the United States sees itself, as a
wealthy nation, as having a responsibility to help improve the
lives of unfortunate peoples in other parts of the world. The
broad goals intended through the use of USAID funds include
developmental activities relating to economic growth, agricul-
ture, and trade; initiatives and efforts to support global health;
and humanitarian assistance directed toward preventing or miti-
gating conﬂict and alleviating suffering that occurs as a result of
man-made or natural disasters. Specific types of assistance in-
clude food aid, medicine, technological assistance, capacity build-
ing assistance, construction of infrastructure, and other activities.
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
441 G Street 
Washington, DC 20314-1000
Phone: (202) 761-0010
www.usace.army.mil/
The United States Army Corps of Engineers, an agency located
within the United States Army, is made up primarily of civilian
employees. Today, about 34,600 civilians work for the Corps of
Engineers, while only 650 active duty military personnel are as-
signed to it. The Army Corps of Engineers employees engineers,
biologists, geologists, hydrologists, natural resource managers,
and various other professionals with technical and technological
expertise.
Directory of Organizations
217

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
The mission of the Army Corps of Engineers is to serve as
the nation’s leading engineering agency of the federal govern-
ment. As such, it is responsible for overseeing and managing
proposed and ongoing engineering and public works projects
orchestrated at the federal level. Components of the agency’s
mission are many, including planning, designing, building, and
operating water resources and other civil works projects (in-
cluding ﬂood control, environmental protection, and disaster re-
sponse); designing and managing the construction of military
facilities for the United States Army and United States Air Force;
and providing design and construction management support
for other Department of Defense and federal agencies.
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
1600 Clifton Rd
Atlanta, GA 30333 
Phone: (404) 639-3311
www.cdc.gov/
The CDC is an agency within the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services headquartered in Atlanta, Georgia. In the
United States, the CDC serves as the primary federal public
health organization; its primary mission is to prevent and con-
trol various infectious diseases, injuries, workplace hazards,
and environmental health threats. The CDC has a significant
emergency management–related responsibility when the disas-
ter or potential disaster is a naturally occurring epidemic or the
use of a biological, chemical, or radiological weapon of mass
destruction. The CDC provides considerable training and infor-
mation for state and local emergency medical services with re-
gard to mass casualty scenarios common to natural disasters or
terror attacks. The CDC also works to reduce or prevent physi-
cal and emotional injuries to first responders who frequently
experience considerable trauma as a result of their response to
devastating disasters and their confrontation with human car-
nage. The CDC maintains innumerable resources on its Web
site that address the medical and public health side to large-
scale emergencies.
U.S. Civil Air Patrol (CAP)
105 South Hansell Street, Building 714 
218
Directory of Organizations

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Maxwell AFB, AL 36112-6332
Phone: (888) 211-1812
www.cap.gov/
The United States Civil Air Patrol is the civilian auxiliary of the
United States Air Force. Currently, the Civil Air Patrol has ap-
proximately 57,000 volunteer members across the United States
and its territories. The Civil Air Patrol serves as a search-and-
rescue and disaster response organization when called upon for
assistance. The organization has a ﬂeet of more than 500 single-
engine, piston aircraft and 1,000 emergency services vehicles.
The organization is also known for having the nation’s most ex-
tensive civilian communications network.
The Civil Air Patrol has a three-pronged mission: aerospace
education, cadet programs, and operations. The first two mis-
sions are education related. Through workshops and confer-
ences, as well as through cadet programs that provide flight
training to secondary education students, the Civil Air Patrol at-
tempts to advance interest in aviation and promote a safe aero-
nautical system in the United States.
The Operations mission of the Civil Air Patrol is most as-
sociated with emergency and disaster response. The Civil Air
Patrol is responsible for performing 95 percent of the nation’s
interior search-and-rescue missions. These missions include
the search for missing aircraft presumed to have crashed, as
well as the search for survivors who may be stranded after a
disaster, such as a flood or blizzard. Each year, an estimated
100 lives are saved by the efforts of the Civil Air Patrol. Addi-
tionally, the Civil Air Patrol regularly flies reconnaissance mis-
sions for the Department of Homeland Security and the Drug
Enforcement Administration. These missions are intended to
identify drug smugglers and human traffickers who cross over
America’s border from Mexico or Canada. Finally, the Civil Air
Patrol also assists with damage assessment after disasters
strike and is regularly called upon to transport time-sensitive
medical supplies.
U.S. Coast Guard (USCG)
Coast Guard Headquarters Commandant
2100 Second Street, SW 
Washington, DC 20593
Directory of Organizations
219

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Phone: (202) 372-4620
www.uscg.mil/
The United States Coast Guard is the smallest of five branches
of America’s armed forces. During a time of war, or at other
times when directed by the president of the United States, the
Coast Guard in part or whole serves under the organizational
command of the United States Navy. At all other times, how-
ever, the Coast Guard operates as an independent agency
within the Department of Homeland Security. The Coast Guard
has a multifaceted mission. It is responsible for enforcing mar-
itime law in American and international waters, providing
maritime assistance and navigation aids, engaging in search-
and-rescue missions in open water and along coastal areas of
the United States, securing the nation’s maritime ports of entry,
engaging in countersmuggling operations, and performing var-
ious regulatory, safety, and administrative functions relating to
the maritime industry.
The Coast Guard is one of nation’s oldest law enforcement
agencies, tracing its roots back to the Revenue Cutter Service,
which was established after America secured its independence
from Great Britain. 
The Coast Guard maintains an active duty force of more
than 40,000 men and women. Many more thousands serve as
members of the Coast Guard Reserve and can be called up to
active duty in a time of war or crisis. Each year, the Coast
Guard responds to tens of thousands of calls for help. From
1994 to 2003, the Coast Guard was directly responsible for sav-
ing the lives of 59,720 people. It played a visible rescue role in
the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina in 2005. Coast Guard heli-
copters and patrol boats rescued thousands of people stranded
on rooftops and in trees after the storm’s intensity subsided.
The Coast Guard demonstrated during the Katrina crisis, as it
had during so many previous disasters, that it is one of the
chief indispensable disaster-response federal agencies and
must be accounted for as an asset in emergency management
planning efforts.
U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
Washington, DC 20528
Phone: (202) 282-8000
www.dhs.gov
220
Directory of Organizations

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
The United States Department of Homeland Security (DHS) is
the cabinet-level federal department responsible for protecting
the interior of the United States. The DHS was created by the
Homeland Security Act of 2002. On March 1, 2003, 22 agencies
from across the landscape of the federal government were reor-
ganized under four major directorates, including Border and
Transportation Security; Emergency Preparedness and Response;
Science and Technology; and Information Analysis and Infra-
structure Protection. Additionally, the U.S. Secret Service and the
U.S. Coast Guard were designated as independent agencies
within DHS and not under any particular directorate.
The functions of DHS are aptly described by the names of
the directorate. Most of DHS’ law enforcement apparatus can be
found in the Border and Transportation Security Directorate. The
Secret Service and the Coast Guard are the two primary excep-
tions to this. The Federal Emergency Management Agency,
which was an independent agency prior to the Homeland Secu-
rity Act’s implementation in 2003, was placed under the Emer-
gency Preparedness and Response Directorate, along with the
Nuclear Incident Response Team (formerly of the Department of
Energy), the Strategic National Stockpile and the National Disas-
ter Medical System (formerly of the Department of Health and
Human Services), the Domestic Emergency Support Teams (for-
merly of the Department of Justice), and the National Domestic
Preparedness Ofﬁce (formerly a unit within the Justice Depart-
ment’s Federal Bureau of Investigation).
In March 2007, DHS announced a reorganization of its emer-
gency management components, including the establishment of
FEMA as an independent agency within DHS (with broader re-
sponsibilities) and the creation of a new directorate: National
Protection and Programs. The responsibility of this new direc-
torate is to advance DHS’ risk-reduction efforts—particularly
where critical infrastructure is concerned. To this end, the Na-
tional Protection and Programs Directorate will identify and as-
sess threats and vulnerabilities involving the nation’s physical
infrastructure (including power grids, water treatment facilities,
transportation networks, etc.), the cyber-environment, and the
US-VISIT program (monitoring potential human risks entering
and leaving the country). This directorate will coordinate closely
with other DHS elements sharing common purposes, such as
FEMA, the Transportation Security Administration, and Cus-
toms and Border Protection.
Directory of Organizations
221

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
U.S. Fire Administration 
16825 South Seton Avenue 
Emmitsburg, MD 21727 
Phone: (301) 447-1000
www.usfa.dhs.gov
The United State Fire Administration is an agency of the U.S.
Department of Homeland Security. Effective March 31, 2007, 
it became organizationally a part of the Federal Emergency Man-
agement Agency as a result of the Post-Katrina Emergency
Management Reform Act of 2006. The agency was ﬁrst created
by the Federal Fire Prevention and Control Act of 1974. In the
Homeland Security Act of 2002, the U.S. Fire Administration was
identiﬁed among the agencies to be transferred to the new De-
partment of Homeland Security, which it did in 2003. The U.S.
Fire Administration serves as the chief federal agency for estab-
lishing ﬁre management and prevention guidelines. The stated
mission of the U.S. Fire Administration is to reduce life and eco-
nomic losses resulting from ﬁres and other emergencies through
the provision of trained leadership, data collection and report-
ing, advocacy, coordination, and support.
Pursuant to its mission, the U.S. Fire Administration main-
tains the National Fire Academy. Through the academy’s train-
ing and education programs, which rely on both residential and
distance-learning platforms, scores of firefighters and emer-
gency medical service personnel have been taught current tech-
nologies and doctrines for fire and emergency management, as
well as principles of leadership in emergency and disaster con-
texts. In fact, since its inception in 1975, the National Fire Acad-
emy has delivered training to more than 1.4 million students
working in the fire services, emergency medical services, and
related areas.
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS)
12201 Sunrise Valley Drive 
Reston, VA 20192
Phone: (703) 648-4000
www.usgs.gov/
The United States Geological Survey is an agency of the United
States Department of Interior. The USGS exists to provide 
222
Directory of Organizations

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
the government and people of the United States with scientiﬁ-
cally sound information concerning the Earth and geological
processes. These processes include potentially disastrous inci-
dents such as earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, landslides,
ﬂoods, and tsunamis. In fact, the USGS maintains agency units
and personnel devoted to the study and response to each of
these types of natural hazards. The services that the USGS pro-
vides the United States are extended to other countries as well—
particularly within the context of disaster warning systems. The
USGS also serves as the primary mapping agency of land and
natural resources in the United States. The USGS plays a signiﬁ-
cant role in emergency management through its natural hazards
monitoring programs, which exist for the purpose of minimiz-
ing the loss of life and property before these hazards actually be-
come disasters.
State Emergency Management Agencies
Below is a list of each state’s emergency management agency,
along with contact information and Internet address. The Web
pages of each of these agencies are ﬁlled with pertinent informa-
tion and links concerning emergency management, disaster
planning, and homeland security—for their own states, for their
regions, and nationally.
State of Alabama
Emergency Management Agency
5898 County Road 41 
P.O. Drawer 2160 
Clanton, Alabama 35046-2160 
Phone: (205) 280-2200
ema.alabama.gov/
State of Alaska
Division of Homeland Security and Emergency Management
Ofﬁce of Homeland Security
P.O. Box 5750
Fort Richardson, AK 99505-5750 
Phone: (907) 428-7000
www.ak-prepared.com/homelandsecurity/
Directory of Organizations
223

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
State of Arizona
Department of Homeland Security 
1700 W. Washington 
Phoenix, AZ 85007 
Phone: (602) 542-7030
www.azdohs.gov/index.htm
State of Arkansas
Department of Emergency Management
P. O. Box 758 
Conway, AR 72033-0758 
Phone: (501) 730-9750
www.adem.state.ar.us/
State of California
Governor’s Ofﬁce of Emergency Services
3650 Schriever Avenue
Mather, CA 95655
Phone: (916) 845-8510
www.oes.ca.gov
State of Colorado
Ofﬁce of Preparedness, Security and Fire Safety
Department of Public Safety
9195 East Mineral Avenue, Suite 234 
Centennial, CO 80112 
Phone: (720) 852-6705
csp.state.co.us/ops.cfm
State of Connecticut
Department of Emergency Management and 
Homeland Security
25 Sigourney Street, 6th Floor
Hartford, CT 06106-5042
Phone: (860) 256-0800
www.ct.gov/demhs
State of Delaware
Delaware Emergency Management Agency
Department of Safety and Homeland Security
165 Brick Store Landing Road 
Smyrna, DE 19977
224
Directory of Organizations

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Phone: (302) 659-DEMA
dema.delaware.gov/
District of Columbia
Emergency Management Agency
2720 Martin Luther King Jr. Avenue, SE 
Washington, DC 20032
Phone: (202) 727-6161
dcema.dc.gov
State of Florida
Florida Division of Emergency Management 
2555 Shumard Oak Boulevard
Tallahassee, Florida 32399-2100
Phone: (850) 413-9969
FloridaDisaster.org
State of Georgia
Georgia Emergency Management Agency
Georgia Ofﬁce of Homeland Security
P.O. Box 18055 
935 East Confederate Avenue, SE 
Atlanta, GA 30316 
Phone: (404) 635-7000
www.gema.state.ga.us/
State of Hawaii
Hawaii State Civil Defense
3949 Diamond Head Road 
Honolulu, Hawaii 96816-4495
Phone: (808) 733-4300
www.scd.state.hi.us/
State of Idaho
Bureau of Homeland Security
4040 Guard Street, Building 600
Boise, ID 83705
Phone: (208) 422-3040
www.bhs.idaho.gov/
Directory of Organizations
225

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
State of Illinois
Illinois Emergency Management Agency
2200 South Dirksen Parkway 
Springﬁeld, Illinois 62703
Phone: (217) 782-2700
www.state.il.us/iema/
State of Indiana
Emergency Response Division
Department of Homeland Security
Indiana Government Center South 
302 W. Washington St., Room E208 
Indianapolis, IN 46204-2739
Phone: (317) 232-3980 or (800) 669-7362 
www.in.gov/dhs/response/
State of Iowa
Iowa Homeland Security and Emergency 
Management Division
Department of Public Defense
7105 N.W. 70th Avenue
Camp Dodge, Building W-4
Johnston, IA 50131 
Phone: (515) 725-3231
www.iowahomelandsecurity.org/
State of Kansas
Division of Emergency Management 
2800 SW Topeka Boulevard 
Topeka, KS 66611-1287
Phone: (785) 274-1409
www.kansas.gov/kdem/
State of Kentucky
Division of Emergency Management
100 Minuteman Parkway 
Frankfort, KY 40601
Phone: (502) 607-1611 or (800) 255-2587
kyem.ky.gov/
226
Directory of Organizations

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
State of Louisiana
Louisiana Ofﬁce of Homeland Security and Emergency
Preparedness
7667 Independence Boulevard 
Baton Rouge, LA 70806
Phone: (225) 925-7500
www.ohsep.louisiana.gov/
State of Maine
Maine Emergency Management Agency
72 State House Station 
45 Commerce Drive 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Phone: (207) 624-4400
www.maine.gov/mema/
State of Maryland
Maryland Emergency Management Agency
5401 Rue Saint Lo Drive
Reisterstown, MD 21136
Phone: (877) MEMA-USA
www.mema.state.md.us/
State of Massachusetts
Massachusetts Emergency Management Agency
400 Worcester Road 
Framingham, MA 01702-5399
Phone: (508) 820-2000
www.mass.gov/mema
State of Michigan
Emergency Management and Homeland 
Security Division
Michigan State Police
714 S. Harrison Road
East Lansing, MI 48823
Phone: (517) 332-2521
www.michigan.gov/homeland
Directory of Organizations
227

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
State of Minnesota
Homeland Security and Emergency Management
Department of Public Safety
444 Cedar Street, Suite 223 
St. Paul, MN 55101-6223 
Phone: (651) 201-7400
www.hsem.state.mn.us/
State of Mississippi
Mississippi Emergency Management Agency
P.O. Box 5644
Pearl, MS 39288
Phone: (601) 933-MEMA
www.msema.org/
State of Missouri
State Emergency Management Agency
2302 Militia Drive 
Jefferson City, MO 65101 
Phone: (573) 526-9100
www.sema.dps.mo.gov/
State of Montana
Disaster and Emergency Services
P.O. Box 4789
1900 Williams Street 
Helena, MT 59604-4789 
Phone: (406) 841-3911
dma.mt.gov/des/
State of Nebraska
Nebraska Emergency Management Agency 
1300 Military Road 
Lincoln, NE 68508-1090 
Phone: 402-471-7410 
www.nema.ne.gov
State of Nevada
Division of Emergency Management 
2525 S. Carson Street 
Carson City, NV 89711 
Phone: (775) 687-4240 
dem.state.nv.us/
228
Directory of Organizations

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
State of New Hampshire
Governor’s Ofﬁce of Emergency Management 
State Ofﬁce Park South 
107 Pleasant Street 
Concord, NH 03301 
Phone: (603) 271-2231 
www.nhoem.state.nh.us/
State of New Jersey
New Jersey Ofﬁce of Emergency Management 
Emergency Management Bureau 
P.O. Box 7068 
West Trenton, NJ 08628-0068 
Phone: (609) 538-6050 
www.state.nj.us/njoem/
State of New Mexico
Emergency Management Bureau 
Department of Public Safety 
P.O. Box 1628 
13 Bataan Boulevard 
Santa Fe, NM 87505 
Phone: (505) 476-9606 or (505) 476-9650 
www.dps.nm.org/emc.htm
State of New York
State Emergency Management Ofﬁce 
1220 Washington Avenue 
Building 22, Suite 101 
Albany, NY 12226-2251 
Phone: (518) 292-2275 
www.nysemo.state.ny.us
State of North Carolina
Division of Emergency Management
Department of Crime Control and Public Safety
4713 Mail Service Center 
Raleigh, NC 27699-4713
Phone: (919) 733-3867
www.ncem.org/
Directory of Organizations
229

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
State of North Dakota
North Dakota Department of Emergency Services 
P.O. Box 5511 
Bismarck, ND 58506-5511 
Phone: (701) 328-8100 
www.nd.gov/des
State of Ohio
Ohio Emergency Management Agency
Department of Public Safety 
2855 W. Dublin-Granville Road 
Columbus, OH 43235-2206 
Phone: (614) 889-7150 
ema.ohio.gov/ema.asp
State of Oklahoma
Ofﬁce of Civil Emergency Management 
Will Rogers Sequoia Tunnel
2401 N. Lincoln 
Oklahoma City, OK 73152 
Phone: (405) 521-2481 
www.odcem.state.ok.us/
State of Oregon
Oregon Emergency Management Department of State Police 
P.O. Box 14370 
Salem, OR 97309-5062 
Phone: (503) 378-2911 
egov.oregon.gov/OOHS/OEM
State of Pennsylvania
Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency 
2605 Interstate Drive 
Harrisburg PA 17110-9463 
Phone: (717) 651-2001
www.pema.state.pa.us/
State of Rhode Island
Rhode Island Emergency Management Agency 645 
New London Avenue
Cranston, RI 02920-3003 
230
Directory of Organizations

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Phone: (401) 946-9996 
www.riema.ri.gov
State of South Carolina
South Carolina Emergency Management Division 
2779 Fish Hatchery Road West 
Columbia, SC 29172 
Phone: (803) 737-8500 
www.scemd.org/
State of South Dakota
Division of Emergency Management
Department of Public Safety 
118 West Capitol 
Pierre, SD 57501 
Phone: (605) 773-3231
www.oem.sd.gov/
State of Tennessee
Tennessee Emergency Management Agency 
3041 Sidco Drive 
Nashville, TN 37204-1502 
Phone: (615) 741-4332 
www.tnema.org
State of Texas
Texas Division of Emergency Management 
5805 N. Lamar 
Austin, TX 78752 
Phone: (512) 424-2138 
www.txdps.state.tx.us/dem
State of Utah
Utah Division of Emergency Services and 
Homeland Security 
1110 State Ofﬁce Building 
P.O. Box 141710 
Salt Lake City, UT 84114-1710 
Phone: (801) 538-3400 
www.des.utah.gov
Directory of Organizations
231

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
State of Vermont
Vermont Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Public Safety 
Waterbury State Complex 
103 S. Main Street 
Waterbury, VT 05671-2101 
Phone: (802) 244-8721 
www.dps.state.vt.us/vem/
State of Virginia
Virginia Department of Emergency Management 
10501 Trade Court 
Richmond, VA 23236-3713 
Phone: (804) 897-6502 
www.vdem.state.va.us
State of Washington
Washington Emergency Management Division 
Building 20, M/S TA-20 
Camp Murray, WA 98430-5122 
Phone: (253) 512-7000 
www.emd.wa.gov/
State of West Virginia
West Virginia Ofﬁce of Emergency Services 
Building 1, Room EB-80 
1900 Kanawha Boulevard 
East Charleston, WV 25305-0360 
Phone: (304) 558-5380 
www.wvdhsem.gov
State of Wisconsin
Wisconsin Emergency Management 
2400 Wright Street 
P.O. Box 7865 
Madison, WI 53707-7865 
Phone: (608) 242-3232 
emergencymanagement.wi.gov/
232
Directory of Organizations

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
State of Wyoming
Wyoming Ofﬁce of Homeland Security 
122 W. 25th Street 
Cheyenne, WY 82002 
Phone: (307) 777-4900 
wyohomelandsecurity.state.wy.us
International Agencies/Organizations
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
19 Avenue de la Paix 
CH 1202 Geneva, Switzerland
Phone: + 41 (22) 734 60 01
www.icrc.org/eng
The International Committee of the Red Cross is a neutral hu-
manitarian organization based in Geneva, Switzerland. The or-
ganization takes an impartial stance with regard to merits of the
arguments between groups or countries embroiled in conflict
with one another. The ICRC, which is the umbrella organization
over the International Red Cross and the International Red Cres-
cent, monitors the compliance of nations with the Geneva Con-
vention—which specifically requires humane treatment for
captured prisoners of war and for minimizing casualties against
noncombative civilian populations.
The activities of the Red Cross and Red Crescent include vis-
iting prisoners of war and security detainees; searching for miss-
ing persons; facilitating communications between separated
family members as a result of civil unrest and conﬂict and reunit-
ing family members where possible; providing water, food, and
medical care to those in need; promoting respect for interna-
tional humanitarian law; monitoring humanitarian law compli-
ance and issuing compliance reports; and contributing to the
development and strengthening of international humanitarian-
ism among international policy and judicial bodies.
Organization of American States (OAS)
Natural Hazards Project
Ofﬁce for Sustainable Development and Environment 
1889 F Street, NW 
Directory of Organizations
233

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Washington, DC 20006
Phone: (202) 458-6295
www.oas.org/nhp/
The OAS is an international associative body made up of thirty-
ﬁve independent Western Hemisphere nations, including those
in North, Central, and South America. The purpose of the OAS is
to strengthen the cooperative efforts between member nations on
matters concerning the development of democratic values, the
defense of common interests, and the deliberation of the major
issues facing the hemisphere and the world. Specific problems
addressed cooperatively through the OAS include terrorism,
drug trafﬁcking, poverty, and the impact of natural disasters.
The OAS Natural Hazards Project is located in the Ofﬁce for
Sustainable Development and Environment. The goal of the Nat-
ural Hazards Project is to help OAS member nations to assess
their own vulnerabilities to natural hazards and to engage in
mitigation efforts to reduce the impact of those hazards should
they materialize. The OAS, through the Natural Hazards Project,
provides technical assistance, technology transfers, training, and
assistance with mitigation project formulation. Current em-
phases of the Natural Hazards Project include floods, the re-
silience of school buildings, and the protection of transportation
corridors.
United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
(UN/ISDR)
International Environment House II 
7–9 Chemin de Balexert 
CH 1219 Chatelaine, Geneva 10, Switzerland 
Phone: +41 22 917 8908/8907
www.unisdr.org/isdrindex.htm
The UN/ISDR is an agency within the United Nations devoted
to fostering disaster-resilient communities around the world by
promoting increased awareness of the importance of disaster re-
duction efforts as a necessary element of progress for developing
countries. The practical goal of the UN/ISDR is to reduce losses
(human, social, economic, and environmental) that tend to fol-
low from natural, technological, and environmental disasters.
Pursuant to its mission, the UN/ISDR promotes four primary
objectives for the purpose of reducing the devastating impact of
disasters: to increase public awareness and understanding of
234
Directory of Organizations

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
risk, vulnerability, and disaster reduction globally; to obtain
commitments from the public authorities in vulnerable countries
to implement disaster reduction policies and action steps; to
stimulate interdisciplinary and intersectoral partnerships, in-
cluding the expansion of risk networks; and to improve scientiﬁc
knowledge about disaster reduction.
United Nations Ofﬁce for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA)
First Avenue at 46th Street 
New York, NY 10017
Phone: (212) 963-1234
ochaonline.un.org/
www.reliefweb.int/
The OCHA was created in 1998 as the UN agency responsible for
coordinating and delivering humanitarian relief to nations in a
time of crisis. Prior to 1998, the responsibility belonged to the
UN’s Department of Humanitarian Affairs (DHA) and to the
Emergency Relief Coordinator located within the DHA. The mis-
sion of the United Nations to provide relief in the face of large-
scale emergencies and natural disasters was articulated and
strengthened by UN Resolution 46/182, which was adopted in
December 1991.
In addition to the applied function of coordinating actual
humanitarian missions for the United Nations, the OCHA also is
responsible for developing policies relating to humanitarian as-
sistance and for engaging in advocacy, on behalf of the UN, for
humanitarian causes. The OCHA also maintains the ReliefWeb
Internet site, described below.
United Nations Relief Web
First Avenue at 46th Street 
New York, NY 10017
Phone: (212) 963-1234
www.reliefweb.int/
ReliefWeb touts itself as the leading Web-based information por-
tal concerning humanitarian crises and disasters. The site is
maintained by the United Nations Ofﬁce for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. The purpose of ReliefWeb is to provide
members of the international humanitarian community (which
includes government agencies, private relief organizations, and
Directory of Organizations
235

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
academic and research institutions, and the media) in providing
emergency assistance to disaster-stricken peoples and informa-
tion about said relief efforts.
ReliefWeb became operational in 1996. Since then, it has be-
come an invaluable resource for exchanging information about
humanitarian needs, practices, and policies between govern-
ments, agencies, and nongovernment organizations. Hundreds
of thousands of documents can be accessed through ReliefWeb,
which has organized and classiﬁed each of these documents. The
usage of ReliefWeb as a resource has steadily grown since its cre-
ation. In 2002, the Web site received 1.5 million hits per week. By
2004, it was receiving nearly a million hits each day. After major
disasters, the usage climbs rapidly. Shortly after the tsunamis
struck South Asia in December 2004, ReliefWeb was receiving 3
million hits each day.
236
Directory of Organizations

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
8
Resources
T
his chapter is intended to provide readers with an indication
of the growing pool of literature and other resources avail-
able regarding the discipline and practice of emergency man-
agement, disaster planning, and homeland security. Speciﬁcally,
this chapter acquaints readers with a number of published arti-
cles, books, government reports, and video productions that may
be of interest to anyone exploring or researching the broad ﬁeld
of emergency management and its cognate activities.
Summary of Selected Scholarship
Relating to Emergency Management
As emergency management continues to develop as a profes-
sion, the literature base relating to the profession grows. Prior to
the emergence of professional emergency management, the
knowledge base for disaster planning and emergency manage-
ment was reflected as a subset in sociological, scientific, and
public safety literature venues. Further, the studies and materi-
als that were produced concerning emergency management
were scant. Today, however, due to the expanding academic and
professional disaster planning and homeland security commu-
nities, considerably more scholarship is being done in emer-
gency management. Indeed, the numbers of applied and
scholarly researchers publishing in the ﬁeld for the purpose of
advancing the discipline have increased dramatically in the past
decade.
237

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
238
Resources
The ﬁrst section of this chapter offers readers a summary of
some of the applied scholarship done in very recent years. Obvi-
ously, the sample of articles selected for summary here should in
no way be construed as an exhaustive representation of the
emergency management literature. Rather, these articles and
studies provide a flavor for the state of the discipline and the
kinds of questions that emergency management researchers are
asking and answering.
Balaban, Victor. 2006. “Psychological Assessments of Children
in Disasters and Emergencies.” Disasters 30 (2): 178–198.
In this article, the author addresses the concern of the mental
health of children after a disaster or other major crisis. Histori-
cally, the traumatic impact of disasters on children who lived
through them was thought to be temporary. It was believed that
children’s memories of disastrous events would fade and the
personal effects of those disasters would abate over time as the
children grow older. However, the author and others assert to-
day that children are not impervious to mental and emotional
trauma resulting from disasters, but rather are among the most
vulnerable and susceptible to it. The author notes that children
and adolescents experience four possible types of posttraumatic
responses: posttraumatic stress disorder, depression, anxiety dis-
orders, and behavioral disorders. Given this range of possible
disorders, depending on the child and depending on the event,
the author argues for a rational approach to assessing the mental
health condition of affected children after disasters strike.
Through this study, the author determined to evaluate psy-
chological assessment instruments and their appropriateness for
the speciﬁc trauma-related mental disorders listed above by ex-
amining studies from 1974 to 2004 that relied on various vali-
dated psychological instruments. The author, using criteria
tailored for disaster-related contexts, identified two to four in-
struments for each of the mental disorders listed above.
The author notes that instruments to be used for assessing
children in postdisaster environments should be cost effective
and brief (to avoid burdening the children, families, relief work-
ers, and health care professionals at a time when human capaci-
ties are already strained). The instruments should also measure
symptoms of multiple disorders. The author provides examples

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
of how elements of different instruments might be combined to
measure different constructs and to evaluate children and par-
ents simultaneously.
Banipal, Kulwinder. 2006. “Strategic Approach to Disaster
Management: Lessons Learned from Hurricane Katrina.” Dis-
aster Prevention and Management 15 (3): 484–494.
In the study, the author explores the state of communications
and information systems in the Gulf region following Hurri-
cane Katrina. The author notes that functional postdisaster
communications and information systems are essential for
search and rescue operations, maintaining law and order, and
estimating losses. In assessing the Gulf region’s communica-
tions and information management systems, the author identi-
fies several problems that existed after Hurricane Katrina made
landfall and that had existed well in advance of the disaster.
These problems included: 
• Lack of direct coordination between ﬁrst responders
• Dependence on the central dispatch center
• Lack of interoperability
Further, the author found that cellular communication was
defeated because of the interconnection between the local electri-
cal supply and the communications system, as well as the wind
and rain damage to the antennas atop cellular towers.
As a result of the author’s evaluation, the article advances
several suggestions for designing more resilient communications
and information systems. The author’s recommendations for im-
proved emergency communications include the use of software-
defined radio systems, the use of microwave backhaul for
carrying cellular traffic after a disaster, and the use of Wi-Max
networks within city administration buildings.
Fernandez, Lauren, Joseph Barbera, and Johan van Dorp. 2006.
“Spontaneous Volunteer Response to Disasters: The Benefits
and Consequences of Good Intentions.” Journal of Emergency
Management 4 (5): 57–66.
This article adds to the understanding of the effective use of vol-
unteers during a natural disaster or other large-scale emergency.
Summary of Selected Scholarship
239

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
The authors explore, through an analysis of the existing litera-
ture, just who in the public are inclined to volunteer their assis-
tance in response to disasters and under what circumstances
they tend to do so. The authors identify many reasons for disas-
ter volunteerism, including a heightened sense of civic duty, and
the experience (for some) of having themselves been victimized
by the current or a prior disaster.
The authors identify several beneﬁts associated with disaster
volunteers. They can amount to a signiﬁcant and timely work-
force for tackling the monumental task of rescue and disaster
clean-up. In fact, the article draws attention to stories of volun-
teers saving lives. When an earthquake struck southern Italy in
1980, 90 percent of the survivors were rescued by other untrained
and uninjured survivors who simply used their hands and every-
day tools to extricate people from the rubble. In 1985, after an
earthquake struck Mexico City, nearly 500 survivors were pulled
from the rubble by untrained, spontaneous volunteers.
The authors also identify risks and challenges to the effec-
tive use of volunteers after a disaster. Chief among these risks is
the possibility that untrained and uncoordinated volunteers
might cause more harm than good. Further, the unorganized
and ineffective use of volunteers may cast a discouraging light
on the rescue and relief operations as a whole, thereby reducing
the morale of the community and increasing a sense of pes-
simism. Volunteers also can tax important resources such as
food, shelter, and time. The resource of time is one that many
professional rescue and relief workers simply would prefer to
not have to expend in an effort to ﬁnd something useful for vol-
unteers to do.
The authors argue that emergency managers must do sev-
eral things to effectively utilize disaster volunteerism. These in-
clude matching volunteers to needs, fostering a common view
of the incident among the disparate volunteers, recognizing the
dynamic nature of disaster response needs, accounting for vol-
unteer safety and health concerns, and understanding that vol-
unteers are going to participate at a disaster scene whether
their help is requested or not. The authors found that emer-
gency managers and published emergency management plans
must consider these issues and develop processes for mobiliz-
ing, utilizing, and demobilizing volunteer response and relief
efforts.
240
Resources

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Fischer, Henry. 2004. FEMA Higher Education Project Survey
Results. Research report presented to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, Emergency Management Institute, Em-
mitsburg, MD.
In this study, the author measured the state of emergency man-
agement as an academic discipline. Through survey research, the
author found that the average emergency management college
program coordinator was in his or her early 50s and had been
teaching emergency management for not less than eight years.
Two-thirds of emergency management faculty taught at public in-
stitutions. Programs tended to be small in faculty numbers. The
average emergency management program had only three full-
time tenure-track faculty. The rest of the teaching load tended to
rely on adjuncts or courses from other disciplines. Males ac-
counted for 68 percent of the coordinators in the survey. Cau-
casians were 97 percent. A little more than half—54 percent—
possessed a doctorate. The remaining 46 percent possessed mas-
ter’s or bachelor’s degrees. The students in emergency manage-
ment programs tended to be male—68 percent. Caucasian
students totaled 85 percent.
Of the programs surveyed, 65 percent offered at least some of
the curriculum through distance education platforms. Most of the
programs—65 percent—reﬂected a traditional emergency manage-
ment orientation, namely to foster disaster resilience in communi-
ties. The remaining third of the programs proclaimed other
emphases, such as homeland security. Program coordinators iden-
tiﬁed several challenges, including the shortage of faculty, lack of
textbooks in needed subject areas, large class sizes, and too great an
emphasis (and interest among the students) on homeland security.
Freeman, Lynn. 2007. “Warning Response.” Journal of Emer-
gency Management 5 (1): 53–57.
In this article, the author addresses the problem of disaster warn-
ings being ignored by members of the public. The author identi-
ﬁes seven parts to the warning process: 
1. Perceiving the warning (usually by hearing or seeing)
2. Understanding the warning
3. Believing that the warning is real and accurate
4. Conﬁrming the warning through other sources
Summary of Selected Scholarship
241

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
5. Personalizing the warning
6. Deciding on a course of action
7. Acting on that decision
Warnings go unheeded when one or more parts of the above
process breaks down. The author acknowledges that disbelief is
a common initial response to disaster warning messages. An-
other common reason for warnings being ignored is when a deci-
sion to act on that warning is not made. In such cases, everything
about the warning may ring true with a particular person, but he
or she decides nonetheless to remain static.
The author provides the emergency management commu-
nity with suggestions for bolstering the effectiveness of disaster
warning systems. First, the perception of local government’s
credibility and trustworthiness must be enhanced for warnings to
be heeded. If the government agency issuing a warning has a his-
tory of “crying wolf” or in some other way misleading the public,
then the likelihood that the agency’s future warnings will be well
regarded is diminished. Additionally, warnings must be issued
through various means. No single method, such as a television
broadcast or a city siren, should be relied upon exclusively. In-
stead, the warning system must be multimethodological.
Grigg, Eliot, Joseph Rosen, and C. Everett Koop. 2006. “The Bi-
ological Disaster Challenge: Why We Are Least Prepared for
the Most Devastating Threat and What We Need to Do About
It.” Journal of Emergency Management 4 (1): 23–35.
The authors of this article present a compelling case for increas-
ing the nation’s capacity to deal with biological disasters. Bio-
logical disasters can befall the United States either due to acts of
terrorism or war or because of naturally occurring epidemics.
The article goes on to address the possibilities that exist with
both of these types of disasters. A signiﬁcant portion of the arti-
cle is devoted to recounting the 1918 ﬂu epidemic that afﬂicted
the United States and the rest of the world. Upwards of 25 mil-
lion people died worldwide during the epidemic’s first six
months. The authors then proceed to dispel the myths about the
ﬂu today, including among other things that we have a plan for
a ﬂu epidemic, that we understand the ﬂu today, that epidemics
242
Resources

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
and pandemics cannot happen in the modern age, and that we
are better off than in 1918 because our antiviral medicines will
certainly work.
The authors recommend several practical emergency miti-
gation and preparedness measures with regard to biological dis-
asters. The most significant recommendation is to increase
stockpiles of various types of medicines. The article states that it
takes six to eight months to manufacture a new vaccine. Waiting
for a disease to afﬂict us and then contracting with drug manu-
facturers is a recipe for massive casualties, according to the au-
thors. Additionally, masks can be distributed throughout society
so that they could be used if needed. Further, plans for reducing
social interaction (such as closing schools and other gathering
places) should be reﬁned and available in the event a large-scale
biological emergency strikes the United States. Still another
proactive method is to provide greater assistance to other coun-
tries of the world—regardless of political friendliness—with
their disease-control efforts.
David McEntire. 2005. “Emergency Management Theory: Is-
sues, Barriers, and Recommendations for Improvement.” Jour-
nal of Emergency Management 3 (3): 44–54.
In this article, the author discusses the state of emergency man-
agement theory today. Like any emerging professional disci-
pline, emergency management has seen a growth in its
knowledge and literature base over the past several years. How-
ever, the theory of emergency management is not so well estab-
lished. Theory and theoretical models in any discipline require
that the observed realities in the ﬁeld be coupled together in a
synthesized and organized way so that they have explanative
and relatively constant properties. As the author notes, ﬁrm deﬁ-
nitions, classifications, and principles of operation, including
causal relationships, tend to ﬂow from theory.
The author states in the article that emergency manage-
ment is lacking of a unified theory or set of theories. In order to
bolster emergency management theory, the author offers sev-
eral recommendations to the academic community. First, emer-
gency management scholars should revisit and reinforce the
discipline’s findings from earlier research relating to hazards,
Summary of Selected Scholarship
243

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
convergence, and emergence. Additionally, common defini-
tions should be sought for key concepts such as just what a dis-
aster is, or what emergency management is. In fact, the author
suggests that the discipline’s name—“emergency manage-
ment”—should possibly be rescinded in favor of some other,
more explanative name, such as disaster management, risk
management, or disaster vulnerability management. Still an-
other action step for scholars is to truly become critical thinkers
regarding the discipline. This requires that academicians
continually examine new ways of doing emergency manage-
ment while remaining realistic in light of limited resources and
technology.
Lioy, Paul, Fred Roberts, Brendan McCluskey, Mary Lioy, Au-
drey Cross, Lee Clarke, Lee Stanton, William Tepfenhart, and
Mary Ferrara. 2006. “TOPOFF 3: Comments and Recommenda-
tions from Members of the New Jersey Universities Consor-
tium for Homeland Security Research.” Journal of Emergency
Management 4 (6): 41–51.
This article provides readers with the evaluation of ﬁrsthand ob-
servers of the large-scale disaster training scenario known as
TOPOFF 3. The TOPOFF 3 exercise, orchestrated by the U.S. De-
partment of Homeland Security, was held April 4–8, 2005. The
exercise took place simultaneously in Connecticut, New Jersey,
the United Kingdom, and Canada. It involved a complex terror
attack scenario in which the participating jurisdictions were each
hit with a weapon of mass destruction. In the scenario, New Jer-
sey suffered through an attack involving pneumonic plague,
while Connecticut was hit with a chemical attack.
In the article, the authors identiﬁed one of the exercise’s pri-
mary weaknesses: its total scripted-ness. As the authors noted,
TOPOFF 3 followed a playbook that completely lacked the ran-
dom elements of surprise or contradictory information, which
would realistically be present in an actual event of this magni-
tude. Because of this, the true decision-making capabilities of
participants and the adequacy of processes in place could not be
accurately judged. There was no sense of chaos among the ofﬁ-
cials and the press. In the article, beyond their recommendations
that address specific observations of the processes witnessed
244
Resources

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
during the exercise, the authors offer their leading recommenda-
tion: the Department of Homeland Security should adopt a more
“war game” style approach to simulation exercises. This would
allow for acute, unexpected, “stochastic” events to occur that
would require decisions and actions without the beneﬁt of signif-
icant contemplation.
Reich, John. 2006. “Three Psychological Principles of Re-
silience in Natural Disasters.” Disaster Prevention and Man-
agement 15 (5): 793–798.
The author in this article sets out to identify those psychological
principles that are deemed indispensable for people to remain
steadfast and resilient in the face of natural or man-made disas-
ters. Through the identiﬁcation and exploration of these princi-
ples, the author hopes to add to our understanding of the human
condition with the goal of improving disaster intervention strate-
gies and effectiveness.
The author identifies three psychological principles of re-
silience, which he describes as the “3 Cs”: 
• Control
• Coherence
• Connectedness
The author cites disaster literature that reinforces the value
of all three principles for the recovery of those affected by disas-
ters. “Control” relates to one’s personal ability (or the sense of
that ability) to aid in their own recovery. For control to exist, vic-
tims must have personal resources at their command, which can
be employed to achieve their goals. “Coherence” relates to the
knowledge and understanding of the victim. Receiving accurate
answers to questions such as, “Where’s my family?” and “Is help
coming?” go a long way toward fostering coherence. Responders
can aid in this area by providing victims with direction and in-
formation. Finally, “connectedness” relates to the notion of
people banding together in the face of a common calamity. After
disaster strikes, every effort should be made to facilitate the
reestablishment of social bonds among victims so that they can
heal together.
Summary of Selected Scholarship
245

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Shaw, Greg, and John Harrald. 2006. “Core Competencies of
Executive Level Business Crisis and Continuity Managers—
The Results.” Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency
Management 3 (1): 1–34.
In this study, the authors address the competencies of private-
sector business executives for dealing with large-scale crises and
ensuring the continuity of the business operations. Particularly,
the authors offer a framework for ensuring the continued fulﬁll-
ment of organizational strategic goals during and after a natural
or man-made disaster. The framework is called the Business
Crisis and Continuity Management (BCCM) model. The authors
then examine the BCCM model and, through survey research,
they prioritize 137 competencies and thirteen functional areas.
The authors found that there is some overlap of competencies
commonly associated with effective emergency managers and
those working under the rubric of the BCCM. However, there
were significant differences as well—so many that the authors
concluded the two disciplines of emergency management and
business continuity management to be very much distinct from
one another. Crisis management was given as the greatest func-
tional priority for BCCM executives.
Books, Government Reports,
and Videos
According to past surveys of practitioners and academicians in
the field of emergency management, a common complaint has
been the numerical lack of published reference materials in the
ﬁeld. Indeed, less than a decade ago, the number of monographs
and textbooks with emergency management titles was small.
This was one of the driving motivations behind the establish-
ment of the Higher Education Project at the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA). This initiative sought to foster a
growth in the authorship and publication of emergency manage-
ment titles.
In this section of the chapter, readers are presented with a
select list of published emergency management books. It should
be understood that this list represents only a sample of available
publications relating to emergency management. Bibliographical
information about the books is provided for easy reference, as
246
Resources

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
well as a brief description of the contents of each book. Some of
the books below were written and published as a direct result of
FEMA’s Higher Education Project. Others were researched and
produced independent of any organized FEMA effort to boost
emergency management’s literature base. But all the books listed
are believed to be useful contributions to the overall understand-
ing of emergency management and disaster planning.
In addition to the books, a list of government reports and
videos related to emergency management and available to the
public is also presented. As with the books, the cited reports and
videos are accompanied by complete bibliographical information
and brief summaries as an aid to the reader seeking to conduct
further research about emergency management and disaster
planning.
Books
Alexander, David. Principles of Emergency Planning and Man-
agement. New York: Oxford University Press. 2002. 340 pp.
ISBN: 978-0-19521-838-1.
David Alexander’s book is one of the most cited in the ﬁeld of
emergency management. This book was one of the very first
texts to present a comprehensive introduction to and overview of
the field of disaster planning and emergency management. It
was also among the ﬁrst to present a theoretical framework and
typologies for understanding and responding to various types of
natural and man-made disasters. The book provides several case
studies of how major disasters were handled or mishandled,
along with accompanying analysis.
Bell, Howard. Homeland Security: A Reference Handbook. Santa
Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. 2005. 235 pp. ISBN: 978-1-85109-803-3.
This book serves as an excellent primer for understanding the
development and the role of the U.S. Department of Homeland
Security and its component parts (which includes the Federal
Emergency Management Agency). Howard Bell presents the
history of the department within the context of the aftermath of
the September 11, 2001, terror attacks. Bell also discusses 
the nation’s pre-9/11 history and track record with regard to
homeland security threats. Bell explores important legislation,
Books, Government Reports, and Videos
247

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
such as the USA PATRIOT Act, and the impact new laws have
had on federal law enforcement efforts to protect the country
from terrorism.
Borodzics, Edward. Risk, Crisis & Security Management. West
Sussex, UK: Wiley & Sons. 2005. 244 pp. ISBN: 0-470-86704-3.
This book introduces readers to the process of assessing risk in
public- and private-sector organizational contexts. The emphasis
of the book relates to risks associated with major hazards and dis-
asters. As the author notes in the book, the management of risk
has ramiﬁcations for public health services, public transportation,
public safety, and corporate activities. It explores the principles of
risk identification and measurement, risk’s organization ele-
ments, and the role of simulation exercises in the determination of
risk and the proper response to its existence.
Brinkley, Douglas. Great Deluge: Hurricane Katrina, New Or-
leans, and the Mississippi Gulf Coast. New York: William Mor-
row. 2006. 716 pp. ISBN: 978-0-06-112423-0.
This book offers a highly documented account of the destruction
caused by Hurricane Katrina, along with the successes and fail-
ures of government at all levels with regard to preparation and
response. Douglas Brinkley has become one of America’s most
popular contemporary historians. He has been featured regu-
larly on television news panels to discuss issues such as Ameri-
can presidents in history, the civil rights movement, and the
United States during wartime. However, as a history professor at
Tulane University and a resident of New Orleans who lived
through Hurricane Katrina, Brinkley brings an elevated authen-
ticity to this particular historical account among the many he is
credited with producing. The book spends considerable time ad-
dressing the shortcomings of leadership at the municipal, state,
and federal levels of government. It chronicles the considerable
suffering that was endured by so many. It also reports on many
successes and individual acts of heroism. The Great Deluge is a
story about the intersection of human foibles and nobility with
nature’s ravages. It depicts this intersection about as thoroughly
as any Katrina book on the market.
248
Resources

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Bullock, Jane, and George Haddow. Introduction to Homeland
Security. Boston: Elsevier. 2006. 672 pp. ISBN: 978-0-7506-7992-3.
This book serves as a useful introduction to the U.S. Department
of Homeland Security, as well as an objective to be achieved by
the United States and other countries. The text examines devel-
opments and trends in the United States concerning homeland
security activities, including those engaged in by both law en-
forcement and emergency management communities at all levels
of government. The text also provides a number of case studies
that inform the study of emergency management. It explains the
role of several different federal and state agencies in the overall
homeland security mission. 
Clarke, Lee. Worst Cases: Terror and Catastrophe in the Popular
Imagination. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 2006. 200
pp. ISBN: 978-0-226-10859-9.
In this text, Lee Clarke does what many said the government of
the United States failed to do prior to the 9/11 attacks: imagine
the unimaginable. Clarke offers detailed worst-case scenarios for
catastrophic terror attacks and natural disasters. The text then af-
fords readers the opportunity to think through the difficult is-
sues associated with the mitigation and response to those events.
Throughout the book, a dialogue takes place between the author
and the reader, which prompts the reader to confront the real
possibility of materialized threats of massive scale. The dramatic,
even unimaginable, destruction in these different scenarios re-
sults in a sharpened sense of the need for proper emergency
management preparedness and mitigation efforts.
Committee on Disaster Research in the Social Sciences: Future
Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council.
Facing Hazards and Disasters: Understanding Human Dimen-
sions. Washington, DC: National Academies Press. 2006. 408
pp. ISBN: 978-0-309-10178-3.
This book revisits the social science research that has been done
since the 1970s concerning society’s ability to adapt to natural,
technological, and terrorism-related disasters. The authors of the
book then proceed to make several recommendations for the
Books, Government Reports, and Videos
249

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
expansion of knowledge within the discipline of emergency
management through additional social science research. In par-
ticular, the predictability, forewarning, magnitude, and duration
of disasters and their effect on society’s capacity to avoid and re-
spond to disasters are the suggested topics of further research.
Coppola, Damon. Introduction to International Disaster Man-
agement. Oxford, UK: Butterworth-Heinemann. 2007. 547 pp.
ISBN: 978-0-7506-7982-4.
In this text, Damon Coppola, a well-known emergency manage-
ment scholar and practitioner, presents an introduction to emer-
gency management and disaster planning from an international
perspective. As a result, many of the illustrations and case stud-
ies found in the book are from places other than the United
States or even the West. This permits the author to take advan-
tage of the lessons and experiences of nations that have suffered
far more devastating natural and man-made disastrous events
than are typical in the United States and the rest of the developed
world. The book also addresses international efforts to confront
natural and man-made hazards and introduces a multitude of
agencies and organizations that affect the emergency manage-
ment process globally.
D’Arcy, Michael, Michael O’Hanlon, Peter Orszag, Jeremy
Shapiro, and James Steinburg. Protecting the Homeland
2006/2007. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press. 2006.
212 pp. ISBN: 978-0-8157-6459-5.
As with other books related to homeland security presented in
this chapter, the publication by d’Arcy et al. provides readers
with a useful overview of homeland security measures and ef-
forts in the United States. However, the book is a product of the
Brookings Institution, which is one the nation’s leading think
tanks. As such, the book is a policy document as much as it is a
running account of the status of American homeland security.
In particular, the authors offer several policy recommendations
for reforming America’s intelligence efforts, increasing the pro-
tection levels of the nation’s infrastructure and borders (which
go to the emergency management themes of preparedness and
250
Resources

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
mitigation), developing new technologies for the improvement
of homeland security, and developing strategies to counter var-
ious types of terrorism and acts of war.
Fitzpatrick, Patrick. Natural Disasters: Hurricanes. Santa Bar-
bara, CA: ABC-CLIO. 1999. 286 pp. ISBN: 978-1-57607-260-8.
Although slightly dated, this book on hurricanes by Patrick Fitz-
patrick possesses a level of usefulness as a disaster reference. As
with other ABC-CLIO books, Natural Disasters: Hurricanes pro-
vides a wealth of introductory information and a multitude of
references for further research—in this case, about hurricanes.
The book explains the cycles of hurricanes and provides an as-
sessment of the economic and environmental damage that severe
hurricanes typically cause. Fitzpatrick also provides readers with
an overview of the findings of modern scientific hurricane
research.
Gustin, Joseph. Disaster and Recovery Planning: A Guide for
Facility Managers. Lilburn, GA: Fairmont Press. 2007. 423 pp.
ISBN: 0-88173-557-4
In this book, Joseph Gustin focuses on emergency management
efforts for business and industry. In particular, he explores pre-
vention and mitigation activities for the purpose of business and
facilities continuity. The book considers these issues in the con-
text of a variety of different hazards, including natural hazards,
large-scale accidents, and acts of terrorism. Measures such as
computer and data protection activities, the installation of
backup power supplies, self-inspection, and contingency plan-
ning are addressed. Ample examples, including examples from
Hurricane Katrina, are provided to enhance the understanding
of the reader.
Hampton, Wilborn. Meltdown: The Race against Nuclear Dis-
aster at Three Mile Island. Cambridge, MA: Candlewick Press.
2001. 112 pp. ISBN: 978-0-76360-715-9
This book explores, from a journalist’s perspective, one of the most
signiﬁcant industrial accidents in American history: the 1979 nu-
clear power plant accident at Three Mile Island in Pennsylvania.
Books, Government Reports, and Videos
251

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
In this book, the events leading up to the meltdown of one of the
power plant’s nuclear reactors is chronicled in detail. A positive
feature of the book is Hampton’s heavy reliance on eyewitness ac-
counts and photographs associated with the event. The potential
danger associated with the nuclear power industry is discussed, as
is the preparedness of government safety and emergency manage-
ment ofﬁcials for dealing with nuclear accidents.
Hooke, William, and Paul Rogers (eds.). Public Health Risks of
Disasters: Communication, Infrastructure, and Preparedness.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press. 2005. 88 pp. ISBN:
978-0-309-09542-6.
This book represents a synthesis of ideas from the emergency
management and public-health professional communities. The
publication is the culmination of cooperative workshops involv-
ing the two disciplines that were sponsored by the National Re-
search Council. The book addresses problems and solutions to
various health risks associated with disasters, particularly in the
United States. It also identiﬁes the need for training and collabo-
rative problem solving to confront challenges relating to public
health as a result of disasters in the future.
Kemp, Roger (ed.). Homeland Security Handbook for Citizens
and Public Officials. Jefferson, NC: McFarland. 2006. 269 pp.
ISBN: 978-0-7864-2432-0
This book is a compilation of articles and chapters written by
various public administration professionals and academicians.
Roger Kemp, who is a city manager in California, is the editor of
the book as well as a contributor to its content. Despite the
phrase “homeland security” appearing in the title, the book is
truly an emergency management text for local government ofﬁ-
cials and presents an all-hazards approach to the discipline—
which includes both natural and man-made disasters. The book,
which in previous editions had been published by the Interna-
tional City/County Managers Association before becoming a
McFarland Press listing, offers a description of best practices in
local government where emergency management and homeland
security are concerned. The text concludes with several useful
appendices.
252
Resources

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Miller, Willard, and Ruby Miller. Natural Disasters: Floods.
Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. 2000. 286 pp. ISBN: 978-1-
57607-289-9.
As with the Patrick Fitzpatrick book on hurricanes listed above,
this book is among the more dated publications offered in this
chapter. But also like the Fitzpatrick book, the content is useful to
the discussion and research of emergency management. Willard
and Ruby Miller provide readers with a very helpful overview of
ﬂooding. This overview includes a discussion on the frequency
of major floods in the United States, the level of damage that
ﬂoods tend to cause, and information about organizations (such
as FEMA and the American Red Cross) that are in place to assist
victims and communities in their recovery from floods. Addi-
tionally, a thorough explanation of modern United States ﬂood
control doctrine and policy is provided in the book.
Molino, Louis, Sr. Emergency Incident Management Systems:
Fundamentals and Applications. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley & Sons.
2006. 518 pp. ISBN: 0-471-45564-4.
In this book, Louis Molino examines the major forms of incident
management systems (IMS), also called incident command sys-
tems. Molino explains the military heritage that is embedded in
IMS, and reveals the critical elements of effective command dur-
ing a disaster or other large-scale emergency management event.
Readers of this book will come away from it with a relatively
thorough understanding of the leadership capacity and the ad-
ministrative responsibilities required of those in charge during
the unfolding and aftermath of critical incidents.
Nicholson, William. Emergency Response and Emergency Man-
agement Law: Cases and Materials. Springﬁeld, IL: Charles C.
Thomas. 2003. 366 pp. ISBN: 978-0-398-07406-7.
William Nicholson has published extensively on emergency
management law and liability. Most of his publications on this
topic have been articles or contributed chapters to other texts.
However, this particular book, authored entirely by Nicholson, is
the ﬁrst and primary book-length publication that considers le-
gal issues for the emergency management community. The book
Books, Government Reports, and Videos
253

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
examines the development of public safety law through statutes
and court decisions. Liability issues concerning training, the op-
eration of emergency vehicles, the provision of first aid, and
“Good Samaritan” acts are explored. The book also offers sug-
gestions for the professional emergency management commu-
nity to consider with regard to forming relationships with the
professional legal community. The book is seen as a bridge of
useful information for both professions involved voluntarily or
by happenstance with one another.
Syzerhans, Douglas (ed.). Federal Disaster Programs and Hurri-
cane Katrina. New York: Nova Science Publishers. 2006. ISBN:
1-59454-889-7.
Various contributors to this book examine the federal response to
Hurricane Katrina. The book looks first at the programs that
were initially in place and their application to the disaster that
occurred in the Gulf region as a result of Hurricane Katrina. It
then examines the federal supplemental disaster programs that
came along in the wake of the inadequacy of the initial response.
Finally, the book explores new programs that have been estab-
lished since Katrina with the hope that future disasters might be
managed more effectively than in the past. The performance of
specific agencies, such as the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, the Social Security Administration, the Army Corps of
Engineers, and others is addressed.
Willis, Henry, Andrew Morral, Terrence Kelly, and Jamison Jo
Medby. Estimating Terrorism Risk. Arlington, VA: RAND Cor-
poration. 2005. 90 pp. ISBN: 0-8330-3834-6.
In this short book, the authors present a discussion about the as-
sessment of risk regarding terrorism in America’s cities. The au-
thors propose new formulas for allocating antiterrorism
homeland security resources (including preparedness and miti-
gation funds) to states and local communities. In particular, the
authors explain and call for the use of density-weighted popula-
tion figures, rather than simple population figures. Readers of
this book will be introduced to ways in which shares of risk can
be assessed among multiple cities. These risk assessments can ac-
count for a wide range of threat scenarios.
254
Resources

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Government Publications
Government Accountability Ofﬁce
An invaluable resource for researching federal emergency man-
agement and homeland security efforts is the U.S. Government
Accountability Ofﬁce (GAO). The GAO is the investigative and
assessment arm of the United States Congress. As such, it helps
Congress perform its executive oversight function by assessing
the performance of federal employees and agencies and evaluat-
ing the effectiveness and efﬁciency of federal programs and ex-
penditures. The GAO has performed hundreds of reviews of the
U.S. Department of Homeland Security and its component agen-
cies, including the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Below is a sample of GAO reports and published testimony
before Congress that address performance and funding issues re-
lating to emergency management. The title of each report or pub-
lished testimony, the GAO identiﬁcation number for the report
or testimony, and a brief summary of each report are provided.
Additionally, the Internet address for accessing the full reports
and testimony is provided to aid those desiring to research the
details of the GAO publication further.
“Disaster Assistance: Better Planning Needed for Housing Vic-
tims of Catastrophic Disasters (GAO-07-88)”
www.gao.gov/new.items/d0788.pdf
This report by the Government Accountability Office was pre-
sented to the U.S. Congress on February 28, 2007. The study ex-
amines the federal government’s responsibility and capacity to
offer housing assistance to victims made temporarily or perma-
nently homeless as a result of a disaster. In particular, this GAO
report explores the extent to which the National Response Plan
clearly describes the responsibilities of federal agencies (e.g.,
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Housing and Urban
Development) and the American Red Cross with regard to hous-
ing assistance. It also examines the degree to which these organi-
zations and agencies had plans for providing shelter and
assistance after hurricanes Katrina and Rita in 2005. Finally, the
GAO report recounts the firsthand experiences of victims who
took advantage of housing assistance programs and also the ob-
servations of government and Red Cross workers involved with
the implementation of the housing assistance programs.
Books, Government Reports, and Videos
255

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
“Emergency Preparedness: Current Emergency Alert System
Has Limitations and Development of a New Integrated System
Will Be Challenging (GAO-07-411)”
www.gao.gov/new.items/d07411.pdf
In this report, dated March 30, 2007, the Government Account-
ability Ofﬁce assessed the current Emergency Alert System (EAS)
for disseminating to the public information during serious emer-
gencies. The GAO reviewed in this report the media’s ability to
meet federal requirements for participating in the EAS; the views
of various stakeholders regarding the challenges endured by the
EAS; the progress made toward the development of a new, inte-
grated alert system; and the Federal Communications Commis-
sion’s rulemaking responsibilities regarding the EAS. Multiple
problems and concerns are identified in the report and recom-
mendations for improving the EAS are provided.
“Federal Emergency Management Agency: Factors for Future
Success and Issue to Consider for Organizational Placement
(GAO-06-746T)”
www.gao.gov/new.items/d06746t.pdf
The Government Accountability Ofﬁce presented this testimony
to Congress on May 9, 2006. The GAO noted that the Federal
Emergency Management Agency is dependent on several factors
for its future success as an emergency and disaster management
organization. These factors may not necessarily include FEMA’s
organizational placement, as some in Congress had postulated.
Rather, according to the GAO, the clarity of FEMA’s mission, re-
sponsibilities, and authorities; the adequacy of FEMA’s human,
financial, and technological resources; and the effectiveness of
planning, simulation exercises, and partnerships affect FEMA’s
success in the future. The GAO noted that even if Congress were
to decide to relocate FEMA elsewhere within the federal govern-
ment or return it to independent agency status, these other fac-
tors must still be addressed.
“First Responders: Much Work Remains to Improve Commu-
nications Interoperability (GAO-07-301)”
www.gao.gov/new.items/d07301.pdf
In this report of the Government Accountability Office, dated
April 2, 2007, the issue of communication interoperability was
256
Resources

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
examined. Since the terror attacks of 9/11, considerable funding
has been made available to state and local governments to im-
prove the ability of different agencies and jurisdictions to com-
municate with each other during a disaster. In fact, from 2003 to
2005, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security awarded $2.15
billion in grants to improve communications interoperability. In
studying the issue, the GAO found that some improvements
have been made across the nation. However, most states and lo-
cales that have received funding have not developed strategic
plans for implementing interoperability of communications.
Consequently, the GAO found that the nation as a whole, and
even those states and communities that have benefited from
communications grants, remain vulnerable in this area. The re-
port goes on to discuss what benchmarks toward interoperabil-
ity the DHS requires state and local governments receiving grant
funds to meet, as well as provides recommendations for speed-
ing up the movement toward interoperability.
“Homeland Security: Preparing for and Responding to Disas-
ters (GAO-07-395T)”
www.gao.gov/new.items/d07395t.pdf
In this published testimony to Congress, dated March 9, 2007,
the Government Accountability Ofﬁce examined the role of the
U.S. Department of Homeland Security and the Federal Emer-
gency Management Agency after reforms implemented in the
wake of the Hurricane Katrina debacle. In 2006, Congress passed
the Post-Katrina Emergency Management Reform Act. This leg-
islation required significant changes to FEMA’s structure and
mission. This GAO report summarizes many of the earlier short-
comings of FEMA and DHS. It goes on to provide recommenda-
tions for Congress to consider to ensure that DHS properly
supports the FEMA mission, and to further ensure that state and
local governments are effective players and partners in the pre-
paredness, response, and recovery processes.
Department of Homeland Security, Ofﬁce of Inspector General
The United States Department of Homeland Security, Ofﬁce of In-
spector General (OIG) is responsible for detecting and defeating
fraud, waste, and abuse within DHS programs. The DHS-OIG
performs its responsibilities by conducting management and ﬁ-
nancial audits, performance reviews, and criminal investigations.
Books, Government Reports, and Videos
257

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Given that the Federal Emergency Management Agency is a part
of the DHS, the DHS-OIG possesses audit and investigatory au-
thority over FEMA. Throughout the year, but no less than semi-
annually, the DHS-OIG presents reports to Congress about its
activities and ﬁndings vis-à-vis DHS programs.
Referenced below is a DHS-OIG performance review of
FEMA after Hurricane Katrina, as well as published testimony
by the deputy inspector general for Disaster Assistance Over-
sight. Summaries for each are provided, as is the Internet address
for accessing the full report and testimony.
“A Performance Review of FEMA’s Disaster Management Ac-
tivities in Response to Hurricane Katrina (OIG-06-32)”
www.dhs.gov/xoig/assets/mgmtrpts/OIG_06-32_Mar06.pdf
This report, produced by the U.S. Department of Homeland Se-
curity, Ofﬁce of Inspector General, is dated March 31, 2006. In the
aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, the DHS and its emergency
management arm, the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
came under considerable criticism for mismanaging the disaster
relief effort following the hurricane’s landfall. With the public
criticism as a backdrop, the DHS Ofﬁce of Inspector General set
out to examine “whether the laws, regulations, policies, proce-
dures, plans, guidelines, and resources were adequate and oper-
ational, and whether FEMA’s organizational structure enhanced
or hindered its emergency management capabilities.” 
The performance review found that much of the criticism
was warranted. The Office of Inspector General found that
FEMA had difficulty deploying sufficient personnel, that the
FEMA communications system was unreliable, and that manage-
ment controls were insufficient for some of the assistance pro-
grams. Further, FEMA was found to be lacking when it came to
providing support to state government officials in preparing
them for the federal response and recovery efforts. Finally, the
Ofﬁce of Inspector General found that the Department of Home-
land Security must give more attention to FEMA and its stated
mission of an all-hazards approach to disasters. The report sug-
gests that the federal government’s shift toward emphasizing
counterterrorism activities may be contributing to reduced atten-
tion being given to FEMA’s responsibilities across all four phases
of emergency management—preparedness, response, recovery,
and mitigation.
258
Resources

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
“Statement of Matt Jadacki, Deputy Inspector General for Dis-
aster Assistance Oversight, U.S. Department of Homeland
Security”
www.dhs.gov/xoig/assets/testimony/OIGtm_MJ_031407.pdf
This statement was delivered to the U.S. House of Representa-
tives, Committee of Appropriations, Subcommittee of Homeland
Security, on March 14, 2007. In this statement, Jadacki reports on
the mission and activities of the Federal Emergency Manage-
ment Agency in the two years since Hurricane Katrina. He also
reports on the actions taken by the Department of Homeland Se-
curity’s Office of Inspector General to monitor FEMA and the
disaster relief programs administered by the federal govern-
ment. Jadacki addresses a wide range of issues, including the
various types of assistance provided to disaster victims, the Na-
tional Flood Insurance Program, the acquisition policies of
FEMA, and the propensity for fraud committed against the
United States by unlawful participation in any number of federal
disaster assistance programs. On this last point, Jadacki touts the
success of the Katrina Fraud Task Force, which has been set up
and includes federal law enforcement ofﬁcers from several agen-
cies, as well as state and local ofﬁcers.
9/11 Commission
“Final Report of the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks
Upon the United States (9/11 Commission Report)”
www.9-11commission.gov/
One of the most significant publications to emerge from the
United States government in recent years is the Final Report of the
National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States, or
the 9/11 Commission Report for short. The 9/11 Commission was
established in late 2002 as a bipartisan commission, authorized
by legislation passed by Congress and signed by the president, to
explore the causes behind the success of the 9/11 terrorist attacks
by Al Qaeda.
The 9/11 Commission examined a wide range of issues, in-
cluding shortcomings in America’s intelligence capabilities, the
failure to “connect the dots” by intelligence and law enforcement
ofﬁcials (primarily due to a failure to communicate with one an-
other), the actions of first responders in Washington, DC and
New York City after the hijacked airliners struck the Pentagon
and both towers of the World Trade Center, and the disaster
Books, Government Reports, and Videos
259

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
management efforts at all levels of government in the days,
weeks, and months after the attacks. Among other points of in-
terest to the emergency management community, the 9/11 Com-
mission called for the major overhaul and reorganization of
departments and agencies within the U.S. government, includ-
ing those agencies having a counterterrorism, homeland security,
or emergency management role.
The 9/11 Commission released its report on August 21, 2004.
By this time, the Department of Homeland Security was already a
year-and-a-half into its existence. Nevertheless, the 9/11 Commis-
sion’s recommendations concerning greater cooperation and com-
munication between federal agencies involved with the mission of
homeland security, as well as with state and local agencies in-
volved in the same, amount to timely and sound advice to this day.
The full report of the 9/11 Commission, although for sale in
print, can be accessed in its entirety for free at the 9/11 Commis-
sion’s Web site provided above.
Videos
This chapter provides below a summary of a selection of videos
that relate in some way to emergency management and disaster
planning. The release years of the videos, the mode, the length,
the cost, and the distributors are listed under the video titles. Ad-
ditionally, the Web address for purchasing the video is provided,
along with a brief summary of each video’s content. Many of the
distributors below offer multiple videos relating to disasters and
emergency management. Readers of this chapter are encouraged
to explore the distributor Web sites further for videos that may
be of interest. Generally, only the most recent and relevant videos
from these distributors appear below.
Civil Defense: The War at Home
Date: unknown
Type: VHS or DVD
Length: 50 minutes
Cost: $24.95
Source: Distributed by Arts and Entertainment Networks
www.aetv.com
This Bill Kurtis Investigative Reports documentary examines the
history and development of civil defense efforts in the United
260
Resources

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
States. The ﬁlm explains how the civil defense was largely orga-
nized around the aim of the United States surviving a nuclear
war during the Cold War with the Soviet Union. However, the
mission of civil defense eventually grew broader and the Civil
Defense Department was replaced by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. Past and present government ofﬁcials in-
volved with the civil defense mission are interviewed.
Disasters of the Century (multiple episodes)
Date: 2006
Type: DVD
Length: 50 minutes
Cost: $29.95
Source: Distributed by Partners In Motion
www.partnersinmotion.com/store.htm
This series, produced in Canada, includes thirty-nine different
episodes. Each episode focuses on a different set of famous disas-
ters in Canada and around the world. The events covered range
from natural disasters (such as a deadly tornado that struck Ed-
monton) to technological accidents (such as the Hindenburg
crash). The emergency response to each disaster is discussed, as
well as the disasters’ toll on lives and property.
Engineering Disasters (multiple episodes)
Date: 2005
Type: DVD
Length: 50 minutes
Cost: $24.95
Source: Distributed by the History Channel
www.history.com/media
The History Channel’s popular series Modern Marvels has pro-
duced more than a dozen episodes of “Engineering Disasters.”
The focus of these videos is on disasters directly affected by the
quality of engineering. Examples include bridge collapses, build-
ing ﬁres, plane and train crashes, and coal mine disasters.
FEMA: In the Face of Disaster
Date: unknown
Type: VHS or DVD
Length: 50 minutes
Cost: $24.95
Books, Government Reports, and Videos
261

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Source: Distributed by Arts and Entertainment Networks
www.aetv.com
Bill Kurtis hosts this documentary as a production of A&E’s In-
vestigative Reports series. This particular program looks at the
Federal Emergency Management Agency. Kurtis explores
FEMA’s history as a government agency. He also delves into a
classiﬁed government report that suggests that the United States,
and FEMA in particular, is entirely unprepared for major natural
disasters. The false sense of security that many communities and
individuals possess because of a feeling that FEMA will take care
of everything should a disaster strike is also addressed.
Great Disasters
Date: 2000
Type: VHS or DVD
Length: 50 minutes
Cost: $79.95 (VHS) 69.95 (DVD)
Source: Distributed by Films for the Humanities and Sciences
www.ﬁlms.com
This documentary highlights the role that both man-made and
natural disasters has played in the history of the twentieth cen-
tury. The ﬁlm is full of archival footage of age-old disasters, in-
cluding the Hindenburg crash in 1937 and the Tacoma Narrows
Bridge collapse in 1940. Other disasters covered in the ﬁlm, and
responses to them, include the explosion of Pan Am ﬂight 103 in
1988; a 1998 high-speed train crash in Eschede, Germany; and
major ﬂoods, hurricanes, avalanches, earthquakes, and volcanic
eruptions that occurred around the world.
Hurricane Katrina: The Storm That Drowned a City
Date: 2006
Type: VHS and DVD
Length: 56 minutes
Cost: $19.95
Source: Distributed by Boston’s public broadcasting afﬁliate
WGBH
Shop.wgbh.org
This is one of many videos available covering the Hurricane Kat-
rina disaster, which made landfall on August 29, 2005. This video
explores the vulnerability of New Orleans and other Gulf Coast
municipalities to devastating hurricanes. The filmmakers also
262
Resources

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
explore critical failures regarding the engineering and mainte-
nance of the levees in New Orleans. Further, the ﬁlm considers
the question of whether and how the city of New Orleans should
be rebuilt given the likelihood of future hurricanes posing just as
much risk as Katrina did in 2005.
Mock Disasters: Best Practices in Business Continuity Planning
Date: 2005
Type: DVD
Length: 38 minutes
Cost: $49.00
Source: Distributed by BCP Media
www.bcpmedia.com/
This excellent training video presents accepted best practices for
businesses when confronted with a natural or man-made disas-
ter. Businesses can be ruined by disasters, despite government
help, because of the loss of customers until such time as the busi-
ness recovers. The video provides practices that should be incor-
porated into business continuity and disaster recovery plans.
The video also contains footage of a mock disaster and follows
the recovery efforts of leading companies attempting to manage
this disaster.
Moment of Crisis: Hurricane Katrina
Date: 2006
Type: VHS or DVD
Length: approximately 50 minutes
Cost: $29.99
Source: Distributed by ABC News
www.abcnewsstore.com/
ABC News, in this Primetime special, closely examines the Hur-
ricane Katrina disaster. This video, like so many others on the
marketplace, examines Katrina because it is such a significant
case study in what can go wrong when ineffective leadership
and emergency management procedures are in place during and
after a major calamity. Through this video, Ted Koppel examines
the Katrina crisis moment by moment and dissects where the
system failed. As the video states, Hurricane Katrina was the
ﬁrst major test of America’s emergency response capacity since
9/11, and virtually every agency involved received failing
grades.
Books, Government Reports, and Videos
263

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Natural Disasters
Date: 2005
Type: DVD
Length: 89 minutes
Cost: $9.98
Source: Distributed by Shami Productions
www.shamiproductions.com/
This video documentary examines the world’s vulnerability to
natural disasters. With the devastating and deadly Indian Ocean
tsunami of 2005 as the backdrop for discussion, the ﬁlm looks at
a wide variety of hazards. These include ﬁres, mud slides, ﬂoods,
earthquakes, and volcanoes. The ﬁlm demonstrates the fragility
of human beings on a planet where so many catastrophic events
can and do occur. The ﬁlm takes a pessimistic view concerning
mankind’s ability to predict many natural disasters.
Planning for Disasters
Date: unknown
Type: VHS or DVD
Length: 15 minutes
Cost: $159.95 (VHS) 149.95 (DVD)
Source: Distributed by Films for the Humanities and Sciences
www.ﬁlms.com
This program, designed for training, shows a full-scale disaster
exercise. The hypothetical disaster includes a building ﬁre and
partial building collapse. The film captures discussions with
planners and participants, providing insight into preparing and
implementing disaster simulation exercises.
Ready or Not? Is America Prepared for Catastrophic Events?
Date: 2006
Type: VHS or DVD
Length: approximately 50 minutes
Cost: $29.99
Source: Distributed by ABC News
www.abcnewsstore.com/
In this video, Ted Koppel hosts a town hall meeting with a panel
of emergency management state and local officials. The panel
discusses Houston’s experience with Hurricane Rita in 2005
where seventy-two hours’ notice proved to be too little time to
264
Resources

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
evacuate a city of 2,000,000 people. The evacuation stalled due to
the gridlock that ensued. Solutions for better and more efﬁcient
evacuation plans are discussed.
Ready or Not? The Next Big One
Date: 2005
Type: VHS or DVD
Length: approximately 50 minutes
Cost: $29.99
Source: Distributed by ABC News
www.abcnewsstore.com/
In this ABC News Primetime special, the question of the United
States government’s readiness for catastrophic disasters is
probed. In particular, three disaster scenarios are considered: a
pandemic outbreak of avian ﬂu, a terrorist detonation of a nu-
clear weapon in a large American city, and a major earthquake in
the San Francisco Bay area. The shortcomings regarding Amer-
ica’s preparedness and the role of emergency management ofﬁ-
cials to ensure readiness are examined.
Books, Government Reports, and Videos
265

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Glossary
advisory
A statement issued from a government agency alerting citi-
zens and other government agencies of the potential for a disaster or
other large-scale emergency.
aftershock
A small earthquake that follows a larger earthquake within
the ﬁrst few hours and days of the larger quake.
all-hazards
An approach to emergency management that attempts to
plan for all types of hazards potentially affecting a region, rather than
planning for individual hazards in isolation from one another (as if the
principles and resources to be employed for each hazard were intrinsi-
cally different).
B-NICE
biological, nuclear, incendiary, and chemical explosive.
casualty
A death or injury resulting from a disaster.
catastrophe
An exceptionally large or cataclysmic disaster or emer-
gency.
CDC
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The primary
federal agency responsible for preventing or containing diseases, epi-
demics, or other public health emergencies. The CDC is a part of the
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
CEM
Certified emergency manager. A professional credential
awarded by the International Association of Emergency Managers to
professional emergency managers who meet certain education and ex-
perience criteria and who have completed 200 hours of in-service train-
ing in certain subject areas.
CERT
Certiﬁed emergency response team.
CFR
Code of Federal Regulations.
civil defense
Primarily known as a campaign and associated activi-
ties geared toward reducing civilian casualties during a nuclear attack
267

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
268
Glossary
amidst the Cold War. The function of preparing civilians and commu-
nities for such a disaster were eventually absorbed into modern emer-
gency management.
community
Local political subdivision, such as a town, village, town-
ship, or city, that typically has the authority to adopt and enforce ordi-
nances for the geographic area under its jurisdiction.
contamination
The undesirable contact of chemical, biological, or ra-
diological material to the surface of skin, clothing, buildings, objects,
and areas.
continuity
The ability of government agencies and businesses to con-
tinue to function, provide services, and produce during and after a dis-
aster strikes.
convergence
The tendency of people, for various reasons, to converge
to a disaster area after one strikes. The inundation of victims, family
members, sightseers, academicians, politicians, and others can create se-
rious complications for the rescue efforts.
cost-beneﬁt analysis
The process of weighing the beneﬁts associated
with inhabiting or utilizing a hazard-prone area against the costs in lives
and property should a disaster actually occur.
damage assessment
The process used to determine the number of in-
juries and deaths, as well as the level of property damage and service
disruption, associated with a disastrous event.
debrieﬁng
The process whereby emergency management ofﬁcials col-
lectively review their activities and individual actions taken after a dis-
aster or simulation exercise to assess what went well and what went
wrong, all for the purpose of garnering lessons to be learned.
decontamination The process of reducing or removing chemical, bio-
logical, or radiological material that has come in contact with skin,
clothing, buildings, objects, and areas.
DHS
U.S. Department of Homeland Security. The cabinet-level federal
department created by the Homeland Security Act of 2002 as a result of
the 9/11 terrorist attacks in the United States. Among other agencies,
DHS is home to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
disaster
A natural catastrophe, large-scale technological accident, or
other man-made event that results in a greater scale of deaths, injuries,
property damage, and service disruption than can be met with a routine
level of emergency response.
disaster field office
An office established in or near a presidentially
declared disaster area in support of federal and state response and re-
covery operations.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
DOD
U.S. Department of Defense. The cabinet-level department of
the United States government that is responsible for all military affairs.
dose
(radiation) The total or accumulated level of ionizing radiation
absorbed by a person or animal.
dosimeter
An instrument distributed to ﬁrst responders for measur-
ing and registering total accumulated exposure to ionizing radiation.
DOT
U.S. Department of Transportation. The cabinet-level depart-
ment of the United States government responsible for ensuring the exis-
tence of safe and efﬁcient transportation networks and infrastructure to,
from, and within the United States.
earthquake
The sudden motion or trembling of the ground due to
movement or displacement of massive underground rock formations, or
plates, typically located within 10 to 20 miles of the Earth’s surface.
Emergency Alert System
A government-established communications
system that co-opts local television and radio stations for the broadcast
of emergency information from federal, state, or local officials to the
public before, during, and after disasters strike.
emergency management event
Any natural or man-made calamitous
event of such a scale that emergency management principles, practices,
and resources are called upon and employed.
EMI
Emergency Management Institute. The training and education
arm of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, located on the cam-
pus of the National Fire Academy in Emmitsburg, MD.
EMS
Emergency medical services. Personnel, facilities, and equip-
ment used to provide emergency medical care to the sick and injured,
including ﬁrst-aid and ambulance crews consisting of emergency med-
ical technicians and paramedics, as well as hospital emergency rooms
and staff, including doctors and nurses.
EOC
Emergency operations center. A protected site near or within a
disaster area from which government ofﬁcials (federal, state, and local)
coordinate disaster emergency response efforts while the emergency is
still unfolding.
EOP
Emergency operation plan. A document describing how govern-
ment agencies will utilize resources, including personnel, equipment,
and facilities to protect lives and property in the event of one type of dis-
aster or another.
EPA
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Lead federal agency re-
sponsible for enforcing environmental regulations and ensuring the
proper clean-up and disposal of environmental hazards.
Glossary
269

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
evacuation
The planned and organized removal and dispersal of
people from an area deemed too dangerous for them to remain. Evacua-
tions can be spontaneous decisions of the people themselves, recom-
mended by government ofﬁcials, or mandated by government ofﬁcials.
evacuees
All individuals who have left or were removed from areas
threatened or affected by a disaster.
exercise
A field or tabletop disaster simulation scenario intended to
train participating personnel and assess capabilities and vulnerabilities
concerning government’s ability to manage a particular type of disaster.
federal coordinating ofﬁcer
The federal ofﬁcial appointed by the pres-
ident to coordinate federal assistance with state and local ofﬁcials dur-
ing a presidentially declared disaster.
FEMA
Federal Emergency Management Agency. The lead federal
agency responsible for emergency management activities. It is organiza-
tionally a directorate within the U.S. Department of Homeland Security.
FEMA trailers
Temporary housing units provided by FEMA for resi-
dents displaced as a result of a disaster.
ﬁeld assessment team
A small group of technical experts designated
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency to conduct an assess-
ment of response needs immediately following a disaster.
ﬂash ﬂood
Flooding that occurs very rapidly and with swift-moving
water following severe rainstorms.
FLETC
Federal Law Enforcement Training Center. Operated by the
U.S. Department of Homeland Security, this multicampus agency serves
as the primary training academy for virtually all federal law enforce-
ment agencies, excluding the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Drug
Enforcement Administration, and the Postal Inspection Service. Located
in Glynco, Georgia; Artesia, New Mexico; and Washington, DC.
ﬂood
A temporary condition characterized by the partial or complete
covering of water over areas normally considered to be dry land.
ﬂoodplain
An area of land prone to becoming inundated with water
when rivers overﬂow their banks. Land areas are considered ﬂoodplains
if they have a 1 percent chance or greater of ﬂooding in any given year.
GAO
Government Accountability Ofﬁce (formerly General Account-
ing Ofﬁce). This federal agency is the investigative arm of the United
States Congress and is responsible for assisting members of Congress in
the exercise of their oversight responsibilities vis à vis the executive
branch of government.
hazard
A natural, technological, or social phenomenon that threatens
lives and property.
270
Glossary

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
hazardous material
A substance determined to pose a risk to the
health and safety of the public were they to come in contact with the ma-
terial. Such hazards typically are classified according to the nature of
their threat—namely, biological, chemical, or radiological.
HAZMAT team
A response team established by a local, state, or fed-
eral agency whose members are specially trained and equipped to con-
tain and remove hazardous materials from areas threatening public
safety.
HHS
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The cabinet-
level department of the United States government responsible for ensur-
ing the health of American citizens. The Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention is located within HHS.
HSA
Homeland Security Act of 2002.
HSPD
Homeland Security Presidential Directive.
hurricane
A large, tropical, cyclonic storm formed over warm ocean
waters in which winds of at least 74 miles per hour blow in a large spiral
around a calm center (the eye).
ICS
Incident command system. An established organizational struc-
ture used to command, control, and coordinate federal, state, and local
resources and activities during a disaster or other large-scale emergency.
joint information center
A central point of contact established by
emergency management officials for all news media inquiries during
and immediately following a disaster.
LEMA
Local emergency management agency.
levee
A linear barrier set up along riverfronts and other bodies of wa-
ter to protect the adjacent land from ﬂooding.
MAA
Mutual aid agreement. A compact between neighboring govern-
mental jurisdictions to provide each other with personnel and equip-
ment during disasters and other emergencies when the needs exceed the
resources and capabilities of the affected community.
mass care
Efforts taken to tend to the acute needs of a large volume of
people affected by a disaster. Needs often include medical care, food,
water, clothing, and shelter.
mitigation
Activities undertaken by government agencies, businesses,
and individuals over the long term for the purpose of reducing or elimi-
nating the risk of various hazards.
MSDS
Material Safety Data Sheet. Information sheets that provide
ﬁrst responders and others with key information about the properties of
individual hazardous materials.
Glossary
271

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
NFA
National Fire Academy. Primary training center of the U.S. Fire
Administration, which is organizationally a part of the Federal Emer-
gency Management Agency. Located in Emmitsburg, MD.
NFIP
National Flood Insurance Program. Federal program designed
to provide individuals and businesses with access to affordable ﬂood in-
surance, provided that certain criteria are met.
NGO
Nongovernmental organization.
NIC
National Integration Center. Organization located within the Fed-
eral Emergency Management Agency’s National Preparedness Division
responsible for overseeing the National Incident Management System.
NIMS
National Incident Management System. Federally established
system for coordinating federal, state, and local resources in response to
a natural or man-made disaster.
NOAA
U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The
primary federal agency responsible for the scientific study of oceanic
and atmospheric conditions and monitoring those conditions for haz-
ards that may threaten America’s communities. The National Weather
Service and the Hurricane Information Center are organized under
NOAA.
NPO
Nonproﬁt organization.
NRC
U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission. The federal agency re-
sponsible for regulating the nuclear power industry and for responding
to emergencies involving nuclear materials.
NRP
National Response Plan. A plan established by FEMA for re-
sponding to various types of emergencies that may occur around the
country. The plan is also a model for state and local governments to use
in adopting their own emergency response plans.
NWS
National Weather Service. The primary federal agency responsi-
ble for forecasting weather conditions throughout the United States and
issuing watches and warnings for severe weather.
OSHA
Occupational Safety and Health Administration. The lead fed-
eral agency, located within the U.S. Department of Labor, for ensuring
that workplaces utilize safe practices, procedures, and working condi-
tions. OSHA monitors the equipment issued to and used by ﬁrst respon-
ders to make sure that rescuers are not incurring any unnecessary
dangers beyond those that are expected as a part of their job.
PDD
Presidential Disaster Declaration. A declaration made by the
president of the United States that an area affected by a disaster meets
certain federal criteria and is eligible for federal disaster assistance and
relief.
272
Glossary

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
PIO
Public information officer. The government official responsible
for preparing and disseminating emergency public information during
a disaster or large-scale emergency.
PPE
Personal protective equipment. Special clothing and breathing
apparatus used by emergency personnel to protect them from hazards
at a disaster or emergency scene while engaged in response and recov-
ery operations.
preliminary damage assessment
An initial assessment by trained ex-
perts dispatched by government emergency management agencies to
determine the immediate needs of disaster victims and the extent of
damage and disruption to infrastructure and key services.
preparedness
The activities of government and other organizations
directed toward maintaining a state of readiness to respond to disasters
and other large-scale emergencies.
PTSD
Posttraumatic stress disorder. A psychological malady with a
wide range of emotional and physical symptoms that result from pro-
longed contact with disturbing, graphic, and tragic human conditions.
recovery
The activities of government and other organizations extend-
ing long after a disaster strikes to restore an affected community to its
predisaster condition or better.
response
The activities of government and other organizations in-
tended to meet the immediate needs of victims during and immediately
after a disaster strikes.
risk
A calculation involving the probability of an event and the conse-
quences of that event to determine the degree to which the potential
event should be planned for and otherwise attended to by emergency
management ofﬁcials.
SAR
Search and rescue. The process of searching for lost or trapped
victims in a disaster, retrieving them, and providing them with sustain-
ing ﬁrst aid. SAR also refers to units engaged in search and rescue.
secondary hazard
A hazard that ensues after a first hazard’s impact
has been felt. For example, a tsunami striking a coastal village could be
considered a secondary hazard if occurring as a result of an earthquake
that has already affected that village.
SEMA
State emergency management agency.
SOP
Standard operating procedure. Procedures that follow estab-
lished step-by-step instructions previously determined as the proper
course of action for accomplishing some goal.
storm surge
A wall of sea water that strikes land as a result of a hurri-
cane’s winds and low barometric pressure, often causing severe coastal
ﬂooding.
Glossary
273

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
tabletop exercise
A disaster simulation exercise primarily conducted
through group discussion and strategy formulation while considering a
written disaster scenario. No actual field resources are deployed or
tested in these exercises.
terrorism
An act or threatened act of violence against civilians or civil-
ian infrastructure to achieve political, social, or religious goals through
fear and intimidation, rather than direct, conventional military con-
frontation.
tornado
A weather event characterized by a rotating column or funnel
of winds reaching a velocity as high as 300 miles per hour. The width of
a tornado’s vortex can range from dozens or hundreds of yards to a
mile. Tornados are often associated with other violent weather, such as
thunderstorms and hurricanes.
triage
The process of emergency medical care providers assessing the
immediate needs of victims and the beneﬁt likely to accrue to a victim
who receives medical treatment. The highest priority is given to those
most seriously injured and most likely to survive if treated.
tsunami
Fast-moving sea waves created by an undersea earthquake.
The waves can reach heights of well over 100 feet and can devastate un-
suspecting coastal communities.
UNDRO
United Nations Disaster Relief Organization.
UN/ISDR
United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduc-
tion.
USC
United States Code.
USCG
U.S. Coast Guard. The agency within the Department of Home-
land Security with primary responsibility for marine safety, security,
and rescue operations.
USGS
U.S. Geological Survey. The lead federal agency for studying
geological phenomena in the United States, including earthquakes, vol-
canoes, avalanches, and ﬂoods.
vulnerability
The degree of susceptibility to damage, casualties, and
destruction from future disasters.
weather warning
A statement issued by the National Weather Service
that dangerous weather (e.g., thunderstorm, tornado, blizzard) is immi-
nent or highly likely. Generally, the statement encourages people in the
affected areas to seek shelter or take other appropriate precautions im-
mediately.
weather watch
A statement issued by the National Weather Service
that the conditions are in place for dangerous or severe weather to occur.
Generally, the statement encourages people in the affected areas to be
274
Glossary

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
observant and vigilant for the possibility of emergent dangerous
weather and to plan for the possibility accordingly.
WMD
Weapon of mass destruction. Generally considered to be any
device intended to cause widespread damage and to kill or injure large
numbers of people by using conventional explosives; dispersing biolog-
ical, chemical, or radiological material; or emitting nuclear reactive
yields.
Glossary
275

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Index
277
ACDA. See American Civil
Defense Association
ACS. See Adventist Community
Services
Adventist Community Services
(ACS), 200
Africa, 82, 101
emergency management in
Nigeria, 98–100
Al Qaeda, 64
Alabama, state emergency
management agency, 
223
Alaska
earthquake and tsunami of
1964, 6, 112
state emergency management
agency, 223
Alexander, David, 1, 31
Allbaugh, Joe, 129–130
Amenemhet III, Pharaoh of
Egypt, 2
American Civil Defense
Association (ACDA),
207–208
American Radio Relay League,
Inc. (ARRL), 200–201
American Red Cross, 59–60,
106–108, 201. See also Barton,
Clara; Boardman, Mabel;
Taft, William Howard
Anchorage, AK, 112
Animal and Plant Health
Inspection Service, 8
Anthrax, 64
Argentina, 96–98
Arizona, state emergency
management agency, 224
Arkansas
Great Mississippi Flood of
1927, 5, 109–110
state emergency management
agency, 224
ARRL. See American Radio Relay
League, Inc.
Assistance to Fireﬁghters Grant,
21
Association of State Floodplain
Managers, 208
Australia, 91–92
Bard, Morton, 37–39
Barton, Clara, 106–107, 131–132
Becton, Julius W., Jr., 132–133
Beslan, Russia, massacre (2004),
102
Biological Emergency
Preparedness Division, 10
Biological weapons, 61–66
Bird ﬂu, 90
Blanchard, B. Wayne, 133–134
Boardman, Mabel, 134
Booth, William, 135
Brinkley, Douglas, 43
Brown, Michael D., 126, 135–137
Buffer Zone Protection Plans, 195
Bullock, J. A., 17
Burkina Faso, 82
Bush, George H. W., 151
Bush, George W.
and FBI director, 146
and FEMA directors, 130, 136,
145
and ﬂood insurance, 130
Homeland Security Act of 2002,
124

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Homeland Security
Presidential Directive #3, 124
Homeland Security
Presidential Directive #5, 125
and Post-Katrina Emergency
Management Reform Act of
2006, 127
and tsunami of 2004, 73
See also Department of
Homeland Security; Ofﬁce
of Homeland Security
California
Los Angeles earthquake of
1994, 120
San Fernando Valley
earthquake of 1971, 114
San Francisco earthquake of
1906, 108
Santa Cruz earthquake of 1989,
118
state emergency management
agency, 224
tsunami of 1964, 6, 112
CAP. See U.S. Civil Air Patrol
Caribbean, 84, 85
emergency management in
Trinidad and Tobago, 94–96
See also Hurricanes
Caribbean Disaster Emergency
Response Agency (CDERA),
95–96
Carter, Jimmy, 7, 116, 137–138, 153
Catholic Charities USA Disaster
Response, 201
CBRN Countermeasures
Programs, 9
CDC. See U.S. Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention
(CDC)
CDERA. See Caribbean Disaster
Emergency Response
Agency
CDR. See Christian Disaster
Response
CEM. See Certiﬁed emergency
manager (CEM) program
Center for Homeland Security
and Defense, 208–209
Certiﬁed emergency manager
(CEM) program, 134
Chad, 82
Chechens, 102
Chemical Regulation Authority,
195
Chemical Stockpile Emergency
Preparedness Division, 10, 21
Chemical weapons, 61–66
Chertoff, Michael, 126, 139–140
Chicago ﬁre of 1871, 105–106
China, 89–91
Chlorine gas, 64
Christian Disaster Response
(CDR), 202
Chronology of events, 105–128
Church of the Brethren
Emergency Response, 202
Church World Service (CWS)
Disaster Response, 202–203
Citizens, as victims. See Sociology
of disasters
Citizens, preparation for
disasters, 26–27, 171–172
Citizen’s Guide to Disaster
Assistance (FEMA
publication), 60
Civil Air Patrol. See U.S. Civil Air
Patrol
Civil unrest, 100–102
Cline, Isaac M., 138–139
Clinton, Bill, 120–123, 153
Coast Guard. See U.S. Coast
Guard
Colombia, 83
Color code security advisory
system, 66–67
Colorado, state emergency
management agency, 224
Communications, post-Katrina
reforms, 173–175, 185
278
Index

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Community Assistance Program,
State Support Services
Element, 21
Community Disaster Loan
Program, 22
Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation,
and Liability Act, 22
Congressional Act of 1803, 105
Connecticut, state emergency
management agency, 224
Constitution, U.S., 2–4
Continuity of Operations
(COOP), 176
Conventional warfare devices, 
64
Coolidge, Calvin, 5, 109
COOP. See Continuity of
Operations
Cooperating Technical Partners,
22
Coppola, Damon, 28, 69
Crisis Counseling (grant
program), 22
Crisis Reaction Repair Cycle,
37–40
CS&C. See Cyber Security and
Communications
CWS. See Church World Service
(CWS) Disaster Response
Cyber Security and
Communications (CS&C),
193–196
Cyclone Dera (2001), 82
Dams
grant programs, 23
Johnstown ﬂood of 1889, 107
National Dam Safety Program
Act of 1996, 121–122
Darfur, Sudan, 101
Defense against Weapons of Mass
Destruction act of 1996, 121
Defense Civil Preparedness
Agency, 7
Delaware, state emergency
management agency, 224
Department of Defense (DOD), 58
Department of Homeland
Security (DHS), 8–10,
220–221
agencies transferred to, 8–9
creation of, 125–126
and FEMA, 50, 127
and Hurricane Katrina, 126–127
See also Chertoff, Michael;
Paulison, Robert D.; Ridge,
Tom
DERA. See Disaster Preparedness
and Emergency Response
Association
DHS. See Department of
Homeland Security
“Dirty bomb.” See Radiological
dispersion devices
Disaster Legal Services, 22
Disaster Mitigation Act of 2000,
123
Disaster Preparedness and
Emergency Response
Association (DERA), 209
Disaster Relief Act of 1974, 6, 115
Disaster Unemployment
Assistance Program, 22
Disaster-Resource.com. See
Disaster Preparedness and
Emergency Response
Association
Disasters
deﬁnitions, 11–13
global distribution of, 74–75.
See also Global perspective
on emergency management
policy debates over focus on
natural disasters vs.
terrorism, 61–66
risk assessment, 14–15, 19, 69
types of disasters and
catastrophes, 13–16
See also Sociology of disasters
Index
279

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Disease epidemics. See Epidemics
District of Columbia
September 11, 2001, 7, 123–124
state emergency management
agency, 225
DOD. See Department of Defense
Domestic Emergency Support
Teams, 8
Drabek, Thomas, 12, 13
Drought, 82, 83, 86, 88
Duct tape, 148
Dye, Thomas, 45
Earthquake Hazards Reduction
Act of 1977, 115
Earthquakes
Alaskan earthquake of 1964,
112
in Europe, 87–88
in Latin America, 83, 84, 85–86
Los Angeles earthquake of
1994, 120
mitigation activities, 17
Peru earthquake of 1970, 83
San Fernando Valley
earthquake of 1971, 114
San Francisco earthquake of
1906, 108
Santa Cruz earthquake of 1989,
118
East Grand Forks, MN, 122
Economic development, 18, 83
Egypt, 2
Emergency Food and Shelter
Program, 22
Emergency management
associations and resource
centers, 207–211
government agencies, 211–223
history, 1–11, 105–128
international
agencies/organizations,
233–237
list of critical infrastructure,
15–16
mitigation phase, 17–18
Post-Katrina Emergency
Management Reform Act of
2006, 10, 55, 127, 178–179
preparedness phase, 18–27
private organizations, 59–61,
200–207
recovery phase, 29–31
response phase, 28–29
risk assessment, 14–15, 19, 
69
state emergency management
efforts, 55–58, 223–233
See also Disasters; Global
perspective on emergency
management; History of
emergency management;
Public policy; Sociology of
disasters
Emergency Management Institute
(EMI), 22, 60, 211–212
Emergency operations plan
(EOP), 19–20
Emergency Preparedness and
Response Directorate, 8
Energy Security and Assurance
Program, 9
Environmental Measurements
Laboratory, 9
EOP. See Emergency operations
plan
Epidemics, 88, 90, 109
Episcopal Relief and
Development, 203
Ethiopia, 82
Ethnic conﬂict, 100–102
Europe, 86–88
Famine, 82
Fargo, ND, 122
FBI. See Mueller, Robert
FCDA. See Federal Civil Defense
Administration
Federal Civil Defense Act of 1950,
5, 111
280
Index

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Federal Civil Defense
Administration (FCDA), 5–6,
111
Federal Computer Incident
Response Center, 9
Federal Disaster Assistance
Administration, 7
Federal Disaster Relief Act of
1950, 6
Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA), 7–8, 10–11
budget, 182–190
and Clinton, 153–154
creation of, 116, 137–138,
156–157
current role and authority,
50–55
deﬁnition of disasters, 12–13
divisions, 212–213
grants, 21–24
and Homeland Security Act of
2002, 124–125
and Hurricane Katrina, 9–10
mission of, 171–173
National Integration Center
(NIC), 55
organization of, 53–55
overview, 212–213
Post-Katrina Emergency
Management Reform Act of
2006, 10, 55, 127, 178–179
post-Katrina testimony before
Congress on reforms,
organization, and budgets,
169–198
and preparedness, 181–182,
195–197
and public policy debates, 48
and recovery phase of
emergency management, 30
reducing waste, fraud, and
abuse, 176–177
text of executive order, 156–157
See also Allbaugh, Joe; Becton,
Julius W., Jr.; Blanchard, B.
Wayne; Brown, Michael D.;
Giuffrida, Louis O.; Loy,
James; Magaw, John W.;
Paulison, Robert D.;
Stickney, Wallace E.; Vickery,
Gordon F.; Witt, James Lee
Federal Law Enforcement
Training Center (FLETC), 8,
40
Federal Preparedness Agency, 7
Federal Protective Service (FPS),
8, 214
Federalism, and debates over
responsibility for emergency
management, 45–60
FEMA. See Federal Emergency
Management Agency
Fire Management Assistance
Grant Program, 22
Fire Prevention and Assistance
Act of 2001, 123
Fires
Chicago ﬁre of 1871, 105–106
Grandcamp cargo ship
explosion of 1947 (TX), 111
grant programs, 21–24
Great Fire of 1802 (Portsmouth,
NH), 105
in Latin America, 83
Peshtigo ﬁre of 1871 (WI), 106
First responders, 39–42, 63
FLETC. See Federal Law
Enforcement Training Center
Flood Control Act of 1928, 5,
109–110
Flood Control Act of 1936, 5,
110–111
Flood Disaster Protection Act of
1973, 114–115
Flood Mitigation Assistance
Program, 23
Floods
in Africa, 82
in China, 90
in Europe, 87–88
Index
281

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
grant programs, 23–24
Great Mississippi Flood of
1927, 5, 109–110
Johnstown ﬂood of 1889 (PA),
107
in Latin America, 83–86
Midwest ﬂoods of 1993, 
119
mitigation activities, 17
and Nile River, 2
Red River Valley ﬂoods of
1997, 122
See also Hurricanes; National
Flood Insurance Program
Florida
Hurricane Agnes (1972), 114
Hurricane Andrew (1992),
118–119
state emergency management
agency, 225
Flu epidemic of 1918, 109
Foresman, George W., 190–198
FPS. See Federal Protective
Service
France, 88
Funding for emergency
management. See Grant
acquisition
Gainesville, GA, 110
Galveston, TX, 107–108, 138–139
Genocide, 101
Georgia
Gainesville tornado of 1936,
110
Hurricane Agnes (1972), 114
state emergency management
agency, 225
Germany, 88
Giuffrida, Louis O., 133, 141–142
Giuliani, Rudolph W. L., III,
140–141
Global perspective on emergency
management
Africa, 82, 98–101
Argentina, 96–98
Australia, 91–92
China, 89–91
civil unrest, ethnic conﬂict, and
terrorism, 100–102
Europe, 86–88, 102
global distribution of disasters,
74–75
India, 92–94, 101
International Strategy for
Disaster Reduction (ISDR),
76–77
Latin America, 82–86
Nigeria, 98–100
role of the UN, 75–76
Trinidad and Tobago, 94–96
Government agencies, 211–223
Grandcamp explosion, 111
Grands Forks, ND, 122
Grant acquisition, 21–24, 128
Great Depression, 5
Great Mississippi Flood of 1927,
5, 109–110
Great Peshtigo Fire of 1871, 106
Great Tri-State Tornado of 1925,
109
Greece, 87
Guatemala, 83
Haddow, G. D., 17
Hawaii, state emergency
management agency, 225
Hazard Mitigation Grant
Program, 23
Heat waves. See Temperatures,
extreme
History of emergency
management, 1–11
1920s and 1930s, 5
1950s, 5–6
1960s and 1970s, 6–7
chronology of events, 
105–128
Department of Homeland
Security, 8–10
282
Index

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
FEMA origins, 7–8
FEMA reorganization, 10–11
and U.S. Constitution, 2–4
Homeland Security Act of 2002,
124
text of, 166–169
Homeland Security Advisory
System, 66–67, 124
Hoover, Herbert, 110
Hurricane Katrina (2005), 126
and criticism of FEMA, 48
failure to identify resources, 
20
and FEMA directors, 9–10
ﬁrst responders as victims, 43
Post-Katrina Emergency
Management Reform Act of
2006, 10, 55, 127, 178–179
post-Katrina testimony before
Congress on reforms,
organization, and budgets,
169–198
See also Allbaugh, Joe; Brown,
Michael D.; Chertoff,
Michael; Nagin, Clarence
Ray, Jr.
Hurricanes
Cyclone Dera (2001), 82
Hurricane Agnes (1972), 114
Hurricane Andrew (1992),
118–119
Hurricane Betsy (1965), 6,
112–113
Hurricane Camille (1969), 6,
113–114
Hurricane Carla (1961), 6, 112
Hurricane Donna (1960), 6,
111–112
Hurricane Floyd (1999), 122
Hurricane Hugo (1988), 118
hurricane of 1900 (Galveston,
TX), 107–108, 138–139
and Latin America, 83
See also Hurricane Katrina
Hydrogen cyanide, 64
IAEM. See International
Association of Emergency
Managers
ICRC. See International
Committee of the Red Cross
Idaho, state emergency
management agency, 225
Illinois
Chicago ﬁre of 1871, 105–106
ﬂoods of 1993, 119
Great Mississippi Flood of
1927, 5, 109–110
Great Tri-State Tornado of
1925, 109
St. Louis Cyclone of 1896, 107
state emergency management
agency, 226
Immigration and Naturalization
Service, 8
India, 92–94, 101
Indiana
Great Tri-State Tornado of
1925, 109
state emergency management
agency, 226
Individuals and Households
Grant Program, 23
INDNDR. See International
Decade for Natural Disaster
Reduction
Information Analysis and
Infrastructure Protection
Directorate, 9
Infrastructure, 15–16
Infrastructure Protection (IP), 
193
Insurance, subsidized, 18. See also
National Flood Insurance
Program
Integrated Public Alert and
Warning System (IPAWS),
174
International
agencies/organizations,
233–236
Index
283

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
International Association of
Emergency Managers
(IAEM), 209–210
International City/County
Management Association
(ICMA), 15, 19
International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC), 233
International Decade for Natural
Disaster Reduction
(INDNDR), 75
International Relief Friendship
Foundation (IRFF), 203
International Strategy for Disaster
Reduction (ISDR), 76–77
Iowa
ﬂoods of 1993, 119
state emergency management
agency, 226
IP. See Infrastructure Protection
IPAWS. See Integrated Public
Alert and Warning System
ISDR. See International Strategy
for Disaster Reduction
Italy, 87
Jamaica, 83
James Lee Witt Associates, LLC,
154
Japan, 65
Kansas
ﬂoods of 1993, 119
state emergency management
agency, 226
Kashmir, 101
Kates, R., 30–31
Kentucky
Great Mississippi Flood of
1927, 5, 109–110
state emergency management
agency, 226
Kenya, 82
Kingdon, John, 46
Kubler-Ross, E., 39
Landslides, 85–86, 88
Latin America, 82–86
emergency management in
Argentina, 96–98
See also Hurricanes
LDR. See Lutheran Disaster
Response
Lewin, Kurt, 49
Lindell, M. K., 30
Logistics, post-Katrina reforms,
175–176
Los Angeles earthquake of 1994,
120
Louisiana
Great Mississippi Flood of
1927, 5
Hurricane Betsy (1965), 6,
112–113
state emergency management
agency, 227
See also Hurricane Katrina
Loy, James, 142–143
Lugar, Richard, 63
Lutheran Disaster Response
(LDR), 203–204
Macy, John W., Jr., 7, 143–144
Magaw, John W., 144–145
Maine, state emergency
management agency, 227
Map Modernization Management
Support, 23
Maryland, state emergency
management agency, 227
Mass media, 47, 74
Massachusetts, state emergency
management agency, 227
McVeigh, Timothy, 120
Medical Teams International
(MTI), 204
Mediterranean, 87
Mendelsohn, Beniamin, 35–37
Mennonite Disaster Services, 204
Miami-Dade Fire Department,
148
284
Index

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Michigan, state emergency
management agency, 227
Minnesota
ﬂoods of 1993, 119
Red River Valley ﬂoods of
1997, 122
state emergency management
agency, 228
Mississippi
Hurricane Camille (1969), 6,
113–114
state emergency management
agency, 228
Tupelo tornado of 1936, 110
Missouri
ﬂoods of 1993, 119
Great Tri-State Tornado of
1925, 109
St. Louis Cyclone of 1896, 
107
state emergency management
agency, 228
Mitigation phase of emergency
management, 17–18
global perspective, 88–100
and post-Katrina FEMA
reforms, 186–187
Montana, state emergency
management agency, 228
Moorhead, MN, 122
Mount St. Helens volcanic
eruption (1980), 66, 117
Mozambique, 82
MTI. See Medical Teams
International
Mueller, Robert, 145–146
Mutual-aid agreements between
communities, 24–25
Nagin, Clarence Ray, Jr., 146–148
Namibia, 82
National BW Defense Analysis
Center, 9
National Communications
System, 9
National Dam Safety Program
Act of 1996, 23, 121–122
National Domestic Preparedness
Ofﬁce, 9
National Earthquake Hazard
Reduction Program
(NEHRP), 23, 115
National Emergency
Management Association,
210
National Emergency Response
Team (NERT), 204–205
National Fire Academy (NFA), 23,
115
National Flood Insurance
Program, 6, 23, 113, 130
National Guard, 57–58, 214–215
National Hazards Center, 210
National Infrastructure Protection
Center, 9
National Infrastructure Protection
Plan (NIPP), 195
National Integration Center
(NIC), 55
National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA), 216
National Protection and
Programs Directorate
(NPPD), 10–11, 192–197
National Protection Planning
Ofﬁce (NPPO), 10–11,
194–195
National Response Plan (NRP),
126–127
National Urban Search and
Rescue (US&R) Response
System, 23–24
Natural hazards, listed, 13–14
Nazarene Disaster Response
(NDR), 205
NDR. See Nazarene Disaster
Response
Nebraska
ﬂoods of 1993, 119
Index
285

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
state emergency management
agency, 228
NEHRP. See National Earthquake
Hazard Reduction Program
NERT. See National Emergency
Response Team
Nevada, state emergency
management agency, 228
New Hampshire
Great Fire of 1802, 105
state emergency management
agency, 229
New Jersey, state emergency
management agency, 
229
New Mexico, state emergency
management agency, 229
New Orleans, LA, 112–113. See
also Hurricane Katrina
New York City
and debates over allocation of
resources, 68
September 11, 2001, 7, 28–29,
123–124
World Trade Center bombing
of 1993, 119
See also Giuliani, Rudolph W.
L., III
New York (state)
Hurricane Agnes (1972), 114
state emergency management
agency, 229
NFA. See National Fire Academy
NIC. See National Integration
Center
Nicaragua, 83
Nichols, Terry, 120
Niger, 82
Nigeria, 98–100
Nile River, 2
NIPP. See National Infrastructure
Protection Plan
Nixon, Richard, 114–115
NOAA. See National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration
North Carolina
Hurricane Agnes (1972), 114
Hurricane Floyd (1999), 122
state emergency management
agency, 229
North Dakota
ﬂoods of 1993, 119
Red River Valley ﬂoods of
1997, 122
state emergency management
agency, 230
NPPD. See National Protection
and Programs Directorate
NPPO. See National Protection
Planning Ofﬁce
NRP. See National Response Plan
Nuclear devices, 64, 65
Nuclear Incident Response Team,
8
Nuclear power, 115–116
Nunn-Lugar-Domenici II Act of
1996, 121
OAS. See Organization of
American States
OCHA. See United Nations Ofﬁce
for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs
Ofﬁce for Domestic Preparedness,
8
Ofﬁce of Cyber Security and
Communications, 11
Ofﬁce of Grants and Training
(Ofﬁce of Grant Programs),
10
Ofﬁce of Homeland Security, 125,
149
Ofﬁce of Intergovernmental
Affairs, 194
Ofﬁce of Intergovernmental
Programs, 11
Ofﬁce of National Capital Region
Coordination, 10
Ofﬁce of Risk Management and
Analysis, 11
286
Index

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Ohio, state emergency
management agency, 230
Oklahoma
and debates over allocation of
resources, 68–69
Oklahoma City bombing
(1995), 68, 120
state emergency management
agency, 230
Oregon
salad bar salmonella incident
(1984), 64
state emergency management
agency, 230
tsunami of 1964, 112
Organization of American States
(OAS), 233–234
Pakistan, 101
Paulison, Robert D., 148–149
testimony before Congress,
170–190
Pennsylvania
Johnstown ﬂood of 1889, 107
state emergency management
agency, 230
Three Mile Island nuclear
accident (1979), 115–116
Perry, R. W., 30
Peru, 83
Peshtigo, Wisconsin, ﬁre of 1871,
106
Pijawka, D., 30–31
Plum Island Animal Disease
Center, 9
The Points of Light Foundation,
205
Policy. See Public policy
Political agendas, 45–48
Port Lavaca, TX, 112
Port O’Connor, TX, 112
Post-Katrina Emergency
Management Reform Act of
2006, 10, 55, 127, 178–179
PPD-39, 120–121
Prater, C. S., 30
Pre-Disaster Mitigation Program,
24
Preparedness phase of emergency
management, 18–27
emergency
management–related
ordinances, 19
emergency operations plan
(EOP), 19–20
global perspective, 88–100
grant acquisition, 21–24
mutual-aid agreements, 24–25
public education, 26–27
resource identiﬁcation, 20–21
risk assessment, 14–15, 19, 69
training and exercises, 25–26
warning systems, 20
Presidential Decision Directive
#39, 120–121
Prince William Sound earthquake
(1964), 6, 112
Private organizations, 59–61,
200–207
Psychological impact of disasters,
37–39
impact on ﬁrst responders,
42–45
providing psychological ﬁrst
aid, 39–42
Public Assistance Grant Program,
24
Public Disaster Communications,
185
Public education campaigns, 18,
26–27
Public policy
debates over focus on natural
disasters vs. terrorism, 61–66
debates over geographical
allocation of resources,
68–70
and media, 47
obstacles to policy changes,
48–50
Index
287

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
public policy process and
political agendas, 45–48
warning systems, 66–68
Puerto Rico
Hurricane Donna (1960),
111–112
Hurricane Hugo (1988), 118
Radiological dispersion devices
(RDDs), 64, 65
RDDs. See Radiological
dispersion devices
REACT International, 205
Ready.gov, 211
Reagan, Ronald, 141
Reconstruction Finance
Corporation (RFC), 110
Recovery phase of emergency
management, 29–31
global perspective, 88–100
Red Cross, American, 59–60,
106–108, 201. See also Barton,
Clara; Boardman, Mabel;
Taft, William Howard
Red Cross, International, 233
Red River Valley ﬂoods of 1997,
122
Reimbursement for Fireﬁghting
on Federal Property, 24
Relief/mitigation organizations
and agencies
associations and resource
centers, 207–211
government agencies, 211–223
international
agencies/organizations,
233–237
private organizations, 200–207
state agencies, 223–233
Repetitive Flood Claims Program,
24
Response phase of emergency
management, 28–29
global perspective, 88–100
Reypen, William Van, 134
RFC. See Reconstruction Finance
Corporation
Rhode Island, state emergency
management agency, 230
Ridge, Tom, 125, 149–150
Risk assessment, 14–15, 19, 69
Risk Management and Analysis
Ofﬁce, 194
Robert T. Stafford Disaster
Assistance and Emergency
Relief Act of 1988. See
Stafford Act
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 5
Russia, 102
Rwanda, 82
Salmonella incident (OR, 1984),
64
Salvation Army, 135
The Salvation Army USA, 206
San Fernando Valley earthquake
of 1971, 114
San Francisco
San Francisco earthquake of
1906, 108
Santa Cruz earthquake of 1989,
118
Santa Cruz earthquake of 1989,
118
Sarin gas, 64–65
SARS, 90
Science and Technology
Directorate, 9
Secret Service. See U.S. Secret
Service
September 11, 2001, 7, 123–124
emergency management
response, 28–29
ﬁrst responders as victims,
43–44
See also Giuliani, Rudolph W.
L., III; Loy, James
Social hazards, listed, 14
Sociology of disasters, 34–45
ﬁrst responders, 39–45
288
Index

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
providing psychological ﬁrst
aid, 39–42
types of victims, 35–36
victimology and victim
precipitation, 34
victims’ responses, 37–39
Somalia, 82
South Carolina
Hurricane Agnes (1972), 114
Hurricane Hugo (1988), 118
state emergency management
agency, 231
South Dakota
ﬂoods of 1993, 119
state emergency management
agency, 231
Southern Baptist Disaster Relief,
206
Spain, 102
Spanish ﬂu epidemic of 1918, 109
St. Louis Cyclone of 1896, 107
Stafford, Robert T., 150
Stafford Act (1988), 51–53, 117,
150
amendments, 123
text of, 157–166
State emergency management
agencies, 55–58, 223–233
State Fire Training System Grants,
24
Stickney, Wallace E., 150–151
Strategic National Stockpile and
the National Disaster
Medical System, 8
Sudan, 82, 101
Sumatra tsunami of 2004, 46, 73
Sununu, John, 151
Superfund Amendments and
Reauthorization Act, 24
Taft, William Howard, 151–152
Tanzania, 82
Technological disasters, 88
Technological hazards, listed, 14
Temperatures, extreme, 88
Tennessee
Great Mississippi Flood of
1927, 5, 109–110
state emergency management
agency, 231
Terrorism
antiterrorism grant funding, 
21
in Argentina, 97
Beslan, Russia, massacre
(2004), 102
and DOD, 58
global perspective, 100–102
London bombings (2005), 102
Madrid train bombing (2004),
102
and National Guard, 58
Oklahoma City bombing of
1995, 68, 120
policy debates over focus on
natural disasters vs.
terrorism, 61–66
and Presidential Decision
Directive #39, 120–121
and public policy debates, 46
salad bar salmonella incident
(1984), 64
September 11, 2001, 7, 28–29,
43–44, 123–124
Tokyo, Japan, subway gas
attack (1995), 65
World Trade Center bombing
of 1993, 119
Texas
Grandcamp cargo ship
explosion of 1947, 111
Hurricane Carla (1961), 6, 112
hurricane of 1900 (Galveston),
107–108, 138–139
state emergency management
agency, 56–57, 231
Texas City, TX, 111
Threat level codes, 124
Three Mile Island nuclear
accident (1979), 115–116
Index
289

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Tokyo, Japan, subway gas attack
(1995), 65
Tornados
and debates over allocation of
resources, 68–69
Great Tri-State Tornado of
1925, 109
St. Louis Cyclone of 1896, 107
Tupelo/Gainesville tornados of
1936, 110
Training in emergency
management, 25–26
Transportation Security
Administration, 8
Trinidad and Tobago, 94–96
Truman, Harry, 111
Tsunamis
and Alaskan earthquake of
1964, 6, 112
Sumatra tsunami of 2004, 46,
73
Tupelo, MS, 110
Turkey, 87
Uganda, 82
UJC Federations of North
America, 206
UN/ISDR. See United Nations
International Strategy for
Disaster Reduction
United Kingdom, 102
United Nations, 75–77
United Nations International
Strategy for Disaster
Reduction (UN/ISDR),
234–235
United Nations Ofﬁce for the
Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), 235
United Nations Relief Web,
235–236
United States Visitor and
Immigrant Status Indicator
Technology (US-VISIT), 11,
194
U.S. Agency for International
Development (USAID),
216–217
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, 5,
217–218
U.S. Bureau of Public Roads, 110
U.S. Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC), 44,
218
U.S. Civil Air Patrol (CAP),
218–219
U.S. Coast Guard (USCG), 9, 113,
219–220. See also Loy, James
U.S. Customs Service, 8
U.S. Department of Homeland
Security. See Department of
Homeland Security
U.S. Fire Administration, 10, 115,
127, 153, 222
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS),
66, 222–223
U.S. Secret Service, 9
USAID. See U.S. Agency for
International Development
USCG. See U.S. Coast Guard
USGS. See U.S. Geological Survey
US-VISIT. See United States
Visitor and Immigrant
Status Indicator Technology
Utah, state emergency
management agency, 231
Venezuela, 83
Vermont, state emergency
management agency, 232
Vickery, Gordon F., 152–153
Victims of disasters. See Sociology
of disasters
Virgin Islands, 118
Virginia
Hurricane Camille (1969),
113–114
290
Index

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
state emergency management
agency, 232
Vision Initiative, 183–184
Volcanic eruptions
in Europe, 88
in Latin America, 83, 85–86
Mount St. Helens volcanic
eruption (1980), 66, 117
Nevado del Ruiz eruption
(Colombia, 1985), 83
warning systems, 66
Volunteers of American, 207
Vulnerability of communities, 
15
Warning systems, 20, 66–68
Washington (state)
Mount St. Helens volcanic
eruption (1980), 117
state emergency management
agency, 232
Washington, D.C. See District of
Columbia
Weapons of Mass Destruction
Civil Support Teams 
(WMD-CSTs), 58
Weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs)
Defense against Weapons of
Mass Destruction act of
1996, 121
policy debates over focus on
natural disasters vs.
terrorism, 61–66
West Virginia, state emergency
management agency, 232
Windstorms, 85–88. See also
Hurricanes
Wisconsin
ﬂoods of 1993, 119
Peshtigo ﬁre of 1871, 106
state emergency management
agency, 232
Witt, James Lee, 153–154
WMD-CSTs. See Weapons of Mass
Destruction Civil Support
Teams
World Conference on Natural
Disaster Reduction
(Yokohama, 1994), 75
World Vision, 207
Wyoming, state emergency
management agency, 233
Yokohama Strategy and Plan for
Action, 75–76
Index
291

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
293
About the Author
Jeffrey B. Bumgarner, Ph.D., is an associate professor in the Department
of Sociology, Criminal Justice, and Anthropology at Texas Christian Uni-
versity in Fort Worth, Texas. He earned a B.A. in political science from
the University of Illinois (Champaign–Urbana), an MAPA in public ad-
ministration from Northern Illinois University, and a Ph.D. in training
and organization development from the University of Minnesota.
Dr. Bumgarner has several years of experience in federal and local
law enforcement, as well as in academe. He is the author of Proﬁling and
Criminal Justice in America (2004), Federal Agents: The Growth of Federal
Law Enforcement in America (2006), and several articles and book chap-
ters relating to public safety and homeland security.


