
Encyclopedia of the
ancient Greek World
Revised edition
David Sacks
Editorial Consultant Oswyn Murray 
Revised by Lisa R. Brody

Encyclopedia of the Ancient Greek World, Revised Edition
Copyright © 2005, 1995 David Sacks
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form or
by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any
information storage or retrieval systems, without permission in writing from the
publisher. For information contact:
Facts On File, Inc.
132 West 31st Street
New York NY 10001
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available on request from 
Facts On File, Inc.
ISBN 0-8160-5722-2
Facts On File books are available at special discounts when purchased in bulk
quantities for businesses, associations, institutions, or sales promotions. Please call
our Special Sales Department in New York at (212) 967-8800 or (800) 322-8755.
You can find Facts On File on the World Wide Web at http://www.factsonfile.com
Produced by Schlager Group Inc.
Text design by Joan M. Toro
Cover design by Cathy Rincon
Illustrations by Margaret Bunson 
Maps by Jeremy Eagle 
Printed in the United States of America
VB Hermitage 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
This book is printed on acid-free paper.

For Rebecca and Katie Sacks.
—David Sacks
For Julia and Connor. Sas agapo.
—Lisa R. Brody


List of Illustrations and Maps
vi
Acknowledgments
x
Introduction to the Revised Edition
xi
Introduction to the Original Edition
xiv
Chronology of the Ancient Greek World
xvii
Entries A to Z
1
Bibliography
376
Index
382
CONTENTS

vi
Photographs & Illustrations
Athenian acropolis
5
Pair of altars, showing the death of Adonis
6
Terra-cotta statuette of a mourning woman
12
Gold mask of Agamemnon
13
Athenian agora
16
Red-figure cup, showing Tekmessa and death of Ajax
17
Silver four-drachma coin, showing Alexander the God
21
Coin, showing King Antiochus I
32
Statuette, Venus de Clerq
34
Statue of Apollo
35
Detail of Ionic capital
41
Temple of Apollo at Corinth, from east
42
Terra-cotta statuette of Artemis, from a small sanctuary at Kanoni
49
Lenormant Athena
57
Bassae, Temple of Apollo Epicurius, interior north
64
Black-figure kylix
65
Detail of Boeotian amphora
67
Bronze youth from Antikythera
70
Erechtheion, Caryatid porch
76
Parthenon frieze, west
79
Lion, Chaeroneia
81
Helmet of Chalcidian shape, with griffin
83
Peplos Kore, head
86
Parthenon frieze, rider in petasos
87
Anavyssos Croesus head and shoulders
95
Relief from Eleusis, showing Demeter and Persephone
108
Red-figure kantharos with masks
114
Votive relief to Demeter and Kore
120
Stele of Aristion
133
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
AND MAPS

Reconstruction of Stele with Sphinx
134
Hairnet, Ptolemaic jewelry
138
Kouros base, youths in gymnasium
142
Terra-cotta red-figure lekythos, showing Paris and Helen
147
Corinthian-style columns and other Greek architectural remnants 
at Palmyra
149
Achilles and Patroclus
160
Kouros base, showing hoplites
163
Dolphin fresco, queen’s megaron (great hall), Knossus
184
Statue of Leda and the swan
189
Antefix of a maenad and satyr dancing
198
Hand mirror with Medusa
205
Mantineia base, three muses
213
Mantineia base detail, Apollo with kithara
214
Gold mask from Mycenae
215
Inlaid dagger from Mycenae, lion hunt
217
Thymiaterion, incense burner, with statuette of Nike
225
Bronze jockey of Artemision
231
Panathenaic prize amphora with lid
238
Parthenon from northwest
241
Metope relief of Perseus, with Medusa
256
Parthenon frieze showing Poseidon, Apollo, and Artemis
276
Anthenian amphora
278
Sampling of Greek pottery designs 279
Terra-cotta cart with amphorae from Euboea
280
Hermes of Praxiteles 281
Black-figure amphora
284
Terra-cotta doll from the Louvre
304
Terra-cotta statuette of a standing woman
305
Theater of Dionysos, Silenus in bema of Phaedrus
314
Epidaurus, theater
338
Bust of a warrior, known as Leonidas
345
Black-figure neck amphora, showing Theseus and the Minotaur
346
Warrior vase from Mycenae
360
Acropolis kore
366
Kouros base, wrestlers
368
Maps
Greece and Neighboring Regions
viii
Mainland Greece and the Aegean Sea
ix
Asia Minor
52
Athens and Its Monuments
59
Crete
94
Hellenistic World, ca. 240 B.C.E.
148
Italy and Sicily
172
Greece during the Peloponnesian War
245
Early Mediterranean Trade Routes
354
List of Illustrations and Maps
vii

viii

ix

x
I am most grateful to several people for help. My former
teacher Oswyn Murray, fellow of Balliol College and lec-
turer in ancient history at Oxford University, vetted the
manuscript with the same patience and receptiveness
that distinguished his tutorial sessions. I owe him a great
deal, not only for the book’s preparation, but also for my
wider fascination with the ancient world. Two other
scholars kindly donated their time to read sections and
make comments: Gilbert Rose, professor of classics at
Swarthmore College, and Christopher Simon, currently a
visiting assistant professor of classics at the University of
California, Berkeley. (Any factual errors here remain my
own, however.)
I wish to thank my parents, Louis and Emmy Lou
Sacks, for their unstinting encouragement. Ditto my good
friend Jeffrey Scheuer. My thanks to Facts On File editor
Gary Krebs, who kept the door open while the manu-
script came together. Especially I must thank my wife,
Joan Monahan, who brought home the family’s bacon,
day after day, during the four years consumed by this
project.
—David Sacks
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

xi
The gleaming marble of the Parthenon in Athens. The
poignant handclasp of a married couple on a tombstone
in the Kerameikos. The perfect acoustics of the theater at
Epidaurus. The vibrant characters of Homer and
Euripides. The rhythmic decoration of a Geometric vase
painting. The driving ambition of Alexander the Great.
The mysterious oracle of Apollo at Delphi. The thrilling
competition of the athletic festival at Olympia.
The ancient Greek world began to emerge in the
eastern Mediterranean during the third millennium B.C.E.
and continued until Rome conquered the region in the
first century B.C.E. Many elements of modern Western
civilization—including art, architecture, literature, phi-
losophy, science, and medicine—rely on the cultural
achievements of the ancient Greeks. Today a wide range
of interdisciplinary scholars study the ancient Greek civi-
lization; the goal of this revised encyclopedia is to present
these scholars’ new discoveries and reinterpretations in a
concise and readable format that will appeal to a broad
audience.
Greece is a peninsula in southeast Europe that pro-
jects into the Mediterranean, flanked by the Aegean Sea
to the east and the Ionian Sea to the west. Its long coast-
line has numerous natural harbors and inlets for sea trav-
el and maritime commerce that became essential to Greek
civilization from its inception. Mainland Greece is also a
mountainous country, with a landscape well suited to
grazing sheep and goats, growing grape vines and olive
trees, and building naturally defended citadels and cities.
The first truly Greek civilization was that of the
Mycenaeans, around 1600–1200 B.C.E., modeled after the
earlier, non-Greek Minoan civilization on the island of
Crete. The centuries following the collapse of the
Mycenaean civilization are variously called the Sub-
Mycenaean period, the Greek Dark Ages, the Protogeo-
metric period, or the early Iron Age. During this time (ca.
1100–900 B.C.E.), the population of Greece decreased and
was redistributed into isolated communities, literacy disap-
peared, and works of art and architecture became all but
nonexistent.
The period from about 900 to 700 B.C.E., the
Geometric era, was a time of renewal and growth for
Greece. Communication and trade routes were renewed,
literacy reemerged with a new written language adopted
from the Phoenicians, and artistic creativity began to be
expressed again. The Geometric Greeks also built sacred
cult areas with altars and temples where they worshipped
their gods with animal sacrifices and other offerings. The
Greeks’ prosperity continued into the early Archaic peri-
od (ca. 700–600 B.C.E.), which saw the rise of the politi-
cal unit known as the polis (city-state). Coinage was
invented, and monumental stone sculpture and architec-
ture began to be created, probably due to influences from
neighboring peoples such as the Egyptians.
In the 500s B.C.E., many of the new Greek city-states
came to be ruled by tyrants, several of whom were strong
patrons of the arts. The communities continued to flour-
ish and trade increased. In Athens, the tyranny of the
Peisistratid family was ended in 510 B.C.E., and after this
a democratic government began to evolve. Around the
same time, the massive Persian Empire began its attempts
to conquer the Greeks. Despite being generally outnum-
bered, the Greeks (under the leadership of the Athenians)
defeated the Persians; the victory was celebrated in public
artworks by scenes of mythological battles where civi-
lized forces triumph over barbaric ones (Gods vs. Giants,
Greeks vs. Centaurs, Greeks vs. Amazons, and Greeks vs.
Trojans).
The end of the Persian Wars in 479 B.C.E. marks the
end of the Archaic period and the start of the classical
INTRODUCTION TO THE
REVISED EDITION

period. The fifth century B.C.E. is viewed as a “golden
age,” especially in Athens under the leadership of the
statesman Perikles. A monumental building program was
undertaken on the Athenian Acropolis, including the
temple of Athena, known as the Parthenon. By the late
400s B.C.E., tension had arisen between imperialist
Athens and other Greek city-states, particularly Sparta
and others in the Peloponnese. The resulting civil war,
the Peloponnesian Wars, disrupted the entire Greek
world and ended the domination of the Athenians.
In the mid-400s B.C.E., a new power began to appear
in Greece: Macedon, under the rule of King Philip and
his son, Alexander the Great. The Macedonian con-
quests, extending as far east as India, spread Hellenic
culture throughout the ancient world and introduced a
new, international era, known as the Hellenistic period.
Cosmopolitan centers such as Alexandria, Athens, and
Pergamon attracted large numbers of artists, philoso-
phers, and scientists. Cults of foreign divinities such as
Isis and Mithras became increasingly popular, alongside
those of the traditional Olympian gods. By the 200s
B.C.E., another new power appeared in the Mediter-
ranean: Rome. In 146 B.C.E., Greece was made a Roman
province, and the defeat of Cleopatra and Mark Antony
at the Battle of Actium in 31 B.C.E. signaled the end of
the Hellenistic period and the start of the Roman
Imperial era.
Travel to Greece, motivated by interest in its ancient
culture, began almost immediately, in the early Roman
period. In the second century C.E., a traveler named
Pausanias toured the mainland and wrote one of the
world’s earliest and most detailed guidebooks. His sys-
tematic accounts of ancient sites and sanctuaries, though
sometimes flawed and often based on hearsay instead of
observation, provide a fascinating source of information
for modern scholars, to be used in conjunction with
archaeological evidence.
In the medieval era, travelers to Greece were mainly
pilgrims, passing through the country on their way to
Jerusalem. They were less interested in contemplating the
ancient Greek world than in reaching their ultimate desti-
nation as quickly as possible. In the early 15th century,
however, an Italian named Cyriac of Ancona journeyed to
Greece with antiquarian purposes in mind. His descrip-
tions of ancient sites and drawings of visible ruins (par-
ticularly inscriptions) are another valuable source for
today’s Classical scholars.
After Cyriac, interest in ancient Greece waned for a
while. Those Europeans of the 16th and 17th centuries
who were curious about the ancient world tended to con-
centrate on Rome instead, though there were a few
exceptions. One of these exceptions involved a group of
scholars and artists led by the French marquis de Nointel
in 1673–1674. One of these artists was Jacques Carrey,
whose invaluable drawings of the Parthenon sculptures
help modern scholars reconstruct many pieces that were
subsequently destroyed.
The real age of travel to Greece began in the 18th cen-
tury, at a time when the “Grand Tour” came into fashion
for large numbers of rich, educated Europeans. One group,
the Society of Dilettanti, sponsored a number of significant
expeditions to Greece and published several illustrated
travel accounts. In 1748, they hired two architects, James
Stuart and Nicholas Revett, to visit Athens and to draw as
many ancient monuments as possible. Their meticulous
work, published in four volumes between 1762 and 1816
as The Antiquities of Athens, is invaluable for information
about many Athenian antiquities that were better pre-
served in the 18th century than they are today.
Other Europeans during the 18th and 19th centuries
continued to visit Greece and to record the places and
things of interest that they experienced. Some of the more
significant travelers to the Greek world during this time
include William Hamilton (1764), Richard Chandler
(1764–1766), J. B. S. Morritt (1794–1796), Sir William
Gell (1801–1834), Edward Dodwell (1801–1806), Colonel
William Martin Leake (1802–1815), George Lord Byron
(1809–1811, 1823–1824), Edward Lear (1848–1864), and
Richard Farrer (1880–1882).
Today scholarship of the ancient Greek world is called
classical studies, and the archaeology of ancient Greece is
called classical archaeology. These fields developed gradu-
ally but constantly from the period of the early travelers to
modern times. One early scholar whose work is sometimes
said to mark the beginning of classical archaeology is the
German Johann Joachim Winckelmann (1717–1768); his
impressive History of Art in Antiquity sparked intense inter-
est in the ancient Greece world during the Romantic era.
The earliest expeditions to Greece were really more
about collecting than archaeology. In 1801, the British
ambassador to Turkey, Lord Elgin, received a permit from
the Turks to “excavate and remove” antiquities from the
Athenian Acropolis. The sculptures that he took from the
ruins of the Parthenon are now in the British Museum in
London and are the object of heated controversy; the
Greeks consider the “Elgin marbles” to be stolen cultural
property and are anxious to have them returned. Elgin’s
undertaking was soon imitated; the Germans removed
sculptures from the Temple of Aphaia at Aegina and the
Temple of Apollo Epikourios at Bassae, and the French
claimed Greek statues such as the Nike of Samothrace
and the Venus de Milo.
In the mid- and late 19th century, the Greek govern-
ment allowed the establishment of several foreign archae-
ological schools in Athens, such as the American School
of classical studies. From this time on, foreign scholars
wanting to excavate Greek sites or study Greek antiqui-
ties have been required to obtain permits and to be close-
ly regulated; no more Greek artifacts would leave the
country. classical archaeology gradually was transformed
xii
Introduction to the Revised Edition

from a hobby of acquisition to a scientific pursuit, due in
large part to the work of German scholars in the late 19th
and early 20th centuries. Systematic excavations were
begun at Olympia by the Germans (1875–1881), at
Delphi by the French (1892–1903), and at Corinth by the
Americans (1896 to the present).
Classical archaeology today is a highly specialized
field, and excavations require the cooperation of experts
from a variety of subspecialties. Despite the long history of
travel to Greece and study of ancient Greek artifacts, new
discoveries are being made all the time. Because of this,
new publications in classical studies appear constantly,
even about such well-studied subjects as the Parthenon
frieze. New revisions of older publications, such as this
Encyclopedia of the Ancient Greek World, are necessary and
valuable for the same reason.
The original format of David Sacks’s Encyclopedia of
the Ancient Greek World has not been altered in this
revised edition, but many of the entries have been edited
and rewritten, and several new entries have been added.
Most of the changes were specified by Sacks, but occa-
sionally I found myself able to add further information
due to my own experience and fields of expertise. I have
also made a few stylistic modifications and a few format
changes according to the publisher’s guidelines. Overall, I
have tried to do as little rewriting as possible, so that the
original author’s “voice” still predominates.
I also adjusted the spelling of several headword
entries. Although Sacks used Latinized and Anglicized
spellings in many instances, I have used modern translit-
erations of the ancient Greek as much as possible, retain-
ing the Latinized ones only in cases where it would be far
more familiar to the general reader: “Perikles” instead of
“Pericles” and “Hephaistos” instead of “Hephaestus,” for
example, but “Corinth” instead of “Korinth” and
“Aeschylus” instead of “Aischylos.”
The change that I hope will provide the greatest ben-
efit to the reader is the addition of specialized bibliogra-
phies (“Further reading”) after each entry, supplementing
the updated, general bibliography at the end of the book.
In compiling these bibliographies, I have tried to include
the most recent and scholarly sources on each topic,
though this was limited to a degree by the necessity of
citing only English-language works.
If this encyclopedia had been published when I
myself was an undergraduate and graduate student in
classical studies, I would have found it extremely benefi-
cial. I have enjoyed preparing the revised edition and
hope that my modifications have made the publication
even more valuable. My hope is that current students, as
well as other interested general readers, will read it and
make reference to it, and that it will enrich their knowl-
edge and appreciation of the ancient Greek world.
—Lisa R. Brody
Introduction to the Revised Edition
xiii

xiv
INTRODUCTION TO THE
ORIGINAL EDITION
About 2100 B.C.E. a migrant, cattle-herding, pony-riding
people made their way into the Mediterranean landmass
that today is called Greece. They entered overland from
the north, probably the Danube basin, but their origins
may have been farther northeast, for they spoke a lan-
guage of the Indo-European linguistic family. Modern
philologists believe that the ancestral Indo-European lan-
guage—whose modern descendants include English,
German, Gaelic, French, Farsi, Hindi, and modern
Greek—evolved in the fourth millennium B.C.E. on the
plains of southern Russia. This mother tongue then
branched into different forms, carried in all directions by
nomadic tribes. The group that reached Greece ca. 2100
B.C.E. brought with it an early form of the Greek lan-
guage. These people can be called the first Greeks.
The land that they invaded was held by farmers who
had probably immigrated centuries earlier from Asia
Minor, a place with which they perhaps remained linked
via an eastward trade network that included the Aegean
island of Crete. They apparently knew seafaring and
stone masonry—two skills that the nomadic Greeks did
not yet have.
But the Greeks were the stronger warriors. They took
over the country, probably by violence in the most desir-
able locales, but elsewhere perhaps by intermarriage (as
may be reflected in the many Greek myths in which the
hero marries the foreign princess). One apparent sign of
conquest is the wrecked remnant of a pre-Greek palace
that modern archaeologists call the House of the Tiles, at
Lerna on the plain of Argos. Destroyed by fire ca. 2100
B.C.E., this may have been the home of a native ruler who
led an unsuccessful defense of the fertile heartland of
southern Greece. Yet at certain other sites, archaeologists
have found no clear signs of violence—only continued
habitation and the abrupt emergence of a new style of
pottery, betokening the Greeks’ arrival.
The region that the Greeks now took over—and that
would henceforth be their homeland—is a huge, jagged,
southward-pointing peninsula, with a coastline stretching
nearly 2,000 miles. Beyond its shores, particularly to the
southeast, are islands that beckon to sea travelers and
traders. Through the peninsula’s center, from north to
south, runs an irregular line of mountain ranges, whose
slopes in ancient times held forests of oak, beech, and
fir—timber for generations of house builders and ship-
wrights. In a later era, the limestone formations in these
mountains would yield marble for sculptors and archi-
tects. But the mountains also occupied most of the main-
land’s total area, leaving only 20 percent as arable land.
Aside from scattered pockets, the farmland lay main-
ly in three regions: the plains of Argos, Boeotia, and
Thessaly, in southern, central, and northern Greece,
respectively. These territories were destined to become
early Greek centers of power, especially the region of
Argos, with its capital at Mycenae.
The soil of much of Greece is red or orange from clay
deposits, which served centuries of potters and sculptors.
In ancient times the farmed plains and foothills produced
wheat, barley, olives, grapes, figs, and pomegranates—
crops that could survive the ferociously hot, dry Greek
summer. Summer, not winter, is the barren season in
Greece, as in other parts of the Mediterranean. Winters
are relatively mild—cool and rainy, but far rainier on the
mainland’s western side. The eastern regions, although
traditionally densely populated, are blocked by the cen-
tral mountains from receiving the westerly rainy weather.
Athens gets only about 15 inches of rainfall a year; Corfu,
on the west coast, has three times that much.
In such a country, where farmland and water supplies
were precious, the Greek invaders of ca. 2100 B.C.E. found
most of the best locales already settled. The Greeks took
over such settlements but kept their pre-Greek names. For

that reason, the names of most ancient Greek cities do not
come from the Greek language. Names such as Athens,
Corinth, and Mycenae are not etymologically Greek; their
original meanings are lost in prehistory. Relatively few
ancient mainland sites have recognizably Greek names,
among them Pylos (“the gate”), Megara (“the great hall”),
Chalcis (“bronze city”), and Marathon (“fennel”).
Eventually the Greeks acquired the civilizing arts of
the people they had conquered. The Greeks learned ship-
building, seamanship, and stoneworking—skills at which
they excelled. More significantly, they borrowed from the
non-Greeks’ agrarian religion, which perhaps involved
the worship of a mother goddess and a family of fertility
deities. Non-Greek goddesses and beliefs, imported into
Greek religion, complemented and refined the warrior
Greeks’ Indo-European–type worship of a sky father and
male gods. A new spirituality was born.
Thus in the centuries after 2100 B.C.E. came the cre-
ative fusion of two cultures—one primitive Greek, one
non-Greek. To these two elements was added a third: the
example and influence of the dynamic, non-Greek, Minoan
civilization of Crete. By 1600 B.C.E. such factors had pro-
duced the first blossoming of the Greeks, in the Bronze Age
urban society called the Mycenaean civilization.
For reasons never adequately explained, the Greeks of
the next 15 centuries showed a spiritual and intellectual
genius that expressed itself in religious awe, storytelling,
poetry, sports, the material arts, trade, scientific studies,
military organization, and in the governments of their self-
contained city-states, particularly Athens. Their legacy to
modern global society is immense. The Greeks invented
democracy, narrative history writing, stage tragedy and
comedy, philosophy, biological study, and political theory.
They introduced the alphabet to European languages. They
developed monumental styles of architecture that in the
United States are used for museums, courthouses, and
other public buildings. They created a system of sports
competitions and a cult of physical fitness, both of which
we have inherited. In sculpture, they perfected the repre-
sentation of the human body. In geometry, they developed
theorems and terminology still taught in schools. They cre-
ated the idea of a national literature, with its recognized
great writers and the libraries to preserve their work. And
(perhaps what most people would think of first) the
Greeks bequeathed to us their treasure trove of myths,
including a hero who remains a favorite today—Herakles,
or Hercules.
The early Greeks learned much about art and tech-
nology from Near Eastern peoples such as the Egyptians
and Phoenicians. But more usually the Greeks became
the teachers of others. They were an enterprising, often
friendly people, and—as sea traders, colonists, mercenary
soldiers, or conquerors—they traveled the world from
southern Spain to Pakistan. Everywhere they went, they
cast a spell through the magnetic appeal of their culture
and style of life.
Their most fateful protégés were the Romans, a non-
Greek people of Italy. Influenced by imported Greek
goods and ideas from the 700s or 600s B.C.E. onward, the
Romans modeled their religion largely on the Greeks’,
using Greek deities to shape their native Roman gods.
This early stage was followed by a more elaborate copy-
ing—of Greek coinage, architecture, and other arts—
starting in the 300s B.C.E. When the Romans sought to
create their own national literature, they naturally turned
to Greek models in epic and lyric poetry, history writing,
rhetoric, tragedy, and comedy. They also became impor-
tant patrons of Greek artists and craftsmen.
But meanwhile Roman armies were capturing Greek
cities and kingdoms—first in Italy and Sicily (300s–200s
B.C.E.), then in mainland Greece, Macedon, and Asia Minor
(100s B.C.E.), and finally in Syria and Egypt (first century
B.C.E.). Roman generals and governors plundered centuries’
worth of Greek sculptures and other art treasures, removing
them from temples and public squares and shipping them to
Rome. In most locales, the inhabitants became taxpaying
subjects of the Roman empire. The Romans more or less put
an end to the Greek achievement, even as they inherited it.
The Roman poet Horace found a more hopeful phrasing for
this when he wrote, about 19 B.C.E., “Captive Greece took
mighty Rome captive, forcing culture onto rustic folk.”
The Romans went on to conquer a domain that, at its
greatest extent, stretched from Scotland to Mesopotamia.
Their borrowed Greek culture became part of the perma-
nent legacy of Europe and the eastern Mediterranean.
Today we speak automatically of our “Greco-Roman” her-
itage. But there was no necessary reason for the Romans
to imitate the Greeks (the two did not even speak the
same language), except that the ambitious Romans saw
these people as superior to them in the civilizing arts.
The Romans were by no means the only ones to fall
under the Greek spell. Another such people were the
Celts. Extant Celtic pottery and metalwork clearly show
that the “La Tène” culture, emerging ca. 500 B.C.E. in
Gaul (modern France, Switzerland, and Belgium), was
inspired by Greek goods and influences, undoubtedly
introduced up the Rhone River by Greek traders from
Massalia (modern Marseilles, founded by Greeks ca. 600
B.C.E.). By the first century B.C.E. the Celts of Gaul were
writing in the Greek alphabet and had learned from the
Greeks how to grow olive trees and grape vines (the latter
mainly for winemaking). The creation of the French wine
industry is a legacy of the ancient Greeks.
Similarly, from the 200s B.C.E. onward, the powerful
African nation of Nubia, in what is now northern Sudan,
traded with Greek merchants from Ptolemaic Egypt. In
time the Nubian upper class adopted certain Greek styles
of life: for instance, queens of Nubia were using the
Greek name Candace down to the 300s C.E.
Nor were the Jews immune to Greek influence, espe-
cially after the conquests of Alexander the Great (334–323
B.C.E.) created a Greco-Macedonian ruling class in the Near
Introduction to the Original Edition
xv

East. In religion, Jewish monotheism was not much affected
by Greek paganism. But in society and business, many Jews
of Near Eastern cities adapted enthusiastically to the Greek
world. They attended Greek theater, exercised publicly in
Greek gymnasiums, and used the Greek language for com-
merce and public life. In Egyptian Alexandria (although not
everywhere else), Greek-speaking Jews forgot their tradi-
tional languages of Hebrew and Aramaic. For the benefit of
such people, a Greek translation of the Hebrew Bible began
being produced in Alexandria during the 200s B.C.E. Thus,
for many assimilated Jews of this era, Judaism was pre-
served in Greek form. Today a Jewish house of worship is
known by a Greek word—synagogue (from sunagog¯e,
“gathering place”)—which is but one reminder of the Jews’
fascination with the Greeks.
This encyclopedia attempts to give all the essential
information about the ancient Greek world. Aimed at high-
school and college students and general readers, the book
tries to convey the achievements of the Greek world, while
also showing its warts. (And warts there were, including
slavery, the subordination of women, brutal imperialism,
and the insanely debilitating wars of Greek against Greek.)
The encyclopedia’s entries, from “Abdera” to “Zeus,”
range in length from about 100 to 3,000 words. The
entries embrace political history, social conditions, war-
fare, religion, mythology, literature, art, philosophy, sci-
ence, and daily life. Short biographies are given for
important leaders, thinkers, and artists. Particular care is
taken, by way of several entries, to explain the emergence
and the workings of Athenian democracy.
The book’s headwords include the names of real-life
people (for example, Socrates), mythical figures (Helen of
Troy), cities (Sparta), regions (Asia Minor), and institu-
tions (Olympic Games), as well as many English-language
common nouns (archaeology, cavalry, epic poetry, mar-
riage, wine). Supplementing the text are more than 70 ink
drawings, based mainly on photographs of extant Greek
sculpture, vase paintings, architecture, and metalwork.
My research has involved English-language scholarly
books and articles, ancient Greek works in translation,
and many of the ancient Greek texts themselves. (I have
used my own translations for quotations from Greek
authors.) In writing this encyclopedia, I have tried to be
aware of recent archaeological finds and other scholarly
developments. My manuscript has been vetted by an emi-
nent scholar. However, I have chosen and shaped the
material for the general reader, not the scholarly one.
I have assumed that the reader knows nothing about
the ancient Greeks and that he or she wants only the
“best” information—that is, for any given topic, only the
main points, including an explanation of why the topic
might be considered important in the first place. I have
tried to keep my language simple but lively and to orga-
nize each entry into a brisk train of thought. Although
facts and dates abound in this book, I hope they only
clarify the bigger picture, not obscure it.
In choosing the entries, I have had to abbreviate or
omit much. Names or topics that might have made per-
fectly good short entries—Antaeus, grain supply, or
Smyrna—have been reduced to mere cross-references in
the text or to listings in the index. The reader is therefore
urged to consult the index for any subject not found as
an entry.
In time frame, the encyclopedia covers more than
2,000 years, opening in the third millennium B.C.E. with
the beginnings of Minoan civilization and ending with
the Roman annexation of mainland Greece in 146 B.C.E.
Occasionally an entry will trace an ongoing tradition,
such as astronomy, beyond the cutoff date. And short
entries are given for a few Roman-era Greek authors,
such as Plutarch (ca. 100 C.E.) and the travel writer
Pausanias (ca. 150 C.E.), because their work sheds impor-
tant light on earlier centuries. But most Greek personages
and events of the Roman Empire, including the spread of
Christianity, are omitted here as being more relevant to
the Roman story than the Greek.
Within its 2,000-year span, the encyclopedia gives
most attention to the classical era—that is, roughly the
400s and 300s B.C.E., which produced the Greeks’ great-
est intellectual and artistic achievements and most dra-
matic military conflicts. The 400s B.C.E. saw the Greeks’
triumphant defense of their homeland in the Persian
Wars, followed by Athens’s rise as an imperial power.
This was the wealthy, democratic Athens of the great
names—the statesman Pericles, the tragedians Aeschylus,
Sophocles, and Euripides, the historian Thucydides, the
sculptor Phidias, and the philosopher Socrates. In these
years the Pathenon arose and the fateful Peloponnesian
War was fought, ending in Athens’s defeat. The 300s
B.C.E. brought the rise of Macedon and the conquest of
the Persian Empire by the Macedonian king Alexander
the Great. This was the time of the philosophers Plato
and Aristotle, the historian Xenophon, the orator
Demosthenes, and the swashbuckling Macedonian prince
Demetrius Poliorcetes. Many of the topics that will bring
readers to a book about ancient Greece fall within these
two centuries.
In a book of this scope written by one person, certain
preferences are bound to sneak in. I have tried always to
be thorough and concise. But I have allowed slightly
more space to a few aspects that I consider more likely
than others to satisfy the general reader’s curiosity. When
I studied Greek and Latin at graduate school, my happi-
est hours were spent reading Herodotus. He was an
Ionian Greek who, in the mid-400s B.C.E., became the
world’s first historian, writing a long prose work of
incomparable richness about the conflict between the
Greeks and Persians. And I find, with all humility, that I
have favored the same aspects that Herodotus tends to
favor in his treatment—namely, politics, personalities,
legends, geography, sex, and war.
—David Sacks
xvi
Introduction to the Original Edition

xvii
Historical Events
Cultural Events
The Aegean Bronze Age
2200 B.C.E.
Minoan civilization begins in Crete
2000 B.C.E.
First Greek speakers arrive in Greece
1750 B.C.E.
Peak of Minoan civilization in Crete
1700 B.C.E.
Palace at Knossos destroyed by earthquake or war 
and subsequently rebuilt
1600 B.C.E.
Mycenaean civilization begins in Greece
1628 B.C.E.
Eruption of volcano on the island of Thera
1250 B.C.E.
Construction of the Lion Gate at 
Mycenae
1200 B.C.E.
Decline of Mycenaean civilization
1185 B.C.E.
Traditional date of the Trojan War
The Greek “Dark Age”
1100 B.C.E.
Greek colonies established in Ionia (Asia Minor)
The Archaic Period
790 B.C.E.
Greek trading post established at Al Mina (Syria)
776 B.C.E.
First Olympic Games
775 B.C.E.
Greek colony of Pithecusae founded in Italy
The Greeks adopt the alphabet from 
the Phoenicians
750 B.C.E.
Homer’s Iliad and Odyssey written down
734 B.C.E.
Greek colony of Corcyra (modern Corfu) established
733 B.C.E.
Greek colony of Syracuse established in Sicily
730 B.C.E.
Greek colonies established in South Italy and Sicily
720 B.C.E.
Beginning of the Lelantine War between Chalcis 
and Eretria
700 B.C.E.
Greek colonies established around the Black Sea 
Hesiod’s Works and Days and Theogony
(Asia Minor)
680 B.C.E.
End of the Lelantine War
(continues)
CHRONOLOGY OF THE
ANCIENT GREEK WORLD

Historical Events
Cultural Events
650 B.C.E.
“Lykourgan” reforms instituted at Sparta
Kypselos establishes tyranny at Corinth
621 B.C.E.
Draco issues law code with capital punishments in Athens
620 B.C.E.
Poetry of Alcman
595 B.C.E.
First Greek coins are minted by the state of Aegina
594 B.C.E.
Solon becomes archon at Athens
590 B.C.E.
Temple of Artemis at Corcyra built
entirely in stone
Poetry of Sappho
585 B.C.E.
Thales predicts solar eclipse
583 B.C.E.
Tyranny at Corinth is overthrown
582 B.C.E.
First Pythian Games
581 B.C.E.
First Isthmian Games
573 B.C.E.
First Nemean Games
566 B.C.E.
First Panathenaic Festival in Athens
560–527 B.C.E.
Tyranny of Peisistratus and his sons in Athens
530 B.C.E.
Pythagoras establishes a school at Croton, in south Italy
520 B.C.E.
Red-figure pottery style begins
to replace black-figure style in 
Athens
510 B.C.E.
Expulsion of the tyrant Hippias from Athens
508 B.C.E.
Kleisthenes introduces democratic reforms in Athens
499 B.C.E.
The Ionian cities revolt against the Persian Empire
498 B.C.E.
Hippocrates becomes tyrant at Gela
495 B.C.E.
The Persians capture Miletus in Ionia
490 B.C.E.
The Greeks defeat the Persians at the Battle of Marathon
Pindar’s Pythian 6
Gelon becomes tyrant at Gela
486 B.C.E.
Pindar’s Pythian 7
485 B.C.E.
Gelon becomes tyrant at Syracuse
483 B.C.E.
Themistokles persuades Athenians to create large naval fleet
The Classical Period
480 B.C.E.
The Persians defeat the Greeks at the Battles of 
Thermopylae and Artemision
The Persians occupy Attica and sack the Acropolis 
in Athens
The Greeks defeat the Persians at the Battle of Salamis
479 B.C.E.
The Greeks defeat the Persians at the Battles of Plataea 
and Mycale
478 B.C.E.
Formation of the Delian League
Hieron succeeds Gelon as tyrant at Syracuse
476 B.C.E.
Pindar’s Olympian 1
472 B.C.E.
Aeschylus’s The Persians
470 B.C.E.
Pindar’s Pythian 1 and Isthmian 2
467 B.C.E.
Aeschylus’s Seven Against Thebes
464 B.C.E.
The Messenians revolt from Spartan control
463 B.C.E.
Aeschylus’s The Suppliants
461 B.C.E.
Long Walls are begun connecting Athens and Piraeus
458 B.C.E.
Aeschylus’s Oresteia (Agamemnon, 
Libation Bearers, Eumenides)
454 B.C.E.
Treasury of Delian League moved from Delos to Athens
451 B.C.E.
Perikles passes citizenship law in Athens
xviii
Chronology of the Ancient Greek World
(continues)

Historical Events
Cultural Events
450 B.C.E.
City plan is designed for Piraeus by 
Hippodamus
Polykleitos’s Doryphoros (Spear Bearer)
Sophokles’ Ajax
449 B.C.E.
Peace of Kallias
447 B.C.E.
The Parthenon in Athens is begun
446 B.C.E.
Boeotia and Megara revolt from Athenian control
Pindar’s Pythian 8
The Spartans invade Attica
Thirty Years’ Peace causes temporary end to hostility 
between Athens and Sparta
442 B.C.E.
Sophokles’ Antigone
440 B.C.E.
Revolt of Samos
438 B.C.E.
Pheidias’s Athena Parthenos is dedicated 
on the Acropolis in Athens
431 B.C.E.
Beginning of the Peloponnesian War
Euripides’ Medea
Battle of Potidaea
Thucydides begins his History of the
Peloponnesian War
Empedokles forms his theory of four
humors of the body
429 B.C.E.
Perikles dies in the plague at Athens
Sophokles’ Oedipus the King
428 B.C.E.
Euripides’ Hippolytus
425 B.C.E.
The Athenians defeat the Spartans at the Battle 
Aristophanes’ Acharnians
of Sphacteria (Pylos)
Herodotus’s History of Greece
424 B.C.E.
Aristophanes’ Knights
423 B.C.E.
Aristophanes’ Clouds
421 B.C.E.
Peace of Nikias begins, causing a temporary end 
Aristophanes’ Peace
to the Peloponnesian War
420 B.C.E.
Sophokles’ Electra
418 B.C.E.
The Spartans defeat the Athenians and Argives 
at the first Battle of Mantineia
415 B.C.E.
Peace of Nikias ends
Euripides’ Trojan Women
The Athenians send an expedition against Syracuse (Sicily)
414 B.C.E.
Aristophanes’ Birds
413 B.C.E.
Nikias and the Athenians surrender in Sicily
411 B.C.E.
Aristophanes’ Lysistrata
409 B.C.E.
Sophokles’ Philoctetes
405 B.C.E.
The Spartans defeat the Athenians at the Battle 
Aristophanes’ Frogs
of Aegospotami
Dionysius I becomes tyrant at Syracuse
Euripides’ Bacchae and Iphigeneia
(presented posthumously)
404 B.C.E.
Athens surrenders to Sparta to end the Peloponnesian War
Rule of Thirty Tyrants is established in Athens
403 B.C.E.
Democracy is restored in Athens
401 B.C.E.
Sophokles’ Oedipus at Colonus
The Late Classical Period
399 B.C.E.
Trial and death of Socrates in Athens
394 B.C.E.
Beginning of Corinthian War
388 B.C.E.
Aristophanes’ Wealth
387 B.C.E.
Plato establishes the Academy in Athens
386 B.C.E.
King’s Peace treaty signed between the Spartans 
and the Persians
Chronology of the Ancient Greek World
xix
(continues)

Historical Events
Cultural Events
382 B.C.E.
Sparta seizes citadel of Thebes
379 B.C.E.
The Spartans are expelled from Thebes
378 B.C.E.
Spartan-Theban alliance
375 B.C.E.
Xenophon’s Anabasis
371 B.C.E.
The Thebans defeat the Spartans at the Battle of Leuctra
362 B.C.E.
The Mantineians defeat the Spartans 
at the second Battle of Mantineia
Dionysius II succeeds Dionysius I 
as tyrant of Syracuse
360 B.C.E.
Xenophon’s Hellenica
354 B.C.E.
Demosthenes’ first public speech
350 B.C.E.
Praxiteles’ Aphrodite of Knidos
King Mausolus’s tomb is constructed 
at Halicarnassus
343 B.C.E.
Aristotle becomes the tutor of 
Alexander the Great
338 B.C.E.
The Macedonians defeat the Greeks at the Battle 
of Chaironeia
336 B.C.E.
Alexander the Great succeeds his father, Philip II, 
as king of Macedon
335 B.C.E.
Aristotle establishes the Lyceum in 
Athens
334 B.C.E.
Alexander invades Asia Minor
333 B.C.E.
Alexander defeats King Darius at the Battle of Issus 
and conquers Persia
332 B.C.E.
Alexander conquers Egypt
327 B.C.E.
Alexander conquers southern India
The Hellenistic Age
323 B.C.E.
Death of Alexander the Great
316 B.C.E.
Menander’s Misanthrope
301 B.C.E.
Alexander’s successors fight at the Battle of Ipsus
300 B.C.E.
King Seleucus establishes his capital, Antioch, 
on the Orontes in Syria
290 B.C.E.
Construction of the Colossus 
(statue of Helios) at Rhodes
280 B.C.E.
Construction of the lighthouse 
at Alexandria
197 B.C.E.
The Romans defeat the Macedonians
146 B.C.E.
The Romans sack Corinth
133 B.C.E.
Pergamon comes under Roman control
64 B.C.E.
Syria comes under Roman control
31 B.C.E.
Octavian defeats Mark Antony and Cleopatra 
at the Battle of Actium
30 B.C.E.
Egypt comes under Roman control
xx
Chronology of the Ancient Greek World

A
1
Abdera
This important Greek city is situated on the
north Aegean coast in the non-Greek region known as
THRACE. Located on a coastal plain near the mouth of the
river Nestos, Abdera was a depot for TRADE with local
Thracian tribesmen and an anchorage on the shipping
route between mainland Greece and the HELLESPONT. Tra-
ditionally said to have been founded by Herakles in
honor of the hero Abderos, the city was actually first set-
tled around 650 B.C.E. by colonists from the city of Cla-
zomenae. Soon afterward it was destroyed by the
Thracians and was reestablished by Greek colonists
around 545 B.C.E. These settlers came from Teos—a city
in the Greek region of western ASIA MINOR called IONIA—
which they had abandoned to the conquering Persians
under King CYRUS (1). Among the Tean settlers was a
young man, ANACREON, destined to become the most
famous lyric poet of his day.
Like other Greek colonies of the northern Aegean,
Abdera prospered from Thracian trade, which brought
GOLD and SILVER ore, TIMBER, and SLAVES (available as war
captives taken in Thracian tribal wars). These goods in
turn become valuable Abderan exports to mainland
Greece and other markets. Local wheatfields and fishing
contributed to the city’s prosperity. The disadvantages
were periodic Thracian hostility and the northern climate
(cold and wet by Greek standards).
Lying directly in the path of the Persian invasion of
the spring of 480 B.C.E., Abdera submitted to the Persian
king XERXES and hosted him at legendary expense. After
the Persian defeat (479 B.C.E.), Abdera became an impor-
tant member of the Athenian-controlled DELIAN LEAGUE
(478 or 477 B.C.E.). In 457 B.C.E. wealthy Abdera was
paying an annual Delian tribute of 15 TALENTS (as much
as BYZANTIUM and more than any other state except
AEGINA).
Although other Greeks considered the Abderans to
be stupid, the city produced at least two important
thinkers of the middle and late 400s B.C.E. the sophist
PROTAGORAS and the atomist philosopher DEMOKRITUS. In
these years Abdera, like other cities of the silver-mining
north Aegean, was famous for the beauty of its COINAGE.
The city’s symbol on coins was an ear of wheat.
Abdera passed briefly to Spartan influence after
Athens’s defeat in the PELOPONNESIAN WAR (404 B.C.E.),
but by about 377 B.C.E., it had become a member of the
SECOND ATHENIAN LEAGUE. Seized by the Macedonian
king PHILIP II around 354 B.C.E., Abdera remained within
the Macedonian kingdom over the next 180 years. Dur-
ing the fourth century B.C.E., the city expanded to the
south on an urban grid plan design. This part of Abdera
included a strong fortification wall, an acropolis, and two
busy harbors. Sacked by Roman troops in 170 B.C.E. dur-
ing the Third Macedonian War, Abdera recovered to
become a privileged subject city in the Roman Empire.
Excavations on the site from 1950 to 1966 uncovered
the outline of the city wall (with a circuit of about 3.4
miles) and the precise grid pattern of the late Classical
expansion. The older part of Abdera and its cemetery
have been the subject of excavations since 1981.
See also COLONIZATION; PERSIAN WARS; ROME.
Further reading: J. M. F. May, The Coinage of Abdera
(London: Royal Numismatic Society, 1966); Dorothy and
Nicholas E. Leekley, Archaeological Excavations in Central
and Northern Greece (Park Ridge, N.J.: Noyes Press,
1980); A. J. Graham, “Abdera and Teos,” Journal of Hel-
lenistic Studies 112 (1992): 44–73.

Abydos
See SESTOS.
Academy
The Akademeia was a GYMNASIUM and park
about a mile outside ATHENS, sacred to the local hero
Akademos. During the sixth century B.C.E., one of
Athens’s three gymnasiums was founded here. In around
387 B.C.E., PLATO bought land and buildings in this sub-
urb and set up a school of PHILOSOPHY there, which can
be counted as the Western world’s first university.
Plato’s aim was to train the future leaders of Athens
and other Greek states. Students at the early Academy did
not pay fees, and lessons probably took place in seminars
similar to the disputations portrayed in Plato’s written
Dialogues. Teachings emphasized MATHEMATICS and the
Platonic reasoning method known as dialectic. In its
breadth of inquiry, the Academy of 386 B.C.E. was distinct
from all prior Greek schools of advanced study, which
taught only RHETORIC, poetry, or the argumentative tech-
niques of the SOPHISTS.
Two great students of the early Academy were the
mathematician-astronomer Eudoxus of KNIDOS and the
philosopher ARISTOTLE. Aristotle was considered Plato’s
possible successor as president, but after the master’s
death Academy members voted Plato’s nephew Speusip-
pus as head (347 B.C.E.). Aristotle eventually set up an
Athenian philosophical school of his own, called the
LYCEUM.
Under Speusippus and his successors, the Academy’s
curriculum became more mathematical and abstract,
until Arcesilaus of Pitane (president ca. 265–242 B.C.E.)
redirected it toward philosophical SKEPTICISM. Arcesilaus
and his distant successor Karneades (ca. 160–129 B.C.E.)
both were known for their criticisms of the rival school of
STOICISM.
After the Romans annexed Greece (146 B.C.E.), the
Academy attracted students from all over the Roman—
and later the Byzantine—Empire. The Academy survived
more than 900 years from its founding, until the Chris-
tian Byzantine emperor Justinian closed it and the other
pagan philosophical schools in 529 C.E.
The school’s name has produced the English com-
mon noun academy,
meaning a place of rigorous
advanced study. The site of the Academy has been inves-
tigated by Greek archaeologists since 1920.
See also EDUCATION.
Further reading: P. A. Brunt, “Plato’s Academy and
Politics” in Studies in Greek History and Thought (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1993), 282–342; David Fowler, The
Mathematics of Plato’s Academy, 2d ed. (Oxford: Claren-
don Press, 1999).
Acarnania
This region of northwest Greece lies
between the Gulf of Patras (to the south) and the Gulf of
AMBRACIA (to the north). It was named for Acarnan, son
of ALCMAEON (1) and grandson of AMPHIRAEUS, who was
said to have first settled the area. Although largely moun-
tainous, Acarnania contains a fertile alluvial plain along
the lower Acheloös River. Acarnania was inhabited by
rough Greek “highlanders” who in the 400s B.C.E. were
still known for carrying weapons in public. Their main
town was named Stratos, and their political structure was
a loosely-knit union of rural cantons (later, of towns).
Acarnania was bordered on the west and east by hostile
neighbors—the Corinthian colonies of the seaboard and
the inland people of AETOLIA. Because of these threats,
the Acarnanians sought alliances with several great states
of the Greek world.
As allies of ATHENS in the PELOPONNESIAN WAR,
Acarnanian troops under the Athenian general DEMOS-
THENES (2) wiped out most of the army of the Corinthian
colony of Ambracia in three days (426 B.C.E.). In 338
B.C.E. Acarnania (with the rest of Greece) passed to the
control of the Macedonian king PHILIP II. The Acarnani-
ans were staunch allies of King PHILIP V in his wars
against Aetolia and shared his defeat in the disastrous
Second Macedonian War against ROME (200–196 B.C.E.).
Thereafter, Acarnania passed into Roman hands.
See also ALCMAEON (1).
Further reading: Stewart I. Oost, Roman Policy in
Epirus and Acarnania in the Age of the Roman Conquest of
Greece (Dallas: Southern Methodist University Press,
1954).
Achaea
For most of ancient Greek history, the place-
name Achaea was applied to two different regions of
Greece: (1) the hilly northwest corner of the PELOPON-
NESE and (2) a small area in THESSALY. The Peloponnesian
Achaea (the more important of the two) was twice orga-
nized into a 12-town Achaean League, with shared gov-
ernment and citizenship. The First Achaean League was
established at some date before the fifth century B.C.E.
and lasted through the fourth century. This confederation
was dissolved soon after it joined in the wars against
Philip II of MACEDON in 338 B.C.E. A Second Achaean
League was founded in 280 B.C.E.
Achaea was important in the Greek colonization of
the western Mediterranean. In the late 700s B.C.E.,
colonists from Achaean cities founded or cofounded
important Greek settlements in southern ITALY, including
CROTON and SYBARIS. These cities were part of the area
that became known as MAGNA GRAECA, due to the large
number of settlements established there by colonists from
Greece.
One of the most important cities in Achaea was
SICYON, on the Gulf of Corinth. Prior to 251 B.C.E.,
Sicyon had been ruled by a tyrant. When the tyranny was
overthrown, the commander Aratus came to power
(active 251–213 B.C.E.) Sicyon joined the Achaean League
and became one of its leading members, so that the
league soon emerged as the strongest power of mainland
2
Abydos

Greece. By tapping the Greeks’ hatred of Macedonian
overlordship, Aratus united the northern Peloponnese
against Macedon. The Achaean League and its allies
forced the Macedonians to retreat from CORINTH in 247
B.C.E., and for a few years the democratic league was the
last hope for that unfulfilled dream of Greek history: the
creation of an independent, federal state of Greece.
In 227 B.C.E., the Achaean League became threatened
by its rival Peloponnesian state, SPARTA, and it requested
aid from its previous enemy, Macedon. This resulted in a
tremendous reduction in power and prestige for the
league. By the time that fighting erupted between Mace-
don and ROME, it became clear that the Achaean League
could no longer survive alone. As a Roman ally (198
B.C.E. and after), the Achaean League encompassed most
of the Peloponnese, including the important cities of
Corinth, Sparta, and Messene. However, resistance to
Roman interference led to the disastrous Achaean War of
146 B.C.E., in which the Romans sacked Corinth, dis-
solved the league, and made Achaea part of a Roman
province.
See also ACHAEANS.
Further reading: E. S. Gruen, “Aratus and the
Achaean Alliance with Macedon,” Historia 21 (1972):
609–625; ———, “The Origins of the Achaean War,”
Journal of Hellenic Studies 96 (1976): 46–49.
Achaeans
The word Achaioi (Achaeans) is one of the
terms used by the poet HOMER (ca. 750 B.C.E.) as a gen-
eral name for the Greeks. In this, Homer probably pre-
serves a usage of the Mycenaean Age (ca. 1600–1200
B.C.E.), when Achaioi would have been the Greeks’ name
for themselves. As a result, modern scholars sometimes
use the name Achaeans to mean either the Mycenaeans or
their ancestors, the first invading Greek tribesmen of
about 2100 B.C.E.
Intriguingly, a place-name pronounced Ahhiyawa has
been deciphered in the cuneiform annals of the Hittite
people of ASIA MINOR (1300s–1200 B.C.E.). In the docu-
ments, the name indicates a strong foreign nation, a sea
power, with which the Hittite kings were on polite terms.
Possibly this foreign nation was the mainland Greek
kingdom ruled from the city of MYCENAE. The Hittite ren-
dering Ahhiyawa may reflect a Greek place-name, Achai-
wia or “Achaea,” meaning the kingdom of Mycenae.
In later centuries, the Greek place-name ACHAEA
came to denote a region of the northwestern PELOPON-
NESE, far from Mycenae. Probably that name arose
because surviving Mycenaeans took refuge there after
their kingdom’s downfall.
See also MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION.
Achilles (Greek: Achilleus, perhaps meaning “grief”)
This preeminent Greek hero in the legend of the TROJAN
WAR was the son of the hero PELEUS and the sea goddess
Thetis. He figured in many tales but received his everlast-
ing portrait as the protagonist of HOMER’s epic poem the
Iliad (written down around 750 B.C.E.). At the story’s cli-
max, Achilles slays the Trojan champion HECTOR in sin-
gle combat, fully aware that his own preordained death
will follow soon.
To the Greek mind, Achilles embodied the old-time
heroic code, having specifically chosen a brief and glori-
ous life over one that would be safe and obscure. Achilles
recounts the terms of this choice in a well-known passage
in the Iliad:
My goddess mother says that two possible destinies
bear me toward the end of life. If I remain to fight at
Troy I lose my homecoming, but my fame will be eter-
nal. Or if I return to my dear home, I lose that glori-
ous fame, but a long life awaits me [book 9, lines
410–416].
The Iliad’s announced theme is “the anger of
Achilles” (book 1, lines 1–2). Opening in the war’s 10th
year, the poem portrays Achilles as a glorious individual-
ist, noble and aloof to the point of excessive pride. Still a
young man, he has come to the siege of TROY from his
native THESSALY at the head of a contingent of troops, his
Myrmidons (“ants”). After quarreling justifiably with the
commander in chief, King AGAMEMNON, over possession
of a captive woman named Briseis, Achilles withholds
himself and his men from the battlefield (book 1). Conse-
quently, the Greeks suffer a series of bloody reversals
(books 8–15). Achilles rebuffs Agamemnon’s offered rec-
onciliation (book 9) but relents somewhat and allows his
friend PATROKLUS to lead the Myrmidons to battle (book
16). Wearing Achilles’ armor, Patroklus is killed by Hec-
tor, who strips the corpse.
Mad with grief, Achilles rushes to battle the next day
wearing wondrous new armor, forged for him by the smith
god HEPHAISTOS at Thetis’s request (books 18–20). After
slaying Hector, he hitches the Trojan’s corpse to his chariot
and drags it in the dust to the Greek camp (book 22).
His anger thus assuaged, Achilles shows his more
gracious nature in allowing Hector’s father, the Trojan
king PRIAM, to ransom the body back (book 24). At the
Iliad’s end Achilles is still alive, but his death has been
foretold (for example, in book 19, lines 408–417). He
will be killed by the combined effort of the Trojan prince
PARIS and the god APOLLO, patron of the Trojans.
Greek writers later than Homer provide details of
Achilles’ life before and after the Iliad’s events. At
Achilles’ birth his mother tried to make him immortal by
dipping him into the river Styx (or into fire or boiling
water, in other versions). But she was interrupted or oth-
erwise forgot to immerse the baby’s right heel, and this
later proved to be the hero’s vulnerable “Achilles’ heel.”
Knowing at the Trojan War’s outset that her son
would never return if he departed, Thetis arranged with
Lykromedes, king of the island of Skyros, to hide Achilles,
Achilles
3

disguised as a girl, in the WOMEN’s quarters of the king’s
palace. There Achilles fathered a son with Lykomedes’
daughter Deidameia; the boy was named NEOPTOLEMUS.
The Greeks, having heard a prophecy that they could
never take Troy without Achilles’ help, sent ODYSSEUS and
other commanders to find Achilles, which they did.
At Troy, Achilles showed himself the greatest of war-
riors, Greek or Trojan. Among the enemy champions he
slew were, in sequence: Cycnus, TROILUS, Hector, Queen
Penthesilea of the AMAZONS, and the Ethiopian king
MEMNON. At last Achilles himself died, after his vulnera-
ble heel was hit by an arrow shot by Paris and guided by
Apollo. (Various myths say that either the arrow was poi-
soned or the wound turned septic.) In Homer’s Odyssey
(book 11), Odysseus meets Achilles among the unhappy
ghosts in the Underworld. But later writers assigned to
Achilles a more blissful AFTERLIFE, in the Elysian Fields.
See also FATE; PROPHECY AND DIVINATION.
Further reading: P. R. Hardee, “Imago Mundi. Cos-
mological and Ideological Aspects of the Shield of
Achilles,” Journal of Hellenistic Studies 105 (1985): 11–31;
K. C. King, Achilles: Paradigms of the War Hero from
Homer to the Middle Ages (Berkeley: University of Califor-
nia Press, 1987); J. T. Hooker, “The Cults of Achilles,”
Rheinisches Museum für Philologie 131 (1988): 1–7; J.
Burgess, “Achilles’ Heel. The Death of Achilles in Ancient
Myth,” Classical Antiquity 14 (1995): 217–243.
acropolis (akropolis)
The word acropolis comes from
the Greek “akro” (“high”) and “polis” (“city”). It gener-
ally refers to a hilltop citadel and was a vital feature of
most ancient Greek cities, providing both a refuge from
attack and an elevated area of religious sanctity. The best-
known acropolis is at ATHENS, where a magnificent col-
lection of temples and monuments, built in the second
half of the fifth century B.C.E., remains partially standing
today. The most famous of these buildings is the
PARTHENON,
the temple of ATHENA
Parthenos (the
maiden). In terms of natural setting, the highest and most
dramatic Greek acropolis was on the 1,800-foot moun-
tain overlooking ancient CORINTH.
Most early societies naturally concentrated their set-
tlements on raised areas, less vulnerable to attack than
low-lying sites. In ancient Greece the royal palaces of the
MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION arose on the choicest of these
hills (1600–1200 B.C.E.). The Mycenaean Greeks favored
hilltops close to agricultural plains and not too near the
sea, for fear of pirate raids. Typical Mycenaean sites
include MYCENAE, TIRYNS, Athens, and Colophon (mean-
ing “hilltop”), a Greek city in ASIA MINOR. Of the great
classical Greek cities, only SPARTA—a post-Mycenaean
settlement—had a puny, unfortified acropolis. Rather
than depend on a defensive citadel, Sparta relied on its
invincible army and on the mountain ranges enclosing
the region.
The Athenian acropolis is a limestone-and-schist for-
mation that rises about 300 feet above the lower town.
There is evidence of occupation on the hill as early as the
Neolithic period (ca. 6500–4500 B.C.E.), but its associa-
tion with the goddess Athena probably dates from the
Bronze Age (ca. 1200 B.C.E.), when a Mycenaean palace
stood there. ARCHAEOLOGY reveals that the acropolis’s
upper sides were first enclosed in a man-made wall
around this time; a later wall from ancient times still
encloses the upper rock face today.
Numerous dedications have been found on the Athe-
nian acropolis from the sixth century B.C.E., including a
series of numerous “korai,” statues of youthful women,
terra-cotta statuettes, bronze vessels, and pottery.
Like other Greek citadels, the Athenian acropolis
played a role in its city’s turbulent politics. Kylon (ca. 620
B.C.E.) and PEISISTRATUS (ca. 560 B.C.E.) each began an
attempted coup by seizing the acropolis. Later, as dictator
(546–527 B.C.E.), Peisistratus beautified the site with new
marble temples to the gods. The temple to Athena was
still unfinished when the Persians sacked Athens in 480
B.C.E. and destroyed all the monuments on the acropolis.
The city of Athens and its allies vowed in the Oath of
Plataea not to rebuild the temples but to leave them in
their ravaged state as a memorial to the barbaric sacrilege
of the Persians.
Several years after the Persians had been defeated,
around 450 B.C.E., the Athenian statesman PERIKLES
reversed the Oath of Plataea and initiated a building pro-
gram that resulted in the remarkable monuments now
standing on the Athenian acropolis—a focus of interna-
tional tourism in the ancient world, as today. Financing
for Perikles’ acropolis building program came from trib-
ute paid by Athens’s allies in the DELIAN LEAGUE. The fact
that other Greek states paid for Athens’s beautification
caused angry debate at that time, both among the allies
and within Athens itself.
The Athenian acropolis building program was super-
vised by the sculptor PHEIDIAS. In addition, several archi-
tects were involved, as well as hundreds of other artisans
and laborers. In part because of this ambitious project,
the mid-fifth century B.C.E. is considered the “golden
age” of Classical Greece. Already in the early Roman
period, Periklean Athens was held up as an ideal of cul-
ture and beauty. In addition to the Parthenon, the acropo-
lis building program included the small, Ionic temple of
Athena 
Nike 
(Athena 
of 
Victory), 
the 
unusual
erechtheion (which housed the cults of Athena, POSEI-
DON, and the legendary king Erechtheus), and the monu-
mental Propylaea (gateway).
In the Hellenistic and Roman periods, very little
construction took place on the Athenian acropolis. In
subsequent later periods, several of the buildings on the
site were converted into Christian churches, Frankish
houses, and Turkish houses and other buildings.
4
acropolis

Several important monuments and sanctuaries from
antiquity can also be found on the slopes of the acropolis,
including the Theater of DIONYSUS, the Sanctuary of
ASKLEPIOS, the Odeion of Herodes Atticus, the Shrine of
the Nymphs, the shrine of Aphrodite and Eros, and the
Odeion of Perikles.
See also
ARCHITECTURE; KALLIAS; PERSIAN WARS;
THUCYDIDES (2).
Further reading: Robin Rhodes, Architecture and
Meaning on the Athenian Acropolis (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1995); Harrison Eiteljorg, The
Entrance to the Athenian Acropolis before Mnesicles
(Dubuque, Iowa: Kendall/Hunt, 1995); Diane Harris, The
Treasures of the Parthenon and Erechtheion (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1995); Jeffrey Hurwit, The Athe-
nian Acropolis: History, Mythology, and Archaeology from
the Neolithic into the Present (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1999).
Adonis
A beautiful mortal youth, Adonis was a lover of
the goddess APHRODITE. According to the usual version of
the MYTH, he was the son of a Cypriot or Syrian princess
who had fallen in love with her own father and became
impregnated by him. Growing up, Adonis was loved by
both PERSEPHONE and Aphrodite. When the two rival
goddesses appealed to ZEUS, he decreed that Adonis
should spend part of the year with each. (This myth
resembles the similar tale of DEMETER and Persephone.)
Out hunting one day in the mountains of what is
now Lebanon, Adonis was gored to death by a wild
boar—the disguised form of the jealous god ARES,
Aphrodite’s occasional lover. Roses or anemones sprang
from the dying youth’s blood; these scarlet flowers recall
Adonis’s beauty and mortality.
At ATHENS and other cities of classical Greece, the
death of Adonis was commemorated each summer in a
WOMEN’s festival lasting about eight days. At the culmina-
tion, women of all social classes would stream out of the
city in a mourning procession, wailing for the slain Ado-
nis and carrying effigies of him to be thrown into the sea.
For this occasion, women would cultivate “gardens of
Adonis”—shallow baskets of earth in which seeds of
wheat, fennel, and flowers were planted, to sprout
quickly and then die and be thrown into the sea. While
probably symbolizing the scorched bleakness of the east-
ern Mediterranean summer, this strange rite also invites a
psychological interpretation—as a socially permitted
emotional release for Greek women, amid their repressed
and cloistered lives.
The worship of Adonis is a prime example of Greek
cultural borrowing from non-Greek peoples of the Near
East. According to modern scholars, the Greek cult of
Adonis
5
The Athenian acropolis, built ca. 400 B.C.E. The gateway was in the west, front center. The small temple of Athena Nike is on the right.
(Alison Frantz Photographic Collection, American School of Classical Studies at Athens)

Adonis derived from a Phoenician festival of the mother
goddess Astarte and her dying-and-reborn lover Baalat or
Tammuz. The center of this worship was the Phoenician
city of BYBLOS. Around the 700s B.C.E., Greek or Phoeni-
cian merchants brought this worship from Byblos to
Greece perhaps by way of the Greco-Phoenician island of
CYPRUS. In the Greek version of the myth, the sex-and-
fertility goddess Astarte becomes the love goddess
Aphrodite.
The name Adonis is not Greek but rather reflects the
Phoenician worshippers’ ritual cry of Adon, meaning
“lord.” (Compare Hebrew Adonai, “the Lord.”)
Further reading: J. G. Frazer, Adonis, Attis, Osiris:
Studies in the History of Oriental Religion. 3d ed. (New
Hyde Park, N.Y.: University Books, 1962); R. A. Segal,
“Adonis: A Greek Eternal Child,” in Myth and the Polis,
edited by Dora Pozzi and John Wickersham (Ithaca: Cor-
nell University Press, 1991), 64–84; J. D. Reed, “The Sex-
uality of Adonis,” Classical Antiquity 14 (1995): 317–347.
Adrastus
See SEVEN AGAINST THEBES.
adultery
See MARRIAGE.
Aegean Sea
The approximately 80,000-square-mile
section of the eastern Mediterranean stretching between
Greece and ASIA MINOR, the Aegean is bounded on the
north by the coast of ancient THRACE and on the south by
the island of CRETE. This body of water contained or bor-
dered upon most of the important ancient Greek states.
The sea was supposedly named for the mythical King
Aegeus, father of the Athenian hero THESEUS; Aegeus was
said to have drowned himself in this sea. In fact, its name
may come from the Greek word aigis, “storm.”
See also CHIOS; CYCLADES; GREECE, GEOGRAPHY OF;
LESBOS; RHODES; SAMOS.
Further reading: H. M. Denham, The Aegean: A Sea-
guide to Its Coasts and Islands (London: Murray, 1963).
Aegina
This small island state is situated in the Saronic
Gulf, in southeast-central Greece. Only 33 miles square,
the triangular island lies 12 miles southwest of the Athe-
nian coast and five miles northeast of the nearest point
on the Argolid. Aegina’s capital city, also called Aegina,
stood in the northwest part of the island, facing the
Argolid and Isthmus.
In prehistoric times, Aegina was inhabited by pre-
Greek peoples and then by Mycenaean Greeks. In the
6
Adrastus
A pair of small personal altars showing the death of Adonis in the arms of Aphrodite. They were probably used to hold sacrificial
burnt offerings during the women’s festival. (The J. Paul Getty Museum)

Iron Age, the unfertile island gave rise to merchant sea-
men who claimed descent from the mythical hero Aeacus
(son of ZEUS and the river nymph Aegina). In the late
600s and the 500s B.C.E., Aegina was a foremost Greek
sea power, with a Mediterranean TRADE network rivaling
that of CORINTH. In the 400s B.C.E., however, the island
became a bitter enemy of nearby ATHENS. The Athenian
statesman PERIKLES (mid-400s B.C.E.) called Aegina “the
eyesore of Piraeus”—a hostile presence on the sea hori-
zon, as viewed from Athens’s main harbor.
The Aeginetans’s trade routes have been difficult to
trace, because they were simply the middlemen in the
selling of most ware. Specifically, they manufactured no
POTTERY of their own for modern archaeologists to find in
far-off locales. But we know that Aeginetan trade reached
EGYPT and other non-Greek Near Eastern empires.
Around 595 B.C.E. Aegina became the first Greek state to
mint coins—an invention probably learned from the
kingdom of LYDIA, in ASIA MINOR. Made of SILVER and
stamped with the image of a sea turtle, Aegina’s COINAGE
inspired other Greek states to start minting.
The 500s B.C.E. were Aegina’s heyday. Relations with
Athens had not yet soured. Aeginetan shippers brought
Athenian black- and red-figure pottery to the ETRUSCANS
of western ITALY; they probably also brought WINE, metal-
work, and textiles. In exchange, the Etruscans gave raw
metals such as silver and tin.
Aegina’s prosperity is reflected in the grand temple of
the goddess Aphaia (a local equivalent of ATHENA or
ARTEMIS), built of local limestone soon after 500 B.C.E.
Located near the island’s northeast coast and still partly
standing today, this Doric-style structure is the best-pre-
served early temple in mainland Greece. The building’s
pediments contained marble figures of mythical Greek
heroes fighting at TROY; these important Archaic SCULP-
TURES were taken away by German archaeologists in 1811
C.E. and now are housed in the Antikensammlungen und
Glyptotek in Munich.
Hostility with Athens flared in the late 500s B.C.E.
The two states had become trade rivals, and Athens
feared Aegina’s navy, the largest in Greece at that time
(about 70 ships). Hatred worsened when Aegina submit-
ted to envoys of the Persian king DARIUS (1), the enemy
of Athens (491 B.C.E.).
By about 488 B.C.E., Aegina and Athens were at war.
The Athenians, urged by their statesman THEMISTOKLES,
built 100 new warships, doubling their navy’s size. But
this Athenian navy fought alongside the Aeginetans in
defending Greece against the invasion of the Persian king
XERXES (480 B.C.E.).
After the Persians’ retreat, Aegina joined SPARTA’s
alliance for protection against Athens. Nevertheless, in
459 B.C.E. the Athenians defeated an Aeginetan fleet,
landed on the island, and besieged the capital. Defeated,
Aegina was brought into the Athenian-controlled DELIAN
LEAGUE and made to pay the highest tribute of any mem-
ber, 30 TALENTS. Probably at this time Athens settled a gar-
rison colony on the island. Aegina’s anger and defiance in
these years are suggested in certain verses by the Theban
poet PINDAR, who had friends there.
According to the Thirty Years’ Peace, agreed to by
Athens and Sparta in 446 B.C.E., the Athenians were sup-
posed to grant Aegina a degree of self-determination
(autonomia). This promise was never kept. The resentful
Aeginetans continually urged the Spartans against Athens
until, at the outbreak of the PELOPONNESIAN WAR (431
B.C.E.), Athens evicted the Aeginetans and repopulated the
whole island with Athenian colonists. The Aeginetans,
resettled by Sparta, eventually were reinstalled on Aegina
by the triumphant Spartan general LYSANDER (405 B.C.E.).
After some renewed hostility toward Athens in the
CORINTHIAN WAR (395–386 B.C.E.), Aegina fades from
history. Aegina is reached most easily today by a short
ferry ride from the port of PIRAEUS. It is a quiet island and
attracts tourists mostly for its beaches and for the lovely
ruins of the Temple of Aphaia. Aegina is also known for
its pistachios, said to be the best in Greece.
See also NAUCRATIS; PERSIAN WARS; WARFARE, NAVAL.
Further reading: Sonia de Neuhoff, Aegina (Milan:
Apollo Editions, 1978); T. J. Figueira. Aegina: Society and
Politics. 3d ed. (New York: Arno Press, 1998); K.
Pilafidis-Williams, The Sanctuary of Aphaia on Aegina in
the Bronze Age (Munich: Hirmer, 1998).
Aegospotami
Aigospotamoi, “goat’s rivers,” was a shore-
line on the European side of the HELLESPONT, opposite the
city of Lampsacus, where the strait is about two miles wide.
There in September 405 B.C.E., the final battle of the PELO-
PONNESIAN WAR was fought. At one swoop, the Spartan
commander LYSANDER eliminated the Athenian fleet and
left the city of ATHENS open to blockade and siege. Within
eight months of the battle, Athens had surrendered.
The battle was waged over possession of the Helles-
pont. In the summer of 405 B.C.E., Lysander slipped into
the Hellespont with a fleet of about 150 warships. There
he captured the Athenian ally city Lampsacus and occu-
pied its fortified harbor. In pursuit came 180 Athenian
warships—almost the entire Athenian navy—led by six
generals drawn from a depleted Athenian high command.
The Athenians encamped opposite Lampsacus, on
the open shore of Aegospotami. The next morning they
rowed out toward Lampsacus to offer battle. But Lysander
kept his fleet inside the harbor’s defenses, which the
Athenians were unwilling to attack. Returning late in the
day to Aegospotami, the Athenians beached their ships
and went ashore for firewood and food. Lysander sent out
a few fast ships to spy on them.
This procedure continued for several days. The Athe-
nian generals did not withdraw to the nearby port city of
SESTOS, where a fortified harbor could offer defense;
apparently they thought a withdrawal would allow
Lysander to escape.
Aegospotami
7

On the fifth evening the Athenian crews beached
their ships as usual at Aegospotami and went ashore.
This time the Spartan scout ships signaled back to
Lysander’s fleet—which immediately rowed out from
Lampsacus and attacked. The Athenians were completely
unprepared: many of their ships still lay empty as the
Spartans reached them. Only one Athenian leader,
KONON, got his squadron away; the other 170 or so Athe-
nian ships were captured, with most of their crewmen.
The Spartans collected their prisoners—perhaps 5,000
Athenians and allies—and put to death the 3,000 or so
Athenians among them.
See also WARFARE, NAVAL.
Further reading: B. S. Strauss, “Aegospotamoi reex-
amined,” American Journal of Philology 104 (1983):
24–35; G. Wylie, “What Really Happened at Aegospota-
moi?” L’Antiquité classique 55 (1986): 125–141.
Aeneas (Greek: Aineias)
In Greek MYTH, Aeneas was a
Trojan hero of royal blood, the son of the goddess
APHRODITE and the mortal man Anchises. Aeneas’s earli-
est appearance is as a minor character in HOMER’s epic
poem the Iliad (written down ca. 750 B.C.E.). He is shown
as a respected figure, pious to the gods (who protect him
in his overambitious combats with the Greek champions
DIOMEDES and ACHILLES) The god POSEIDON prophesies
that Aeneas will escape Troy’s doom and that his descen-
dants will rule future generations of Trojans (book 20).
Over later centuries, partly in response to Greek explo-
ration and COLONIZATION in the western Mediterranean,
there arose various non-Homeric legends describing how,
after the fall of Troy, Aeneas voyaged westward, establishing
cities in SICILY, ITALY, and elsewhere. In the first century
B.C.E. the Roman poet Vergil amalgamated these tales in his
patriotic Latin epic poem, the Aeneid. Vergil’s Aeneas
endures hardships and war in order to found the city of
Lavinium and initiate a blood line that will eventually build
the city of ROME. The Julio-Claudian emperors, including
Julius Caesar and Augustus, claimed direct descent from
Aeneas through his son, Ascanius (Iulus). Since Aeneas was
the son of Aphrodite, this gave the Imperial family the right
to assert that they were also related to the goddess (whom
they called Venus). Aeneas was thus one of the very few
Greek mythological figures who was more important in the
Roman world than in the Greek.
See also TROJAN WAR.
Further reading: K. Galinsky, Aeneas, Sicily, and
Rome (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1969);
David West, trans. The Aeneid, 2d ed. (London: Penguin
Books, 2003).
Aenus (Greek: Ainos)
This rich and important Greek
trading city is situated on the northeastern Aegean coast,
in the principally non-Greek region known as THRACE.
Aenus was founded around 600–575 B.C.E. by colonists
from CYME and other AEOLIAN GREEK cities of ASIA
MINOR. The city lay advantageously at the mouth of the
Hebrus River, in the territory of the powerful Odrysian
Thracians. Like its distant Greek neighbor ABDERA, Aenus
prospered from TRADE with the Thracians, who brought
TIMBER, SLAVES, SILVER ore, and other precious resources
for overseas export to the major markets of Greece.
Around 477 B.C.E. Aenus became an important mem-
ber of the Athenian-controlled DELIAN LEAGUE. Around
this time Aenus was minting one of the most admired sil-
ver coinages in the Greek world; the Aenian coins showed
the head of HERMES, god of commerce. The city remained
an Athenian ally during the PELOPONNESIAN
WAR
(431–404 B.C.E.); and it came under Spartan rule after
Athens’ defeat. Later Aenus passed to the region’s domi-
nant powers: MACEDON, PERGAMON, and, in the 100s
B.C.E., ROME. A late tradition connected the founding of
Aenus with the mythical Trojan-Roman hero AENEAS.
See also AEOLIS; COINAGE.
Further reading: J. M. F. May, Ainos: Its History and
Coinage 474–341 B.C. (London: Oxford University Press,
1950).
Aeolian Greeks
This ethnic branch of the ancient
Greeks was distinct from the two other main groups, the
IONIAN GREEKS and DORIAN GREEKS. The Aeolians spoke
a dialect called Aeolic and claimed a mythical ancestor,
Aeolus (not the ruler of the winds in the Odyssey, but
another Aeolus, son of the first Greek man, HELLEN).
During the epoch of MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION (ca.
1600–1200 B.C.E.), the Aeolians seem to have been cen-
tered in central and northeastern Greece. But amid the
Mycenaeans’ violent end (ca. 1100–1000 B.C.E.), displaced
Aeolians migrated eastward across the AEGEAN SEA. First
occupying the large eastern island of LESBOS, these people
eventually spread along the northwest coast of ASIA
MINOR, in the region that came to be called AEOLIS.
By the 600s B.C.E. Aeolian Greeks inhabited Lesbos
and Aeolis (in the eastern Aegean) and BOEOTIA and
THESSALY (in mainland Greece). The strong poetic tradi-
tions of Aeolian culture reached their peak in the poetry
of SAPPHO and ALCAEUS, written at Lesbos in the early
500s B.C.E.
See also GREEK LANGUAGE; LYRIC POETRY.
Further reading: S. Bommeljé, “Aeolis in Aetolia:
Thuc. 3, 102, 5 and the origins of the Aetolian ethnos,”
Historia 37 (1988): 297–316.
Aeolic dialect
See GREEK LANGUAGE.
Aeolis
This region on the northwest coast of ASIA
MINOR, was inhabited by AEOLIAN GREEKS. Extending
from the Hermus River northward to the HELLESPONT,
Aeolis was colonized by Aeolians in eastward migrations
between about 1000 and 600 B.C.E.; the nearby island of
8
Aeneas

LESBOS apparently served as an operational base for these
invasions. The major city of Aeolis was KYM¯E.
Aeolis prospered from east-west TRADE. However, the
loose confederation of Aeolis’ cities never achieved inter-
national power in the Greek world, and Aeolis was
dwarfed in importance by its southern Greek neighbor,
the region called IONIA.
Further reading: British Museum, Department of
Coins and Medals, Catalogue of the Greek Coins of Troas,
Aeolis, and Lesbos, edited by Warwick Wroth (Bologna: A.
Forni, 1982).
Aeolus
See ODYSSEUS.
Aeschines (ca. 400–320 B.C.E.) Athenian orator
Aeschines is remembered mainly as a political enemy of
the famous orator DEMOSTHENES (1). In 346 B.C.E., when
the Macedonian king PHILIP II was extending his power
by war and intimidation throughout Greece, Aeschines
and his mentor, Eubulus, belonged to an Athenian party
that sought a negotiated peace with Philip; Aeschines
served on two Athenian embassies to Philip that year.
Aeschines’ conciliatory speeches in the Athenian ASSEM-
BLY brought him into conflict with Demosthenes, who
staunchly advocated war.
Soon Philip’s flagrant expansionism had borne out
Demosthenes’ warnings, and Demosthenes brought
Aeschines to court twice (346 and 343 B.C.E.) on charges
that he had advised the Athenians irresponsibly, acting as
Philip’s paid agent. Although the bribery charge was
probably false, Demosthenes’ second prosecution nearly
succeeded, with Aeschines winning the jury’s acquittal by
merely one vote.
Thirteen years later Aeschines struck back with a
charge against an associate of Demosthenes named Kte-
siphon, who had earlier persuaded the Athenians to pre-
sent Demosthenes with a golden crown, in gratitude for
his statesmanship. By a procedure known as graph¯e para-
nomon, Aeschines accused Ktesiphon of having attempted
to propose illegal legislation in the assembly. Demos-
thenes spoke in Ktesiphon’s defense; his speech, On the
Crown, survives today and is considered to be Demos-
thenes’ masterpiece of courtroom oratory. Defeated and
humiliated, Aeschines retired to the island of RHODES.
Three of Aeschines’ speeches are extant, each relating
to one of his three court cases against Demosthenes. In
the speech Against Timarchus (346 B.C.E.), Aeschines suc-
cessfully defended himself by attacking Demosthenes’
associate Timarchus, who was coprosecuting. Invoking
an Athenian law that forbade anyone of bad moral char-
acter from addressing the court, Aeschines argued persua-
sively that Timarchus had at one time been a male
prostitute. The speech is a valuable source of information
for us regarding the classical Greeks’ complex attitudes
toward male HOMOSEXUALITY. Aeschines’ speech Against
Ktesiphon (330 B.C.E.) also is interesting, for it gives a
negative assessment of Demosthenes’ career.
See also LAWS AND LAWCOURTS; RHETORIC.
Further reading: E. M. Harris, Aeschines and Athenian
Politics (New York: Oxford University Press, 1995); R. L.
Fox, “Aeschines and Athenian Democracy,” in Ritual,
Finance, Politics. Athenian Democratic Accounts Presented to
David Lewis (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1994), 135–155.
Aeschylus (525–456 B.C.E.) Famous playwright of fifth-
century-B.C.E. Athens
Aeschylus was one of the three most famous tragedians in
Classical Athens; the other two were SOPHOKLES and
EURIPIDES. He wrote 90 plays, of which only seven sur-
vive under his name; and of these, Prometheus Bound may
not really have been written by him. Like other Athenian
tragedians, Aeschylus wrote mainly for competition at the
annual Athenian drama festival known as the City
Dionysia, where three playwrights would each present
three tragedies and a satyr play. Among Aeschylus’s
extant plays is the only complete Greek tragic trilogy to
come down to us, the Oresteia, or Oresteian Trilogy—one
of the greatest works of Greek literature.
Aeschylus’s place in Western culture is due to his
solemn vision of divine justice, which orders events on
earth. He drew largely on MYTHS for his stories, and
described his plays as morsels from the banquet of
HOMER. He was also a pioneer of stage technique at a
time when Greek drama was still crude, and he was a
spokesman for the big, patriotic emotions that had been
aroused by Athens’s victory in the PERSIAN
WARS
(490–479 B.C.E.). Aeschylus won first prize at the
Dionysian competition 13 times; after his death, his plays
came to be seen as old-fashioned in theme and language.
Aeschylus was born into an aristocratic family of Eleu-
sis, a city in Athenian territory. His father’s name was
Euphorion. Little is known of Aeschylus’s life, but as a
teenager he would have witnessed two great public events:
the expulsion of the dictator HIPPIAS (1) (510 B.C.E.)
and the institution of Athenian DEMOCRACY as fashioned
by the reformer KLEISTHENES (1) (508 B.C.E.). In 490 B.C.E.
Aeschylus took part in the single most important moment
in Athenian history, fighting as a soldier in the Battle of
MARATHON, which repulsed a Persian invasion (and in
which his brother Cynegeirus was killed). Aeschylus also
may have fought 10 years later at the sea battle of SALAMIS
(1), where a much larger Persian invasion was defeated. His
participation in these great events shaped his patriotism
and his faith in an ordering divinity—themes that echo
throughout his plays. These were beliefs shared by his audi-
ences in the 480s–460s B.C.E.
One anecdote from Aeschylus’s early years mentions
a competition ca. 489 B.C.E. to choose the official epitaph
for the Athenian dead at Marathon. Aeschylus’s submitted
poem was not selected, although he was an Athenian who
Aeschylus
9

had fought at the battle; the judges, finding that his poem
lacked sympathy of expression, preferred the poem sub-
mitted by the poet SIMONIDES of Keos. A modern schol-
arly reconstruction of the two poems has shown that
Simonides’ poem characterized the dead men as saviors
of Greece, but Aeschylus’s as saviors of Athens. The
episode is significant in showing Aeschylus’s pro-Athe-
nian outlook and his inclination toward the grand vision
rather than the human details. Both of these traits tend to
contrast Aeschylus with the younger tragedian Euripides,
and it is no coincidence that the comic playwright
ARISTOPHANES fictionally showed Aeschylus and Euripi-
des competing in his comedy Frogs (405 B.C.E.).
Aeschylus presented his first tragedies in around
499 B.C.E. and won his first festival victory in 484
B.C.E., with a trilogy whose name we do not know. His
tragedy The Persians was presented in 472 B.C.E. as part
of a trilogy that won first prize, and its chor¯egos (paying
sponsor) was the rising young politician PERIKLES. The
Persians apparently is modeled somewhat on The
Phoenician Women, by the tragedian PHRYNICHUS. It is
unusual in that its subject matter is drawn not from
myths but rather from a recent event—namely, the Per-
sian disaster at Salamis, as seen from the Persian view-
point. The play’s title describes the chorus (a group of
Persian councillors), and the protagonist is Atossa,
mother of the Persian king XERXES. In the simple plot,
arrival of news of the calamity is followed by an invoca-
tion of the ghost of the great Persian king DARIUS (1),
Xerxes’ father. The Persians are presented theatrically,
but with pathos and dignity, as victims of Xerxes’
insane HUBRIS.
Shortly afterward, Aeschylus traveled to SICILY, to the
wealthy court of the Syracusan tyrant HIERON (1) (patron
also of such poets as Simonides and PINDAR). It was prob-
ably at this time that Aeschylus wrote a new play, Women
of Aetna (now lost), to commemorate Hieron’s founding
of a city of that name, near Mt. Etna. Aeschylus returned
to Athens to compete at the City Dionysia of 468 B.C.E.,
but he lost first place to a 28-year-old contestant named
Sophokles.
Of Aeschylus’s other extant work, the Seven Against
Thebes—a pageant centering on the Theban king Eteo-
cles’ decision to meet his brother, Polynices, in combat to
defend his city—was presented in 467 B.C.E. Another
play, The Suppliants—about the Danaid maidens’ flight
from their suitors, the sons of Aegyptus—dates from
around 463 B.C.E. The three plays of the Oresteia—
Agamemnon, the Libation Bearers, and the Eumenides—
were performed in 458 B.C.E.
Perhaps alarmed by growing class tensions at Athens,
Aeschylus traveled again to Sicily, where he died at the
age of 69; Prometheus Bound, if it is in fact by Aeschylus,
may have been presented in Sicily in his final years. He
was buried at GELA. Aeschylus’s brief verse epitaph,
which he supposedly prepared himself, ignored his many
literary honors and mentioned only that he had fought at
Marathon.
The Oresteian trilogy, Aeschylus’s greatest work,
describes the triumph of divine justice working through a
series of horrific events on earth. In the first play,
Agamemnon, the vainglorious Agamemnon, fresh from his
victory in the TROJAN WAR, is so misled by pride that he
cannot see that his wife, the adulterous CLYTAEMNESTRA,
plans to murder him. After the killing, their son, ORESTES,
must avenge his father by slaying his mother in the tril-
ogy’s second play, the Libation Bearers (Ch¯oephoroi). But
this act in turn incites the wrath of supernatural fiends,
the FURIES (Erinues), whose divine function is to avenge a
parent’s blood. In the third play, the Eumenides, Orestes is
pursued by the chorus of Furies to Athens, where he is
cleansed of his curse with the help of ATHENA and
APOLLO. Tried for his murder before the Athenian law
court of the AREOPAGOS, Orestes is acquitted, and his per-
secutors are invited to stay on at Athens as protective spir-
its—the “Kindly Ones” of the play’s title. The Eumenides is
simultaneously a bit of Athenian nationalism and a pro-
found vision of civilized society as a place where the old,
violent code of blood vengeance has been replaced by law.
Aeschylus was responsible for many innovations that
soon became standard on the Athenian stage. He devel-
oped the use of lavish costumes and introduced a second
speaking actor, thereby greatly increasing the number of
possible speaking roles (since each actor could “double”
or “triple” on roles). Aeschylus had a fondness for visual
effects and wild, demonstrative choral parts, which his
successors found crude. Yet in places his language has a
spellbinding solemnity, and in the scenes leading up to
the murders in the Agamemnon and Libation Bearers, he is
a master of suspense.
His later life saw a period of serious political strife at
Athens, between radical democrats and more right-wing
elements. The brilliant left-wing statesman THEMISTOKLES
was ostracized (ca. 471 B.C.E.) and forced to flee to PERSIA
to avoid an Athenian death sentence, but his policies
eventually were taken up by the young Perikles and his
comrades. It is evident that Aeschylus was a member of
this democratic party, not only from his 472 B.C.E. associ-
ation with Perikles, but also from the plays he wrote. The
Athenian navy is indirectly glorified in The Persians; there
are muted, approving references to Themistokles in The
Persians and The Suppliants; and a major aim in the
Eumenides (458 B.C.E.) is to dignify the Areopagos, which
in real life had recently been stripped of certain powers
by left-wing legislation.
But Aeschylus’s work was never partisan in a petty
way: plays such as The Suppliants and the Eumenides end
with hopeful reconciliation between opposing forces, and
in this we can see the lofty, generous spirit of an artist
who sought out the divine purpose in human affairs.
See also DIONYSUS; ELECTRA; EPHIALTES; PROMETHEUS;
SEVEN AGAINST THEBES; THEATER.
10
Aeschylus

Further reading: S. Goldhill, Language, Sexuality, Nar-
rative: The Oresteia (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
Press, 1984); Philip Vellacott, The Logic of Tragedy: Morals
and Integrity in Aeschylus’ Oresteia (Durham, N.C.: Duke
University Press, 1984); C. J. Herington, Aeschylus (New
Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1986); Alan H. Som-
merstein, Aeschylean Tragedy
(Bari: Levante, 1996);
Anthony J. Podlecki, The Political Background of Aeschylean
Tragedy, 2d ed. (London: Bristol Classical Press, 1999);
Harold Bloom, ed., Aeschylus: Comprehensive Research and
Study Guide (Broomall, Pa.: Chelsea House, 2002).
Aesop (ca. 620–560 B.C.E.) Supposed author of a number
of moralizing fables, many involving animals as characters
According to Greek legend, Aesop was a Phrygian slave
on the island of SAMOS in the 500s B.C.E. He was said to
have earned his freedom through his cleverness and lived
afterward at the court of King Croesus of Sardis. On a
visit to the oracle of APOLLO at DELPHI, Aesop openly crit-
icized the priests there, who murdered him in their anger.
Another version says that Aesop had been sent to Delphi
by Croesus with gold as a gift to the citizens, but when he
refused to distribute the money after seeing their greed,
he instead sent it back to the king. The incensed Delphi-
ans then executed Aesop as a public criminal. A statue of
Aesop was erected in Athens, carved by the famous Greek
sculptor LYSIPPUS.
In fact, it is not certain whether Aesop existed as a
real person. Aesop may just be a name around which cer-
tain ancient folktales gravitated, as with Homer and the
epic poems attributed to him.
One of the best known of Aesop’s fables tells of the
race between the tortoise and the hare. The overconfident
hare, stopping to nap in the middle of the race, loses to
his slower but steadier opponent.
Animal parables also occur in extant verses by
ARCHILOCHOS (ca. 650 B.C.E.), whose writings may have
inspired some of the tales that we known as Aesop’s.
Further reading: Anton Wiechers, Aesop in Delphi
(Meisenheim, Germany: Hain, 1961); Ben E. Perry, Studies
in the Text History of the Life and Fables of Aesop (Chico,
Calif.: Scholars Press, 1981); J.-Th. A. Papademetriou,
Aesop as an Archetypal Hero (Athens: Hellenic Society for
Humanistic Studies, 1997); C. A. Zafiropoulos, Ethics in
Aesop’s Fables. The Augustana Collection (Leiden, Nether-
lands: E. J. Brill, 2001).
Aetolia
Mountainous region of central Greece, north of
the Corinthian Gulf, bordered on the west by ACARNANIA
and on the east by the Mt. Parnassus massif. Interior Aeto-
lia contained good farmland, but the southern mountains
blocked Aetolia from the gulf and from outside influences.
Through the 400s B.C.E. the Aetolians remained rugged
Greek “highlanders,” divided by tribal feuds and known
for carrying weapons in public for self-defense.
During the PELOPONNESIAN WAR, Aetolia was invaded
by the Athenian general DEMOSTHENES (2), who hoped to
seize the eastward mountain route into enemy BOEOTIA.
But the Aetolians, arrayed as javelin-throwing light
infantry, defeated the cumbersome Athenian HOPLITES in
the hills (426 B.C.E.).
In the late 300s B.C.E. Aetolia emerged as a force in
the Greek resistance to the overlordship of MACEDON. By
now the Aetolians had united into a single federal state—
the Aetolian League. Aetolian towns shared a common
citizenship, representative ASSEMBLY, and a war captain,
elected annually; the capital city was Thermon. By the
late 200s B.C.E. the aggressive league dominated most of
central Greece, with alliances extending to the PELOPON-
NESE. Aetolia fell into conflict with its southern rival, the
Achaean League, as well as with Macedon. In 218 B.C.E.
the dynamic Macedonian king PHILIP V invaded Aetolia
and sacked Thermon.
Aetolia was a natural ally for Philip’s enemy, the impe-
rialistic Italian city of ROME. Allied to Rome in the Second
Macedonian War, the Aetolians helped defeat Philip at the
Battle of Cynoscephalae (197 B.C.E.). However, disap-
pointed by the mild Roman peace with Macedon, the
Aetolians allied with the Seleucid king ANTIOCHUS (2) III
against Rome (192 B.C.E.). After the Romans had defeated
Antiochus, they broke the Aetolian League’s power and
made it a Roman subject ally (189 B.C.E.).
See also ACHAEA; WARFARE, LAND.
Further reading: W. J. Woodhouse, Aetolia: Its Geog-
raphy, Topography, and Antiquities (New York: Arno Press,
1973); S. Bommeljé, et al., Aetolia and the Aetolians:
Towards the Interdisciplinary Study of a Greek Region
(Utrecht, Netherlands: Parnassus Press, 1987).
afterlife
Throughout ancient Greek history, nearly all
Greeks believed in some form of life after death. Only
the philosophy called EPICUREANISM (after 300 B.C.E.)
maintained unequivocally that the human soul died with
the body. Because Greek RELIGION had no specific doc-
trine on the subject, beliefs in the afterlife varied greatly,
from crude superstition to the philosopher PLATO’s lofty
vision (ca. 370 B.C.E.) of an immortal soul freed of its
imperfect flesh and at one with absolute reality in
another world.
The primitive concept that the dead somehow live
on in their tombs never disappeared from Greek reli-
gion. The shaft graves at MYCENAE—datable to
1600–1550 B.C.E., at the dawn of MYCENAEAN CIVILIZA-
TION—were filled with armor, utensils, and even pets
and SLAVES killed in sacrifice, to comfort the deceased in
the afterlife. This practice may have been inspired by
the burial rites of Egyptian pharaohs, but the general
idea seems to have survived in Greece for over 1,000
years. Greeks of the 400s and 300s B.C.E. were still offer-
ing food and drink at the graveside, as nourishment for
the dead.
afterlife
11

Another belief was that the souls of the dead traveled
to an Underworld, the realm of the god HADES and his
wife, PERSEPHONE. Unlike the modern concept of Hell,
this “House of Hades” (as the Greeks called it) was not
primarily a place of punishment. It was, however, a cold
and gloomy setting, where the souls—after being led
from the living world by the messenger god HERMES—
endured a bleak eternity.
The earliest extant description of Hades’ kingdom
comes in book 11 of HOMER’s epic poem the Odyssey
(written down around 750 B.C.E.), when the living hero
ODYSSEUS journeys there by ship to seek prophecy. The
site is vaguely described as a grim shoreline of OCEANUS,
at the edge of the living world. (Later writers tended to
situate it underground.) There Odysseus recognizes the
ghosts of some of his family and former comrades. He
also sees the torments of three sinners—Tityus, TANTA-
LUS, and SISYPHUS—who had betrayed the friendship of
the gods. The only people to be excused from Hades’
realm were those who had been granted divinity and who
now resided with the other gods on Mt. OLYMPUS. These
lucky few included HERAKLES and the twins CASTOR AND
POLYDEUCES.
Gradually, concepts of reward and punishment were
enlarged. Poets wrote of a place called Elysium (Elusion)
where certain souls, chosen by the gods, enjoyed a happy
afterlife. Also known as the Islands of the Blessed, this
locale is described by the Theban poet PINDAR (476
B.C.E.) in terms of shady parklands and athletic and musi-
cal pastimes—in other words, the ideal life of the living
Greek aristocrat. Post-Homeric sources placed ACHILLES
there with other heroes, including the Athenian tyranni-
cides of 510 B.C.E. HARMODIUS AND ARISTOGEITON.
Similarly, legend began to specify a lowermost abyss
in Hades’ realm, a place called Tartarus. This was the
scene of punishment for the evil TITANS and for the worst
human sinners. (Post-Homeric sources add the DANAIDS
and IXION to the group.) Typical punishments require the
prisoner to endure eternal frustration of effort (Sisyphus,
the Danaids) or desire (Tantalus).
Greek writers such as Plato began to describe the
mythical judges who assigned each soul to Elysium, Tar-
tarus, or the netherworld. These judges were MINOS and
Rhadamanthys (who were brothers) and Aeacus, all of
whom had once been mortal men. The concept of eternal
judgment contains an obvious ethical message—a warn-
ing to act justly in this life—that resembles the later
Christian view.
The well-known rivers of the Underworld are best
described in Vergil’s Latin epic poem, the Aeneid (ca. 20
B.C.E.). But the idea of rivers or lakes in Hades’ kingdom
goes back at least to the Greek poet HESIOD’s Theogony (ca.
700 B.C.E.). The Greeks associated these Underworld
waters with actual rivers of mainland Greece, apparently
believing that the waters continued their course under-
ground. The Styx (“hated”) was an actual river in ARCADIA.
The Acheron (“woeful”) flowed in EPIRUS, near an oracle
of the Dead. The Underworld’s other rivers were Lethe
(“forgetting”), Cocytus (“wailing”), and Pyriphlegethon or
Phlegethon (“burning”). These dire names probably
referred to Greek FUNERAL CUSTOMS rather than to any
punishment for the souls.
Legend usually described the Styx as the Under-
world’s boundary. New arrivals were brought across by
the old ferryman Charon, and Greek burial sites often
included placing a coin in the corpse’s mouth, to pay for
this final passage. The monstrous many-headed dog KER-
BEROS stood watch on the Styx’s inner bank, preventing
the souls from leaving.
This grim Greek picture of the common man’s after-
life eventually inspired a reaction: A number of fringe
12
afterlife
A pottery statuette of a woman mourning the soul of a loved
one carried to the Underworld; a tomb decoration (Alison
Frantz Photographic Collection, American School of Classical
Studies at Athens)

religious movements arose, assuring their followers of a
happy afterlife. These were called mystery cults or mys-
teries (must¯eria, from must¯es, “an initiate”). While center-
ing on a traditional deity such as DIONYSUS, DEMETER, or
Persephone, the mysteries claimed to offer the correct
beliefs and procedures for admittance into Elysium. In
Greek tombs of southern ITALY from about 400 B.C.E.,
archaeologists have discovered golden tablets inscribed
with precise directions for the soul entering the Under-
world: The soul is warned not to drink from the attrac-
tive spring of forgetfulness—“seen on the right, where
the white cypress grows”—but from the lake of remem-
brance, beyond.
One mystery faith, ORPHISM, emphasized reincarna-
tion (also known as transmigration). According to this
belief, each person’s soul passed, at death, into a newborn
body, whether human or not. The new assignment was
based on the person’s conduct and belief in the prior life;
bad souls descended through criminals, slaves, and ani-
mals, but a right-living soul ascended to kings and
heroes, eventually gaining admittance to Elysium. This
concept was adapted by the philosophers PYTHAGORAS
(ca. 530 B.C.E.) and EMPEDOKLES (ca. 450 B.C.E.), who
influenced Plato.
In the Hellenistic and Roman periods, other mystery
religions from the eastern Mediterranean became
extremely popular, including those of Osiris and Mithras.
These cults welcomed worshippers of all ages, genders,
and social status, and their teachings of a blissful afterlife
were enhanced by their rituals of rebirth and reincarna-
tion. At the same time, Judaism and Christianity devel-
oped from relatively minor local cults into the major
religious institutions that they are today, eventually replac-
ing the polytheistic belief systems of the ancient Greeks.
See also ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES; HELLENISTIC AGE;
PROPHECY AND DIVINATION.
Further reading: Jan M. Bremmer, The Early Greek
Concept of the Soul (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Univer-
sity Press, 1983); Robert Garland, The Greek Way of
Death (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1984); Jan
N. Bremmer, “The Soul, Death, and the Afterlife in Early
and Classical Greece,” in Hidden Future. Death and
Immortality in Ancient Egypt, Anatolia, the Classical, Bib-
lical, and Arabic-Islamic World, edited by Jan N. Brem-
mer, Th. P. J. van den Hout, and R. Peters (Amsterdam:
Amsterdam University Press, 1994), 91–106; C. Pen-
glase, “Some Concepts of Afterlife in Mesopotamia and
Greece,” in The Archaeology of Death in the Ancient Near
East, edited by Stuart Campbell and Anthony Green
(Oxford: Oxbow Books, 1995), 192–195; B. C. Dietrich,
“Death and Afterlife in Minoan Religion,” Kernos 10
(1997): 19–38.
Agamemnon
In MYTH, Agamemnon was the king of
MYCENAE and ARGOS, son of ATREUS, the husband of
KLYTEMNESTRA, and the commander of the allied Greek
army in the TROJAN WAR. Agamemnon’s earliest appear-
ance in literature is in HOMER’s epic poem the Iliad (writ-
ten down around 750 B.C.E.), where he is portrayed
negatively. Contrary to his name, which means “very
steadfast,” Agamemnon is shown to be an irresolute,
arrogant, and divisive leader. His quarrel with the Greek
champion ACHILLES over possession of a female war cap-
tive provokes Achilles to withdraw from the fighting and
sets in motion the Iliad’s tragic plot.
The events leading up to Agamemnon’s command are
told by Homer and later writers. The Greek-Trojan con-
flict began when Helen, wife of MENELAUS (Agamemnon’s
brother) was seduced by the Trojan prince PARIS and
eloped with him. Agamemnon organized an expedition
against TROY to recover Helen, but incurred Klytemnes-
tra’s hatred by sacrificing their daughter IPHIGENIA as a
blood offering to the hostile goddess ARTEMIS, who was
sending contrary winds to prevent the Greek ships’
departure.
After the Greeks sacked Troy, Agamemnon sailed for
home with his war booty, which included the captured
Trojan princess CASSANDRA. But on the very day that they
stepped ashore, Agamemnon and Cassandra were mur-
dered by henchmen of Agamemnon’s treacherous cousin
Aegisthus, Klytemnestra’s illicit lover. (This is Homer’s
version in the Odyssey; in later tales the king dies while
Agamemnon
13
A gold mask portrait thought to be of Agamemnon, king of
Mycenae, who led the expedition against Troy to recover
Helen (Alison Frantz Photographic Collection, American
School of Classical Studies at Athens)

emerging from his bath, stabbed by Aegisthus or axed by
Klytemnestra.) It was left to Agamemnon’s son ORESTES
and daughter ELECTRA to avenge his murder.
Agamemnon’s downfall is the subject of Athenian
playwright AESCHYLUS’s tragedy Agamemnon (458 B.C.E.),
the first play in the Oresteian Trilogy.
See also HELEN OF TROY.
Further reading: Christopher Logue, The Husbands:
An Account of Books 3 and 4 of Homer’s Iliad (London:
Faber, 1994); Donna F. Wilson, Ransom, Revenge, and
Heroic Identity in the Iliad (New York: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 2002); Aeschylus, Oresteia, translated by Alan
Shapiro and Peter Burian (New York: Oxford University
Press, 2003).
Agathokles (361–289 B.C.E.) Ruthless and flamboyant
ruler of the Sicilian Greek city of SYRACUSE from 316 to
289 B.C.E.
Agathokles was the last of the grandiose Syracusan
TYRANTS. He challenged the mighty African-Phoenician
city of CARTHAGE and captured most of SICILY from
Carthaginians and fellow Greeks. His imperial reign in
the Greek West was inspired partly by the example of
ALEXANDER THE GREAT’s successors in the East.
Agathokles did not come from the ruling class. Born
in Thermae, in the Carthaginian-controlled western half
of Sicily, he was the son of a Greek manufacturer of POT-
TERY; enemies later derided Agathokles as a mere potter.
Emigrating to Syracuse, he came to prominence as an
officer in the Syracusan army. In 316 B.C.E. he over-
threw the ruling Syracusan OLIGARCHY and installed
himself as turannos, or dictator, with the common peo-
ple’s support.
Many adventures followed. Suffering a major defeat
in battle against the Carthaginians, Agathokles was
besieged by land and sea inside Syracuse (summer 311
B.C.E.). But he solved this predicament with an amaz-
ingly bold action: In August 310 B.C.E., when the
Carthaginians briefly relaxed their naval blockade,
Agathokles sailed from Syracuse harbor with 60 ships
and a mercenary army of about 13,000 to invade
Carthage itself.
His was the first European army to land in Cartha-
ginian North Africa. But despite his victories over
Carthaginian armies in the field, Agathokles failed to cap-
ture the city. Meanwhile, in Sicily, Syracuse held out
against the Carthaginians; but a Sicilian-Greek revolt
against Agathokles induced the tyrant to abandon his
African army under his son Archagatus and return to
Sicily. Eventually Archagatus and his brother were mur-
dered by the army, which evacuated North Africa.
Agathokles made peace with the Carthaginians, giv-
ing up territories in west Sicily (306 B.C.E.). But he soon
became the sole ruler of Greek-held eastern Sicily. In 304
B.C.E., patterning himself on Alexander the Great’s heirs
who were reigning as supreme monarchs in the East,
Agathokles adopted the absolute title of king (basileus).
He then extended his power to Greek south ITALY
and western mainland Greece. In about 300 B.C.E. he
drove off the Macedonian king KASSANDER, who was
besieging CORCYRA. Agathokles took over Corcyra and
gave it, twice, as a dowry for his daughter Lanassa’s two
influential MARRIAGES, first to the Epirote king PYRRHUS
(295 B.C.E.) and then to the new Macedonian king,
DEMETRIUS POLIORKETES (ca. 291 B.C.E.). The aging
Agathokles himself married a third wife, a daughter of
the Greek Egyptian king PTOLEMY (1). But his hope of
founding a grand dynasty faded when his son Agathokles
was murdered by a jealous relative.
The elder Agathokles died at age 72, probably from
jaw cancer. Although he had thwarted the Carthaginian
menace, he left no legacy of good government for Sicily.
However, his military exploits were influential in demon-
strating that mighty Carthage was susceptible to invasion.
The Romans would invade Carthage more effectively dur-
ing their Second Punic War (202 B.C.E.).
Further reading:
R. R. Holloway, “The Bronze
Coinage of Agathocles,” in Greek Numismatics and Archae-
ology. Essays in Honor of Margaret Thompson, edited by
Otto Morkholm and Nancy Waggoner (Wetteren, Bel-
gium: Editions NR, 1979), 87–95; M. B. Borba Floren-
zano, “Political Propaganda in Agathocles’ coins,” in Actes
du XIe Congrès international de numismatique, Bruxelles
8–13 septembre 1991 (Louvain-la-Neuve, 1993), 71–77; M.
Ierardi, “The Tetradrachms of Agathocles of Syracuse. A
Preliminary Study,” American Journal of Numismatics 7–8
(1995–1996): 1–73.
Agathon (ca. 450–401 B.C.E.) Athenian tragic playwright
of the late 400s B.C.E.
Agathon was considered by the Athenians to be their
fourth greatest tragedian after AESCHYLUS, SOPHOKLES,
and EURIPIDES. Less than 40 lines of his work survive;
these show a clever, polished style, influenced by the
contemporary rhetorician GORGIAS and by the SOPHISTS.
Agathon won his first drama competition at the annual
festival known as the City Dionysia, in 416 B.C.E., with a
tragic trilogy whose titles have not survived.
We know little of Agathon’s life. But we do know that
in 407 B.C.E. he left Athens—as Euripides had done—for
the court of the Macedonian king Archelaus, and there
(like Euripides), Agathon died.
From references in ARISTOTLE’s Poetics we know that
Agathon was an innovator. He often removed the chorus
from the story’s action, reducing the choral odes to mere
interludes. In his day he was noteworthy for his tragedy
Antheus, of which he invented the entire plot himself,
rather than drawing on MYTH or history. His plots were
overinvolved; Aristotle once criticized him for having
crammed the entire tale of the TROJAN WAR into one play.
14
Agathokles

Agathon had personal beauty and apparently an
effete manner. He appears as a fictionalized character in
ARISTOPHANES’ comedy Thesmophoriazusae (411 B.C.E.)
and is burlesqued for his effeminacy—but not for his
writing, which Aristophanes calls “good” (agathos).
Agathon also appears as a character in the philosopher
PLATO’s dialogue the Symposium (ca. 370 B.C.E.), which is
set at a drinking party at Agathon’s house to celebrate his
416 B.C. competition victory.
See also THEATER.
Further reading: Pierre Leveque, Agathon (Paris:
Societé d’édition Les Belles Lettres, 1955).
Agesilaos (444–360 B.C.E.) Spartan king who reigned
399–360 B.C.E.
Agesilaos led SPARTA during the city’s brief phase of
supremacy after the PELOPONNESIAN WAR. Although a
capable battlefield commander, he steered Sparta into a
shortsighted policy of military domination in Greece that
eventually provoked the rise of a challenger state, THEBES.
The Athenian historian XENOPHON was a friend of
Agesilaos and wrote an admiring biography of him, as
well as including his exploits in the general history titled
Hellenica. These two extant writings provide much of our
information about Agesilaos.
A son of King ARCHIDAMUS of Sparta’s Eurypontid
royal house, Agesilaos was dynamic, pious, and lame in
one leg. He became king after the death of his half
brother, King Agis II. In 396 B.C.E. he took 8,000 troops
to ASIA MINOR to protect the Spartan-allied Greek cities
there from Persian attack. Marching inland through Per-
sian-held west-central Asia Minor, Agesilaos defeated the
Persians in battle before being recalled to Sparta (394
B.C.E.). His raid probably helped inspire the future con-
quests of ALEXANDER THE GREAT.
Agesilaos had been summoned home to help his
beleaguered city in the CORINTHIAN WAR. Bringing his
army overland through THRACE
and THESSALY,
he
descended southward into hostile BOEOTIA, where he nar-
rowly defeated a coalition army of Thebans, Argives,
Athenians, and Corinthians at the Battle of Coronea (394
B.C.E.). Wounded, and with his army now too weak to
occupy Boeotia, Agesilaos withdrew to Sparta. He com-
manded subsequent Spartan actions against ARGOS (391
B.C.E.), CORINTH (390 B.C.E.), ACARNANIA (389 B.C.E.),
and defiant Thebes (378–377 B.C.E.).
His hostility toward the Theban leader EPAMINONDAS
at a peace conference resulted in renewed war and a dis-
astrous Spartan defeat at the Battle of LEUKTRA (371
B.C.E.). In the disarray that followed, Agesilaos helped
lead the defense of the Spartan homeland, culminating in
the stalemate Battle of MANTINEIA (362 B.C.E.).
After peace was made, the 82-year-old king sailed
to EGYPT with 1,000 Spartan mercenary troops to assist
an Egyptian prince’s revolt against the Persians. (The
expedition’s purpose was to replenish Sparta’s depleted
revenues.) The revolt went awry, and Agesilaos died on
the voyage home.
See also EURYPONTID CLAN.
Further reading: Paul Cartledge, Agesilaos and the
Crisis of Sparta (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1987); M. A. Flower, “Agesilaus of Sparta and the
Origins of the Ruler Cult,” Classical Quarterly 38
(1988): 123–134; Charles D. Hamilton, Agesilaus and
the Failure of Spartan Hegemony (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell
University Press, 1991); D. R. Shipley, A Commentary on
Plutarch’s Life of Agesilaos: Response to Sources in the
Presentation of Character (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1997).
Agiad clan
The Agiads (Agiadai) were the senior royal
family at SPARTA, which had an unusual government in
that it was ruled simultaneously by two kings. The
Agiads, “descendants of Agis,” traced their ancestry back
to a legendary figure who was one of the sons of HERAK-
LES. As the senior house, the Agiads enjoyed certain cere-
monial privileges over their partners, the EURYPONTID
CLAN.
Notable Agiad kings include the brilliant
KLEOMENES (1) and Leonidas, the commander at the Bat-
tle of THERMOPYLAE.
Further reading: R. Martínez-Lacy, “The Application
of the Concept of Revolution to the Reforms of Agis,
Cleomenes, and Nabis at Sparta,” Quaderni di Storia 46
(1997): 95–105; S. Hodkinson, “The Development of
Spartan Society and Institutions in the Archaic Period,”
in The Development of the Polis in Ancient Greece, edited
by Lynette Mitchell and P. J. Rhodes (London: Routledge,
1997), 83–102; A. Powell, Athens and Sparta: Constructing
Greek Political and Social History from 478 B.C. (New
York: Routledge, 2001).
agora
The open “place of assembly” in an ancient
Greek city-state. Early in Greek history (900s–700s
B.C.E.), free-born males would gather in the agora for mil-
itary duty or to hear proclamations of the ruling king or
COUNCIL. In the more settled centuries that followed, the
agora served as a marketplace where merchants kept
open-air stalls or shops under colonnades.
Classical ATHENS boasted a grand agora—the civic
heart of the city that dominated Greece. This area had
been used as a cemetery as early as the third millennium
B.C.E. Under the Athenian dictators PEISISTRATUS and
HIPPIAS (1) (second half of the 500s B.C.E.), the agora
was cleared to a rectangular open area of about 600 by
750 yards, bordered with grand public buildings. Devas-
tated by the occupying Persians in 480–479 B.C.E., the
agora was rebuilt in the later 400s to include temples,
government buildings, and several colonnades, of which
the best known was the Stoa Poikil¯e (painted colon-
nade). The agora continued to be the center of Athenian com-
mercial and political life throughout antiquity. One of
agora
15

the most prominent buildings added to the space in
the Roman period was the Odeion of Agrippa, built in
15 B.C.E.
The ancient Athenian agora has been excavated by
the American School of Classical Studies since 1931. In
the 1950s, the Hellenistic Stoa of Attalos was recon-
structed on the east side of the agora, and today it
serves as the site museum and as storage and office
space for the excavation team. Another building that
has been rebuilt, using a large amount of its original
material, is the Doric temple on a hill overlooking the
west side of the agora, the so-called Hephaisteion (pre-
viously misidentified as a temple of THESEUS and now
generally identified as a temple of HEPHAISTOS), built
around 449 B.C.E.
See also
ARCHITECTURE; 
ASSEMBLY; 
DEMOCRACY;
OSTRACISM; PAINTING; STOICISM.
Further reading: John McK. Camp, The Athenian
Agora: Excavations in the Heart of Classical Athens (Lon-
don: Thames and Hudson, 1986); American School of
Classical Studies at Athens, The Athenian Agora: A
Guide to the Excavation and Museum, 4th ed. (Athens,
ASCSA, 1990).
agriculture
See FARMING.
Ajax (1)
In the legend of the TROJAN WAR, Ajax
(Greek Aias) was king of SALAMIS (1) and son of Tela-
mon. After ACHILLES, he was the bravest Greek warrior at
Troy. In HOMER’s epic poem the Iliad, Ajax engages in
many combats—for example, dueling the Trojan hero
HECTOR to a standoff (book 7) and leading the Greeks in
defense of their beached ships (book 13). Giant in size,
stolid, and slow-spoken, Ajax embodies the virtue of
steadfastness. He carries a huge oxhide shield and is often
called by the poetic epithet “bulwark of the Achaeans.”
Homer implicitly contrasts him with his chief rival
among the Greeks, the wily ODYSSEUS. Although the
stronger of the two, Ajax loses a WRESTLING match to
Odysseus’s skill (Iliad book 23).
As described by Homer in the Odyssey (book 11),
Ajax’s death came from his broken pride over this rivalry.
After Achilles was killed, Ajax and Odysseus both
claimed the honor of acquiring his wondrous armor. The
dispute was arbitrated by Trojan prisoners of war, who
agreed that Odysseus had done more to harm the Trojan
cause. Maddened with shame, Ajax eventually killed
himself with his own sword. This tale is the subject of
the extant tragedy Ajax, written around 450–445 B.C.E.
by the Athenian playwright SOPHOKLES. Sophokles’ Ajax
is brought down by his flaws of anger and pride—and by
a deep nobility that prevents him from accepting a world
of intrigue and compromise personified by Odysseus.
See also ACHAEANS; HUBRIS.
Further reading: Joe P. Goe, Genre and Meaning in
Sophokles’ Ajax (Frankfurt: Athenaeum, 1987); Sophok-
les, Ajax, translated by Shomit Dutta (New York: Cam-
bridge University Press, 2001).
Ajax (2)
Often known as the lesser Ajax, this warrior
was the son of Oileus and leader of troops from LOCRIS.
In the legend of the TROJAN WAR, he was brave, swift-
footed, arrogant, and violent. His savage behavior at the
sack of TROY, unmentioned by the poet HOMER, is
described by later writers. Finding the Trojan princess
CASSANDRA in sanctuary at the goddess ATHENA’s altar,
Ajax pulled her away and raped her. He was hated by
Athena, but his death, as described in Homer’s Odyssey
(book 4), occurred at POSEIDON’s hands. On the home-
ward voyage from Troy, Ajax’s ship was wrecked; he
reached shore safely but sat atop a cliff declaring hubristi-
cally that he had beaten the gods. Poseidon, enraged,
blasted him back into the sea.
See also HUBRIS.
Further reading: R. Rubenstein, “Ajax and Cassan-
dra: An Antique Cameo and a Drawing by Raphael,” Jour-
nal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes 50 (1987):
204–205; Joan B. Connelly, “Narrative and Image in Attic
Vase Painting. Ajax and Kassandra at the Trojan Palla-
16
agriculture
An example of the Doric order of architecture at the Athenian
agora. There were eight columns front and back and 17 along
both sides. A triangular gable or pediment in the roof front and
back usually contained sculptures. (Alison Frantz Photographic
Collection, American School of Classical Studies at Athens)

dion,” in Narrative and Event in Ancient Art, edited by
Peter J. Holliday (New York: Cambridge University Press,
1993), 88–129.
Akragas (Acragas, modern Agrigento)
In antiquity,
Akragas was the second-most-important Greek city of
SICILY, after SYRACUSE. Today the site contains some of the
best-preserved examples of Doric-style monumental
Greek ARCHITECTURE.
Located inland, midway along the island’s southern
coast, Akragas is enclosed defensively by a three-sided,
right-angled mountain ridge. The city was founded in
about 580 B.C.E. by Dorian-Greek colonists from the
nearby city of GELA and the distant island of RHODES.
Akragas lay close to the west Sicilian territory of the hos-
tile Carthaginians, and the city soon fell under the sway
of a Greek military tyrant, Phalaris, who enlarged the
city’s domain at the expense of the neighboring native
Sicans around 570–550 B.C.E. (Notoriously cruel, Phalaris
supposedly roasted his enemies alive inside a hollow,
metal bull set over a fire.)
Akragas thrived as an export center for grain to the
hungry cities of mainland Greece. Local WINE, olives, and
livestock added to the city’s prosperity. Under the tyrant
Theron (reigned 488–472 B.C.E.), Akragas became the
capital of a west Sicilian empire. Theron helped defeat the
Carthaginians at the Battle of HIMERA (480 B.C.E.) and
used Carthaginian war captives as labor for a grand con-
struction program at Akragas. Among Theron’s works
was a temple of ZEUS, never finished but intended to be
the largest building in the Greek world.
After ousting Theron’s son and successor, Thrasy-
daeus, the Akragantines set up a limited DEMOCRACY (ca.
472 B.C.E.). Associated with this government was Akra-
gas’s most illustrious citizen—the statesman, philosopher,
and physician EMPEDOKLES (ca. 450 B.C.E.). In Empedok-
les’ time, Akragas underwent a second building program,
whose remnants include the temples that stand today
along the city’s perimeter ridge as if guarding the site.
The most admired of these is the beautifully preserved
Temple of Concord (so-called today, perhaps really a tem-
ple of CASTOR AND POLYDEUCES).
Captured and depopulated by the Carthaginians in
406 B.C.E., Akragas was resettled by the Corinthian com-
mander TIMOLEON (ca. 338 B.C.E.) but never recovered its
former greatness. By about 270 B.C.E. the city was again a
Carthaginian possession. As a strategic site in the First
Punic War between CARTHAGE and ROME (264–241
B.C.E.), Akragas was twice besieged and captured by
Roman troops. In 210 B.C.E. it was again captured by the
Romans and soon thereafter repopulated with Roman
colonists.
See also DORIAN GREEKS; ORPHISM; TYRANTS.
Further reading: A. Bruno, “Ancient Greek Water
Supply and City Planning. A Study of Syracuse and Acra-
gas,” in Technology and Culture (1974): 389–412; M. Bell,
“Stylobate and Roof in the Olympeion at Akragas,” Amer-
ican Journal of Archaeology 84 (1980): 359–372.
Alcaeus (ca. 620–580 B.C.E.) Lyric poet of the city of
Mytilene on the island of Lesbos
Born into an aristocratic family, Alcaeus was a contempo-
rary and fellow islander of the poet SAPPHO. Like her he
wrote love poems, but unlike her, he also wrote of his
involvement in great events, such as the civil strife
between Mytilene’s traditional ARISTOCRACY and ascen-
dant TYRANTS. Better as a poet than as a political analyst,
Alcaeus was a spokesman for the old-fashioned aristo-
cratic supremacy, which in his day was being dismantled
throughout the Greek world.
Although no one complete poem by him has come
down to us, the surviving fragments show his talent and
give a dramatic biographical sketch. When Alcaeus was a
boy in around 610 B.C.E., his elder brothers and another
noble, PITTACUS, expelled the local tyrant. Soon Alcaeus
was fighting under Pittacus’s command in Mytilene’s
war against Athenian settlers in northwest ASIA MINOR.
Alcaeus threw away his shield while retreating and (like
ARCHILOCHOS, an earlier Greek poet) wrote verses about it.
When another tyrant arose in Mytilene, Alcaeus
went into exile until the tyrant died. Alcaeus may have
gone home—but only for a brief time—because soon his
Alcaeus
17
In the tragic play by Sophokles, Tekmessa covers Ajax’s body
after his suicide. The Brygos painter of this cup shows the
sword entering through the back rather than through the
stomach, a unique way to “fall on one’s sword.” (The J. Paul
Getty Museum)

former comrade Pittacus was ruling singly in Mytilene,
and Alcaeus and many other nobles were expelled. In his
poetry Alcaeus raved against Pittacus as a “low-born”
traitor and expressed despair at being excluded from the
political life that was his birthright.
Apparently Alcaeus went to EGYPT, perhaps as a mer-
cenary soldier. (Meanwhile, his brother joined the army
of the Babylonian king Nebuchadnezzer and took part in
the campaign that captured Jerusalem in 597 B.C.E.) At
some point Alcaeus and his friends planned to attack
Mytilene and depose Pittacus, but the common people
stood by their ruler. Supposedly Pittacus at last allowed
Alcaeus to come home.
Like Sappho, Alcaeus wrote in his native Aeolic
dialect and used a variety of meters. A number of his
extant fragments are drinking songs, written for solo pre-
sentation at a SYMPOSIUM. Even by ancient Greek stan-
dards, Alcaeus seems to have been particularly fond of
WINE. He wrote hymns to the gods, including one to
APOLLO that was much admired in the ancient world. In
accordance with the upper-class sexual tastes of his day,
he also wrote love poems to young men.
More than 550 years after Alcaeus’s death, his poetry
served as a model for the work of the Roman poet
Horace.
See also GREEK LANGUAGE; HOMOSEXUALITY; HOPLITE.
Further reading: Anne P. Burnett, Three Archaic
Poets: Archilochus, Alcaeus, Sappho (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1983).
Alcestis
In MYTH, Alcestis was the wife of King Adme-
tus of Pherae in THESSALY. She became Admetus’s wife
after he was able, with the god APOLLO’s help, to fulfill
her father Pelias’s onerous precondition of yoking a lion
and wild boar to a chariot and driving it around a race-
course.
Alcestis is best known for the story of how she vol-
untarily died in her husband’s place. Apollo, discovering
from the Fates that his mortal friend Admetus had only
one day to live, arranged that Admetus’s life be spared if a
willing substitute could be found; the only one to con-
sent was Alcestis. In EURIPIDES’ tragedy Alcestis (438
B.C.E.), this old tale of wifely duty is recast as a disturbing
account of female courage and male equivocation.
See also FATE.
Further reading: Euripides, Alcestis, translated by
William Arrowsmith (New York: Oxford University Press,
1989); Charles Segal, Euripides and the Poetics of Sorrow:
Art, Gender, and Commemoration in Alcestis, Hippolytus, and
Hecuba (Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press 1993);
Sarah W. Goodwin and Elisabeth Bronfen, eds., Death and
Representation (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,
1993); Kiki Gounaridou, Euripides and Alcestis: Specula-
tion, Simulation, and Stories of Love in the Athenian Culture
(Lanham, Md.: University Press of America, 1998).
Alcibiades (ca. 450–404 B.C.E.) Athenian general, politi-
cian, and social figure
Alcibiades strongly influenced the last 15 years of the
PELOPONNESIAN WAR between ATHENS and SPARTA. The
mercurial Alcibiades embodied the confident Athenian
spirit of the day. Although brilliant as a leader in battle,
he was prone to dangerously grandiose schemes in war
strategy and politics. His fellow citizens repeatedly voted
him into high command, yet they mistrusted him for his
private debaucheries and for his ambition, which seemed
aimed at seizing absolute power of Athens. After his
political enemies organized the people against him (415
B.C.E.), Alcibiades spent three years as a refugee turncoat,
working for the Spartans (414–412 B.C.E.). Pardoned by
Athens in its hour of need, he led the Athenians through
a string of victories on land and sea (411–407 B.C.E.) that
could have saved the city from defeat. But the Athenians
turned against him once more, and he died in exile, mur-
dered at Spartan request, soon after Athens surrendered.
As a flawed genius of tragic dimensions, Alcibiades is
vividly portrayed in extant Greek literature. His Athenian
contemporaries, the historians THUCYDIDES
(1) and
XENOPHON, describe him in their accounts of the Pelo-
ponnesian War. A biography of Alcibiades comprises one
of PLUTARCH’s Parallel Lives, written around 100–110 C.E.
A fictionalized Alcibiades appears in dialogues written by
the philosopher PLATO in around 380 B.C.E.
Alcibiades was born into a rich and powerful Athe-
nian family during the Athenian heyday. His mother,
Deinomache, belonged to the aristocratic Alcmaeonid
clan. After his father, Kleinias, was killed in battle against
the Boeotians (447 B.C.E.), Alcibiades was raised as a
ward of Deinomache’s kinsman PERIKLES, the preeminent
Athenian statesman. Breeding and privilege produced a
youth who was confident, handsome, and spoiled, and he
became a rowdy and glamorous figure in the homosexual
milieu of upper-class Athens; Plutarch’s account is full of
gossip about men’s infatuated pursuit of the teenage
Alcibiades. Later he also showed a taste for WOMEN, espe-
cially for elegant courtesans. He married an Athenian
noblewoman, Hipparete, and they had two children, but
Alcibiades’ conduct remained notoriously licentious. We
are told that he commissioned a golden shield, embla-
zoned with a figure of the love god EROS armed with a
thunderbolt.
In his teens Alcibiades became a follower of the
Athenian philosopher SOCRATES, who habitually tried to
prompt innovative thought in young men bound for pub-
lic life. This is the background for the scene in Plato’s
Symposium where a drunken Alcibiades praises Socrates
to the assembled thinkers: According to Plato’s version,
the middle-age Socrates was in love with Alcibiades but
never flattered the younger man or had sexual relations
with him, despite Alcibiades’ seductive advances.
Alcibiades reached manhood at the start of the Pelo-
ponnesian War. At about age 18 he was wounded in the
18
Alcestis

Battle of POTIDAEA (432 B.C.E.) while serving as a HOPLITE
alongside Socrates. (Supposedly Socrates then stood
guard over him during the combat.) Alcibiades repaid the
favor years later at the Battle of Delion (424 B.C.E.). On
horseback, he found the foot soldier Socrates amid the
Athenian retreat and rode beside him to guard against the
pursuing enemy.
Although an aristocrat, Alcibiades rose in politics as
leader of the radical democrats, as his kinsman Perikles
had done. He was only about 30 years old when he was
first elected as one of Athens’s 10 generals. Meanwhile, he
pursued fame with scandalous extravagance, sponsoring
no fewer than seven CHARIOTS at the OLYMPIC GAMES of
416 B.C.E.—the most ever entered by an individual in an
Olympic contest. His chariots took first, second, and
fourth places, and inspired a short poem by EURIPIDES.
Many right-wing Athenians were alarmed by this flam-
boyance, so reminiscent of the grandiose TYRANTS of a
prior epoch.
Alcibiades’ political leadership was similarly reckless.
In 420 B.C.E. he helped to sabotage the recent Peace of
NIKIAS (which had been meant to end Spartan-Athenian
hostilities), by convincing the Athenians to ally themselves
with Sparta’s enemy, the city of ARGOS. The outcome was a
Spartan field victory over an army of Argives, Athenians,
and others at the Battle of MANTINEIA (418 B.C.E.).
In 415 B.C.E. Alcibiades led the Athenian ASSEMBLY
into voting for the most fateful undertaking of Athenian
history—the expedition against the Greek city of SYRA-
CUSE. (This huge invasion—by which Alcibiades hoped
eventually to conquer SICILY and CARTHAGE—would later
end in catastrophe.) Not trusting Alcibiades as sole com-
mander, the Athenians voted to split the expedition’s
leadership between him and two other generals, includ-
ing the cautious Nicias. But the force, with 134 warships,
had barely reached Sicily when Athenian envoys arrived,
summoning Alcibiades home to face criminal charges of
impiety.
One accusation (possibly true) claimed that on a
prior occasion Alcibiades and his friends had performed a
drunken parody of the holy ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES. A sec-
ond accusation concerned a strange incident that had
occurred just before the Sicilian expedition’s departure:
An unknown group had gone around overnight smashing
the herms (HERMAI, marble figures of the god HERMES
that stood outside houses throughout Athens), perhaps to
create a bad omen against the invasion. Alcibiades was
charged with this mutilation—although this charge was
certainly false.
Knowing that these accusations had been orchestrated
by his enemies to destroy him, Alcibiades accompanied the
Athenian envoys by ship from Sicily but escaped at a land-
fall in southern ITALY. Crossing on a merchant ship to the
PELOPONNESE, he sought refuge at Sparta, where his family
had ancestral ties. The Athenians condemned him to death
in absentia and confiscated his property.
In Alcibiades the Spartans found a most helpful
traitor. At his urging, they sent one of their generals to
Syracuse to organize that city’s defense; within two years
the Athenian invasion force was totally destroyed. Also
on Alcibiades’ advice, the Spartans occupied Dekeleia, a
site about 13 miles north of Athens, to serve as their per-
manent base in enemy territory (413 B.C.E.). By now
Athens had begun to lose the war.
In 412 B.C.E. Alcibiades went on a Spartan mission to
the eastern Aegean to foment revolt among Athens’s
DELIAN LEAGUE allies and to help bring PERSIA into the
war on Sparta’s side. Yet the Spartans soon condemned
Alcibiades to death—they mistrusted him, partly because
he was known to have seduced the wife of the Spartan
king Agis. With Sparta and Athens both against him,
Alcibiades fled to the Persian governor of western ASIA
MINOR. From there he began complex intrigues with
commanders at the Athenian naval base on the nearby
island of SAMOS in hopes of getting himself recalled to
Athenian service.
His chance came in June 411 B.C.E., after the govern-
ment at Athens fell to the oligarchic coup of the FOUR
HUNDRED, and the Athenian sailors and soldiers at Samos
defiantly proclaimed themselves to be the democratic
government-in-exile. Alcibiades was invited to Samos and
elected general. After the Four Hundred’s downfall
(September 411 B.C.E.), he was officially reinstated by the
restored DEMOCRACY at Athens, although he stayed on
active duty around Samos.
Then about 40 years old, Alcibiades began a more
admirable phase of his life. The theater of war shifted to
Asia Minor’s west coast and to the HELLESPONT seaway,
where Spartan fleets, financed by Persia, sought to
destroy Athens’s critical supply line of imported grain.
Alcibiades managed to keep the sea-lanes open. His for-
mer ambition and recklessness now shone through as
bold strategy and magnetic leadership. (For example, he
once told the crews of his undersupplied ships that they
would have to win every battle, otherwise there would be
no money to pay them.) His best victory came in 410
B.C.E. at CYZICUS, where he surprised a Spartan fleet of 60
ships, destroying or capturing every one. In 408 B.C.E. he
recaptured the strategic but rebellious ally city of BYZAN-
TIUM. In 407 B.C.E., at the height of his popularity, he
returned ceremoniously to Athens to receive special pow-
ers of command. Then he sailed back to war, destined
never to see home again.
In 406 B.C.E. a subordinate of Alcibiades was defeated
in a sea battle off Notion, near EPHESOS, on Asia Minor’s
west coast. The fickle Athenian populace blamed Alcibi-
ades and voted him out of office. Alarmed, he fled from his
fellow citizens a second time—only now he could not go
to Sparta. He eventually settled in a private fortress on the
European shore of the Hellespont. But, with Athens’s sur-
render to Sparta in 404 B.C.E., Alcibiades had to flee from
the vengeful Spartans, who now controlled all of Greece.
Alcibiades
19

He took refuge with Pharnabazus, the Persian gover-
nor of central Asia Minor. But too many people desired
Alcibiades’ death. The Spartan general LYSANDER and the
Athenian quisling KRITIAS feared that Alcibiades would
lead the defeated Athenians to new resistance. At Spartan
request, Pharnabazus sent men to kill him. Legend says
that Alcibiades was abed with a courtesan when he awoke
to find the house on fire. Wrapping a cloak around his
left arm as a shield, he dashed out naked, sword in hand,
but fell to arrows and javelins. The woman escaped and
later had him buried.
So died the foremost Athenian soldier of his day. The
historian Thucydides sums up the dual tragedy of Athens
and Alcibiades: “He had a quality beyond the normal,
which frightened people. . . . As a result his fellow citi-
zens entrusted their great affairs to men of lesser ability,
and so brought the city down.” The Athenians’ puzzle-
ment over him is suggested in ARISTOPHANES’ comedy
Frogs, staged in 405 B.C.E., the year before Alcibiades’
death. The play involves a poetry contest in the Under-
world; the final question to the contestants is: “What do
you think of Alcibiades?”
See also ALCMAEONIDS; HOMOSEXUALITY; PROSTITUTES.
Further reading: Walter M. Ellis, Alcibiades (New
York: Routledge, 1989); Steven Forde, The Ambition to
Rule: Alcibiades and the Politics of Imperialism in Thucy-
dides (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1989); W. M.
Ellis, Alcibiades (London: Routledge, 1989); E. F. Bloe-
dow, “‘Not the Son of Achilles, but Achilles himself’:
Alcibiades’ Entry on the Political Stage at Athens.” Histo-
ria 39 (1990): 1–19; ———, “On ‘nurturing lions in the
state’: Alcibiades’ Entry on the Political Stage at Athens,”
Klio 73 (1991): 49–65; ———, “Alcibiades: Brilliant or
Intelligent?” Historia 91 (1992): 139–157; Plato, Alcibi-
ades, edited by Nicholas Denyer (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2001).
Alcmaeon (1)
In MYTH, Alcmaeon was a hero of the
city of ARGOS. After his father, Amphiaraus, was killed in
the exploit of the SEVEN AGAINST THEBES, Alcmaeon led
the expedition of the Epigoni (Descendants) and cap-
tured THEBES. Then, in accordance with a prior vow to
Amphiaraus, Alcmaeon murdered his own mother, Eri-
phyle, for her treacherous role in convincing Amphiaraus
to join the doomed expedition. The dying Eriphyle
cursed her son, wishing that no land on earth might wel-
come him.
Tormented by the FURIES for his crime, Alcmaeon
fled from home. On advice he journeyed to ACARNANIA,
where a recent strip of alluvial shore from the River Ache-
loos supplied a “new” land, unaffected by Eriphyle’s
curse. There Alcmaeon received absolution.
The story is similar to the myth of ORESTES, who was
also compelled by duty to kill his mother. The horror and
legalistic dilemma of this situation appealed to the classi-
cal Greek mind. Alcmaeon was the subject of at least two
tragedies by the Athenian playwright EURIPIDES (late 400s
B.C.E.).
Further reading: J. P. Small, “The Matricide of
Alcmaeon,” Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archäologischen
Instituts. Römische Abteilung 83 (1976): 113–144.
Alcmaeon (2)
See CROTON.
Alcmaeonids
The 
Alkmaionidai 
(descendants 
of
Alcmaeon) were a noble Athenian clan, active in politics
in the 600s–400s B.C.E. The family claimed descent from
a certain Alcmaeon (not the same as the Argive hero
ALCMAEON or the physician Alcmaeon of CROTON).
Although the Alcmaeonids were aristocrats, a few of them
played major roles in the Athenian DEMOCRACY of the late
500s–mid-400s B.C.E. These included KLEISTHENES (1)
and (by maternal blood) PERIKLES and ALCIBIADES.
As a group, the Alcmaeonids were not greatly trusted
by other Athenians. They were suspected of plotting to
seize supreme power, and they were considered to be liv-
ing under a hereditary curse from the days when an
Alcmaeonid commander had impiously slaughtered the
conspirators of KYLON (632 B.C.E.).
The Alcmaeonids were thought to be responsible for
the treasonous heliographic signal—the showing of the
shield—that accompanied the Battle of MARATHON (490
B.C.E.). In the rash of OSTRACISMS of the 480s B.C.E.—
aimed against suspected friends of the fallen tyrant HIP-
PIAS—two Alcmaeonid figures were expelled: Kleisthenes’
nephew Megakles and XANTHIPPUS, who had married into
the clan and was Perikles’ father.
Perikles gained the people’s trust by disassociating
himself from the family; he avoided Alcmaeonid com-
pany and aristocratic gatherings in general. In 431 B.C.E.,
on the eve of the PELOPONNESIAN WAR, the hostile Spar-
tans demanded that the Athenian people “drive out the
curse,” that is, by expelling Perikles. But the demand was
ignored.
See also ARISTOCRACY; HARMODIUS AND ARISTOGEITON;
TYRANTS.
Further reading: D. Gillis, “Marathon and the
Alcmaeonids,” Greek, Roman, and Byzantine Studies 10
(1968): 133–145; T. E. Surikov, “Perikles and the
Alcmaeonidae,” Vestnik drevnej istorii (1997): 14–35.
Alcman (654–611 B.C.E.) Famous poet of SPARTA
A plausible later tradition says Alcman was an Ionian
Greek who had immigrated from ASIA MINOR; he was
notorious for his supposed gluttony. Only a few frag-
ments of his work have come down to us, but they
include the earliest surviving example of a choral ode—a
type of poem sung by a chorus of girls or men, to musical
accompaniment, at a religious festival or other event.
Choral poetry was in those years a distinctly Spartan art
20
Alcmaeon

form, and the Doric Greek dialect of Sparta was the lan-
guage of the genre.
Alcman’s 101-line fragment presents the final two
thirds of a partheneion, a “maiden song.” The fragment
begins by recounting one of the adventures of the hero
HERAKLES, then abruptly switches topic and starts praising
by name the individual teenage girls who are singing the
words. Certain passages seem intended for delivery by half
choruses in playful rivalry. The poem obviously was com-
posed for a specific occasion, perhaps a rite of female ado-
lescence connected with the Spartan goddess ARTEMIS
Orthia. Alcman’s technique of layering mythology and
personal references seems to anticipate the work of the
greatest Greek choral poet, PINDAR (born 508 B.C.E.).
Intriguing for a modern reader are the emotionally
charged statements that Alcman wrote for public recita-
tion by these aristocratic girls. (“It is Hagesichora who
torments me,” the chorus says, referring to the beauty of
a girl who may have been the chorus leader.) The
nuances are sexual, and presumably the verses commem-
orate genuine emotions within this exclusive girls’ group.
In the surviving fragments of another partheneion,
Alcman seems to be addressing the same topic. The situa-
tion resembles the female-homosexual style of life later
described by the poet SAPPHO (ca. 600 B.C.E.).
In other extant verse, Alcman celebrates simple
aspects of the natural world: birds, flowers, food. His
buoyant, sophisticated poetry reflect a golden phase of
Spartan history—the period of the city’s triumph in the
hard-fought Second Messenian War, before Sparta had
completely become a militaristic society.
See also GREEK LANGUAGE; HOMOSEXUALITY; IONIAN
GREEKS; LYRIC POETRY; MESSENIA.
Further reading: M. L. West, “Alcman and the Spar-
tan Royalty,” Zeitschrift für Papyrologie und Epigraphik 91
(1992): 1–15; Charles Segal, Aglaia: The Poetry of Alcman,
Sappho, Pindar, Bacchylides, and Corinna (Lanham, Md.:
Rowman & Littlefield, 1998); Claude Calame, The Poetics
of Eros in Ancient Greece (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 1999); G. O. Hutchinson, Greek Lyric
Poetry: A Commentary on Selected Larger Pieces (New
York: Oxford University Press, 2001).
Alexander the Great (356–323 B.C.E.) Macedonian king
and conqueror
Alexander was the finest battlefield commander of the
ancient world, and when he died of fever just before his
33rd birthday he had carved out the largest empire the
world had ever seen, stretching 3,000 miles from the
Adriatic Sea to the Indus River.
His principal achievement was the conquest of the
empire of PERSIA, an event that remade the map of the
ancient world. For 200 years previously, the Persian king-
dom had been a menacing behemoth on the Greeks’ east-
ern frontier. With Alexander’s conquests, Persia ceased to
exist as a sovereign power. The Persians’ former terri-
tory—including their subjugated regions such as EGYPT
and Mesopotamia—became Alexander’s domain, gar-
risoned by Macedonian and Greek troops.
Alexander’s sprawling realm quickly fell apart after his
death, and there arose instead several Greco-Macedonian
kingdoms of the East, including Ptolemaic Egypt, the
SELEUCID EMPIRE, and Greek BACTRIA. These rich and pow-
erful kingdoms carried Greek culture halfway across Asia
and overshadowed old mainland Greece, with its patch-
work of relatively humble city-states. Historians refer to
this enlarged Greek society as the Hellenistic world.
At the start of his reign, the 20-year-old Alexander
was the crowned king only of MACEDON—a crude Greek
nation northeast of mainland Greece—and some of the
credit for his triumphs must go to his father, King PHILIP
II. When the tough, hard-drinking Philip fell to an assas-
sin’s knife in 336 B.C.E., he himself was preparing to
invade Persian territory. Philip had devoted his reign to
building a new Macedonian army, invincible in its CAV-
ALRY and its heavy-infantry formation known as the PHA-
LANX. He bequeathed to Alexander troops, home-base
organization, and propaganda program needed for the
Persian campaign.
Alexander conquered to rule, not to plunder.
Whereas most Greeks despised non-Greeks as barbarians
Alexander the Great
21
Alexander the god. A generation after his death, Alexander is
shown with the ram’s horns of the Greek-Egyptian deity Zeus-
Ammon on this silver four-drachma coin, minted around 285
B.C.E. in the north Aegean region of Thrace. (The J. Paul Getty
Museum, Gift of Lily Tomlin)

(barbaroi,
meaning “those who speak gibberish”),
Alexander planned to introduce the Persian ruling classes
into his army and government. This plan is sometimes
referred to as Alexander’s fusion policy.
Still, the man had serious flaws. He neglected his
kingdom’s future by exhausting himself in warfare while
he delayed in fathering a royal successor. He was capable
of dire cruelty when opposed. His heavy drinking led to
disastrous incidents and hastened his death. His lack of
long-range planning is shown by his conquest of the far-
off Indus valley (327–325 B.C.E.)—how could he have
hoped to manage such an immense domain? It has been
said that Alexander died just in time, before he could see
his empire collapse.
Knowledge of Alexander comes mainly from the sur-
viving works of four ancient authors who lived centuries
after him: Arrian, PLUTARCH, DIODORUS SICULUS, and the
first-century C.E. Roman writer Curtius Rufus. Arrian, the
most reliable of the four, was an ethnic Greek Roman citi-
zen who served in the Roman government in the
120s–130s and devoted his retirement to writing. His
thorough account of Alexander’s campaigns, written in
Greek, is believed to derive from the now-vanished cam-
paign memoirs of Alexander’s friend and general
PTOLEMY (1). Plutarch’s biography of Alexander, written
around 110 C.E. is one of his Parallel Lives (short biogra-
phies comparing noble Greeks with noble Romans); here,
Alexander’s life story is paired with that of Julius Caesar.
Alexander (Alexandros, “defender”) was King
Philip’s eldest legitimate child. His mother, Olympias,
came from the ruling clan of the northwestern Greek
region called EPIRUS.
The tempestuous Olympias
remained for 20 years the foremost of the polygamous
Philip’s wives. But the royal MARRIAGE was unhappy, and
mother and son sided together against Philip.
As a mystical follower of the god DIONYSUS,
Olympias was said to sleep with a giant snake in her bed
as a pet and spiritual familiar. Apparently she convinced
the young Alexander that in conceiving him she had been
impregnated not by Philip but by ZEUS, king of the gods.
This divine parentage would have put Alexander on a par
with the noblest heroes of MYTH.
Such childhood influences gave Alexander a belief in
his preordained greatness, a need to surpass his father
and all other men, and an imperviousness to danger,
pain, and fatigue. Ancient writers describe Alexander’s
yearning for adventure and exploration. He modeled his
behavior on two legendary heroes—the world-civilizing
HERAKLES and the great soldier ACHILLES.
Alexander was fair-skinned, fair-haired, and not tall.
Although a dedicated soldier, he disliked all SPORT except
hunting. He was sexually abstemious, once remarking
that sleep and sexual intercourse both made him sad
since they reminded him that he was mortal. When he
did pursue love, he tended in his youth to prefer males.
His lifelong intimate friend was Hephaistion, a Macedo-
nian noble. Later in life, Alexander had sexual relations
with WOMEN; when he died he left behind two wives, one
of whom was pregnant with his son. Alexander’s bisexual
development was in keeping with Greek upper-class cus-
tom.
Legend claims that at about age nine Alexander
tamed the stallion Bucephalus (Boukephalus, “ox head”),
after its trainer failed to do so. Bucephalus became
Alexander’s war-horse, carrying him into each of his
major battles over the next 20 years.
To tutor the teenage Alexander, King Philip brought
the Greek philosopher ARISTOTLE to Macedon. From
about 343 to 340 B.C.E. Aristotle taught Alexander politi-
cal science and literature, among other subjects. For the
rest of his life, Alexander is said to have kept with him
Aristotle’s edited version of HOMER’s Iliad. Also, in future
years King Alexander supposedly sent specimens of unfa-
miliar plants and animals from Asia to his old tutor, to
assist Aristotle’s biological studies at the LYCEUM.
At age 16 Alexander held his first battlefield com-
mand, defeating a Thracian tribe on Macedon’s northern
frontier. Two years later, in 338 B.C.E., he commanded the
Macedonian cavalry at the Battle of CHAERONEA, in which
King Philip won control over all of Greece. (In all his bat-
tles, even as king, Alexander remained a cavalry com-
mander, personally leading the charge of his 2,000 elite
mounted assault troops known as the Companions.)
With Greece subjugated, King Philip next planned to
“liberate” the Persian-ruled Greek cities of ASIA MINOR—
and to seize the fabled wealth of Persian treasuries. For
propaganda purposes, Philip arranged the creation of a
federation called the Corinthian League, representing all
the major mainland Greek states, except resistant SPARTA.
League delegates dutifully elected Philip as war leader.
But before Philip could invade Persian territory, he was
assassinated in Macedon (summer 336 B.C.E.).
The killer, an aggrieved Macedonian nobleman, was
slain as he tried to escape. The official verdict claimed
that he had been bribed by the Persian king, Darius III.
Yet suspicion also lights on Alexander and his mother,
who had both recently fallen from royal favor. After
Philip’s death, Alexander was immediately saluted as the
new Macedonian king.
The invasion was delayed for two more years. First
Alexander was elected as the Corinthian League’s new
war captain, empowered to raise troops from mainland
Greece and to make war against Persia, in revenge for the
Persian king XERXES’ invasion of Greece over 140 years
before. But despite this pretence of alliance, the Greek
city of THEBES revolted (335 B.C.E.). Alexander—who
feared a Greek rebellion as the worst threat to his plans—
angrily captured the city and destroyed it. Six thousand
Thebans were killed; 30,000, mostly women and chil-
dren, were sold as SLAVES.
Leaving behind a regent, ANTIPATER, to guard Greece
and Macedon and organize reinforcements, Alexander
22
Alexander the Great

invaded Persian territory in the spring of 334 B.C.E. He
sailed across the HELLESPONT to northwestern Asia Minor
with a small Macedonian-Greek force—about 32,000
infantry, 5,100 cavalry, and a siege train. His second-in-
command was the 60-year-old Parmenion, who had been
Philip’s favorite general.
The events of the next 11 years, culminating in
Alexander’s conquest of Persia and the Indus Valley, can
only be summarized here. Alexander’s first battle victory
came within a few days, at the River Granicus, where he
defeated a smaller Persian army commanded by local
Persian governors. The central action was a cavalry bat-
tle on the riverbank, after Alexander had led a charge
across the river.
The Granicus victory opened Asia Minor to Alexan-
der. There he spent the next year and a half, moving
methodically south and east. Local Persian troops fell
back to a few strongholds. The fortress of Sardis surren-
dered without a fight. The Persian garrisons at MILETUS
and HALICARNASSUS resisted but succumbed to siege.
As local Greek cities opened their gates to Alexander,
he set up democratic governments and abolished Persian
taxes. But in Asia Minor’s non-Greek territories, he
merely replaced Persian overlordship with a similar sys-
tem of obligation toward himself. Most non-Greek cities
continued to pay tribute, now to Alexander. His gover-
nors were chosen either from his staff or from coopera-
tive local gentry.
By the spring of 333 B.C.E. he had reached the
province of Phrygia, in central Asia Minor. At the Phry-
gian capital of Gordion stood an ancient wagon suppos-
edly driven by the mythical king MIDAS. The wagon’s
yoke carried a thong tied in an intricate knot, and legend
claimed that whoever could untie the Gordian Knot was
destined to rule Asia. According to the most familiar ver-
sion, Alexander sliced the knot apart with his sword.
In November 333 B.C.E. Alexander defeated a second
Persian army, this one commanded by King Darius him-
self. The battle took place in a seaside valley on the Gulf
of Issus—the geographic “corner” where Asia Minor joins
the Levantine coast—about 15 miles north of the modern
Turkish seaport of Iskenderun. The mountainous terrain
presents a string of narrow passes; it was a natural place
for the Persians to try to bottle up Alexander.
At the Battle of Issus, Alexander had about 40,000
troops; Darius had about 70,000. Although half of Dar-
ius’s army was inferior light infancy, they could have
won the battle had not Darius fled in his chariot when
Alexander and his Companion Cavalry charged into the
Persian left wing. Darius’s retreat caused most of his
army to follow.
Darius had lost more than a battle. The captured Per-
sian camp at Issus contained the king’s wife (who was
also his sister) and other family, who now became
Alexander’s hostages. Ancient writers emphasize that
Alexander not only refrained from raping Darius’s beauti-
ful wife, as was his due, but he also became friends with
Darius’s captive mother!
Oddly, rather than pursue the beaten Darius, Alexan-
der chose to let him go. (Upon reaching Mesopotamia,
Darius began raising another army.) Alexander turned
south to the Levant, to capture the Persians’ remaining
Mediterranean seaboard. Most of PHOENICIA submitted.
But the defiant island city of Tyre provoked an immense
siege, which lasted eight months (332 B.C.E.). The siege’s
turning point came when the Greeks of CYPRUS rebelled
from Persian rule and declared for Alexander, sending
him 120 badly needed warships. Lashing these ships into
pairs as needed, Alexander equipped some with catapults
and others with siege ladders. When the ships’ catapults
had battered down a section of Tyre’s wall, he led his
shipborne troops inside. With exemplary cruelty, Alexan-
der sold most of the 30,000 inhabitants into slavery.
Envoys from Darius offered peace: Darius would give
his daughter in marriage to Alexander and cede all terri-
tory west of the Euphrates River. When the Macedonian
general Parmenion commented that he would accept
such terms if he were Alexander, the young king replied,
“So would I, too, if I were Parmenion.” Alexander dis-
missed the envoys.
In Egypt in the fall of 332 B.C.E., he received the Per-
sian governor’s surrender and was enthroned by the
Egyptians as their new pharaoh (as Persian kings had
customarily been). In the spring of 331 B.C.E. west of the
Nile’s mouth, he founded a city destined to be one of the
greatest of the ancient world, ALEXANDRIA (1).
The final campaign against Darius came in the fall of
331 B.C.E. Alexander marched northeast from Egypt. King
Darius, with a huge army levied from all remaining parts
of the empire, awaited him east of the northern Tigris,
near Gaugamela village, not far from the city of Arbela
(modern Erbil, in Iraq).
The Battle of Gaugamela, also called the Battle of
Arbela, was a huge, clumsy affair that has defied modern
analysis. Alexander was greatly outnumbered. Against his
7,000 cavalry and 40,000 foot, the Persians had perhaps
33,000 cavalry and 90,000 foot. The Persians remained
weak in the quality of their infantry, most of whom were
Asiatic light-armed troops. But Darius intended a cavalry
battle.
Darius launched a massive cavalry attack against
both wings of Alexander’s army. Somehow the cavalry’s
departure left Darius’s own center-front infantry open to
attack; Alexander led his Companion Cavalry charging
across the open ground between the two armies’ center
fronts and struck the Persian infantry there. The melee
brought the Macedonians close to Darius—who turned
and fled in his chariot, just as at Issus. Soon all Persian
troops were in retreat, despite having inflicted heavy
losses on Alexander’s men.
With his kinsman Bessus, Darius fled into the moun-
tains toward Ecbatana (modern Hamadan, in Iran). For
Alexander the Great
23

the second time, Alexander turned away from a defeated
Darius and marched south, into Mesopotamia.
Alexander now declared himself king of Asia. At
Babylon he received the submission of the Persian gover-
nor and appointed him as his governor there. This move
is the first sign of Alexander’s fusion policy. Soon he
would reappoint other such governors and organize well-
born Persian boys into units of cadets, to train for a
Macedonian-Greek-Persian army.
From Babylon, Alexander headed southeast, over-
coming some fierce resistance, into the Persian heartland.
The royal cities of Susa and Persepolis surrendered, open-
ing to him the fantastic wealth of the Persian kings. In
April 330 B.C.E. at Persepolis, Alexander burned down
the palace complex designed by King Xerxes. (Its impres-
sive ruins are visible today.) According to one story,
Alexander—usually so respectful of Persian royalty—set
the fire during a drunken revel.
Alexander’s claim to the Persian throne was con-
firmed by Darius’s death (July 330 B.C.E.). Stabbed by
Bessus’s men in the countryside near what is now Tehran,
Darius died just as Alexander’s pursuing cavalry arrived.
Alexander is said to have wrapped his cloak around the
corpse. Bessus fled farther east and declared himself king,
but Alexander had him hunted down and executed.
Still Alexander did not rest. The years 330–327 B.C.E.
saw him campaigning in Bactria (northern Afghanistan)
and Sogdiana (Uzbekistan and Tajikistan), where rugged
mountain dwellers and horsemen had lived semi-inde-
pendent of any Persian king. Subduing these people,
Alexander took one of them as his bride—Roxane, the
beautiful daughter of a Sogdian baron. No doubt the mar-
riage helped to pacify the defiant region. But it is puz-
zling that the 29-year-old conqueror did not choose a
marriage of wider political advantage.
By then he had won the entire domain over which
his adversary Darius had ruled. Alexander’s northeast
frontier became dotted with garrison towns named
ALEXANDRIA (2). But these years brought worsening rela-
tions between Alexander and certain Macedonian nobles
who resented his solicitude toward the defeated Persians
and his adoption of Persian customs. Between 330 and
327 B.C.E. several of Alexander’s associates were executed
for suspected treason. These included the 70-year-old
Parmenion and the army’s official historian, Kallisthenes,
who was Aristotle’s nephew. History does not record Aris-
totle’s reaction.
In the summer of 327 B.C.E., Alexander led his army
across the Hindu Kush Mountains and down into the
plain of the Indus River (called India by the Greeks but
today contained inside Pakistan). This region had at one
time been part of the Persian Empire. Alexander’s con-
quest required three arduous years, during which he
encountered a fearsome new war machine—the Indian
elephant, employed as “tank corps” by local rulers.
A battle fought in monsoon rains at the River
Hydaspes (an Indus tributary, now called the Jhelum) was
Alexander’s military masterpiece. There he defeated his
most capable adversary, the local king Porus. The cap-
tured Porus was confirmed as Alexander’s governor of the
region (May 326 B.C.E.).
In the fall of 326 B.C.E., at the Beas River, Alexander’s
men mutinied, refusing to continue east to the Ganges
River. Angrily and reluctantly, Alexander turned west and
south. The army had reached its easternmost point and
was now on a roundabout route home.
At the resistant fortress of the Malloi (perhaps mod-
ern Multan, in Pakistan), Alexander’s siege ladder col-
lapsed behind him as he went over the enemy wall.
Trapped inside, he was hit in the lung by an arrow.
Although rescued, he nearly died. The damaged lung
surely hastened his death, now less than two years away.
After a disastrous march west through the southern
Iranian desert (325 B.C.E.), Alexander returned to the
Persian royal cities. At Susa in 324 B.C.E. he held his
famous marriage of East and West. Although he already
had a wife, he now also married Darius’ daughter Barsine,
and 90 other Macedonian and Greek officers married
high-born Persian women.
That year Alexander sent messages to the mainland
Greeks requesting that they honor him as a living god.
This request was granted but was met with derision at
ATHENS and elsewhere—the Greeks of that era did not
generally deify living people. If Alexander had a political
purpose in this, it failed. By now he may have been losing
his grip on reality.
At Ecbatana in the late summer of 324 B.C.E., Alexan-
der’s close friend Hephaistion died from fever and drink-
ing. Alexander, frantic with grief, ordered a stupendously
extravagant monument and funeral. He himself was
drinking heavily. Reportedly, in these last days, the brood-
ing Alexander would go to dinner dressed in the cos-
tumes of certain gods, such as HERMES or ARTEMIS.
Planning a naval expedition to Arabia, Alexander
traveled in the spring of 323 B.C.E. to Babylon (which is
humid and unhealthy in the warmer months). After sev-
eral nights of drinking, he fell ill. He died 10 days later,
on June 10, 323 B.C.E., in the palace of Nebuchadnezzar.
The story that he was poisoned by Antipater’s sons KAS-
SANDER and Iolas—to preserve their father’s power—is
probably false. Legend claims that the dying Alexander,
when asked to name his successor, replied, “The
strongest.”
Of his two widowed wives, Barsine was murdered by
order of the pregnant Roxane, who gave birth to Alexan-
der’s only legitimate son, also named Alexander. Kas-
sander, as ruler of Macedon, later murdered Roxane, her
son, and Olympias. The empire broke into warring con-
tingents under Alexander’s various officers, known as the
DIADOCHI, or Successors.
24
Alexander the Great

See also ANTIGONUS (1); HELLENISTIC AGE; HOMOSEX-
UALITY; RELIGION; WARFARE, LAND; WARFARE, NAVAL; WAR-
FARE, SIEGE.
Further reading: Peter Green, Alexander of Macedon
356–323 B.C.: A Historical Biography (Berkeley: Univer-
sity of California Press, 1992); A. B. Bosworth, Conquest
and Empire: The Reign of Alexander the Great (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1993); Robin Lane Fox,
Alexander the Great (New York: Penguin Books, 1994).
Alexandria (1)
This city in EGYPT was a major
Mediterranean port both in ancient times and still today.
Alexandria was founded in 331 B.C.E. by ALEXANDER THE
GREAT, who established many Eastern cities. Located 20
miles west of the Nile’s westernmost mouth, Alexandria
was immune to the silt deposits that persistently choked
harbors along the river. Alexandria became the capital of
the hellenized Egypt of King PTOLEMY (1) I (reigned
323–283 B.C.E.). Under the wealthy Ptolemy dynasty, the
city soon surpassed ATHENS as the cultural center of the
Greek world.
Laid out on a grid pattern, Alexandria occupied a
stretch of land between the sea to the north and Lake
Mareotis to the south; a man-made causeway, over three-
quarters of a mile long, extended north to the sheltering
island of Pharos, thus forming a double harbor, east and
west. On the east was the main harbor, called the Great
Harbor; it faced the city’s chief buildings, including the
royal palace and the famous Library and Museum. At the
Great Harbor’s mouth, on an outcropping of Pharos,
stood the lighthouse, built ca. 280 B.C.E. Destroyed in an
earthquake in the early 1300s C.E., the lighthouse was
reckoned as one of the SEVEN WONDERS OF THE WORLD
for its unsurpassed height (perhaps 460 feet); it was a
square, fenestrated tower, topped with a metal fire basket
and a statue of ZEUS the Savior.
The library, at that time the largest in the world, con-
tained several hundred thousand volumes and housed
and employed scholars and poets. A similar scholarly
complex was the Museum (Mouseion, “hall of the
MUSES”). During Alexandria’s brief literary golden period,
around 280–240 B.C.E., the library subsidized three
poets—KALLIMACHUS, APOLLONIUS, and THEOKRITUS—
whose work now represents the best of Hellenistic litera-
ture. Among other thinkers associated with the library or
other Alexandrian patronage were the mathematician
Euclid (ca. 300 B.C.E.), the inventor Ktesibius (ca. 270
B.C.E.), and the polymath Eratosthenes (ca. 225 B.C.E.).
Cosmopolitan and flourishing, Alexandria possessed
a varied population of Greeks and Orientals, including a
sizable minority of JEWS, who had their own city quarter.
Periodic conflicts occurred between Jews and ethnic
Greeks.
The city enjoyed a calm political history under the
Ptolemies. It passed, with the rest of Egypt, into Roman
hands in 30 B.C.E., and became the second city of the
Roman Empire.
Recently, archaeologists have been conducting under-
water excavations in the harbor of Alexandria, discover-
ing a rich array of monuments and artifacts from the
Greek and Roman history of the city. These include the
remains of over a dozen ships, dated from the fourth cen-
tury B.C.E. to the seventh-century C.E., which are provid-
ing invaluable information about the trade networks
between Alexandria and the rest of the ancient Mediter-
ranean. Numerous fragments of buildings and statues
have also been discovered, including several colossal
blocks that appear to come from the Pharos lighthouse.
See also ASTRONOMY; HELLENISTIC AGE; MATHEMATICS;
SCIENCE.
Further reading: William La Riche, Alexandria: The
Sunken City (London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1996);
Alexandria and Alexandrianism: Papers Delivered at a Sym-
posium Organized by the J. Paul Getty Museum and the
Getty Center for the History of Art and the Humanities and
Held at the Museum, April 22–25, 1993 (Malibu, Calif.: J.
Paul Getty Museum, 1996); Jean-Yves Empereur, Alexan-
dria Rediscovered (New York: George Braziller, 1998);
Theodore Vrettos, Alexandria: City of the Western Mind
(New York: Free Press, 2001); M. S. Venit, The Monumen-
tal Tombs of Ancient Alexandria: The Theater of the Dead
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002).
Alexandria (2)
Several cities founded by ALEXANDER
THE GREAT on his conquests eastward (334–323 B.C.E.)
were named Alexandria. Among these were:
1. Modern-day Iskenderun (previously known as Alex-
andretta), in southeastern Turkey. Founded after
Alexander’s nearby victory at Issus (333 B.C.E.), the
city guarded the mountain passes linking ASIA MINOR
with the Levantine coast.
2. Modern-day Herat, in northwest Afghanistan.
3. A city at or near modern-day Kandahar, in southeast
Afghanistan.
The grandiose Greek city recently excavated at the
site called Aï Khanoum, in northern Afghanistan, may
have been the Alexandria-in-Sogdiana mentioned by
ancient writers.
See also COLONIZATION.
Al Mina
This modern name refers to an ancient seaport
at the mouth of the Orontes River, on the Levantine coast
in what is now southern Turkey. In around 800 B.C.E. the
town was settled as an overseas Greek trading depot—the
earliest such post-Mycenaean venture that we know of—
and it seems to have been the major site for Greek TRADE
with the East for several centuries. Al Mina was surely the
main source for Eastern goods that reached Greece and
the islands during the “Orientalizing” period, roughly
Al Mina
25

750–625 B.C.E. This seaport was discovered purely by
ARCHAEOLOGY in 1936 C.E. Some scholars believe that it
may be the ancient site of Poseideion.
There is evidence of Bronze Age occupation in the
area, but the main period of activity at Al Mina begins in
the ninth century B.C.E., when the first Greeks must have
arrived with permission of the Armenian-based kingdom
of Urartu, which then controlled the region. The trading
post was run by Greeks, Cypriots, and local Phoenicians,
as shown by the types of pottery found at the site. Being a
place where East and West mingled, Al Mina is the most
probable site for the transmission of the Phoenician
ALPHABET to the Greeks (ca. 775 B.C.E.).
Greek occupation of Al Mina continued until the
fourth century B.C.E. (with a brief recession under Baby-
lonian supremacy in the sixth century). Around 300
B.C.E., the site was displaced by nearby ANTIOCH and its
seaport, Seleuceia.
See also CHALCIS; ERETRIA; PHOENICIA.
Further reading: A. Graham, “The Historical Inter-
pretation of Al Mina,” Dialogues d’Histoire Ancienne 12
(1986): 51–65; John Boardman, “Al Mina and History,”
Oxford Journal of Archaeology 9 (1990): 169–190; Joanna
Luke, Ports of Trade, Al Mina, and Geometric Greek Pottery
in the Levant (Oxford: Archaeopress, 2003).
alphabet
The Greek alphabet, containing 24 to 26 let-
ters (depending on locale and era), was adapted from the
22-letter alphabet of the ancient Phoenicians, sometime
between 800 and 750 B.C.E. Prior to this time, Greek soci-
eties had used syllabic, pictographic scripts, where one
character corresponded to a single syllable: e.g., in mod-
ern English, one symbol for “pen,” two for “pencil.”
(Although simple in concept, a syllabic system requires
several dozens or even hundreds of symbols to accommo-
date the various sounds in a language.) Once the alpha-
bet came into use, the number of symbols was reduced
because each symbol was assigned a precise sound, not
an entire syllable. These alphabetic symbols (letters) can
be used flexibly in innumerable combinations to fit dif-
ferent spoken languages.
It appears that the Greeks first encountered the
alphabet through their commerce and trade activities,
probably observing the record keeping of the Phoenician
merchants. One place where such exchanges may have
occurred was the north Levantine harbor of AL MINA,
where Greeks and Phoenicians interacted from about 800
B.C.E. on. Other trading centers on CYPRUS, CRETE, or
mainland Greece could also have supplied points of con-
tact. One of the earliest forms of the Greek alphabet was
written by the Greeks of CHALCIS (who were also promi-
nent at Al Mina); by 700 B.C.E., many regional versions of
the Greek alphabet had emerged. The Ionic version, as
later adopted and modified at ATHENS, is the ancient form
most familiar today.
The Greeks imitated the general shapes, names, and
sequence of the Phoenician letters. Phoenician 
(aleph,
“an ox”) became Greek 
and was renamed alpha.
Phoenician 
(bayt, “a house”) became Greek  beta, β,
and so on. All the Phoenician letters represented conso-
nantal sounds, and most of these were retained by the
Greeks—Greek β imitates the “b” sound of Phoenician
, for instance. Since the Phoenician alphabet did not
include any vowels, the Greeks changed the meaning of
seven of the letters in order to supply them. Thus Greek
represented the vowel sound “a,” replacing the aleph’s
glottal stop.
The Phoenician alphabet is loosely preserved in the
modern Arabic and Hebrew alphabets. The ancient Greek
letters live on in modern Greek, although several of them
have acquired new pronunciations. The Greek alphabet
was also adapted by the ETRUSCANS and the Romans to
produce a Roman alphabet (ca. 600 B.C.E.) that is the
direct ancestor of our modern Roman alphabet, among
others.
See also PHOENICIA; ROME; WRITING.
Further reading: L. H. Jeffery, The Local Scripts of
Archaic Greece: A Study of the Origin of the Greek Alpha-
bet and Its Development from the Eighth to the Fifth Cen-
turies B.C., 2d ed. (New York: Oxford University Press,
1961); John Healey, The Early Alphabet (Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press, 1990); Henry R. Immerwahr,
Attic Script: A Survey (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1990); Martin Bernal, Cadmean Letters: The Trans-
mission of the Alphabet to the Aegean and Further West
before 1400 B.C. (Winona Lake, Ind.: Eisenbrauns,
1990); Roger Woodard, Greek Writing from Knossos to
Homer: A Linguistic Interpretation of the Origin of the
Greek Alphabet and the Continuity of Ancient Greek Liter-
acy (New York: Oxford University Press, 1997); Marc-
Alain Oauknin, The Mysteries of the Alphabet, translated
by Josephine Bacon (New York: Abbeville Press, 1999);
Andrew Robinson, The Story of Writing (New York:
Thames and Hudson, 1999); John Man, Alpha Beta: How
26 Letters Shaped the Western World (New York: Wiley,
2000).
Amazons
In Greek MYTH, a tribe of female, horse-rid-
ing warriors was imagined as dwelling in northeast ASIA
MINOR, or along the east coast of the BLACK SEA, or at
other locales on the northeast fringe of the known world.
Beneath layers of poetic elaboration, the Amazon myth
may recall Hittite armed priestesses in Asia Minor in the
second millennium B.C.E. An alternative source for the
legends has been suggested by recent archaeological finds
on the Ukrainian steppes, where 21 Scythian burial
mounds have been excavated. In five of these tombs were
found the bodies of young women buried along with
their weapons: usually a quiver, bow, arrows, and two
throwing spears.
26
alphabet

Whatever its origin, the Amazon story exerted a
strong influence on the Greek imagination. Amazon
society was thought of as savage and exclusively female.
To breed, the Amazons periodically mated with foreign
males, and they discarded or crippled any resulting male
babies. The Amazons wore clothes of animal skin and
hunted with bow and arrow; to facilitate use of the
bow, they would sear off their young girls’ right
breasts—hence their name, “breastless” (Greek: amazoi).
Appropriately, the Amazons worshipped ARTEMIS,
virgin goddess of the hunt, and ARES, the war god. In
Greek art, Amazons usually are shown wearing Scythian-
style trousers, with tunics that reveal one breast; they are
armed with bow, sword, or ax and carry distinctive cres-
cent-shaped shields.
In HOMER’s epic poem the Iliad (written down
around 750 B.C.E.) the Amazons are mentioned as a dis-
tant people, previously warred upon by the Trojan king
PRIAM and the Greek hero BELLEROPHON.
Later writers give the Amazons a role in the TROJAN
WAR. The beautiful Amazon queen Penthesilea led a
contingent of her tribeswomen to Troy to aid the belea-
guered city after HECTOR’s death; she was slain by the
Greek champion ACHILLES, who then grieved over her
death. Other tales develop the sexual overtones; for his
ninth Labor, HERAKLES journeyed to the Amazons’ land
and fought them to acquire the belt (often called the
“girdle”) of their queen, Hippolyta. Similarly, the Athe-
nian hero THESEUS abducted the Amazon queen Antiope;
when her outraged subjects pursued them back to
Athens and besieged the city, Theseus defeated them and
(Antiope having been killed) married their leader. This
Amazon bride, also named Hippolyta, bore Theseus’s
son, HIPPOLYTUS.
Certain tales associated the Amazons with the found-
ing of EPHESOS and other Greek cities of Asia Minor. A
later legend claimed that an Amazon queen met the real-
life Macedonian king ALEXANDER THE GREAT on his East-
ern campaign and dallied with him, hoping to conceive
his child (ca. 330 B.C.E.).
The Amazons were in part a reverse projection of the
housebound lives of actual Greek WOMEN, most of whom
were excluded from the men’s world, bereft of both politi-
cal power and sexual freedom. Imaginary “male women”
apparently were both fascinating and frightening to
Greek men. On the one hand, the Greeks found tall, ath-
letic women generally attractive, and the legend of hard-
riding, overtly sexual Amazons seems designed in part to
provide an enjoyable male fantasy.
On the other hand, the Amazons represented the
kind of foreign, irrational power that was felt to threaten
life in the ordered Greek city-state. A favorite subject in
Greek art was the Amazonomachy, the battle between
Greeks and Amazons; by the mid-400s B.C.E. the Ama-
zonomachy had come to symbolize the Greeks’ defeat of
Eastern invaders in the PERSIAN WARS. An Amazono-
machy is portrayed among the architectural marble carv-
ings of the Athenian PARTHENON and on the shield of
ATHENA PARTHENOS.
Further reading: W. B. Tyrrell, Amazons, A Study in
Athenian Mythmaking (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univer-
sity Press, 1984); J. Blok, The Early Amazons: Modern and
Ancient Perspectives on a Persistent Myth (New York: E. J.
Brill, 1994); Lyn Webster Wilde, On the Trail of the
Women Warriors: The Amazons in Myth and History (New
York: St. Martin’s Press, 2000).
Ambracia
This Corinthian colony of northwestern
Greece is located north of the modern Gulf of Ambracia.
The city was founded in around 625 B.C.E. as part of a
string of northwestern colonies along CORINTH’s trade
route to ITALY.
Ambracia soon came into conflict with its non-
Corinthian Greek neighbors in ACARNANIA and Amphi-
lochia. In the PELOPONNESIAN WAR (431–404 B.C.E.),
Ambracia fought as a Corinthian ally against ATHENS but
was effectively neutralized in 426 B.C.E., when most of its
army was wiped out by the brilliant Athenian general
DEMOSTHENES (2).
In 338 B.C.E. Ambracia was occupied by troops of the
Macedonian king PHILIP II. In 294 B.C.E. the city passed
into the hands of King PYRRHUS of EPIRUS, who made it
his capital. As a member of the Aetolian League, Ambra-
cia was besieged and captured by the Romans in 189
B.C.E. It later became a free city of the Roman empire.
See also AETOLIA; PERIANDER.
Further reading: C. M. Kraay, “The Earliest Issue of
Ambracia,” Numismatica e antichità classiche 6 (1977):
35–52; ———, “The Coinage of Ambracia and the Pre-
liminaries of the Peloponnesian War,” Numismatica e
antichità classiche 8 (1979): 37–59; V. Karatzeni, “Ambra-
cia during the Roman Era,” in L’Illyrie méridionale et
l’Epire dans l’antiquité, 3. Actes du IIIe Colloque interna-
tional de Chantilly, 16–19 octobre 1996, edited by Pierre
Cabanes (Paris: De Boccard, 1999), 241–247.
Amphiaraus
See SEVEN AGAINST THEBES.
Amphictyonic League
This confederation of different
peoples in central Greece was organized originally
around the temple of DEMETER at Anthela (near THER-
MOPYLAE) and later around the important sanctuary of
APOLLO at DELPHI. The league’s name derives from the
Greek amphictiones, “dwellers around.” The 12 member
states included THESSALY, BOEOTIA, LOCRIS, and PHOCIS.
The league maintained its two sanctuaries, holding regu-
lar meetings of members’ delegates and raising and
administering funds. It was the league, for instance, that
managed Delphi’s PYTHIAN GAMES.
Amphictyonic League
27

Further reading: Anthony Yannacakis, Amphictyony,
Forerunner of the United Nations (Athens, 1947).
Amphipolis
This Athenian colony is located near the
north Aegean coast of the non-Greek region known as
THRACE. Located about three miles inland, Amphipolis
(“surrounded city”) stood on a peninsula jutting into the
Strymon River. Originally a Thracian town had occupied
the site. The Athenian colony was established in 437
B.C.E., after a failed attempt in 462 B.C.E., when native
Thracians massacred the settlers.
Amphipolis controlled the local bridge across the
Strymon and hence the east-west route along the Thra-
cian coast, as well as the north-south riverine route to the
interior. As a local TRADE depot, Amphipolis was an
important source of certain raw materials exported to
ATHENS. Among these were GOLD and SILVER ore (mined
from Thrace’s Mt. Pangaeus district) and probably SLAVES,
purchased as war prisoners from the feuding Thracian
tribes. Shipbuilding TIMBER was another valuable local
product, and it seems that Athenian warships were con-
structed right at Amphipolis.
In 424 B.C.E., during the PELOPONNESIAN WAR, the
city was captured without a fight by the brilliant Spartan
commander BRASIDAS. In 422 B.C.E., at the Battle of
Amphipolis, Brasidas and the Athenian leader CLEON
were both killed as the Athenians tried unsuccessfully to
retake the city. Thereafter Amphipolis remained beyond
Athenian control. Captured by King PHILIP II of MACE-
DON in 357 B.C.E., it became a Macedonian city and coin-
minting center. After ROME’s final defeat of Macedon in
the Third Macedonian War (167 B.C.E.), Amphipolis
passed into Roman hands.
A major archaeological monument near the site is the
colossal Lion of Amphipolis, a grave marker erected in
the 300s B.C.E.
See also THUCYDIDES (1).
Further reading: Oscar Broneer, The Lion Monument
at Amphipolis (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1941).
amphora
See POTTERY.
Anacreon (ca. 575–485 B.C.E.) Celebrated Greek lyric
poet of the late 500s B.C.E.
Anacreon was active at SAMOS and ATHENS but born at
Teos, a Greek city of western ASIA MINOR. Witty, deca-
dent, and evidently bisexual, Anacreon was the poet of
pleasure. His sophisticated verses celebrate 
WINE,
WOMEN, boys, and song—the vital ingredients at the SYM-
POSIUM, or upper-class drinking party. Anacreon exempli-
fied the wealth and sophistication of his native region of
IONIA, which during the poet’s own lifetime fell disas-
trously to Persian invasion.
Anacreon was in his teens or 20s when he joined the
evacuation of Teos to escape the attacking Persians, ca.
545 B.C.E. Sailing north to the coast of THRACE, these
refugees founded the city of ABDERA; one poem by
Anacreon, presumably from this period, is an epitaph for
an Abderan soldier slain in local fighting.
Before long, however, Anacreon had emerged at one
of the most magnificent settings in the Greek world—
the court of the tyrant POLYCRATES of Samos. There
(where another great poet, IBYCUS, was installed) Anac-
reon won fame and fortune and became a favorite of the
tyrant. In keeping with upper-class taste (and with Poly-
crates’ own preference), Anacreon wrote many poems on
homosexual themes, celebrating the charms of boys or
young men.
In around 522 B.C.E., when the Persians killed Poly-
crates and captured Samos, Anacreon went to Athens.
According to one tale, he escaped the Persian onslaught
aboard a warship sent expressly by Hipparchus, the
brother and cultural minister of the Athenian tyrant HIP-
PIAS (1). Anacreon thrived at Hippias’s court (where the
poet SIMONIDES was another guest). By the time of Hip-
pias’s downfall (510 B.C.E.), Anacreon had found new
patrons among the aristocrats of THESSALY. Soon, however,
he was back in Athens, where he seems to have been wel-
come despite his prior association with the tyrant.
His Athenian friends of these years include XAN-
THIPPUS (later the father of PERIKLES) and a young man
named Kritias (the future grandfather of the oligarch
KRITIAS and an ancestor of PLATO), to whom Anacreon
wrote love poems. Anacreon seems to have created a
cultural sensation at Athens; a red-figure vase made in
about 500 B.C.E. shows a symposium scene with a figure
labeled “Anacreon” wearing an Asian-style turban and
playing an Ionian-style lyre. Surely Anacreon’s long stay
in Athens helped to introduce Ionian literary tastes,
thus contributing to the city’s grand cultural achieve-
ments in the following decades. He probably died at
Athens, perhaps in around 490 B.C.E.; legend assigns to
him an appropriate death, from choking on a grape
seed. In later years the Athenians set up a statue of him
on the ACROPOLIS.
Most of Anacreon’s surviving poems are short solo
pieces for lyre accompaniment, written to be sung at a
symposium. In simple meters and simple Ionic language,
these verses combine yearning with merriment. Whereas
a poet like SAPPHO (ca. 600 B.C.E.) might earnestly
describe love as a fire under the skin, Anacreon writes of
love as a game of dice or a boxing match. “Boy with the
virginal face,” he writes, “I pursue you but you heed me
not. You do not know you are the charioteer of my
heart.”
One poem (later imitated by the Roman poet Horace)
compares a young woman to a frisky colt who needs the
right fellow to mount her gently and break her in.
28
Amphipolis

Another poem clearly presents the poet’s sophisticated
world: “Now golden-haired Love hits me again with a
purple ball and tells me to play with the girl in colored
sandals. But she comes from Lesbos, a cosmopolitan
place, and finds fault with my gray hair. And she gapes at
someone else—another girl!”
Among his other surviving work are hymns to
ARTEMIS, EROS, and DIONYSUS. The corpus also includes
60 anonymous poems, not written by Anacreon but
penned centuries after his death, in imitation of his style.
These verses, called Anacreonta, had great literary influ-
ence in the Roman era.
See also GREEK
LANGUAGE; HOMOSEXUALITY; LYRIC
POETRY; MUSIC.
Further reading: Anacreon, Anakreon: The Extant
Fragments, translated by Guy Davenport (Tuscaloosa:
University of Alabama, Parallel Editions, 1991); Patricia
Rosenmeyer, The Poetics of Imitation: Anacreon and the
Anacreontic Tradition (New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1992).
Anaxagoras (ca. 500–428 
B.C.E.) Greek philosopher,
born in Clazomenae but active in Athens
Coming from the intellectually advanced region called
IONIA, in Greek ASIA MINOR, Anaxagoras played a vital
role in introducing the study of PHILOSOPHY at Athens. As
such, he was an important forerunner of the philosopher
SOCRATES.
A teacher and friend of the Athenian statesman PERIK-
LES, Anaxagoras is said to have lived at Athens for 30
years, probably ca. 480–450 B.C.E. Supposedly he taught
philosophy to the tragic playwright EURIPIDES. Eventually,
however, Anaxagoras was charged with the criminal
offense of impiety (asebeia, the same charge that would
destroy Socrates 50 years later). The supposed offense was
Anaxagoras’s theory that the Sun is really a huge, red-hot
stone—an idea that would logically deny the existence of
the sun god, HELIOS—but probably the accusation was
meant to harm Perikles. Anaxagoras fled Athens, appar-
ently before the case went to trial, and was condemned to
death in absentia. He settled at Lampsacus, in Asia Minor,
near the HELLESPONT, where he founded a philosophical
school and lived as an honored citizen.
Anaxagoras carried forth the Ionian tradition of natu-
ral philosophy—that is, of theorizing about the natural
world. He is said to have written only one book (now
lost). Our knowledge of his work comes mainly from
sometimes contradictory references by later writers. He
seems to have accepted PARMENIDES’ doctrine that reality
is unchanging and eternal, but he also was influenced by
the atomist theories of DEMOCRITUS and LEUCIPPUS to the
extent that he pictured a system of various “seeds” that
bunch together in different combinations to constitute
different material. Behind the movements of these seeds
is “Mind” (nous), the universe’s animating force, which is
infinite and aloof, but which is somehow reflected in
human intelligence and other phenomena. These con-
cepts help to explain Anaxagoras’ best-remembered
(although enigmatic) statement: “In everything there is a
portion of everything except Mind. And there are some
things in which there is Mind also.”
An important figure in early Greek ASTRONOMY,
Anaxagoras followed ANAXIMENES’ theory that the Earth
is flat and suspended in air, with the heavenly bodies
rotating around it. Anaxagoras guessed that the Moon is
closer to us and smaller than the Sun, and that its light is
reflected from the Sun. His belief that the Sun, Moon, and
stars are really huge stones was probably influenced by
the fall of a large meteorite in the Hellespont district in
467 B.C.E.
See also
ANAXIMANDER;
PERSIAN
WARS;
THALES;
THUCYDIDES (2).
Further reading: Daniel E. Gershenson, Anaxagoras
and the Birth of Physics (New York: Blaisdell, 1964);
Anaxagoras, The Fragments of Anaxagoras, edited with an
introduction and commentary by David Sider (Meisenheim
am Glan, Germany: Hain, 1981); Sven-Tage Teodorsson,
Anaxagoras’ Theory of Matter (Göteborg, Sweden: Acta
Universitatis Gothoburgensis, 1982).
Anaximander (ca. 610–545 B.C.E.) Early brilliant scien-
tist and philosopher
A pupil of THALES, Anaximander lived in MILETUS, in the
flourishing Greek region called IONIA, in western ASIA
MINOR. In modern opinion, Anaximander is the most dis-
tinguished of the three thinkers who comprised the Mile-
sian School of natural philosophers. (The third is
ANAXIMENES.) Anaximander also can be called the West’s
first astronomer and geographer.
Anaximander wrote the earliest known Greek prose
work, a theoretical description and history of the natural
world. This treatise has not survived, but a number of
later ancient writers refer to it. It contained the first
Greek map of the heaven and the Earth, and described
the movements of the constellations. It was probably the
first written attempt in the West to substitute SCIENCE for
MYTH in explaining the universe.
Anaximander pictured the Earth as a cylinder sus-
pended upright, with the flat ends at top and bottom;
humans live on the top surface, surrounded by the heav-
ens. While Thales had theorized that the Earth floats on
water. Anaximander believed that the Earth is suspended
in air, equidistant from all other heavenly bodies. This
idea looks remarkably like a guess at the celestial law of
gravity.
According to Anaximander, the primal element in the
universe is not water, as Thales believed, but a more mys-
terious substance that Anaximander refers to as the apei-
ron, the “boundless” or “indefinite.” He apparently
imagined this apeiron as partaking of characteristics more
Anaximander
29

usually ascribed to the gods. The apeiron is immortal,
indestructible, the source of creation for the heavens and
the Earth, and also the receptacle that receives and recir-
culates destroyed matter. Although abstruse, Anaximan-
der’s theory seems to point toward a pantheistic or
monotheistic notion of a life force animating the uni-
verse; it also anticipates modern chemistry’s discovery
that basic matter is never really destroyed but only
undergoes change.
Anaximander seems to have guessed at the biological
process of evolution. He is recorded as having believed
that humankind originally emerged from fishes to step
forth onto land. He is also credited with constructing the
first sundial in the Greek world, probably based on Baby-
lonian examples.
Anaximander is said to have died around 545 B.C.E.,
the same year in which the proud, accomplished Ionian
Greek cities were conquered by the Persian armies of
King CYRUS (1).
See also ASTRONOMY; PHILOSOPHY.
Further reading: Robert Hahn, Anaximander and the
Architects: The Contributions of Egyptian and Greek Archi-
tectural Technologies to the Origins of Greek Philosophy
(Albany: State University of New York Press, 2001); Dirk
Couprie et al., Anaximander in Context: New Studies in the
Origins of Greek Philosophy (Albany: State University of
New York Press, 2003).
Anaximenes (ca. 585–525 B.C.E.) Early Greek philoso-
pher and scientist
Anaximenes lived at MILETUS, a prosperous Greek city in
the region called IONIA, in western ASIA MINOR. Follow-
ing his two greater predecessors, THALES and ANAXIMAN-
DER, Anaximenes was the last important member of what
is called the Milesian School of natural philosophers.
Nothing is known of his life except that he wrote a book
in “simple and unpretentious Ionic language,” as one
later writer described it. Although the book is lost to us,
enough of it is paraphrased by other authors to give an
idea of its message.
Like Thales and Anaximander, Anaximenes sought to
identify a single, primal substance that is the basic ele-
ment in the universe. Thales had said that this primal
substance is water. Anaximenes, apparently observing
that water is itself part of a larger process of condensation
and evaporation, identified the universal element as aër—
“air” or “mist.”
The air, he said, is infinite and eternally moving. As
it moves, it can condense into different forms: into wind,
which produces cloud, which creates rain, which can
freeze into ice. Contrarily, air can rarify itself to form
fire. Cold is a result of condensation; heat, or rarefaction.
This is why a person puffs through compressed lips to
cool down hot food, but puffs through open lips to heat
cold hands.
Anaximenes believed that the Earth was flat and
floated on air in the cosmos. He considered air to be the
divine, ordering force in the universe; it is said that he
did not deny the existence of the gods, but claimed that
the gods arose from air. Although much of Anaximenes’
theory seems to derive from his two forerunners, his
commonsensical attempt to explain material change was
to have great influence on later philosophers, particularly
on the atomist DEMOCRITUS.
See also PHILOSOPHY; SCIENCE.
Further reading: Jonathan Barnes, Early Greek Phi-
losophy (New York: Penguin Books, 1987); Robin Water-
field, ed. The First Philosophers: The Presocratics and
Sophists (New York: Oxford University Press, 2000).
Andokides (ca. 440–390 B.C.E.) Athenian political figure
and businessman
The adventures of Andokides were associated with the
downfall of his city in the PELOPONNESIAN WAR (431–404
B.C.E.). Four speeches are preserved under his name,
although one of these “Against Alcibiades,” is considered
a later forgery.
Andokides was born into a prominent aristocratic
family at ATHENS. As a member of a right-wing club, he
was named as one of the conspirators in the Mutilation of
the Herms in 415 B.C.E. To gain immunity from prosecu-
tion, Andokides confessed and named his co-conspira-
tors—whether truthfully or not is unclear. Departing
from Athens, he prospered elsewhere as a merchant, sup-
plying needed oars at cost to the Athenian fleet at SAMOS.
Unluckily, Andokides’ return to Athens in 411 B.C.E.
coincided with the oligarchic coup of the FOUR HUNDRED,
which brought to power men from the right-wing circles
that had been harmed by his confession of four years
before. He was then thrown into prison. Released, he left
Athens again and resumed his trading. Eventually he was
reinstated at Athens, after defending himself against cer-
tain charges in his speech “On the Mysteries” (ca. 400
B.C.E.).
As an Athenian ambassador to SPARTA in 392 B.C.E.
during the CORINTHIAN WAR, Andokides helped negotiate
a proposed Athenian-Spartan peace treaty, the terms of
which are preserved in his speech “On the Peace.”
Unfortunately, the Athenians rejected the terms and
prosecuted the ambassadors, whereupon Andokides left
Athens yet again. He died soon after.
See also OLIGARCHY; RHETORIC.
Further reading: Anna Missiou, The Subversive Ora-
tory of Andokides: Politics, Ideology, and Decision-making
in Democratic Athens (New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1992); William D. Furley, Andokides and the Herms:
A Study of Crisis in Fifth-century Athenian Religion (Lon-
don: Institute of Classical Studies, 1996); Michael
Gagarin and Douglas M. MacDowell, trans., Antiphon and
Andocides (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1998).
30
Anaximenes

Andromache
In Greek MYTH, Andromache was a
princess from southeastern ASIA MINOR who became the
wife of the Trojan prince HECTOR. During the 10-year
TROJAN WAR, her father, brothers, and husband were
slain by the Greek hero ACHILLES. Her son, Astyanax, was
executed by the Greeks after their capture of TROY, and
Andromache became the slave of Achilles’ son, NEOP-
TOLEMUS. She accompanied him home to EPIRUS and bore
him a son, Molossus, ancestor of the royal Molossian
tribe. She ended her days in Epirus, as wife of the refugee
Trojan prince Helenus.
In HOMER’s epic poem the Iliad, she appears as a gra-
cious and stalwart lady whose future misery is clearly
foreshadowed. As an embodiment of female suffering at
the hands of conquerors, Andromache was a natural sub-
ject for the intellectual Greek playwright EURIPIDES; his
tragedy Andromache (presented in about 426 B.C.E.) sur-
vives today, and Andromache also is prominent among
the characters in his Trojan Women (415 B.C.E.).
Further reading: Grace-Starry West, “Andromache
and Dido,” American Journal of Philology 104 (1983):
257–267; Euripides, Andromache, translated by Susan
Stewart and Wesley D. Smith (New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 2001).
Andromeda
See PERSEUS (1).
Antaeus
See HERAKLES.
Antalcidas
See KING’S PEACE, THE.
Antigone
A mythical princess of the central Greek city
of THEBES, Antigone was the daughter of the incestuous
union of OEDIPUS and Jocasta. She is the heroine of an
extant tragedy by the Athenian playwright SOPHOKLES.
His Antigone (performed in about 442 B.C.E.) examines
the conflict between law and moral obligation. Although
Sophokles was drawing on an existing MYTH, most of the
information available to us about Antigone comes from
his play.
Antigone had two brothers, Eteokles and Polynices.
In the disastrous expedition of the SEVEN
AGAINST
THEBES, Polynices led a foreign army to Thebes in an
attempt to depose Eteokles, who, contrary to prior agree-
ment, was monopolizing the kingship. The two brothers
killed each other in single combat. The new Theban
ruler, Kreon, decreed that the invader Polynices’s corpse
go unburied, thereby—according to Greek belief—deny-
ing Polynices’s ghost a resting place in the Underworld.
But Antigone chose her obligations of KINSHIP and RELI-
GION over her obligations as a citizen, and she covered
the body with dust and did honors at the graveside. As
punishment, Kreon sentenced her to be sealed alive in a
vault. After being warned prophetically that he was
offending the gods, Kreon relented: too late, for Antigone
had killed herself. This brought calamity to Kreon’s
house, in the suicides of Kreon’s son Haemon (who had
been betrothed to Antigone) and of his wife, Eurydice.
Antigone was the subject of a lost play by EURIPIDES
that seems to have followed a familiar folktale pattern. In
this version, the condemned Antigone is handed over to
Haemon for execution; instead he hides her in the coun-
tryside, and they have a son. Unaware of his royal lin-
eage, the boy eventually makes his way to Thebes, where
adventures and recognition follow.
See also AFTERLIFE; FUNERAL CUSTOMS.
Further reading: George Steiner, Antigones (New
Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1996); Nicholas
Rudall, trans., Antigone/Sophokles (Chicago: Ivan R. Dee,
1998); Judith P. Butler, Antigone’s Claim: Kinship between
Life and Death (New York: Columbia University Press,
2000).
Antigonus (1) (ca. 382–301 B.C.E.) Macedonian general
and dynast
Antigonus ruled ASIA MINOR and other parts of the Greek
world in the tumultuous years after the death of ALEXAN-
DER THE GREAT (323 B.C.E.). He is counted as one of the
DIADOCHI, who carved up—and fought over—Alexan-
der’s vast domain. Antigonus and his son, the dynamic
soldier DEMETRIUS POLIORKETES, came close to recon-
quering and reknitting Alexander’s fragmenting empire.
But Antigonus died in battle at the hands of a coalition of
his enemies (301 B.C.E.). Much of our information about
him comes from the later writer PLUTARCH’s short biogra-
phy of Demetrius.
Antigonus was nicknamed One-eyed (Monophthal-
mos), possibly from a war injury. Serving as one of
Alexander’s generals in the East, Antigonus was appointed
governor of Phyrgia (central Asia Minor), around 333
B.C.E. His ascent truly began in 321 B.C.E. when the Mace-
donian regent ANTIPATER appointed him chief commander
in Asia. In the next two decades, Antigonus’s ambition of
reuniting the empire brought him and his son into wars
on land and sea against the four secessionist Diadochi—
PTOLEMY (1) (who claimed EGYPT as his domain); KAS-
SANDER (who claimed MACEDON and Greece); LYSIMACHUS
(who claimed THRACE); and SELEUCUS (1) (who, having
deserted from Antigonus’s command, claimed vast tracts
in Mesopotamia and the Iranian plateau).
Based at Celaenae, in southern Phrygia, Antigonus
and Demetrius fought against the allied Diadochi over
two periods, 315–312 B.C.E. and 307–301 B.C.E., in Syria,
Asia Minor, Greece, and the Mediterranean. After
Demetrius’s spectacular naval victory over Ptolemy near
Cyprian Salamis (306 B.C.E.), Antigonus adopted the title
king (basileus)—that is, king of Alexander’s empire.
Soon after, each of the other Diadochi took the title king
as well.
Antigonus
31

The downfall of Antigonus, aged about 80, came
from a concerted campaign against him. With Ptolemy
and Cassander helping elsewhere, Seleucus marched an
army west out of Asia and joined Lysimachus in northern
Phrygia. The Battle of the Kings was fought at Ipsus, in
central Phrygia, in 301 B.C.E. Antigonus and Demetrius,
with an army allegedly of 70,000 infantry, 10,000 cavalry,
and 75 elephants, opposed Seleucus and Lysimachus’s
force of 64,000 foot, 10,500 horse, and 480 elephants.
Demetrius, leading his cavalry, was drawn too far forward
in the field and was cut off by the enemy’s elephants.
Antigonus was surrounded and killed; his last recorded
words were: “Demetrius will come and save me.”
Demetrius survived the battle and fled to EPHESOS, to
fight another day. Antigonus’s kingdom was divided
between Seleucus and Lysimachus.
Further reading: Richard Billows, Antigonus the One-
eyed and the Creation of the Hellenistic State (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1990).
Antigonus (2)
See MACEDON.
Antioch
This rich and important Greek city on the
northern Levantine coast is situated beside the Orontes
River, about 15 miles inland from the Mediterranean Sea.
King SELEUCUS Nikator, (1) creator of the SELEUCID EMPIRE,
founded Antioch in 300 B.C.E. to be his Syrian provincial
capital. He named it for his son, Prince Antiochos. The city
thrived, eventually replacing Seleuceia-on-the-Tigris as the
capital of the Seleucid Empire which reached from Macedo-
nia to the borders of India. Antioch’s port was another city
named Seleuceia, at the mouth of the Orontes.
Antioch profited from its fertile plain and especially
from its position on the age-old TRADE route between
Mesopotamia and the Mediterranean. Militarily, it gave
access north to ASIA MINOR, west to the Mediterranean,
and east to the Asian continent. Antioch was the second
city of the eastern Mediterranean, after Egyptian ALEXAN-
DRIA (1); like Alexandria, it had an international popula-
tion, including a large minority of JEWS.
Along with the remaining Seleucid domain, Antioch
became a Roman possession in 63 B.C.E. In later times,
Antioch became an important center in the spread of
Christianity, as well as in the spread of heretical move-
ments. The city continued to prosper through the Byzan-
tine era until it was damaged by an earthquake and
sacked by the Persians in the sixth century C.E. It was
rebuilt by the emperor Justinian but was later taken again
by the Persians, and then by the Arabs. Antioch was cap-
tured and recaptured several times in the following cen-
turies, by the Byzantines, the Selçuks, the Crusaders, the
Ottomans, the Egyptians, the French, and finally became
part of Turkey in 1939.
In the HELLENISTIC AGE, a Greek sculptor named
Eutychides of SIKYON, a pupil of LYSIPPOS, created for
Antioch a BRONZE statue of Tyche that became extremely
admired and famous. Tyche was the goddess of Fortune
and the protector of cities; in the Hellenistic period
almost every city began to worship its own unique Tyche,
often modeled on the Tyche of Antioch. Eutychides rep-
resented her in a complex, twisted pose, seated on a rock,
with her foot resting on the back of a youth swimming in
front of her, a personification of the Orontes River. She
wears a mural crown, in the form of a city fortification
wall. The original statue does not survive, but it is
reflected in numerous copies from the later Hellenistic
and Roman periods.
See also SCULPTURE.
Further reading:
Fatih Cimok, Antioch on the
Orontes. 2d ed. (Istanbul: A Turizm Yayinlari, 1994).
Antiochos (1)
See ANTIOCH; SELEUCID EMPIRE.
Antiochos (2) III (ca. 241–187 B.C.E.) Capable and
ambitious king of the Seleucid Empire (reigned 223–187
B.C.E.)
Surnamed “the Great,” Antiochos reconquered prior
Seleucid holdings in the Iranian plateau and eastward,
but came to grief on his western frontier against the
expansionism of ROME. The Romans were alarmed by
Antiochos’s conquests in the Levant at the expense of
32
Antigonus 
A portrait of King Antiochos I of the Seleucid dynasty,
founded by one of Alexander’s generals, Seleucus I. The
depiction intentionally mimics those of Alexander the Great,
with tangled hair and expressive eyes. (The J. Paul Getty
Museum, Gift of Chester B. Frantz)

Ptolemaic EGYPT (202–198 B.C.E.), by his invasion of
THRACE (196 B.C.E.), and finally by his invasion of Greece
at the invitation of the Aetolian League (192 B.C.E.). In
the Romans’ Syrian War (192–188 B.C.E.), Antiochos was
defeated in Greece and western ASIA MINOR and at sea.
His peace treaty with Rome prohibited any further Seleu-
cid military activity on the Mediterranean seaboard. This
Treaty of Apamaea (188 B.C.E.) was a major step toward
Rome’s absorption of the Greek East. Antiochos died the
following year.
See also AETOLIA.
Further reading: C. A. Kincaid, Successors of Alexan-
der the Great (Chicago: Argonaut, 1969); John Ma, Anti-
ochus III and the Cities of Western Asia Minor (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1999); John D. Grainger, The
Roman War of Antiochus the Great (Leiden, Netherlands:
E. J. Brill, 2002).
Antipater (397–319 B.C.E.) Macedonian general
During King ALEXANDER THE GREAT’s eastern campaigns
(334–323 B.C.E.), Antipater served as Alexander’s regent
over MACEDON and the conquered land of Greece. He
destroyed two Greek rebel uprisings: one in 331 B.C.E.,
led by the Spartan king Agis III, and the second in
323–322 B.C.E., when ATHENS and other states arose at
news of Alexander’s death.
With the Macedonian royal house in disarray, Antipa-
ter became nominal regent of Alexander’s whole empire
in 321 B.C.E. In his last years’ struggle to keep the vast
domain together, Antipater was aided by his friend
ANTIGONUS (1), whom he made chief commander in Asia.
But on Antipater’s death, his own son KASSANDER seized
Macedon and Greece, in defiance of Antigonus.
See also DIADOCHI.
Further reading: Christopher W. Blackwell, In the
Absence of Alexander: Harpalus and the Failure of Macedo-
nian Authority (New York: Peter Lang, 1999).
Antiphon (ca. 480–411 B.C.E.) Athenian orator
Antiphon was the mastermind behind the abortive right-
wing coup of the FOUR HUNDRED in 411 B.C.E. at ATHENS.
After the coup’s failure, Antiphon chose to remain behind
when most of his co-conspirators fled. Arrested, he was
condemned for treason and executed. The historian
THUCYDIDES (1) knew Antiphon and describes him as one
of the most capable Athenians of the day. Antiphon rarely
spoke in public before the ASSEMBLY or law courts, prefer-
ring instead to advise or to compose speeches for clients.
His speech in his own defense at his treason trial was,
according to Thucydides, probably the best courtroom
speech ever made.
Antiphon’s work survives in three rhetorical exercises
for courtroom-speaking practice, plus two or three
speeches written for actual court cases. The exercises are
known as tetralogies, from their four-part structure—two
speeches each by both prosecution and defense. The best
known of the tetrologies concerns an imagined criminal
case, apparently popular among contemporary thinkers, in
which a boy at the GYMNASIUM has been killed accidentally
by a thrown javelin. Who is guilty, the speech inquires: the
one who hurled the weapon, or the weapon itself?
See also OLIGARCHY; PROTAGORAS; RHETORIC.
Further reading: R. C. Jebb, ed., Selections from the
Attic Orators: Being a Companion Volume to the Attic Ora-
tors from Antiphon to Isaeus (New Rochelle, N.Y.: Caratzas
Bros., 1983); Michael Nill, Morality and Self-interest in
Protagoras, Antiphon, and Democritus (Leiden, Nether-
lands: E. J. Brill, 1985); Antiphon, Orationes et Frag-
menta,
translated by Michael Gagarin (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1997); Michael Gagarin and
Douglas M. MacDowell, trans., Antiphon and Andocides
(Austin: University of Texas Press, 1998); A. Tullin,
“Slave Witnesses in Antiphon 5, 48,” Scripta Classica
Israelica 18 (1999): 21–24; Michael Gagarin, Antiphon the
Athenian: Oratory, Law, and Justice in the Age of the
Sophists (Austin: University of Texas Press, 2002).
Aphrodite
Aphrodite was the ancient Greek goddess of
love, sex, fertility, rebirth, and physical beauty. She was
also closely associated with the sea. She is one of several
deities (along with ZEUS, ATHENA, and APOLLO) whose
earthly influence is most celebrated in Greek art and
poetry.
Aphrodite’s cult arrived in mainland Greece some-
time between about 1200 and 900 B.C.E., probably
imported from the island of CYPRUS, which had attracted
Greeks in the COPPER TRADE. In MYTH, Cyprus was said to
be the birthplace of Aphrodite, and in historical times the
Cyprian city of Paphos had an important temple dedi-
cated to the goddess.
The early Aphrodite of Cyprus was probably origi-
nally a fertility goddess similar to the Near Eastern god-
dess Ishtar-Astarte. Among the Greeks she came to
personify sexuality and was devoutly worshipped as a
universal force. Many local sanctuaries dedicated to
Aphrodite arose throughout mainland Greece, and her
cults often varied widely from place to place. In some
areas, Aphrodite was considered a war goddess, which
may have been the stimulus for her mythical association
with ARES, the god of war.
Not surprisingly, Aphrodite was also considered to be
the patron deity of PROSTITUTES. Her temple at CORINTH
was famous in Roman times for its sacred prostitutes,
whose fees went to the sacred treasury. This feature seems
to have been unique in a Greek cult, and it probably
developed in the prosperous harbor city of Corinth
because of the Syrian-Phoenician influence that arose in
the 700s B.C.E. through trade and commerce. Another
important cult center for Aphrodite was Cythera, off the
southern Peloponnesian coast.
Aphrodite
33

In myth, Aphrodite’s husband was the lame and
deformed blacksmith god, Hephaistos. This attests the
Greek sense of humor that sometimes pervaded their
conceptions of the gods—the loveliest goddess being
married to the ugliest of the gods. Dissatisfied, Aphrodite
had several affairs with the handsome Ares. The goddess
also took numerous mortal men as lovers, including the
Trojan shepherd Anchises (their union produced the hero
AENEAS) and the Cypriot youth ADONIS, whom jealous
Ares eventually killed.
The origin of the name Aphrodite is unknown; the
Greeks explained it as meaning “foam-born.” A passage
in HESIOD’s epic poem the Theogony (ca. 700 B.C.E.) tells
the best-known version of her birth. The primeval god
CRONUS severed the genitals of his father, Uranos, and
threw them into the sea. There, they generated a white
foam (Greek: aphros). The goddess arose from this foam,
fully formed, and stepped ashore at Cyprus. There is also
another version of her birth, told in HOMER’s epic Iliad
and Odyssey, written down perhaps 50 years before Hes-
iod’s time. There, Aphrodite is said to be the daughter of
Zeus and the ocean nymph Dione.
Homer’s Aphrodite is an oddly undignified character.
In the Iliad, she tries to protect the Trojans and her Trojan
son, Aeneas, but she ignominiously flees the battlefield
after being wounded by the Greek hero DIOMEDES. Zeus
then reminds the goddess that her province is love, not
war (book 5). An episode in the Odyssey’s book 8 tells
how Aphrodite’s cuckolded husband, Hephaistos, used a
chain-link net to trap her and Ares together in bed, then
dragged the ensnared pair before the assembled gods on
MT. OLYMPUS.
Later legends made Aphrodite the mother (by Ares)
of the boy-god EROS and also the mother (by the god
HERMES) of Hermaphroditus, a creature with the sex
organs of both genders.
Aphrodite’s attributes included the dove, the myrtle
leaf, and the woman’s hand mirror; in later centuries
these traits, like the rest of Aphrodite’s worship, were
borrowed by the Romans for their goddess Venus.
Aphrodite’s cult titles included Pandemos (of the whole
people), Ourania (celestial), Pelageia (of the sea), and
Philommeides (laughter-loving or genital-loving).
Aphrodite was one of the most popular subjects in
ancient Greek art, inspiring numerous sculptors and
painters. The first monumental statue to show a female
nude was the statue of Aphrodite carved by PRAXITELES for
KNIDOS around 340 B.C.E. Shown preparing for her bath,
this representation was considered so scandalous that its
original commissioner, Kos, rejected it in favor of a clothed
image. The Knidian Aphrodite subsequently became one of
the most famous statues in ancient Greece, and it inspired
numerous nude and seminude representations of the god-
dess. One of these is the famous Venus de Milo, displayed
in the Louvre in Paris. This second-century B.C.E. statue
was found on the Greek island of MELOS and is apparently
a copy of a lost original from the 300s B.C.E.
See also OCEANUS.
Further reading: Geoffrey Grigson, The Goddess of
Love: The Birth, Triumph, Death, and Return of Aphrodite
(New York: Stein and Day, 1977); Paul Friedrich, The
Meaning of Aphrodite (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1978); Charlotte R. Long, The Twelve Gods of
Greece and Rome (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 1987);
Arianna S. Huffington, The Gods of Greece (New York:
Atlantic Monthly Press, 1993); Giulia Sissa, The Daily
Life of the Greek Gods, translated by Janet Lloyd (Stan-
ford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2000); Stephanie
Budin, The Origin of Aphrodite (Bethesda, Md.: CDL
Press, 2003).
34
Aphrodite
The goddess of love undressing for her bath. This Roman stat-
uette copies a famous statue carved by Praxiteles around 350
B.C.E. and the first full-scale female nude in Greek art. (The J.
Paul Getty Museum)

Apollo (Greek: Apollon)
This important Greek god
embodied certain high ideals of ancient Greek society.
Apollo’s association with human intellect, musical har-
mony, religious purity, and male beauty have led him to
be called (in one modern scholar’s phrase) “the most
Greek of the gods.”
According to MYTH, Apollo and his twin sister, the
goddess ARTEMIS, were children of the demigoddess Leto
and the great god ZEUS. The Greeks imagined Apollo as
partaking of his father’s wisdom and authority, but in a
young form. Greek SCULPTURE and PAINTING portrayed
him as muscular, handsome, and (often) in his late
teens—at manhood’s threshold but still wearing his hair
long in a boy’s fashion.
Apollo personified Greek male citizen youth. His
name may mean “god of the assembly,” and it seems to
have been connected with the annual Greek festival of
the Apelleia, at which 17-year-old males were initiated
into the community.
The god was believed to oversee several facets of civi-
lized life. As patron of MEDICINE and physicians, he could
cure human illness or, contrarily, bring it on. As lord of
MUSIC, poetry, and the MUSES, he inspired human poets
and was often shown in art holding the bard’s stringed
instrument, the lyre. He was associated with Greek math-
ematical discoveries and philosophical thought. He was a
patron of shepherds and archers. Along with the lyre,
Apollo’s most usual attribute was the archer’s bow; the
arrows with which he killed his enemies might be either
solid or intangible and “gentle,” bringing disease.
Apollo oversaw human religious purification and
atonement. One myth, most famously retold in AESCHY-
LUS’s tragedy Eumenides (458 B.C.E.), described how the
god personally exonerated the hero ORESTES of blood
guilt. In real life, certain priests of Apollo could provide
rituals or advice intended to cleanse a person or place of
religious pollution.
This giving of advice was related to Apollo’s most
famous aspect, the giving of prophecies. Through various
oracles—that is, priests or priestesses who supposedly
spoke for the god—Apollo might reveal the future and
the will of his father, Zeus. Apollo was not the only Greek
god of prophecy, but it was one of his oracular shrines
that became the Greek world’s most influential religious
center—DELPHI, in central Greece.
Oracles of Apollo existed at other Greek locales as well,
including CUMAE in western ITALY, Didyma and Claros on
the western coast of ASIA MINOR, and sites along Asia
Minor’s southern coast. Delphi’s preeminence was due to its
role as religious adviser to the great colonizing expeditions
that sailed from Greece in the 700s through 500s B.C.E. The
god of Delphi was the protector of colonists; one of Apollo’s
many cult titles was Archegetis, “leader of expeditions.”
The lord of harmony was linked with human
restraint and moderation. Apolline ideals were expressed
in two famous proverbs carved on the Delphi temple
wall: “Nothing in excess” and “Know thyself” (meaning
“Know your human limitations”).
Not every sanctuary of Apollo featured an oracle. After
Delphi, Apollo’s next most important sanctuary was on the
tiny Aegean island of DELOS, his mythical birthplace.
Apollo
35
Apollo, the god of youth, music, and prophecy, shown as a
young man, would probably have been holding a bow and
arrows, now missing. The statue is Roman (100s C.E.) in the
style of the Greeks (400s B.C.E.). (The J. Paul Getty Museum)

Although adorned with architectural splendors, Delos had
no oracle in historical times. Two other prominent, non-
oracular shrines of Apollo were at Amyclae (near SPARTA)
and at THEBES.
Modern scholars believe that Apollo’s cult, like that
of APHRODITE, entered Greek RELIGION relatively late—in
the centuries after the collapse of the MYCENAEAN CIVI-
LIZATION around 1200 B.C.E. Apollo may have emerged
from the fusion of two older deities: a god of shepherds,
brought southward by the DORIAN GREEKS in about
1100–1000 B.C.E., and a non-Greek, Semitic god of
plague, imported from PHOENICIA around 1000–800
B.C.E. via the island of CYPRUS, where Greeks and Phoeni-
cians mingled. If the primitive Dorian god was associated
with tribal animal totems, this could help explain
Apollo’s many sacred animals, including the wolf, stag,
swan, and dolphin. Apollo’s familiar title Phoebus, often
translated as “shining,” more probably meant “fox god.”
Similarly, Apollo’s Near Eastern ancestry may be
reflected in his Asia Minor cults and his mythical associa-
tion with the non-Greek city of TROY, in Asia Minor.
According to Greek legend, Apollo helped to found that
city and in the TROJAN WAR he fought on the side of the
Trojans, shooting arrows of plague into the Greek camp
(Iliad, book 1) and later guiding the Trojan arrow that
killed the Greek champion, ACHILLES.
Contrary to some modern belief, Apollo was not a
sun god. Although a Greek philosophical theory of the
400s B.C.E. associated him with the Sun, this never
became a sincere religious concept. Instead, the Sun had
its own mythical personification, named HELIOS.
See also APOLLONIA; ASKLEPIOS; BASSAE; BOXING; CAS-
SANDRA; COLONIZATION; CYRENE (1); CYRENE (2); EPIC
POETRY; HERAKLITUS; HOMER; HOMOSEXUALITY; HYACIN-
THUS; ION (1); LYCEUM; LYRIC POETRY; NIOBE; PROPHECY
AND DIVINATION; PYTHAGORAS; PYTHIAN GAMES.
Further reading: H. W. Parke, The Oracles of Apollo
in Asia Minor (London: Croom Helm, 1985); Mary
Barnard, The Myth of Apollo and Daphne from Ovid to
Quevedo: Love, Agon, and the Grotesque (Durham, N.C.:
Duke University Press, 1987); Jon Solomon, ed. Apollo:
Origins and Influences (Tucson: University of Arizona
Press, 1994); Leda Krontira, Getting to Know Apollo’s Del-
phi (Athens: Ekdotike Athenon, 1996).
Apollodorus of Athens (Apollodoros) (ca. 180–120
B.C.E.) Author of books on grammar, mythology, geography,
and history; said to have written the Bibliotheca [Library]
Apollodorus was born in Athens but spent much of his
adult life studying and writing in the cultural center of
Alexandria, where he was a pupil of the philologist
Aristarchus. He left Alexandria around 146 B.C.E., per-
haps for Pergamon, and eventually returned to his home
city of Athens. Since Byzantine times Apollodorus has
been said to have been the author of a famous mythologi-
cal work called the Bibliotheca [Library], but this text as
we have it today is actually a much later compilation,
written in the first or second century C.E.
Apollodorus is known to have written several works
that today survive only in tantalizing fragments. The
Chronica, in four books, was a historical account of
Greece from 1184 B.C.E. (said to be the fall of TROY) to
144/3 B.C.E. A later supplement continued the history
down to at least 120/19 B.C.E. Apollodorus’s work was
based on the writings of his third-century B.C.E. predeces-
sor, Eratosthenes, one of the first to try to establish a sys-
tematic chronology for events in Greek history. The
surviving fragments of the Chronica are composed in
iambic trimeter verse and show an eloquent writing style.
Another work by Apollodorus, mostly lost, was On
the Gods. This 24-book mythological treatise was filled
with attempts to explain the Greek gods in terms of ratio-
nal principles. Apollodorus had studied STOICISM in
Athens, and this work seems to have been greatly influ-
enced by the teachings of that philosophical school. The
surviving fragments of On the Gods are very different, in
this respect, from the Bibliotheca, providing another rea-
son to suspect that Apollodorus had nothing to do with
the composition of the latter. The Bibliotheca is a tradi-
tional, conservative retelling of numerous Greek myths,
closely based on the works of SOPHOKLES, EURIPIDES,
HOMER, and APOLLONIOS.
Apollonia
Several Greek cities bore this name, in
honor of APOLLO, god of colonists. The most important
Apollonia was located inland of the eastern Adriatic
coast, in a non-Greek territory that is now Albania. The
city was founded in about 600 B.C.E. by colonists from
CORINTH and perhaps also from CORCYRA, as part of a
Corinthian TRADE network extending westward to ITALY.
Other Greek cities named Apollonia included one on
the Aegean island of Naxos, one on the western BLACK
SEA coast, and one that was the port city of CYRENE (1).
See also COLONIZATION; EPIDAMNUS; ILLYRIS.
Further reading: H. Ceka, Apollonia (Tiranë, Albania:
N. Sh. botimeve “Naim Frashëri,” 1958); R. G. Good-
child, J. G. Pedley, and D. White, Apollonia, the Port of
Cyrene: Excavations by the University of Michigan
1965–1967 (Tripoli, Libya: Department of Antiquities,
1976).
Apollonius (ca. 295–230 B.C.E.) Greek poet and scholar
of Alexandria (1), in Egypt
Apollonius’s surviving epic poem, the Argonautica, presents
the legend of JASON (1) and the Argonauts in their quest
for the Golden Fleece. Impressive in its verbal beauty and
presentation of character, the Argonautica is the only Greek
epic to be preserved from the HELLENISTIC AGE (300–150
B.C.E.). The poem’s scholarly subject matter, its often play-
ful tone, and its concern with male and female sexual feel-
36
Apollodorus of Athens

ings all reveal the values of the Alexandrian literary move-
ment. Apollonius—along with his rival, KALLIMACHUS—
epitomizes this sophisticated movement.
Although probably born in Alexandria, Apollonius is
often known by the surname Rhodius (of RHODES), refer-
ring to the Greek island city where he spent the last part
of his life. According to various sources, he began as the
pupil of the established poet Kallimachus, but the two
men became antagonists in a famous literary feud. This
bitter quarrel—which the poets also pursued in their
verses—was perhaps based partly on literary tastes. (The
experimental Kallimachus objected to the writing of
Homeric-style EPIC POETRY, with its familiar subject mat-
ter and long plot.) Another cause of enmity may have
been King PTOLEMY (2) II’s appointment of Apollonius as
director of the great Library of Alexandria (ca. 265
B.C.E.). This prestigious job made Apollonius the most
influential person in the Greek literary world and inci-
dentally placed him in authority over Kallimachus, who
also was employed at the Library (and who may have
been passed over for the directorship).
Whether the disruptive feud played a part or not,
Apollonius resigned from the Library post and withdrew
to Rhodes, in order to write, or rewrite, his Argonautica.
This relatively short epic—5,834 dactylic hexameter lines,
in four books—skillfully combines traditional MYTH,
scholarly erudition, and romance. The first two books
describe the outward voyage from THESSALY to Colchis, at
the eastern shore of the BLACK SEA, the admirable third
book describes the Colchian princess MEDEA’s self-
destructive love for the hero Jason and the exploits relat-
ing to the fleece’s capture; the last book recounts the
Argonauts’ escape homeward by way of a fantastical route
that calls forth much geographical lore from the poet. The
poem’s flaw is a lack of cohesion in theme and tone, but it
is noteworthy for being the first Greek epic to include
psychological descriptions of a woman in love (possibly
inspired from the stage tragedies of EURIPIDES). In this and
other aspects, the Argonautica had a great affect on subse-
quent poetry, particularly on the Roman poet Vergil’s epic
work, the Aeneid (ca. 20 B.C.E.).
Apollonius also wrote prose treatises, epigrams, and
scholarly poems on the foundations of certain cities,
according to the literary taste of the day. Other than one
extant epigram attacking Kallimachus, these writings sur-
vive only in fragments.
See also LYRIC POETRY; WOMEN.
Further reading: Charles Rowan Beye, Ancient Epic
Poetry: Homer, Apollonius, Virgil (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell
University Press, 1993); Mary Margolies DeForest, Apol-
lonius’ Argonautica: A Callimachean Epic (Leiden, Nether-
lands: E. J. Brill, 1994); V. H. Knight, The Renewal of Epic:
Responses to Homer in the Argonautica of Apollonius (Lei-
den, Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 1995); Robert V. Albis, Poet
and Audience in the Argonautica of Apollonius (Lanham,
Md.: Rowman & Littlefield, 1996); Theodore Papanghelis
and Antononios Rengakos, eds., A Companion to Apollo-
nius Rhodius (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 2001); R. J.
Clare, The Path of the Argo: Language, Imagery, and Narra-
tive in the Argonautica of Apollonius Rhodius (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2002).
Aratus (1)
See ACHAEA.
Aratus (2) (ca. 315–240 B.C.E.) Greek poet and philosopher
Born in the city of Soli in southeastern ASIA MINOR, Ara-
tus studied at ATHENS under the Stoic founder Zeno.
There he met the future Macedonian king Antigonus II
(reigned ca. 276–239 B.C.E.). Aratus became a court poet
and physician to Antigonus, and it was at the king’s
request that he composed the long poem about ASTRON-
OMY, for which he is best known: the Phainomena
(aspects of the sky). He also composed a second poem,
Prognostica (signs of weather).
The Phainomena survives today. It is a didactic treatise
that combines religious and philosophical lore with the
astronomical theories of Eudoxus of KNIDOS (active ca.
350 B.C.E.) in explaining the movements of the heavenly
bodies. The poem was immensely popular in the ancient
world; it was admired and translated into Latin by Cicero.
Later generations regarded Aratus as one of the four great
Hellenistic poets, along with KALLIMACHUS, APOLLONIUS,
and THEOKRITUS, but the relatively abstruse subject matter
of his work leaves it virtually unread today.
See also HELLENISTIC AGE; STOICISM.
Further reading: Malcolm Campbell, ed., Index Verbo-
rum in Arati Phaenomena = A Word-index to Aratus’
Phaenomena (New York: G. Olms, 1988); Emma Gee,
Ovid, Aratus, and Augustus: Astronomy in Ovid’s Fasti (New
York: Cambridge University Press, 2000); D. Mark Pos-
sanza, Translating the Heavens: Aratus, Germanicus, and the
Poetics of Latin Translation (New York: Peter Lang, 2004).
Arcadia
This mountainous, landlocked, central portion
of the PELOPONNESE is bordered on the south by the terri-
tory of SPARTA and on the northeast by that of ARGOS.
Arcadia was inhabited by a rugged breed of highlanders
who claimed to have inhabited their mountain glens
since before the Moon was born. The poverty and hardi-
ness of the Arcadians is shown in their ancient reputation
for eating acorns. Serving as HOPLITES,
they were
formidable warriors, and by the 400s B.C.E. they were
producing mercenary soldiers for wars abroad.
Arcadia had few cities aside from the important group
of TEGEA, MANTINEIA, and Orchomenus in the eastern
plains, and (later) Megalopolis in the west. The area’s his-
tory in the 500s–300s B.C.E. mostly involves feuding
between Tegea and Mantinea and periodic resistance to
Spartan domination. The Theban statesman EPAMINONDAS
liberated Arcadia from Sparta at the battle of LEUCTRA
(371 B.C.E.) and founded a new city, MEGALOPOLIS, in
Arcadia
37

about 365 B.C.E. Megalopolis was a strategically located
settlement formed by the amalgamation of numerous
Arcadian villages, and it became the center of a new politi-
cal/religious federation.
In the Hellenistic period, Arcadia was divided in its
response to Macedonian domination, with Megalopolis
supporting the northern power and the rest of the cities
rebelling against them. From about 250 B.C.E., the Arcadi-
ans were members of the Achaean League. After being
defeated by the Romans, Arcadia (like the rest of Greece)
became part of the Roman province of Macedonia in 146
B.C.E. In the Roman period, the territory of Arcadia
declined sharply in importance and population.
The Arcadians’ dialect bore resemblance to that of
the distant island of CYPRUS; scholars believe that this
shared, unique dialect goes back to the language of the
MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION (ca. 1600–1200 B.C.E.). Both
Arcadia and Cyprus seem to have been points of refuge
for the Mycenaeans, whose civilization was destroyed by
internal wars and by the invading DORIAN GREEKS of
1100–1000 B.C.E. Corroboratively, archaeological evi-
dence reveals little settlement in Arcadia before about
1000 B.C.E.
In the cosmopolitan circles of the Hellenistic and
Roman worlds (and later, in the European Renaissance),
Arcadia was romanticized as the home of rustic virtues
amid a mythical Golden Age. The Sicilian-Greek poet
THEOKRITUS (ca. 265 B.C.E.) imagined Arcadia as an idyl-
lic haunt of lovelorn shepherds and shepherdesses.
See also HELLENISTIC AGE.
Further reading: W. E. Thompson, “Arcadian Fac-
tionalism in the 360s,” Historia 32 (1983): 149–160; M.
E. Voyatzis, The Early Sanctuary of Athena, Alea and other
Archaic Sanctuaries in Arcadia (Göteborg, Sweden: P.
Astroms forlog, 1990); O. Palagia and W. Coulson, eds.
Sculpture from Arcadia and Laconia. Proceedings of an
International Conference Held at the American School of
Classical Studies at Athens, April 10–14, 1992 (Oxford:
Oxbow Books, 1993).
archaeology
The science of archaeology involves the
systematic study of past cultures through the recovery
and analysis of material remains, including building
debris, sculpture in stone, wood, metal, or clay, metal
weapons and utensils, clay utensils, objects of wood or
basketry, coins, jewelry, human and animal skeletons,
plant remains, and written inscriptions. In most instances
these objects are preserved by being buried protectively
underground or by lying undisturbed for centuries on the
sea floor.
POTTERY was ubiquitous in ancient households and
provides by far the single most common source of archae-
ological data. Although clay vessels often break into
numerous small fragments, those fragments are virtually
indestructible and can be preserved in the ground for up
to 10,000 years. Stone, in building and in SCULPTURE, also
survives well, but many ancient structures have partially
or completely disappeared because they were quarried for
materials in later antiquity or the Middle Ages. Metal
objects, particularly bronzes, were frequently melted
down in later periods for reuse as sculpture, tools, or
coins. Organic materials such as wood, textiles, and
papyrus generally are not preserved, since they tend to
disintegrate due to moisture and other conditions of the
air and soil. Only in the arid atmosphere of Egypt and
some other southern and eastern Mediterranean sites, or
occasionally under water, have a few such materials been
preserved from ancient Greek times.
The subfield of archaeology that studies Greek and
Roman antiquities is traditionally called classical archae-
ology. It had its origins in art collecting, going back at
least to the London-based Society of Dilettanti (founded
1733 C.E.), which financed a series of expeditions to Italy
to produce sketches and written descriptions of visible
remains, and to purchase numerous antiquities. The prac-
tice of excavation had begun by 1738, when Queen Maria
of Naples sponsored the dig that discovered the ancient
Roman city of Herculaneum. The finds there and at Pom-
peii sparked a tremendous interest in classical antiquity
throughout western Europe. French, British, and German
enthusiasts eagerly purchased excavation rights at sites in
the eastern Mediterranean, often subsequently confiscat-
ing their discoveries. As a result, numerous Greek and
Turkish national treasures were stored and displayed in
western European countries. The most famous such case
is the group of PARTHENON sculptures known as the Elgin
Marbles, which is currently in the British Museum and is
the subject of many heated debates as Greece tries to
lobby for its return to Athens. Today, foreign archaeolo-
gists may receive permits to excavate in the Mediter-
ranean countries, but all artifacts remain government
property.
The most spectacular archaeological discoveries
regarding the ancient Greek world took place in the later
19th century. Using intuition and reliance on descriptions
in HOMER’s Iliad, the wealthy German businessman and
amateur archaeologist Heinrich Schliemann discovered
and excavated the site of ancient TROY (1871–73). Schlie-
mann next turned his attention to the mainland Greek
city of MYCENAE (whose location was already known).
Digging just inside the famous Lion’s Gate in the summer
of 1876, Schliemann discovered the group of treasure-
filled, second-millennium tombs now known as Grave
Circle A. Schliemann also excavated at Boeotian
ORCHOMENUS and at TIRYNS. His work proved the histori-
cal basis of the Homeric poems and established the exis-
tence of a previously unsuspected Greek prehistory, dated
around 1600–1200 B.C.E.—the MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION.
Similarly, starting in 1900 C.E. excavations by the British
scholar Sir Arthur Evans at KNOSSOS and other sites in
38
archaeology

CRETE brought to light the earliest great Aegean culture,
the MINOAN CIVILIZATION.
In the century since Evans, archaeology has benefited
from advanced technology, including aerial photography
and electromagnetic search. Aerial viewing of terrain
from aircraft at several thousand feet can reveal variations
in the color of topsoil or of ripening crops that indicate
the presence of buildings underneath. Electromagnetic
search—typically conducted on foot, with hand-held
equipment—can reveal the presence of buried material by
indicating an obstruction to the soil’s natural conductiv-
ity of electrical flow. Similarly, buried items of IRON or
burned clay create a perceptible distortion in the area’s
natural magnetic field.
Modern underwater equipment such as submersible
vessels, scuba gear, and the vacuum cleaner-like suction
dredger have opened the sea floor to archaeology since
the mid-20th century. Several dramatic Aegean finds have
been made in recent years, including the sunken ancient
trading ship lying off the island of Dokos, near the
Argolid, in southern Greece. Possibly a remnant of the
pre-Hellenic inhabitants of Greece, 2200 B.C.E., this very
early discovery testifies to those people’s shipbuilding
skill and overseas TRADE routes—assets later taken over
by the conquering Greeks.
Another valuable new technological advance in
archaeological research is DNA analysis. Better retrieval
processes on excavations recover increasing quantities of
plant remains and bones (both human and animal),
which can be subjected to genetic testing for identifica-
tion of species, gender, population group, and disease.
Despite modern equipment, archaeology still relies
much on “low-tech” tools as the trowel, brush, sieve, and
icepick-like piolet. After removing an area’s topsoil and
sifting it for displaced remains, the archaeological team
might divide the site into numbered quadrants, indicated
by a gridwork of strings held aloft on poles. As digging
proceeds with trowel, piolet, and brush, the team keeps
meticulous records regarding the depth at which each
discovered item was found. With some variation, earlier
items tend to be located deeper underground, later items
nearer the surface.
One of the greatest modern advances has been schol-
ars’ ability to assign a time frame to recovered items.
Until recently, dates were assigned largely on the basis of
associated information, such as excavation level, or how
the item’s shape compared with similar ones of known
date. But recent technology allows for dating on the basis
of some items’ molecular structure. For example, carbon-
14 dating measures the radioactive type of carbon that
occurs in all living matter. Thermoluminescence reveals
the number of loose electrons in certain material. Both
methods can give approximate dates to some archaeologi-
cal remains.
The most fruitful archaeological sites are ones that
are no longer inhabited. For instance, much of our infor-
mation about housing and town planning in the 300s
B.C.E. comes from OLYNTHOS, a north Aegean Greek city
abruptly destroyed by war in 357 B.C.E. and never reoccu-
pied. Conversely, archaeology at ATHENS has been greatly
restricted by the problem of how to requisition excava-
tion sites in the middle of the modern Greek capital city.
THEBES and PIRAEUS are two examples of modern Greek
cities sitting atop ancient layers that remain largely
untouched and inaccessible.
Among the more successful classical archaeological
projects of recent years has been the excavation of the
original city of Smyrna, near the modern Turkish seaport
of Izmir. The site—containing remnants of houses, a tem-
ple of the goddess ATHENA, and an encircling wall—pro-
vides the best surviving example of a Greek city-state of
the early 500s B.C.E.
See also
DELOS;
DELPHI;
EPHESOS;
EPIDAURUS;
LEFKANDI; LINEAR B.
Further reading: K. Schuchardt, Schliemann’s Excava-
tions: An Archaeological and Historical Study, translated by
Eugenie Sellers (New York: B. Blom, 1971); Dorothy
Leakley, Archaeological Excavations in Central and North-
ern Greece (Park Ridge, N.J.: Noyes Press, 1980); Michael
Grant, The Visible Past: Greek and Roman History from
Archaeology 1960–1990 (New York: Scribner, 1990); A. E.
Raubitschek, The School of Hellas: Essays on Greek His-
tory, Archaeology, and Literature (New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1991); Ian Morris, ed., Classical Greece:
Ancient Histories and Modern Archaeologies (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1994); Kenneth Sheedy, ed.,
Archaeology in the Peloponnese: New Excavations and
Research (Oxford: Oxbow Books, 1994); W. Biers, The
Archaeology of Greece: An Introduction, 2d ed. (Ithaca,
N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1996); Michael Shanks,
Classical Archaeology of Greece: Experiences of the Disci-
pline (New York: Routledge, 1996); James Delgado, ed.,
Encyclopedia of Underwater and Maritime Archaeology
(New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1998); James
Whitley, The Archaeology of Ancient Greece (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2001); Christopher Mee,
Greece: An Oxford Archaeological Guide (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2001).
Archidamus
Dynastic name among the Eurypontid
kings of SPARTA. The best known was King Archidamus
II, who reigned from about 469 to 427 B.C.E. His reign
was clouded by Spartan-Athenian hostility, culminating
in the PELOPONNESIAN WAR. Impressed by Athenian sea
power and wealth, Archidamus unsuccessfully urged his
fellow Spartans to vote against war in 431 B.C.E. He pre-
dicted (correctly) that they would be bequeathing the
war to their children.
After hostilities began, the aged Archidamus led the
Spartan invasion of Athenian territory in 431, 430, and
428 B.C.E. and the attack on PLATAEA in 429 B.C.E. The
Archidamus
39

war’s first decade, from 431 to the Peace of NIKIAS in 421
B.C.E., is often known as the Archidamian War.
See also EURYPONTID CLAN.
Further reading: C. D. Hamilton, “Philip II and
Archidamus,” in Philip II, Alexander the Great, and the
Macedonian Heritage (Washington, D.C.: University Press
of America, 1982): 61–83; C. D. Hamilton, “The Early
Career of Archidamus,” Echos du monde classique 1
(1982): 5–20; E. F. Bloedow, “Archidamus, the ‘Intelli-
gent’ Spartan,” Klio 65 (1983): 27–49.
Archilochos (ca. 680–640 B.C.E.) One of the earliest and
greatest Greek lyric poets
Archilochos was the bastard son of Telesikles, an aristo-
crat of the island of Paros, and a slave woman. Archilo-
chos emigrated with a colonizing expedition that his
father led to the northern Aegean island of THASOS (in a
GOLD- and SILVER-mining region). There Archilochos
served as a soldier, defending the colony against native
Thracians. At some point he may have taken work as a
mercenary to fight elsewhere. He is said to have died in
battle.
As a poet, Archilochos was an innovative genius, the
first person in Western culture to write movingly about
his own experiences and emotions. There had been lyric
poets before him, but he gave to his verses the kind of
strong personal content that is considered to be the iden-
tifying feature of more modern poetry. Later generations
of Greeks revered him as an artist of the caliber of
HOMER, PINDAR, and SOPHOKLES.
Archilochos’s work survives in some 100 fragments
quoted by later writers. His favorite verse forms are
iambic meters (which he pioneered as a form for satire)
and the elegy (generally composed to be sung or recited
to flute accompaniment). The personality that emerges in
these verses is cynical, angry, proud, and vigorously het-
erosexual. Archilochos’s illegitimate birth and adverse life
seem to have given him an outsider’s sardonic view of the
world, yet he could also feel intense passions.
Archilochos writes of his love for and anger with the
woman Neoboule and of his tender seduction of her
younger sister. Other subjects include shipwreck, war,
WINE,
and the male organ. One famous fragment
describes with jovial regret how he had to abandon his
(expensive but heavy) shield in order to run away from
the Thracians: “Let the shield go,” the fragment ends, “I’ll
get another just as good.” The antiheroic tone sounds
almost modern and sets Archilochos apart from other
voices of his age. Greek society frowned on a soldier’s
retreat and loss of shield, but that did not stop Archilo-
chos from writing about it. Among later Greeks he had a
reputation for being abusive in verse. According to leg-
end, when Neoboule’s father, Lycambes, reneged on his
promise to give her in MARRIAGE to Archilochos, the infu-
riated poet circulated such withering satirical verses that
Lycambes, Neoboule, and the rest of the family hanged
themselves out of shame.
See also AESOP; COLONIZATION; HOPLITE; LYRIC POETRY.
Further reading: Anne P. Burnett, Three Archaic Poets:
Archilochus, Alcaeus, Sappho (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1983); Carlos Miralles, Archilochus and
the Iambic Poetry (Rome: Edizioni dell’Ateneo, 1983).
Archimedes (287–211 B.C.E.) Inventor and mathemati-
cian from the Sicilian Greek city of Syracuse
Archimedes’ discoveries in geometry and hydrostatics (the
study of the properties of standing water) were monumen-
tal, and represent a high point of Greek achievement.
A friend and adviser of King Hieron II, Archimedes
was famous for his inventions, which included the
Archimedes screw, still used today for drawing a continu-
ous flow of water upward. Yet he dismissed engineering
feats as pandering to a vulgar public and was prouder of
his work in geometry, particularly his discovery that a
sphere contained inside a cylinder will always have an
area two-thirds that of the cylinder.
Regarding the weight-displacing abilities of the lever,
Archimedes made the famous statement, “Give me a
place to stand and I will move the world.” But his best-
remembered utterance concerns his discovery of the prin-
ciple of specific gravity, after he was asked by King
Hieron to determine whether a golden crown had been
adulterated by baser metal. Pondering the problem in his
bath at the GYMNASIUM (the story goes), Archimedes sud-
denly realized that he could compare the amount of water
displaced by the crown with that displaced by an equal
weight of pure GOLD. Delighted with his discovery, he ran
naked through the street shouting “I have found it!—
heur¯eka!” (or, as we render it today, “eureka”).
During the Roman siege of Syracuse (213–211 B.C.E.),
he constructed elaborate devices of defense, including a
giant glass lens that focused sunlight on Roman warships
in the harbor and set them afire. When the Romans cap-
tured the city, Archimedes was killed, supposedly because
he enraged a Roman soldier by commanding “Don’t dis-
turb my circles” as the man found him pondering dia-
grams in the sand.
Of his written work, nine treatises survive in Greek
and two others in later Arabic translation. Most of these
deal with geometrical inquiries, particularly regarding
circles, spheres, and spirals.
See also MATHEMATICS; SCIENCE.
Further reading: A. Wegener Sleeswyk, “Archimedes’
Odometer and Waterclock,” in Ancient Technology. Sympo-
sium Athens. 30.3–4.4.1987 (Helsinki: 1990); 23–37;
Sherman K. Stein, Archimedes: What Did He Do Besi-
des Cry Eureka? (Washington, D.C.: Mathematical Asso-
ciation of America, 1999); G. M. Phillips, Two Millennia
of Mathematics: From Archimedes to Gauss (New York:
Springer, 2000).
40
Archilochos

architecture
The ancient Greeks bequeathed a tremen-
dous legacy to subsequent centuries of Western civiliza-
tion in their architecture. The three “orders” that
developed between the 600s and 300s B.C.E. remain cen-
tral to architectural design even today and can be seen on
the exteriors of such modern neoclassical public build-
ings as banks, museums, libraries, and city halls. These
orders were known as Doric, Ionic, and Corinthian, and
all describe variations on buildings where a solid upper
structure (entablature) is supported by vertical columns.
Certain architectural elements are common to all
three of the ancient Greek orders. The columns stand on
a foundation course known as the stylobate, which is
sometimes itself supported by two or three more courses.
The columns have an upper part, the capital, which is the
easiest means of distinguishing the three orders. Doric
column capitals are relatively plain, with a rounded echi-
nus sitting on a square abacus. Ionic capitals have spiral
volutes at each corner, and Corinthian ones are derived
from a floral design, representing baskets of acanthus
leaves. Above the columns, the entablature includes a
frieze, which on a Doric building consists of alternating
elements called triglyphs and metopes. The blank metopes
could be filled with painted images or carved reliefs.
Ionic and Corinthian friezes were continuous, uninter-
rupted spans that were frequently filled with relief SCULP-
TURES. In every order, the temple’s sloped roof had a
triangular gable, or pediment, at the front and back. These
pediments were often adorned with sculptures fastened
to the wall behind. The figures often showed a scene
from MYTH, and Greek sculptors used great ingenuity in
devising arrangements that would accommodate the ped-
iment’s narrowing height at the outer edges. The sculp-
tures were painted, to project the flesh, hair, clothing,
and weaponry, and the pediment’s background was also
painted, usually a solid blue or red. In addition, the col-
umn capitals and the architectural moldings adorning
other elements of the building would have been brightly
painted in blue, red, and yellow.
The Doric and Ionic orders (both older than the
Corinthian order) emerged in the 600s B.C.E. specifically
for the construction of temples of the gods, which now
began to be built of stone. Previously, cult buildings had
generally been constructed of less permanent materials
such as wood, thatch, and mud-brick. As cut stone
(either limestone or marble) became the predominant
building material, Greek architects began developing
canonical systems of proportion and design for their
work. Scholars believe that the Doric and Ionic orders
are, to some extent, translations into stone of the wooden
structures that came before. For example, certain purely
ornamental details of the Doric style are best understood
as preserving (in stone) the shapes of wooden beams and
pegs that had been necessary structural elements of ear-
lier, wooden temples. Also, the vertical fluting of Doric
and Ionic columns may echo the grooving done by adze
in the tree-trunk pillars of earlier temples. Since wood is
rarely preserved in the archaeological record, however, no
wooden structures survive from ancient Greece to com-
pare with their stone successors.
The Doric order emerged in mainland Greece. The
name (Dorike arche in Greek) refers to the style having
originated at such prosperous Dorian-Greek cities as
CORINTH and the Corinthian colony of CORCYRA. The
earliest known all-stone building is the Temple of
Artemis at Corcyra (modern Corfu), completed around
590 B.C.E. This temple was built of limestone—cheaper,
more readily available, and easier to carve than marble—
which later became the preferred material for Greek
architects. Although only the building’s foundations and
parts of its western pediment survive today, modern
scholars can reconstruct its probable appearance. Like all
Greek temples, the heart of the cult building was a
walled, rectangular, roofed structure (the naos, or cella)
that housed the cult statue of the deity. The cella’s single
doorway was typically in the east, perhaps with two
architecture
41
The Ionic order was used specifically in the construction of
temples of the gods. The top or capital of each column was
decorated with this scroll-like pattern. (Alison Frantz Photo-
graphic Collection, American School of Classical Studies at
Athens)

columns in the entranceway. The roof extended on all
four sides around the cella and was supported on each
side by at least one row of columns. At Corcyra—as at
one of the most famous Greek temples, the Athenian
PARTHENON (completed by 438 B.C.E.)—there are eight
columns across the front and back, with 17 along each
side (counting the corner columns twice). This eventu-
ally became the canonical proportion for a Greek temple,
with “x” columns across the front and back and “2x + 1”
along the sides.
Also in the 600s B.C.E., the Ionic order emerged at
such wealthy Ionian-Greek cities as EPHESOS and MILE-
TUS, on the west coast of ASIA MINOR. Ionic buildings
were taller and lighter than Doric ones, and they were
also far more ornate. Of the distinctive details in the Ionic
order, the most obvious are the scroll-like volutes at the
four corners of the column capital. A forerunner of the
Ionic capital is the vegetal Aeolic capital, which survives
in a carved stone form of the 600s B.C.E. from the Greek
island of LESBOS (near the coast of Asia Minor).
Ionic columns are more slender than their Doric
counterparts. Other distinctive Ionic features include the
use of a decorative column base and a continuous frieze
replacing the Doric-style metopes and triglyphs beneath
the roof and pediments. This difference allowed the
Ionic entablature to show continuous carvings around
the entire building in the frieze. The most glorious
building in the Ionic order was the huge temple of
Artemis at Ephesos, constructed around 550–450 B.C.E.
and considered to be one of the SEVEN WONDERS OF THE
WORLD. Unfortunately, it and most other Ionic temples
have disappeared over the centuries. Among the few
Ionic structures standing today are the Erechtheion and
the Temple of Athena Nike, both on the Athenian
ACROPOLIS.
The Corinthian order arose in the 400s B.C.E. as an
ornate variant on the Ionic form, using a design of styl-
ized acanthus leaves for its column capital. Its early use
was more decorative than structural and seems to have
been confined to the interiors of certain structures in
southern Greece. One of the first known Corinthian
columns appears inside the Doric Temple of APOLLO at
BASSAE (ca. 400–390 B.C.E.). The Corinthian order first
appears on the exterior of a building (but still as an orna-
mental element) on the Monument of Lysikrates in
Athens (334 B.C.E.). It is employed in the 300s B.C.E. at
42
architecture
The Temple of Apollo at Corinth shows the fluted columns topped by rounded capitals of the Doric order in closer detail.
(Alison Frantz Photographic Collection, American School of Classical Studies at Athens)

the rotunda of ASKLEPIOS’s temple at EPIDAURUS and at the
Temple of ATHENA at TEGEA. Later the design was
thought to communicate imperial splendor and became a
favorite of the Romans; a great example of a Corinthian
temple in Greece is the Temple of Olympian Zeus in
Athens, mostly built in the second century C.E. under the
emperor Hadrian.
Greek architects were extremely talented and sophis-
ticated, and in the Classical period they began incorpo-
rating certain refinements into their buildings to create a
more “perfect” effect. One of the best-known examples
of a building with such architectural refinements is the
Athenian Parthenon. The horizontal courses of this
structure (such as the stylobate and the entablature)
curve upward in the center to counteract the natural
optical illusion that a horizontal line, seen from a dis-
tance, appears to sag downward. In addition, the
columns are carefully carved so that they are not per-
fectly straight but slightly cigar-shaped; this refinement
is called entasis.
See also DORIAN GREEKS; IONIAN GREEKS; RELIGION.
Further reading: J. J. Coulton, Ancient Greek Archi-
tects at Work: Problems of Structure and Design (Ithaca,
N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1977); A. W. Lawrence,
Greek Architecture, 5th ed. (New Haven, Conn.: Yale Uni-
versity Press, 1996).
archon
Meaning “leader” or “ruler,” the archon was a
political executive in numerous ancient Greek states.
Prior to the seventh century B.C.E., archons ruled for 10-
year terms; before that they had been chosen to serve for
life. In the democratic ATHENS of the mid-400s B.C.E. and
later, the archonship was a prestigious but relatively nar-
row job, with executive and courtroom duties. Nine
archons were selected annually by lot, from the Athenian
upper and middle classes.
The three senior Athenian archons were the archon
basileus (or king), the polemarchos (war leader), and the
archon eponumos (eponymous). The basileus oversaw state
religious functions and any related lawsuits. Religious and
judicial duties also were assigned to the polemarchos
(whose role as a military commander was discontinued
soon after 490 B.C.E.). The eponumos had jurisdiction over
cases of inheritance and other property rights. The man
who served as archon eponumos also gave his name to the
calendar year—that is, the year was henceforth known as
that in which so-and-so had been archon.
A man (WOMEN were ineligible) might be an archon
only once at Athens. After the end of his office, barring
any disqualifying offense, he was enrolled for life in the
judiciary council known as the AREOPAGOS.
See also DEMOCRACY; LAWS AND LAW COURTS.
Further reading: William B. Dinsmoor, The Archons
of Athens in the Hellenistic Age (Amsterdam: A. M.
Hakkert, 1966).
Areopagos
In the democratic ATHENS of the mid-400s
B.C.E. and later, the Areopagos was a special law court of
200–300 members, comprised of former ARCHONS. With
regard to its origin, the Areopagos (the word in Greek
means “hill of ARES,” indicating the site where the court’s
building stood) was a remnant of Athens’s old-time aris-
tocratic government.
In the days of aristocratic rule, around 900–600
B.C.E., the Areopagos probably ran the city, acting as a
legislative body and high court. As Athens developed in
stages toward DEMOCRACY, however, the Areopagos grad-
ually was shorn of power. Under SOLON (ca. 594 B.C.E.), a
new COUNCIL preempted the Areopagos’s legislative-exec-
utive duties, and a newly created court of appeals made
the Areopagos’s legal decisions no longer final.
As the job of Athenian archon became less exclusive
and demanding (500s–400s B.C.E.), so did the Areopagos
cease to function as a right-wing bastion. In 462 B.C.E. the
radical reforms of EPHIALTES deprived the Areopagos of
most of its important legal jurisdictions and distributed
these among the citizens’ ASSEMBLY, the council, and the
other law courts. The Areopagos henceforth heard only
cases of deliberate homicide, wounding, and arson.
In its capacity as a homicide court, the new, dimin-
ished Areopagos is celebrated in AESCHYLUS’s tragedy the
Eumenides (458 B.C.E.). In the second half of this play,
actors portray the ancient Areopagos sitting in judgment
over the mythical hero ORESTES for the murder of his
mother. Aeschylus wrote the Eumenides during the period
of civil turmoil following Ephialtes’ reforms, and one of
his intentions was to soothe the class strife of his fellow
citizens.
See also ARISTOCRACY; LAWS AND LAW COURTS.
Further reading: Robert W. Wallace, The Areopagos
Council, to 307 B.C. (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1989).
Ares
The Greek god of warfare, Ares was one of the 12
principal gods, the son of ZEUS and HERA. Unlike his
Roman counterpart, Mars, Ares was never considered by
the Greeks to be a benevolent guardian figure. He was
primarily a personification of battle, with little moral
aspect. He was physically attractive—thus his amorous
pairing with the beautiful APHRODITE—but cruel, arro-
gant, and bloodthirsty; he was disliked by most of the
other Olympians.
There were relatively few major sanctuaries in Greece
dedicated specifically to Ares’ worship; only in THEBES
was his cult important. He was also particularly associ-
ated with the land of THRACE and may have been Thra-
cian in origin, although his name seems to be Greek. His
sacred animals were the vulture and the dog.
In his epic poem the Odyssey (book 8), HOMER
describes how the clever smith god HEPHAISTOS captured
Ares making love with Hephaistos’s wife, Aphrodite, by
Ares
43

trapping them in an unbreakable chain-link net. The
lovers were then dragged in front of all the gods; this
irreverent tone is typical of much of Ares’ treatment in
myth and poetry; one passage in the Iliad (book 5) men-
tions that Ares was subdued by the demigods Otus and
Ephialtes, imprisoned in a metal casket.
Fierce and impetuous, Ares had unhappy associa-
tions. Disguised as a wild boar, he jealously killed Aphro-
dite’s mortal lover, the beautiful youth ADONIS. Ares’
children by various mortal women included such violent
characters as the Thracian Diomedes and the outlaw Cyc-
nus, both slain by HERAKLES. He was also the father of the
personifications Deimos (Fear) and Phobos (Terror). Ares
and Aphrodite were the parents of EROS and of Harmonia,
who became CADMUS’s wife.
See also ATHENA.
Further reading: Charlotte R. Long, The Twelve Gods
of Greece and Rome (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J. Brill,
1987); Arianna S. Huffington, The Gods of Greece (New
York: Atlantic Monthly Press, 1993); Giulia Sissa, The
Daily Life of the Greek Gods, translated by Janet Lloyd
(Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2000).
Argonauts
See JASON (1).
Argos
Major city of the eastern PELOPONNESE, located
three miles inland, on the western rim of the Argive plain,
at the neck of the large peninsula known as the Argolid.
The city’s patron deity was the goddess HERA, whose
Argive cult was very ancient, going back to the pre-Greek
mother goddess worshipped there. In its early days, Argos
was one of the foremost cities of Greece. But after about
600 B.C.E. SPARTA displaced Argos in the control of the
Peloponnese, and thereafter Argos’s story was one of
decline and subordination, despite flashes of ambition.
With its farmland and twin citadels, Argos was a
fortress and cult center by the early Bronze Age (ca. 2100
B.C.E.). The Greeks’ conquest of the region may perhaps
be shown by local ARCHAEOLOGY in the burned remnants
of the House of the Tiles at Lerna, near Argos. During the
Greek MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION (ca. 1600–1200 B.C.E.),
Argos shared preeminence with the overlord city of
MYCENAE, just across the plain, and with nearby TIRYNS.
Argos’s importance in this era is suggested by the
city’s prominent role in Greek MYTH, as the home of
PERSEUS (1), of ATREUS and his royal family, and of many
other heroes. In general, Argos seems to have supplanted
Mycenae in later folk memory (or perhaps Mycenae was
once called Argos). In the epic poems of HOMER, the term
Argive—along with Achaean and Danaan—simply means
“Greek.”
During 
the 
Dorian-Greek 
invasion 
of 
about
1100–1000 B.C.E., Argos became a Dorian city and the
Dorians’ base for their conquest of southern Greece.
Thereafter Argos remained supreme in the Peloponnese
for over 400 years until the rise of Sparta, farther south.
In the mid-600s B.C.E. Argos enjoyed a brief peak of
power under its dynamic King PHEIDON, who defeated
the Spartans at the Battle of Hysiae (669 B.C.E.) and
extended his rule across the Peloponnese. Pheidon may
also have been the first to introduce coinage into main-
land Greece, as well as a new system of weights and mea-
sures. But soon Sparta and CORINTH had become the great
southern Greek powers, while Argos withdrew into isola-
tion, occasionally emerging to fight (and lose to) Sparta.
Argos’s worst defeat came at the Battle of Sepeia (494
B.C.E.), at the hands of the Spartan king KLEOMENES (1).
This disaster brought the Spartans right up to the walls of
Argos (where, according to legend, the Argive poet Tele-
silla rallied her fellow citizens and led a counterattack of
armed Argive WOMEN).
During the Persian king XERXES’ invasion of Greece
(480–79 B.C.E.), Argos alone of the Peloponnesian states
remained neutral, in effect siding with the Persians. Inter-
nal strife, possibly caused by the trauma of Sepeia, now
resulted in the OLIGARCHY’s overthrow and the rise of a
DEMOCRACY on the Athenian model. Argos allied itself to
ATHENS in 461, 420, and 395 B.C.E., but did so without
realizing its potential as a rival to Sparta. In 226 B.C.E.,
Argos joined the Achaean League and came under Roman
control in 146 B.C.E.
Argos was famous for its Classical school of SCULP-
TURE. Its best-known member was the sculptor POLYK-
LEITOS, who worked in the mid-400s B.C.E. and was
particularly renowned for his statues of men. He wrote a
treatise on the perfect proportions of the human figure
and illustrated it with a BRONZE statue of a warrior called
the Spear-bearer (Greek: Doryphoros). His original work
does not survive but is preserved in numerous copies
from the Roman period.
See also ACHAEA; DORIAN GREEKS; PELOPONNESIAN
WAR; THEMISTOKLES.
Further reading: R. A. Tomlinson, Argos and the
Argolid: From the End of the Bronze Age to the Roman Occu-
pation (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1972);
Thomas Kelly, A History of Argos to 500 B.C. (Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 1976); Christopher Pfaff,
The Architecture of the Classical Temple of Hera (Princeton,
N.J.: American School of Classical Studies, 2003).
Arion (600s B.C.E.) Greek lyric poet
Arion was active at the wealthy court of the tyrant
PERIANDER in CORINTH, around 620 B.C.E. He was born
on the Aegean island of LESBOS—where strong artistic
traditions produced other poets of this era, including
SAPPHO,
ALCAEUS,
and TERPANDER—and he became
famous as a performer who sang his own verses, as well
as other poets’, while accompanying himself on the
kithara (a type of lyre). The Greek historian HERODOTUS
described Arion as “the best singer in the world.”
44
Argonauts

Arion is credited with imposing artistic order on the
dithyramb, a song sung by a chorus in honor of the god
DIONYSUS. Apparently he systematized the performance
so that the singers stood stationary, grouped in a circle;
he may have assigned a specific subject to each song.
These developments would later contribute to the emer-
gence of Greek stage tragedy. None of Arion’s composi-
tions survives today.
But Arion is best remembered for the charming legend
that he rode on a dolphin’s back through the sea. Accord-
ing to the tale told by Herodotus, Arion—returning from a
lucrative performance tour of the Greek cities of SICILY and
ITALY—took passage on a ship from Italy to Corinth. But
he was forced to jump overboard when the crew decided to
steal his money. As the ship sailed on, Arion was picked up
at sea by a dolphin—an animal sacred to the god APOLLO,
who was also the patron of poets. Carried to Cape Tae-
narum, on the southern coast of the PELOPONNESE, Arion
made his way back to Corinth, arriving ahead of the ship.
When the ship’s crew reached Corinth, they were con-
fronted by Arion and the ruler, Periander.
The legend may have a kernel of truth. According to
modern scientific studies, the sea mammals known as
dolphins and porpoises are the only wild animals to be
attracted to humans. It is not unusual for dolphins to
flock around a human swimmer at sea.
See also MUSIC; LYRIC POETRY; THEATER.
Further reading: A. W. Picard-Cambridge, Dithyramb,
Tragedy, and Comedy, 2d ed. (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1962); Lonzo, Anderson, Arion and the Dolphins: Based on
an Ancient Greek Legend (New York: Scribner, 1978).
Aristides (Aristeides) (ca. 530–465 
B.C.E.) Athenian
soldier and statesman who was one of the founders of the
Athenian empire
Aristides was instrumental in creating the Athenian-con-
trolled alliance of Greek states known as the DELIAN
LEAGUE. He was surnamed “the Just” for his reputedly
fair dealings in politics and in diplomacy with other
Greek states.
According to the later Greek writer PLUTARCH, Aris-
tides was one of the Athenian generals at the Battle of
MARATHON (490 B.C.E.). Yet in 482 B.C.E. the Athenians
voted to ostracize him—amid a rash of OSTRACISMS in the
480s B.C.E. This might have been an outcome of Aristides’
political conflict with THEMISTOKLES.
As required by the ostracism law, Aristides withdrew
from ATHENS, expecting to be in exile for 10 years. How-
ever, two years later he was recalled to help against the
Persian king XERXES’ invasion of Greece. Elected as a gen-
eral by the Athenians, he served alongside his former
enemy Themistokles. Aristides fought at the Battle of
SALAMIS (1) (480 B.C.E.) and, reelected as general for the
following year, commanded the Athenian contingent at
the land BATTLE OF PLATAEA (479 B.C.E.).
As a general again in 478 B.C.E., Aristides led the
Athenian squadron in the allied Greek naval liberation of
BYZANTIUM and much of CYPRUS. When the arrogance of
the Spartan commander Pausanias alienated the other
Greeks, Aristides began his diplomatic efforts to secure a
mutual-defense alliance between Athens and the eastern
Greek states. When the resulting Delian League was
formed, in the summer of 478 or 477 B.C.E., Aristides
won admiration for his fair assessment of the annual con-
tribution due from each member state.
Aristides seems to have been widely contrasted with
the wiliness and rapacity of Themistokles. At the perfor-
mance of AESCHYLUS’s tragedy SEVEN AGAINST THEBES in
Athens in 467 B.C.E., when certain lines were spoken
concerning the hero Amphiaraus’s wisdom and righ-
teousness, the entire audience turned to look at Aristides
in his seat.
Aristides is said to have died poor, having refused to
enrich himself dishonestly through office.
Further reading: Plutarch, The Lives of the Noble Gre-
cians and Romans, translated by John Dryden (New York:
Modern Library, 1979); Barbara Scardigli, ed., Essays on
Plutarch’s Lives (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1994).
aristocracy
The word comes from the Greek aristokra-
tia and means “rule by the best.” It refers to an early form
of government in some Greek city-states whereby power
was shared by a small circle whose membership was
defined by privilege of noble birth. This ruling circle—
often confined to one clan—tended to monopolize
wealth, land, and military and religious office as well as
government. The typical instrument of aristocratic rule
was the COUNCIL (boul¯e), a kind of omnipotent senate
that decided laws and state policies.
Aristocracies arose to supplant the rule of kings, after
the fall of MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION around 1200–1100
B.C.E. (Some Greek states, such as ARGOS and SPARTA,
seem to have retained kings who were merely the first
among aristocratic equals.) By the 600s B.C.E., however,
growth in TRADE and revolutionary developments in war-
fare had resulted in the breakup of the old aristocratic
monopoly, as a new class of citizen—the middle class—
acquired wealth and military importance. In some cities,
such as CORINTH, conflict between aristocrats and com-
moners produced revolutions that placed popular
TYRANTS in power; elsewhere, the new middle class grad-
ually was granted political power. In these cases, the aris-
tocracy became an OLIGARCHY (rule by the few—the mass
of poorer citizens still were excluded from power).
Although oligarchies resembled aristocracies in certain
ways, such as the council, they notably lacked the old
requirement of the noble blood.
See also HOPLITE; POLIS.
Further reading: Paul L. MacKendrick, The Athenian
Aristocracy, 399 to 31 B.C. (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
aristocracy
45

University Press, 1969); Oswyn Murray, Early Greece, 2d
ed. (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1993);
Martin Ostwald, Oligarchia: The Development of a Constitu-
tional Form in Ancient Greece (Stuttgart: F. Steiner, 2000).
Aristogeiton
See HARMODIUS AND ARISTOGEITON.
Aristophanes (ca. 450–385 B.C.E.) Athenian comic play-
wright
In antiquity, Aristophanes was recognized as the greatest
classical Athenian writer of comedy. Eleven of his 30 or
so plays have survived in their entirety. These 11 plays
supply our only complete examples of fifth-century-B.C.E.
Athenian “Old Comedy” and show the highly political
nature of that art, with plots and jokes devoted to current
events. Aristophanes’ work provides valuable information
about Athenian public opinion during the PELOPON-
NESIAN WAR (431–404 B.C.E.).
As suggested by his name (meaning “noblest show-
ing”), Aristophanes probably came from an aristocratic
family. On the basis of a reference in Aristophanes’ play
Acharnians, some scholars believe that the playwright
owned land on the Athenian-occupied island of AEGINA.
The satirical spirit of his comedies provides no clear
proof of Aristophanes’ own political beliefs, but he proba-
bly identified with the intellectual, anti-left-wing, and
basically antiwar Athenian noble class (the class that pro-
vided the military’s CAVALRY and that is sympathetically
portrayed in Aristophanes’ play Knights). Without being
fully antidemocratic, Aristophanes’ comedies mock the
excesses of Athenian DEMOCRACY: namely, the people’s
fickle abuse of power and the political pandering and vul-
garity of the demagogues.
But any aspect of Athenian life was fair game for
Aristophanes, whose weapons were parody, burlesque,
and comic exaggeration. Against members of his own
leisured class, he derides the dishonest quibbling of the
SOPHISTS, and the abstruse brainwork of the philosopher
SOCRATES and the tragedian EURIPIDES. These men and
many of his other targets were Aristophanes’ contempo-
raries, who might be found in the audience at a play’s
performance.
Athenian comedy was performed at two state-spon-
sored festivals: the Lenaea, in midwinter, and the grander
holiday called the City Dionysia, in early spring. Each
play was part of a three-way competition.
By a convention of the era, most of Aristophanes’
plays are titled according to the group character of the
onstage chorus. His earliest play, Banqueters (427 B.C.E.),
was presented when he was probably in his early 20s.
Neither that work nor his comedy of the next year, Baby-
lonians, has survived, but we know that Babylonians dar-
ingly portrayed the Greek subject allies of the Athenian
empire as SLAVES, grinding at the mill. Coming at a
moment when ATHENS was relying heavily on allied loy-
alty against the Spartan enemy in the Peloponnesian War,
the play provoked the powerful left-wing politician
KLEON to prosecute Aristophanes. (We do not know the
exact charge.) The prosecution failed, and Aristophanes’
mocking pen was eventually turned against Kleon.
Acharnians, performed at the Lenaea of 425 B.C.E., is
Aristophanes’ earliest surviving work. The plot involves
an Athenian farmer who makes a private peace with the
Spartans while the Athenian military fights on. The play’s
pro-peace message foreshadows the more urgent antiwar
themes of Aristophanes’ Peace (421 B.C.E.) and Lysistrata
(411 B.C.E.). Without being defeatist, Acharnians spoke to
a city disillusioned in its hopes of an early victory, and
the play received first prize.
Knights, performed at the 424 B.C.E. Lenaea, is
Aristophanes’ most political play: It amounts to a vicious
attack on the politician Kleon, who at that time was
standing for election to Athens’s board of generals. In
Knights, Kleon clearly appears in the character of a flat-
tering, scheming slave named Philodemos (“lover of the
people”). Philodemos’s foolish and elderly master is
Demos (“the people”), and the plot involves Philodemos’s
vulgar competition with a sausage vendor for Demos’s
affection. The Athenians approved of Aristophanes’
mockery of Kleon, and Knights received first prize. How-
ever, the real-life Kleon still won the election.
Clouds ridicules the real-life Socrates as a crackpot
scientist and corrupt teacher of sophistry and RHETORIC.
The play won only third prize at the 423 B.C.E. City
Dionysia, being defeated by KRATINUS’s masterpiece, The
Bottle. The next year saw the Wasps, which parodies
Athenian litigiousness and the elderly Athenians’ enthusi-
asm for jury duty. Like Knights, this play contains liberal
mockery of Kleon (who had sponsored a law increasing
jury pay). Kleon’s death in battle in 422 B.C.E. deprived
Aristophanes of his favorite comic butt.
Peace was presented at the City Dionysia of 421
B.C.E., just a few days before or after the Peace of NIKIAS
was concluded, which supposedly ended the Pelopon-
nesian War. This plot involves the rescue of the goddess
Peace from her prison pit. Despite its topical subject,
Peace received only second prize.
Aristophanes’ comedies of the years 420–415 B.C.E.
have not come down to us. By the time of his next extant
work, Birds (414 B.C.E.), the playwright had begun to
move away from political topics in favor of themes more
generally social. In Birds, two Athenians, in despair over
the city’s litigiousness, fly off and create a bird city in the
sky, Cloud-cuckoo-land (Nephelokokkugia). Birds con-
tains some of Aristophanes’ finest theatrical effects, par-
ticularly in its onstage chorus of birds. The play won
second prize at the City Dionysia.
The year 411 B.C.E. brought two comedies about
WOMEN’s issues. Thesmophoriazusae (women celebrating
the Thesmophoria festival) amounts to a satire on the
tragedies of Euripides; the story involves a scheme by the
46
Aristogeiton

Athenian women to destroy Euripides on account of his
plays’ revealing portrayal of women. Lysistrata imagines
the Athenian women organizing a sex strike to compel
the men to make peace in the Peloponnesian War (which
by now was turning disastrously against Athens). The
comedy combines bawdiness with a sincere, conciliatory,
antiwar message.
Frogs, which won first prize at the Lenaea in 405
B.C.E., is considered Aristophanes’ masterpiece. The
comic protagonist is the god DIONYSUS, who journeys to
the Underworld to fetch back the tragedian Euripides
(who in fact had died the previous year). But once in the
Underworld, Dionysus is compelled to judge a contest
between Euripides and AESCHYLUS (died 456 B.C.E.), as to
who was the greater tragedian. Deciding in favor of
Aeschylus, the god brings him back, instead, to save
Athens. Part of Frogs’ appeal is its pathos: Performed
barely a year before Athens’ final defeat in the war, the
play conveys a giddy sense of desperation.
Aristophanes’ career continued after the war’s end for
perhaps 20 years, but we have only two plays from this
final period. Ecclesiazusae (women in the assembly) was
presented in 392 or 391 B.C.E. In this play, the Athenian
women, tired of the men’s mismanagement, take over the
government and proclaim a communist state.
Wealth (388 B.C.E.) is Aristophanes’ latest surviving
comedy. Plutus, the god of wealth, is blind, which
explains why riches are inappropriately distributed in the
world. But when Wealth regains his sight in the story,
attempts at redistribution create social chaos. Wealth
clearly belongs to the less political, more cosmopolitan
“comedy of manners” of the 300s B.C.E.
See also ASSEMBLY; EUPOLIS; MENANDER; THEATER.
Further reading: Kenneth J. Dover, Aristophanic
Comedy (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1972);
E. David, Aristophanes and Athenian Society of the Early
Fourth Century B.C. (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J. Brill,
1984); Lauren Taaffe, Aristophanes and Women (New
York: Routledge, 1993); Douglas MacDowell, Aristo-
phanes and Athens: An Introduction to the Plays (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1995); G. Van Steen, Venom in
Verse: Aristophanes in Modern Greece (Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press, 2000).
Aristotle (384–322 B.C.E.) Greek philosopher and scientist
A man of immense learning and curiosity, Aristotle (Aris-
toteles) can be seen as the most influential Western
thinker prior to the 19th century C.E. Aristotle spent 20
years as the student of the great Athenian philosopher
PLATO, but he eventually rejected his teacher’s other-
worldly doctrines to concentrate on better understanding
the material world around him. Aristotle was as much
interested in defining problems as in finding answers, and
he created categories of systematic research that are still
used today, including “logic,” “biology,” and “physics.”
His writings established a scholarly tradition of study that
formed a foundation for all subsequent scientists and
philosophers. He also founded a new scholarly commu-
nity in Athens, the LYCEUM, which became one of the
greatest centers for advanced study in the ancient world.
His chief accomplishment in PHILOSOPHY was in
devising the first system of logic—the system now known
as Aristotelian syllogistic, which provided a cornerstone
of logic studies for centuries. In SCIENCE his work was
epochmaking. He pioneered the studies of biology and
zoology (among others), and he divorced science from
philosophy, setting scientific method on its future course
of empirical observation.
Of his many writings, less than one-fifth have sur-
vived—about 30 treatises. Yet these few works came to
dominate European higher learning during the Middle
Ages and Renaissance. Among his other accomplishments,
Aristotle was one of the first political scientists, catalogu-
ing and analyzing the various forms of government in the
Greek world and beyond. His extant treatise Politics is
now probably his most widely read work, having become
a virtual textbook for college political science courses.
Although he spent more than half his adult life in
ATHENS, Aristotle was never an Athenian citizen. He was
born in a minor town named Stagirus (later Stagira), in the
Greek colonial region called CHALCIDIC¯E, on the northwest
Aegean coast near the Greek kingdom of MACEDON. Aris-
totle’s father, Nicomachus, was the court physician to the
Macedonian king Amyntas III. Aristotle’s career was des-
tined to be shaped by both the Macedonian connection
and by the medical tradition’s emphasis on observation and
diagnosis. The family was probably rich; hence Aristotle’s
ability to travel and to devote himself to study.
After Nicomachus’ death, 17-year-old Aristotle was
sent to Athens to join Plato’s philosophical school, the
ACADEMY (367 B.C.E.). Eventually recognized as Plato’s
foremost pupil and possible successor at the Academy,
Aristotle remained there for 20 years until Plato’s death
(347 B.C.E.). In the election of the Academy’s new presi-
dent, Aristotle was passed over—which may be why he
then left Athens with a number of friends and followers.
They traveled to northwest ASIA MINOR, where they set
up a school at the town of Assos at the invitation of Her-
mias, a local Greek ruler who was a Persian vassal. Evi-
dently Aristotle became a close friend of Hermias, for he
married Hermias’s adopted daughter, Pythias. But when
Hermias was arrested and executed for some unknown
reason by the Persians, Aristotle and his followers sailed
to the nearby Greek island of LESBOS, and stayed in the
city of MYTILENE. By then Aristotle’s group included a
well-born man of Lesbos named Theophrastus, who
became his protégé and later his successor as head of his
philosophical school.
At the landlocked lagoon of Pyrrha, in central Les-
bos, Aristotle conducted many of the observations of
marine animals recorded in his zoological writings. His
Aristotle
47

method of field observation and documentation—an
innovation in his own day—was destined to set the pat-
tern for all future biological study.
In around 343 B.C.E.
the 41-year-old Aristotle
accepted an invitation from King Philip, by then the most
powerful man in the Greek world, to go to Macedon to
tutor Philip’s 13-year-old son, Alexander (who was des-
tined to conquer the Persian Empire and be known to
history as ALEXANDER THE GREAT). Aristotle spent about
three years providing a higher education for the prince
and some of his retinue. The curriculum probably
included political science—Aristotle wrote two (lost)
treatises for Alexander, On Kingship and On Colonists—as
well as studies in literature and biology. Aristotle gave
Alexander an edited version of HOMER’s Iliad that the
young warrior supposedly carried with him for the rest of
his life. According to legend, King Alexander would later
send Aristotle specimens of unfamiliar Eastern plants and
animals to study. Beyond this, however, Aristotle’s influ-
ence on Alexander was not profound, and the teacher
probably went home to Stagirus after Alexander began
serving as regent for his father, in 340 B.C.E.
In 335 B.C.E., after Alexander had inherited the
throne, Aristotle returned to Athens to establish his own
philosophical school there. He opened the school in
rented buildings outside the city, on the grounds of a
GYMNASIUM known as the Lyceum ([Lukeion], named for
its grove sacred to the god APOLLO in his cult title
Lukeios). Aristotle’s Lyceum period (335–323 B.C.E.) is
the third and most important phase of his life.
The Lyceum enjoyed special resources and status—
Alexander supposedly donated the immense sum of 800
TALENTS—and was protected by the local Macedonian
authorities. Without doubt, the Lyceum provided Aris-
totle with the means to engage in the encyclopedic array
of inquiries for which he is remembered. The school
resembled a modern university in some ways, with gen-
eral courses alongside “graduate” research projects
under the master’s guidance. Among such delegated
projects was a description of the individual govern-
ments (or “constitutions”) of the 158 most important
Greek cities; of these 158 analyses, only one survives
today—the Constitution of Athens (Athenaion Politeia),
our major source of information for the workings of the
Athenian DEMOCRACY.
Supposedly, Aristotle would lecture to general audi-
ences in the morning and to the advanced scholarly cir-
cle in the afternoon. It is said that he had a habit of
walking around (peripatein) while lecturing and that his
listeners walked with him—which gave to the commu-
nity its title of the Peripatetic School. (However, the
name may come from the roofed courtyard, peripatos,
that was a physical feature at the Lyceum or at a later
site.) In personal demeanor, Aristotle is said to have
dressed elegantly or even foppishly and to have spoken
with an upper-class lisp.
During these years at Athens, Aristotle’s wife,
Pythias, died, and he lived with a common-law wife, Her-
pylla. Aristotle had two children: a daughter named
Pythias, after her mother, and a son, Nicomachus, by
Herpylla. Nicomachus is remembered in the title of Aris-
totle’s Nicomachean Ethics, so called because the son sup-
posedly edited the work after his father’s death.
With Alexander’s sudden death in the East (323
B.C.E.), anti-Macedonian feeling erupted at Athens, and a
criminal charge of impiety was lodged against Aristotle.
The 61-year-old scholar fled, supposedly remarking that
he was saving the Athenians from committing a second
sin against philosophy (a reference to their execution of
SOCRATES for impiety in 399 B.C.E.). Aristotle took refuge
at the nearby city of CHALCIS, where his mother had been
born and where a Macedonian garrison was in control,
and there he died in the following year (322 B.C.E.).
As previously mentioned, less than one-fifth of Aris-
totle’s writings are represented in the 30 works that have
come down to us. The vanished work—bits of which sur-
vive as quotations cited by later ancient authors—
included poems, letters, essays, and Platonic-style
dialogues. Many of these were polished literary pieces,
intended for a general readership: In a later century, the
Roman thinker Cicero described Aristotle’s writing style
as “a river of gold.” This praise would not be appropriate
for the 30 surviving items, which often make for difficult
reading.
Ironically, most of these extant writings probably
were never meant for publication. Many seem to be Aris-
totle’s lecture notes for his more advanced courses of
study. These “treatises” or “esoteric writings,” as they are
sometimes called, contain passages that are notoriously
difficult—either overly condensed or repetitive—with
apparent cross-references to works now lost. The titles
and sequence of these preserved treatises are not Aristo-
tle’s choice, but rather are the work of ancient editors
after Aristotle. However, the 30 treatises do provide a
good sampling of Aristotle’s mature thought, covering
logic, metaphysics, ethics, scientific inquiries, literary
criticism, and political science.
Aristotle’s six treatises on logic (logik¯e, meaning “the
art of reasoning”) are sometimes mentioned under the
collective title Organon, or “tool”—that is, of thought. Of
these works, the best known is the one titled Prior Ana-
lytics, which contains Aristotle’s system of syllogistic. (A
syllogism is a form of reasoning consisting of two
premises and a conclusion. The classic form of syllogism
is: [1] Socrates is a man. [2] All men are mortal. There-
fore, [3] Socrates is mortal.) The Prior Analytics examines
the various forms of syllogistic thought.
Other extant treatises include studies of the natural
world: Physics, On the Heavens, Meteorology, Generation of
Animals, and the admired History of Animals (so called
traditionally, although Zoological Researches would better
translate the Greek title), which presents many careful
48
Aristotle

descriptions of different species. The very notions of
genus and species—general type, specific type—are
among the categories devised by Aristotle.
Aristotle’s theory of reality is found in his Meta-
physics, or “Beyond Physics” (a title created by an ancient
editor, originally signifying only that the book followed
the Physics in sequence). Here—in a criticism and radical
adaptation of Plato’s theory of Forms—Aristotle explains
how universal qualities are rooted in particulars. For
example, a specific dog partakes of universal “dogness”
along with all other canines, yet this dogness has no exis-
tence apart from the world’s flesh-and-blood dogs. Book
12 of the Metaphysics presents Aristotle’s well-known pic-
ture of God as the unmoved mover—pure intelligence,
uninvolved in the world’s day-to-day occurrences.
In book 1 of the Nicomachean Ethics, Aristotle identi-
fies the attainment of happiness as the highest good, and
he defines happiness as an activity of the soul in confor-
mity with virtue (aret¯e). Book 2 is famous for defining
virtue as the mean (mesot¯es) between two extremes of
behavior: Courage, for example, falls between cowardice
and recklessness; generosity falls between stinginess and
extravagance.
In the Rhetoric, Aristotle examines the art of public
speaking in terms of its desired goal, persuasion. The
Poetics analyzes the nature of literature and offers the
famous Aristotelian observation that stage tragedy pro-
vides a cleansing (katharsis) of the audience’s emotions of
pity and fear.
See also ASTRONOMY; EDUCATION; MEDICINE.
Further reading: G. E. R. Lloyd, Aristotelian Explo-
rations (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1996);
Jonathan Barnes, Aristotle: A Very Short Introduction, 2d
ed. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000); Adrian Old-
field, Ordered Cities, Ordered Souls: An Introduction to
Greek Political Thought (London: Routledge, 2003).
Aristoxenus
See MUSIC.
armies
See ALEXANDER THE GREAT; CAVALRY; HOPLITE;
PELOPONNESIAN WAR; PERSIAN WARS; PHALANX; WAR-
FARE, LAND.
arms and armor
See CAVALRY; HOPLITE; WARFARE, LAND.
art
See ARCHITECTURE; PAINTING; POTTERY; SCULPTURE.
Artemis
Greek goddess of wilderness, wild animals,
and the hunt, also associated with childbirth and the
Moon. Although her worship was of secondary rank in
most cities of mainland Greece, she was a principal deity
for many Greeks of ASIA MINOR. At EPHESOS, for example,
she was the primary city deity and was honored with a
huge temple, begun in the mid-500s B.C.E. and counted
as one of the SEVEN WONDERS OF THE WORLD.
In MYTH, Artemis was the twin sister of the god
APOLLO; their parents were the great god ZEUS and the
demigoddess Leto. Impregnated by Zeus, Leto fled from
Zeus’s jealous wife, HERA, and found refuge on the island
of DELOS, in the AEGEAN SEA. There she gave birth to the
divine twins. Artemis was born first and, while only a few
minutes old, helped her mother give birth to Apollo. For
this reason, the Greeks considered her to be a goddess of
childbirth, even though she is a virgin with no children of
her own. She is also the guardian of young girls, before
they become women.
Artemis and Apollo grew to be skilled archers. With
their arrows, they slew a number of Leto’s enemies,
including the 14 children of the arrogant NIOB¯E. Niob¯e
had boasted that she was superior to the goddess because
she had borne seven sons and seven daughters, while
Leto had only one of each. Artemis also shot the enor-
mous hunter ORION, who had tried to rape her; his body
now hangs as a constellation in the sky.
Artemis
49
Statuette of Artemis, goddess of wilderness, wild animals, and
the hunt, shown with her bow and holding a fawn (Alison
Frantz Photographic Collection, American School of Classical
Studies at Athens)

Like ATHENA and HESTIA, Artemis was a virgin god-
dess. Imagined as a lithe young woman, she was said to
roam mountain forests and uncultivated lands, hunting
the beasts and, contrarily, overseeing their safety and
reproduction. Her most famous title, mentioned by the
poet HOMER (ca. 750 B.C.E.), was Potnia Theron, “mistress
of wild animals.” In art she often was shown accompanied
by deer, bears, or similar beasts, and myths told of her ret-
inue of NYMPHS—female creatures embodying the spirit of
wilderness places. Among her human devotees described
in myth were the Athenian prince HIPPOLYTUS and the
female warriors known as AMAZONS. Two regions dear to
Artemis were the mountains of CRETE and ARCADIA.
In the classical Greek mind, Artemis’s virginity prob-
ably suggested the sanctity of wilderness places. A legend
tells how the Theban prince Actaeon, while out hunting
with his hounds, accidentally found Artemis bathing
naked in a stream. Enraged to have her modesty compro-
mised, the goddess changed Actaeon into a stag, where-
upon his own hounds mauled him to death.
Although she had no children of her own, Artemis
was concerned with birth and offspring among both ani-
mals and humans. One of her titles was Kourotrophos
(“nurse of youths”). Like the goddess HERA, Artemis
watched over WOMEN in labor. They would call on her in
their distress, remembering the birthing pains of Leto.
Women who died in childbirth, or who died suddenly
from other natural causes, were said to have been killed
by Artemis’s arrows.
The puzzle of why the Greeks would have a virgin
fertility goddess can perhaps be explained. Artemis may
combine two different heritages, of which the fertility
concept is the older. The name Artemis seems not to
come from the Greek language, and scholars believe that
this goddess—like Athena and Hera—was not originally
Greek. Rather, Artemis represents a religious survival
from the non-Greek peoples who inhabited the Aegean
region before the first Greek invaders arrived in about
2100 B.C.E. A goddess of mountains and beasts is por-
trayed on surviving gemstones and other artwork of the
second millennium B.C.E. from Minoan Crete. This
unnamed goddess, or series of goddesses, is shown walk-
ing with a lion and standing between rampant lions. She
appears to be a deity of wilderness abundance. Presum-
ably the conquering Greeks appropriated this regal Lady
of Animals into their own RELIGION, during the second
millennium B.C.E., changing her into Zeus’s daughter.
This origin would explain the Greek Artemis’s ties to
Crete. Artemis’s virginity could have been an aspect cre-
ated by the Greeks, perhaps because the original fertility-
Artemis had no husband in the mythology.
Even in historical times, certain cults of Artemis
emphasized fertility over virginity. The Artemis wor-
shipped at Ephesus was a mother figure, influenced by
the contemporary cult of the goddess Cybele, from the
Phrygian territory in interior Asia Minor. The Ephesian
Artemis’s cult image, of which numerous copies survive
today, depicted a crowned goddess with numerous
objects attached to her breast (thought today to represent
bulls’ testicles and to symbolize fertility). Artemis in Asia
Minor thus appears to have been very unlike the virgin
huntress of mainland Greek religion.
In Greece, one of the main cult sites for Artemis was
at Brauron, where a festival (the Brauronia) was held
every four years. Another peculiar cult existed at SPARTA.
At the annual festival of Artemis Orthia (the surname’s
meaning is lost to us), Spartan boys endured a public
ordeal of whipping as they tried to steal cheeses from the
goddess’s altar. This brutal rite, dating at least from the
400s B.C.E., had deteriorated into a tourist attraction by
the days of the Roman Empire.
See also MINOAN CIVILIZATION.
Further reading: Charlotte R. Long, The Twelve Gods
of Greece and Rome (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J. Brill,
1987); C. Sourvinou-Inwood, Studies in Girls’ Transitions:
Aspects of the Arkteia and Age Representation in Attic
Iconography (Athens: Kardamitsa, 1988); Arianna S. Huff-
ington, The Gods of Greece (New York: Atlantic Monthly
Press, 1993); Giulia Sissa, The Daily Life of the Greek
Gods, translated by Janet Lloyd (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford
University Press, 2000).
Artemisia
See HALICARNASSUS.
Artemision
This harbor and ship-beaching site on the
north shore of EUBOEA, off the eastern coast of Greece,
was named for a local temple of the goddess ARTEMIS. The
site overlooks a six-mile-wide channel whose opposite
shore lies along the Magnesian peninsula of THESSALY. In
this channel, during the PERSIAN WARS, the allied Greek
navy first opposed the invading navy of King XERXES
(summer of 480 B.C.E.). The Battle of Artemision was
fought nearly simultaneously with the land battle of THER-
MOPYLAE, 40 miles away, and was part of a Greek strategy
to block the Persian southward advance at two neighbor-
ing bottlenecks, on land and sea, north of central Greece.
Like Thermophylae, Artemision was a marginal Persian
victory that nevertheless helped to boost Greek morale.
The allied Greek fleet had about 380 warships, with
the largest contingent supplied by ATHENS (180 ships).
The Persian ships—which in fact were manned by sub-
ject peoples, such as Phoenicians, Egyptians, and IONIAN
GREEKS—may have numbered 450 or more. This fleet
recently had been reduced, from perhaps 600 ships, by
storms off Thessaly.
The battle began when the Persian fleet left its base
on the channel’s Thessalian shore and rowed out in an
enveloping crescent formation against the Greeks. In its
Phoenician contingent, the Persian side had the better
sailors and faster vessels, but these advantages were
reduced in the chaotic press of battle.
50
Artemisia

The fight was something of an infantry battle on the
water. The Persians preferred boarding tactics to ram-
ming: They fought by bringing their ships alongside the
Greeks’ and sending over the thirty Persian foot soldiers
who rode aboard each ship. The Greeks fought back with
their own ships’ soldiers, about 40 per vessel. After sub-
stantial mutual damage, the two fleets returned to their
harbors. But upon receiving news of the Greek defeat at
Thermophylae, the Greeks withdrew southward.
Artemision contributed to the strategic Greek naval
victory at SALAMIS (1), about three weeks later. The
Artemision losses weakened the Persian fleet and nar-
rowed Xerxes’ options for using it; he decided against
sending a squadron to raid Spartan territory (which
might have been successful in breaking up the Greek
alliance). For the Greeks, Artemision supplied a lesson. It
probably helped convince the Greek commanders that, to
offset the enemy fleet’s better maneuverability, they
would have to offer battle in a narrower channel than the
one at Artemision—a channel such as the one at Salamis.
In modern times, the Artemision waters have yielded
up one of the finest artworks of the ancient world: an
over-life-sized BRONZE statue of the god ZEUS, from about
455 B.C.E. Lost with an ancient shipwreck and recovered
by underwater ARCHAEOLOGY in the 1920s, the statue
now stands in the National Museum in Athens, along
with another bronze sculpture from the same shipwreck,
a Hellenistic horse and jockey.
See also SCULPTURE; WARFARE, NAVAL.
Further reading: Carol Mattusch, Classical Bronzes:
The Art and Craft of Greek and Roman Statuary (Ithaca,
N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1996); Sean Hemingway,
The Horse and Jockey from Artemision: A Bronze Equestrian
Monument of the Hellenistic Period (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 2004).
Asklepios
This mythical Greek physician-hero was
eventually worshipped as a god of MEDICINE. The cult of
Asklepios blossomed in the 300s B.C.E., partly in response
to a new spirit of individualism, which sought a more
personal RELIGION. Asklepios’s cult was centered on his
sanctuary at EPIDAURUS, in the northeastern PELOPON-
NESE. Sick people flocked there to acquire, for a fee, cures
supposedly provided by the god.
The myth of Asklepios is told in a choral ode by the
poet PINDAR, performed in about 470 B.C.E. At this time
Asklepios was still regarded as a mortal hero who had
lived and died long before. He was the son of APOLLO and
the Thessalian woman Koronis, but was brought up by
the centaur Chiron after Apollo destroyed Koronis for her
infidelity. Medicine was one of Apollo’s arts, and his son,
taught by Chiron, came to excel as a physician. Unfortu-
nately, Asklepios overstepped the boundary of human
knowledge when, at the plea of the goddess ARTEMIS, he
resurrected a previously dead man (HIPPOLYTUS, a favorite
of Artemis). The high god ZEUS, recognizing Asklepios’s
skill as a threat to natural order, immediately killed both
men with a thunderbolt.
In the latter 400s B.C.E., Asklepios became associated
with divine healing. It is unclear why he should have
grown to rival his mythical father, Apollo, as patron of
physicians, but in any case Asklepios began to be wor-
shipped as a god. His cult center at Epidaurus became a
shrine for invalid pilgrims, comparable to that of Lour-
des, in France. Its growth and popularity at this particu-
lar time were likely due in part to the plague that
devastated Athens in 430 B.C.E.
The Epidaurus cult was based on a process known as
incubation, whereby a worshipper who sought a cure
would spend a night in a dormitory associated with the
temple, and be visited by the god in a dream. The next
morning, perhaps, the god’s priests would interpret the
dream and dispense specific medical advice. Many exist-
ing inscriptions attest to this procedure’s success,
whether the explanation lies in the worshippers’ autosug-
gestion or in pious fraud on the part of priests who might
impersonate the nocturnal god. But Epidaurus and other
Asklepian shrines contained genuine health-promoting
facilities, such as baths and GYMNASIUMS. Major Asklepian
sanctuaries, established through the Epidaurus priest-
hood, arose at ATHENS (420 B.C.E.); PERGAMON (300s
B.C.E.); and the Italian, non-Greek city of ROME (291
B.C.E.). At Rome, the god’s name was latinized to Aescu-
lapius.
Asklepios’s totem was a sacred snake; a snake nor-
mally lived at each of his shrines. Greek art often pro-
trayed the Asklepian snake as wrapped around another of
the god’s emblems, the physician’s staff. Asklepios’s snake
and staff survive today as the symbol of the modern med-
ical profession.
See also CENTAURS; HIPPOCRATES.
Further reading: Nikolaos Faraklas, Epidaurus: The
Sanctuary of Asclepios 2d ed. (Athens: Lycabettus Press,
1972); Mabel Lang, Cure and Cult in Ancient Corinth: A
Guide to the Asklepeion (Princeton, N.J.: American School
of Classical Studies, 1977); R. A. Tomlinson, Epidauros
(Austin: University of Texas Press, 1983); Emma J. Edel-
stein, Asclepius: A Collection and Interpretation of the Testi-
monies (Salem, N.H.: Ayer, 1988); Sara Aleshire, Asklepios
at Athens: Epigraphic and Prosopographic Essays on the
Athenian Healing Cults (Amsterdam: J. C. Gieben, 1991).
Asia
See EUROPE AND ASIA.
Asia Minor
This peninsular landmass, 292,260 miles
square, forms a western subcontinent of Asia. Also
known as Anatolia, this territory comprises much of
modern Turkey. In Greek and Roman times, Asia Minor
contained important Greek cities, particularly in the cen-
tral west coast region called IONIA.
Asia Minor
51

The name Asia Minor (lesser Asia) came into use
among the Romans not long before the birth of Jesus; for
the Greeks of prior centuries, the region was simply
called Asia. At its northwest corner, Asia Minor is sepa-
rated from the European continent by the narrow
BOSPORUS and HELLESPONT waterways and the SEA OF
MARMARA. The hospitable west coast—fertile, temperate,
with fine harbors—opens onto the AEGEAN SEA; large
inshore islands include (from north to south) LESBOS,
CHIOS, SAMOS, and RHODES. Asia Minor’s southern coast
faces the greater Mediterranean; its north coast faces the
BLACK SEA. North and south coasts give rise to steep
mountains. The Pontic Range, alongside the north coast,
offered TIMBER and raw metals in ancient times. The Tau-
rus Range, in the south, intrudes on the shoreline and
limits the number of harbors and habitable sites. Stretch-
ing eastward, the long Taurus chain also restricts land
travel between southeast Asia Minor and northern Syria,
narrowing the route to a series of mountain passes, such
as the Cilician Gates, north of Tarsus. Inland of the
mountains, Asia Minor is an often-arid plateau.
By the early second millennium B.C.E., before the
first Greeks arrived, Asia Minor was controlled by the
Hittites, who ruled out of the north-central interior. Prob-
ably with the Hittites’ permission, Mycenaean Greeks set
up trading posts along the west coast in around 1300
B.C.E. (as suggested by the troves of Mycenaean POTTERY
found at MILETUS and other sites). The Greeks were look-
ing for raw metals—copper, tin, GOLD, and SILVER, all
mined in the Asia Minor interior—and for luxury goods,
such as carved ivory, available through TRADE routes from
Syria and Mesopotamia. The legend of the TROJAN WAR
surely reflects (distortedly) the Mycenaean Greeks’
destruction of an actual, non-Greek fortress town in
52
Asia Minor

northwest Asia Minor, a town we call TROY, which evi-
dently was interfering with inbound Greek shipping in
the Hellespont (ca. 1200 B.C.E.).
After the Hittite Empire collapsed (ca. 1200 B.C.E.),
central Asia Minor came under control of an Asian people
called the Phrygians. Their name survived in the central
region, known as Phrygia. In these years the new tech-
nology of IRON-working, previously monopolized by the
Hittites, spread from Asia Minor to mainland Greece
(before 1050 B.C.E.). Greek legend claimed that the
world’s first ironworkers were the Chalybes, a mountain
people of northeastern Asia Minor.
Asia Minor’s west coast then came under steady
Greek invasion, amid the migrations accompanying the
downfall of Mycenaean society in mainland Greece. By
1000 B.C.E. Greeks of the Ionian ethnic group had settled
in the region thereafter called Ionia; the foremost states
here were Miletus, Samos, Chios, and EPHESOS. Greeks of
the Aeolian type, using Lesbos as their base, colonized
Asia Minor’s northern west coast, thereafter called AEOLIS
(ca. 1000–600 B.C.E.). Greeks of Dorian ethnicity occu-
pied sites around the southern west coast (ca. 900 B.C.E.),
including HALICARNASSUS, KNIDOS, and the islands of Cos
and Rhodes. Seizing the best harbors and farmlands, the
arriving Greeks ejected the non-Greek peoples. One such
people were the Carians, who survived in the southwest-
ern region called Caria.
Greek settlement spread to Asia Minor’s northern and
southern coasts during the great age of COLONIZATION
(ca. 750–550 B.C.E.). In the north, CYZICUS, on the Sea of
Marmara, and SINOPE, midway along the Black Sea coast,
were among the colonies founded by Miletus in an
attempt to control the Black Sea trade route. On the
south coast, the principal Greek cities were (from west to
east) Phaselis, Perge, Aspendus, and Side.
The Greek settlements prospered along their sea
routes and caravan routes. The cities of Ionia produced
the poet HOMER (ca. 750 B.C.E.) and the earliest Greek
achievements in SCIENCE, PHILOSOPHY, and monumental
ARCHITECTURE (600s–500s B.C.E.). But there were also
non-Greek nations of the interior to contend with. The
marauding Kimmerians overran Phrygia and besieged
Ephesos (ca. 600 B.C.E.). The kingdom of LYDIA domi-
nated the west coast (by 550 B.C.E.) and then fell to the
Persian king CYRUS (1) (546 B.C.E.).
By the late 500s B.C.E. all of Asia Minor was under
the jurisdiction of the Persian king, who ruled and col-
lected tribute through governors called satraps. The two
chief satraps of western Asia Minor were based at the for-
mer Lydian capital of Sardis and at Dascylion, on the Sea
of Marmara. At the end of the PERSIAN WARS, the Greek
naval counteroffensive liberated most of Asia Minor’s
western Greek cities (479–477 B.C.E.). Persian puppet
governments were expelled in favor of Athenian-style
DEMOCRACY, and the Greek cities became tribute-paying
members of the Athenian-dominated DELIAN LEAGUE.
Passing to Spartan control by the end of the PELOPON-
NESIAN WAR (404 B.C.E.), these cities were ignominiously
handed back to PERSIA by the terms of the KING’S PEACE
(386 B.C.E.).
ALEXANDER THE GREAT’s invasion of Asia Minor (334
B.C.E.) reliberated the Greek cities and brought them into
a suddenly enlarged Greek world. Alexander restored
local democracies and abolished tribute. After his death
(323 B.C.E.), Asia Minor became a battleground for his
warring successors. ANTIGONUS (1) ruled from his Phry-
gian citadel of Celanae, but upon his death at the Battle
of Ipsus (in Phrygia, in 301 B.C.E.), Asia Minor was
parceled out between LYSIMACHUS and SELEUCUS (1).
Seleucus destroyed Lysimachus at the Battle of Coru-
pedium (in Lydia, in 281 B.C.E.) and brought Asia Minor
into the sprawling SELEUCID EMPIRE. But the emergence
of the city of PERGAMON, inland on the middle west coast,
created a local rival for power (mid-200s B.C.E.). By the
early 100s B.C.E., Pergamon was one of the most beautiful
and prosperous Greek cities.
The Pergamene kings cooperated with the encroach-
ing nation of ROME, and—after helping a Roman army
defeat the Seleucids at the Battle of Magnesia (189
B.C.E.)—Pergamon obtained control of most of Asia
Minor. The entire region passed into Roman hands with
the death of the last Pergamene king (133 B.C.E.). Later
the non-Greek kingdom of Pontus arose against Roman
authority.
See also AEOLIAN GREEKS; BRONZE; DIADOCHI; DORIAN
GREEKS; HELLENISTIC AGE; IONIAN GREEKS; MYCENAEAN
CIVILIZATION.
Further reading: George M. A. Hanfmann, From
Croesus to Constantine: The Cities of Western Asia Minor
and Their Arts in Greek and Roman Times (Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press, 1975); James Mellaart, The
Archaeology of Ancient Turkey (Totowa, N.J.: Rowman and
Littlefield, 1978); Seton Lloyd, Ancient Turkey: A Trav-
eller’s History of Anatolia (Berkeley: University of Califor-
nia Press, 1989); Ekrem Akurgal, Ancient Civilizations and
Ruins of Turkey: from Prehistoric Times until the End of the
Roman Empire, translated by John Whybrow and Mollie
Emre, 8th ed. (Istanbul: NET Turistik Yayinlar, 1993);
David Parrish, ed., Urbanism in Western Asia Minor: New
Studies on Aphrodisias, Ephesos, Hierapolis, Pergamon,
Perge, and Xanthos (Portsmouth, R.I.: Journal of Roman
Archaeology, 2001).
Aspasia (ca. 470–410 B.C.E.) Common-law wife of the
Athenian statesman Perikles
After divorcing his legal wife, Perikles lived with Aspasia
from about 450 B.C.E. until his death in 429 B.C.E.
Aspasia was an immigrant from MILETUS and thus
was a resident alien at ATHENS. Perikles, being an Athe-
nian citizen, was prohibited from marrying her (according
to a law of 451 B.C.E., which he himself had sponsored).
Aspasia
53

Historians traditionally have theorized that Aspasia was
either herself a prostitute (hetaira) or that she at least
managed a “house” of hetairai, but some modern scholars
dismiss this information as being a daring joke of Athe-
nian stage comedy. Contemporary comic playwrights such
as KRATINUS, EUPOLIS, and ARISTOPHANES made vicious
public fun of Perikles’ liaison with Aspasia.
Witty and well educated, Aspasia seems to have had
a captivating personality. She is said to have given lessons
in RHETORIC, and the Athenian philosopher SOCRATES
supposedly enjoyed conversing with her.
The 430s B.C.E. at Athens saw a rash of politically
motivated prosecutions indirectly aimed at Perikles; the
immediate targets included Aspasia and Perikles’ friends
PHEIDIAS and ANAXAGORAS. Aspasia was accused of impi-
ety (asebeia)—a common charge against intellectuals—
and she also may have been accused of procuring
freeborn Athenian ladies for Perikles’ pleasure. At trial
she was acquitted after Perikles made a personal appeal
to the jurors, during which he uncharacteristically burst
into tears.
She and Perikles had a son, also named Perikles.
Although ineligible for Athenian citizenship because his
mother was alien, the younger Perikles was enrolled as a
citizen at his dying father’s request, in about 429 B.C.E. In
406 B.C.E. the younger Perikles was one of six Athenian
generals executed by public order for failing to rescue
Athenian survivors after the sea battle of Arginusae, dur-
ing the PELOPONNESIAN WAR.
Aspasia provides an example of the kind of success
that an ambitious woman might find in a society that
generally excluded WOMEN from power and wealth.
Although further disadvantaged by being alien, she
achieved a degree of influence and security by attaching
herself to a powerful man.
See also EDUCATION; MARRIAGE; METICS; PROSTITUTES.
Further reading: Madeleine M. Henry, Prisoner of
History: Aspasia of Miletus and Her Biographical Tradition
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995); S. Blundell,
Women in Classical Athens (London: Bristol Classical
Press, 1998).
assembly
The word used to translate the Greek word
ekkl¯esia—the official gathering of citizens in a Greek
DEMOCRACY for the purpose of public debate and vote. At
democratic ATHENS in the 400s and 300s B.C.E., the
assembly was the sovereign body of government.
Admission to the Athenian assembly was open to all
male citizens over age 18 (in theory about 30,000–40,000
men; in practice about 5,000). Under the radical democ-
racy there were no property requirements for admission,
and the 300s B.C.E. saw the introduction of a small pay-
ment for attendance, comparable to our modern jury pay.
The Athenian assembly met at least 40 times per
year, with extra meetings as called for by the COUNCIL or
by the board of generals. In the 400s B.C.E. the usual
place of meeting was the Pnyx (“Packing Place”), a
smoothened hillside west of the ACROPOLIS. There the
people might vote on issues by show of hands; if written
balloting was required—such as in an OSTRACISM vote—
then the AGORA would be used. In debate, any Athenian
had the right to address the assembly; a chairman of the
day presided; and rules of order were maintained. Foreign
ambassadors and other noncitizens might be allowed to
address the assembly on issues of state.
Usually the assembly could debate and vote only on
those topics placed on the agenda by the council; however,
the assembly could (by vote) require the council to list a
certain topic for the next meeting. Like other instruments
of Athenian government, the assembly enjoyed courtroom
powers. For example, it had the final verdict in certain seri-
ous criminal cases. By its vote the assembly passed laws,
declared war, made peace, inflicted individual sentences of
death or exile, and elected the army’s generals and other
important executives. The power of the assembly during
Athens’ imperial heyday can be seen in the Mytilenean
Debate—described in THUCYDIDES’ (1) history of the PELO-
PONNESIAN WAR (book 3)—where the fate of every man,
woman, and child of the rebellious city of MYTILENE was
decided in public debate at Athens in 427 B.C.E.
Further reading: M. H. Hansen, The Athenian Eccle-
sia: A Collection of Articles, 1976–1983 (Copenhagen:
Museum Tusculanum Press, 1983); ———, The Athenian
Assembly in the Age of Demosthenes (New York: B. Black-
well, 1987); ———, The Athenian Ecclesia II: A Collection
of Articles, 1983–1989 (Copenhagen: Museum Tuscu-
lanum Press, 1989); Chester G. Starr, The Birth of Athe-
nian Democracy: The Assembly in the Fifth Century B.C.
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1990); James L.
O’Neil, The Origins and Development of Ancient Greek
Democracy (Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield, 1995);
John Thorley, Athenian Democracy (New York: Routledge,
1996); M. H. Hansen, The Athenian Democracy in the Age
of Demosthenes: Structure, Principles, and Ideology, trans-
lated by J. A. Crook (Norman: University of Oklahoma
Press, 1999).
astronomy
The ancient Greeks pioneered the study of
astronomy in the Western world, cataloguing the stars
and identifying five of the planets (besides the Earth).
Most important, they developed several geometric models
that tried to explain the movements of the heavenly bod-
ies in terms of concentric spheres and other orbital paths.
Unfortunately, the Greeks incorrectly placed Earth at the
center of the universe. This geocentric theory was
brought to a false perfection by Ptolemy of ALEXANDRIA
(1), around 135 C.E. With Ptolemy’s revisions, the geo-
centric model seemed to account for all heavenly motion
observable to the unaided eye. (The Greeks possessed no
telescopic lenses, only crude sighting devices.)
54
assembly

Ptolemy’s system was so persuasive that it remained
canonical in late antiquity and the Middle Ages, before it
was finally ousted in 1543 C.E. by Copernicus’ heliocen-
tric model, which correctly placed the Sun at the center
of the solar system. Ironically, the ancient Greek
astronomer Aristarchus of SAMOS (ca. 275 B.C.E.) had pro-
duced a simple heliocentral model, but this had been
bypassed in favor of the more apparently promising geo-
centric one.
Like other ancient peoples lacking precise calendars,
the earliest Greeks relied on the rising and setting of the
constellations in order to gauge the FARMING year. The
poet HESIOD’s versified farming almanac, Works and Days
(ca. 700 B.C.E.) mentions certain duties as signaled by the
stars—for instance, grapes are to be picked when the
constellation ORION has risen to a position overhead, in
early autumn.
In the verses of HOMER (ca. 750 B.C.E.) and other
early poets, the Earth is imagined as a disk surrounded by
the stream of Ocean (Okeanos). The early philosopher-
scientist THALES of MILETUS (ca. 585 B.C.E.) elaborated on
this concept, picturing a world that floats like a log on a
cosmic lake of water. Thales’ successor ANAXIMANDER (ca.
560 B.C.E.) devised the first, crude astronomical theory;
he saw the world as a cylinder or disk suspended in
space, with the cylinder’s flat top constituting the inhab-
ited world and the visible sky comprised of a series of fit-
ted rings forming a hemisphere. The Sun, Moon, and
stars are holes in these rings, through which we glimpse a
distant celestial fire.
An obvious weakness of Anaximander’s theory was
its inability to explain the puzzling movements of the
planets. The five planets known to the Greeks were Mer-
cury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn (to use modern
names). To the naked eye they look like bright stars, but
their individual, looping progress through the night skies
earned them the Greek name plan¯etai, or “wanderers.”
The 
planets’ 
movements 
were 
first 
plausibly
explained by the brilliant mathematician Eudoxus of
KNIDOS, who was a student of PLATO at the ACADEMY at
ATHENS (ca. 350 B.C.E.). Eudoxus held that all heavenly
movements are caused by the circular rotations of 27
concentric spheres, with the Earth at their center. All of
the proper stars exist on the single, outermost sphere
(according to Eudoxus), but each planet employs no
fewer than four concentric spheres, which spin along dif-
ferent axes to produce the planet’s irregular course. Simi-
larly, Sun and Moon are governed by three spheres each.
Greater precision seemed to be achieved when more
spheres were added by Eudoxus’ younger contemporary
Callipus of CYZICUS and by the great ARISTOTLE (both ca.
330 B.C.E.).
Another astronomer of this Athenian intellectual hey-
day was Heraclides Ponticus (like Eudoxus, a younger
associate of Plato at the Academy). Using the geocentric
model, Heraclides suggested that the Earth itself rotates on
its axis. All of these thinkers approached astronomy as a
challenge in geometry, not physics; there seem to have
been no theories regarding what mechanical forces would
cause the spheres to move. Understandably, the Greeks had
no knowledge of astrophysics; topics such as gravity or the
chemical compositions of stars were largely unexplored.
Aristarchus of Samous was a follower of Aristotelian
Peripatetic School at Athens, around 275 B.C.E. Rejecting
the Eudoxan model, Aristarchus invented the heliocen-
tric theory, which correctly posited that the Earth and
planets revolve around the Sun and that the Earth spins
on an axis. Like prior astronomers, Aristarchus imagined
the stars as spread along a vast outer sphere—but
thought that this sphere was stationary. He also correctly
believed that the stars’ apparent movement is an illusion
created by the Earth’s orbit. Few of Aristarchus’s writings
survive, and we know of his theory mainly from later
authors.
This heliocentric theory was not accepted in antiq-
uity for two reasons. First, it ran counter to prevailing
religious-philosophical beliefs by removing humankind
from the center of creation. Second, it failed to account
satisfactorily for the absence of stellar parallax—in other
words, if the Earth moves through space, then the stars
should be seen to slide sideways in their progress over-
head, which they do not seem to do. (In fact, the stars do
shift their angles minutely as the Earth orbits past, but
their immense distance from the Earth makes this varia-
tion invisible to the naked eye.)
The next great name in Greek astronomy is Apollo-
nius of Perg¯e (a Greek town in southwestern ASIA
MINOR), who was active at Alexandria around 200 B.C.E.
A mathematical genius, Apollonius revolutionized the
geocentric theory by abandoning Eudoxus’s cumbersome
spheres in favor of two different models explaining celes-
tial movement in terms of irregular orbits called eccen-
trics and epicycles. For example, the epicyclical theory
imagined a planet shooting around in a small circle while
at the same time orbiting in a much larger circle around
the Earth.
One of antiquity’s few practical astronomers was
Hipparchus of Nicaea (a Greek city in western Asia
Minor). Active at RHODES around 135 B.C.E. Hipparchus
invented or improved the sighting device known as the
dioptra, and was the first to map and catalogue approxi-
mately 850 stars.
The work of Apollonius and Hipparchus laid the
groundwork for the greatest astronomer of the ancient
world, Claudius Ptolemaeus, usually known as Ptolemy
(but not a member of the Macedonian-Egyptian royal
dynasty that used that name). A Greek-blooded Roman
citizen of Alexandria, Ptolemy was active around
127–140 C.E., under the Roman Empire. His written mas-
terpiece was the Almagest,
which has survived in
medieval Arabic translation. (That title is the Arabic form
for the unofficial Greek title Megist¯e, “the greatest,” i.e.
astronomy
55

textbook.) In 13 books, the Almagest presented the sum
total of astronomical knowledge of the day, as enlarged by
Ptolemy’s own work on the geocentric model. Aided by
his pioneering use of the sighting device known as the
armillary astrolabe (the forerunner of the medieval astro-
labe), Ptolemy also enlarged Hipparchus’ star map,
among his many other achievements.
See also ARATUS (2); MATHEMATICS; OCEANUS; PYTHA-
GORAS.
Further reading: Theodor S. Jacobsen, Planetary Sys-
tems from the Ancient Greeks to Kepler (Seattle: University
of Washington Press, 1999); Jean Claude Pecker, Under-
standing the Heavens: Thirty Centuries of Astronomical
Ideas from Ancient Thinking to Modern Cosmology, edited
by Susan Kaufman (New York: Springer, 2001); Ronald
Brashear, Star Struck: One Thousand Years of the Art and
Science of Astronomy (Seattle: University of Washington
Press, 2001).
Astyanax
See ANDROMACHE; HECTOR.
Atalanta
In MYTH, Atalanta was an Arcadian or Boeo-
tian heroine of the athletic, forest-ranging, virginal type
(in the pattern of the goddess ARTEMIS and of the AMA-
ZONS). Beloved by the hero Meleager, Atalanta joined him
in the CALYDONIAN BOAR HUNT. But the best-known leg-
end about Atalanta concerns her MARRIAGE. Unwilling to
be wed, she declared that she would submit only to the
man who could beat her in a footrace. According to one
version, she would follow the racing suitor with a spear
and stab him as she overtook him. She was finally won by
a suitor named Melanion (or Hippomenes) who, with the
goddess APHRODITE’s help, had acquired three golden
apples. During the race he dropped these treasures one by
one in Atalanta’s way; pausing to acquire them, she lost
the contest. Their son was named Parthenopaeus (“born
of the virgin”).
Further reading: J. Barringer, “Atalanta as Model:
The Hunter and the Hunted,” Classical Antiquity 15:1
(1996): 44–76; Thomas Scanlon, Eros and Greek Athletics
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002).
Athena (often Athene)
This important Greek goddess
was the guardian of the city of ATHENS—whose name
she shared—and the patron of wisdom, handicraft, and
the disciplined aspect of war. Athena was worshipped on
the ACROPOLIS of several Greek cities, including ARGOS
and SPARTA. But her most significant shrine was on the
Athenian acropolis, where a succession of temples cul-
minated, in 438 B.C.E., in the building that is the gem of
ancient ARCHITECTURE: the PARTHENON, or Temple of
Athena the Virgin.
The name Athena, like the name Athens, is not actu-
ally Greek; the ending -na belongs to the language of the
non-Greek people who preceded the Greeks as the inhab-
itants of mainland Greece. In her pre-Greek form, Athena
was probably a patron deity of kings, whose hilltop
palaces she guarded as an idol shown clad in armor; in
her ultimate origins she may be related to armed god-
desses of the ancient Near East, such as the
Mesopotamian Ishtar. After about 2100 B.C.E., when eth-
nic Greek invaders began taking over the land of Greece,
Athena became incorporated into the developing Greek
RELIGION (as did other pre-Greek goddesses, including
HERA and ARTEMIS). Keeping her armor and her associa-
tion with the hilltop, Athena entered Greek MYTH as the
daughter of the great god ZEUS. This transition was under
way by the Mycenaean era (1600–1200 B.C.E.), as is sug-
gested by the mention of a “Lady of Atana” on a surviving
Mycenaean clay tablet, inscribed in LINEAR B script and
dated by archaeologists to 1400 B.C.E.
The charming myth of Athena’s birth from the head
of Zeus is told by the poets HESIOD (ca. 700 B.C.E.) and
PINDAR (467 B.C.E.). It seems that Zeus swallowed his
first wife, Metis, when she was pregnant. He did this
because a prophecy had warned him that Metis would
otherwise bear a son destined to depose his father. But
Zeus soon felt a terrible headache. And when the smith
god HEPHAISTOS helpfully split open Zeus’ skull, the god-
dess Athena sprang out—adult, in full armor, giving a
war shout. This tale surely contains a primitive religious-
political motive: namely, it shows absolutely that the god-
dess is Zeus’s daughter and hence subordinate to him.
The story also symbolizes how Zeus and Athena both
partake of cleverness (Greek: m¯etis). The birth scene is a
favorite subject on surviving Greek vase paintings from
the 600s B.C.E. onward.
As goddess of organizational wisdom, Athena was
thought to guide the typical Greek city-state (not only
Athens). Her cult titles included Boulaia, “goddess of the
COUNCIL,” and Polias, “goddess of the city.” In these func-
tions she resembled Zeus, who was god of cosmic order
and whose titles included Poleios, “lord of the city.” In
later centuries she naturally became associated with the
academic wisdom of PHILOSOPHY.
As a protector of civilized Greek life, Athena was
prominent in myths of order versus chaos. She was imag-
ined as fighting gallantly in the gods’ primeval war
against the rebellious GIANTS. A famous section of the
Great Altar of PERGAMON, sculpted around 180 B.C.E. and
now in Berlin, shows Athena hauling the subdued Giant
leader, Alcyoneus, by his hair. In other myths she repeat-
edly appears as a counselor to heroes struggling against
monsters and villains. She helps HERAKLES with his
Twelve Labors, ODYSSEUS with his homecoming, and
PERSEUS (1) with the killing of MEDUSA.
As a war goddess, Athena overlapped with the war
god ARES. But where the brutal Ares embodied war’s
madness and waste, Athena tended to represent the more
glorious aspects—strategy, discipline, national defense.
She was said to have introduced such military inventions
56
Astyanax

as the ship, the horse bridle, and the war chariot. In
HOMER’s epic poem the Iliad (written down around 750
B.C.E.), she is the Greeks’ staunch ally against the Tro-
jans, accompanying her chosen warriors into battle. She
intervenes to aid her favorite, DIOMEDES, and, in the
poem’s climactic section, helps ACHILLES to slay the Tro-
jan HECTOR. Early in the poem, however, she restrains
Achilles from an act of violence against the Greek com-
mander, AGAMEMNON, for she is also a deity of reason
and control.
In poetry and art, Athena’s war gear includes a
breastplate, helmet, spear, and shield of some sort. Some-
times her shield is the supernatural aegis (aigis), associ-
ated also with Zeus. Homer describes the aegis as a
fearsome storm cloud, but by the mid-600s B.C.E. vase
painters were picturing it as a goatskin mantle on
Athena’s left arm or covering her breast, tassled with live
snakes and showing the vanquished Medusa’s face. Later
the aegis became styled as a round metal shield,
embossed with Medusa’s image.
Among peaceful duties, Athena was said to have
invented weaving, spinning, and other domestic crafts
performed by WOMEN in the ancient Greek world. She
was also the patron of carpenters, potters, and (like the
god Hephaistos) of metalworkers. Her relevant title was
Ergan¯e, “worker woman.”
The Athenians credited her with introducing the cul-
tivation of the olive, a staple of the ancient Greek diet
and economy. Legend said that Athena and the god
POSEIDON had competed publicly over who would
become the Athenians’ patron deity. Poseidon stabbed his
trident into the acropolis summit, bringing forth a saltwa-
ter well; but alongside it Athena planted the first olive
tree, and she was judged the winner by the people. The
saltwater well and sacred olive tree were features of the
Athenian acropolis in historical times.
Athena was pictured as stately and beautiful,
although stern. In Homer’s verses, Zeus calls her by the
fond nickname glaukopis, “gray eyes” or “bright eyes.”
Her virginity—a trait she had in common with the god-
desses Artemis and HESTIA—may perhaps harken back to
her primeval form as a defender of the citadel: She is invi-
olate, like the fortress that she oversees. Her famous
Athenian cult title was Parthenos, “the virgin,” and her
very old title Pallas was likewise understood as meaning
“virgin.” In myth, the Palladion was an image of Athena,
sent down from heaven and worshipped by the Trojans.
By the late 400s B.C.E. Athena had two sanctuaries on
the Athenian acropolis. One was the Parthenon, housing
a 
35-foot-tall, 
GOLD-and-ivory 
statue 
of 
Athena
Parthenos; the other was the Erectheion, housing a
smaller, immemorably old, olivewood statue of Athena
Polias. This simple wooden idol was revered at the mid-
summer festival of the Panathenaia (“all Athens”)—con-
sidered to be Athena’s birthday—when the people
ceremoniously brought a new woolen gown (peplos) up
to the goddess. An especially large celebration, held every
fourth year, was called the Great Panathenaia. At another
festival, in early summer, the Polias statue was carried
down to the sea to be washed.
The Greeks identified their gods with certain ani-
mals; Athena was associated with snakes and, particu-
larly, owls. Folklore claimed that owls were wise, like
their goddess. Modern scholars believe that Athena’s links
with the owl, snake, and olive tree were all survivals of
her primitive, pre-Greek cult, dating back to the third
millennium B.C.E.
See also
FARMING; MINOAN
CIVILIZATION; PARIS;
PHEIDIAS.
Further reading: C. J. Herrington, Athena Parthenos
and Athenia Polias: A Study in the Religion of Periclean
Athens (Manchester, U.K.: Manchester University Press,
1955); Jenifer Neils, Goddess and Polis: The Panathen-
aic Festival in Ancient Athens (Princeton, N.J.: Prince-
ton University Press, 1992); ———, ed., Worshipping
Athena (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1996);
Athena
57
Statue of Athena, goddess of wisdom and protector of the city
of Athens, shown leaning on her shield (Alison Frantz Photo-
graphic Collection, American School of Classical Studies at
Athens)

Susan Deacy and Alexandra Villing, Athena in the Classi-
cal World (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 2001).
Athenian democracy
See DEMOCRACY.
Athens
This is the foremost city of ancient Greece and
one of the three most important ancient cities that shaped
Western civilization, along with ROME and Jerusalem. The
culture produced by the rich and confident Athens of the
mid-400s B.C.E.—in THEATER, ARCHITECTURE, SCULPTURE,
and PHILOSOPHY—provides a cornerstone of our modern
society. Most important, Athens was the birthplace of
DEMOCRACY (d¯emokratia, “power by the people”).
The physical city, beautified by the wealth of empire,
was a marvel to the ancient world—as it is today for the
tourists and scholars who visit Athens (now the modern
Greek capital). With some justification the Athenian
statesman PERIKLES described his city as “the greatest
name in history . . . a power to be remembered forever.”
Defeat in the PELOPONNESIAN WAR (431–404 B.C.E.)
broke Athens’s imperial might, but the city remained
politically important for the next century and culturally
influential for the rest of antiquity.
An advantageous site helped make the city great.
Located in southeast-central Greece, in the peninsular
landmass called ATTICA, Athens lies amid the region’s
largest plain, where grain and olives were grown in his-
torical times. The plain is surrounded by mountains and
has three major rivers running through and near the city:
the Eridanos, the Ilissos, and the Kephissos. Athens lies
approximately four miles from the shore of the Saronic
Gulf, and its primary geographical feature is the 300-foot-
tall, rock-formed hill later known as the ACROPOLIS. This
defensible position dominated the plain and, being four
miles inland of the Saronic Gulf, gave access to the sea
without inviting naval attack.
The locale was inhabited long before the first Greek-
speaking tribesmen arrived around 2000 B.C.E. Archaeolog-
ical excavations on the Acropolis have found evidence of
occupation as far back as the Neolithic period. The name
Athens (Athenai) is pre-Greek and is associated with the
city’s patron goddess, ATHENA, who is likewise pre-Greek.
Evidently the early Greek invaders appropriated these two
related names (whose original meanings are lost to us).
During the flourishing Greek MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION
(1600–1200 B.C.E.), Athens was a second-rank power—
overshadowed by MYCENAE, THEBES, and other centers.
Greek MYTH claims that the unification of Attica
under Athenian control was brought about by the Athe-
nian king THESEUS. This legend probably recalls a real-life
event of the late Mycenaean era. In later centuries this
unification (sunoikismos, “synoecism”) was celebrated at
an annual Athenian festival called the Sinoikia. Among
the resources of the Attic countryside that then passed to
Athenian control were the fertile plain of Eleusis, the
marble of Mt. Pentelicus, and, most important, the raw
SILVER of Mt. Laurion. In a later era, Laurion silver would
provide the Athenian COINAGE and help finance the social
and military programs of the democracy.
A united Attica was able to resist the invading
DORIAN GREEKS who swept southward through Greece
after the collapse of Mycenaean society (around 1100
B.C.E.). Legend tells how the last Athenian king, Kodrus,
sacrificed his life to save Athens from Dorian capture.
Other legends describe Athens as a rallying point for
Greek refugees whose homes in the PELOPONNESE had
been overrun by the Dorians. These refugees, of the
Ionian ethnic group, migrated eastward to establish cities
on the ASIA MINOR coast that in later centuries retained
cultural and political ties to Athens.
Following the depressed years of the DARK AGE
(1100–900 B.C.E.), Athens emerged as a mainland com-
mercial power, alongside CORINTH, CHALCIS, and a few
other cities. In the 800s–700s B.C.E., Athenian workshops
produced a widely admired Geometric-style POTTERY
eventually imitated throughout Greece. At Athens, as at
other prosperous Greek cities, there arose a monied mid-
dle class—mainly manufacturers and farmers—who
resented being excluded from political power.
Like other Greek states, Athens at this time was gov-
erned as an ARISTOCRACY. A small circle of noble families
monopolized the government and judiciary and owned
most of the land. The general population was unrepre-
sented, its political function being mainly to pay taxes,
serve under arms, and obey the leaders’ decrees. The
emergence of democracy involved a drastic revamping of
Athens’ government in the 500s and 400s B.C.E., to the
point where the citizens’ ASSEMBLY
comprised the
sovereign, decision-making body.
This process required improvization, compromise,
and bloodshed. In about 632 B.C.E. an adventuring noble-
man named KYLON tried to exploit middle-class unrest to
make himself tyrant of Athens, but the coup failed. Popu-
lar demand for a permanent, written law code was left
unsatisfied by the aristocratically biased legislation of
DRACO (ca. 624 B.C.E.), but SOLON’s radical reforms (ca.
594 B.C.E.) averted revolution and laid the foundations
for Athenian democracy. In foreign affairs, Athens
defeated its nearby rival MEGARA (1) for control of the
island of SALAMIS (1). Athenian COLONIZATION in the
HELLESPONT district—at Sigeum and the CHERSONESE—
foreshadowed Athens’s imperial control of that region in
future years.
Despite Solon’s legislation, class tensions remained
keen enough for PEISISTRATUS to seize power as tyrant
(mid-500s B.C.E.). Under his enlightened rule, Athens
advanced commercially and artistically. Supplanting
Corinth as the foremost mainland mercantile power,
Athens monopolized the pottery market, exporting Athe-
nian black-figure ware throughout the Mediterranean.
58
Athenian democracy

Athens became a cultural center, as Peisistratus and his
son and successor, HIPPIAS (1), attracted poets, sculptors,
and other craftsmen from throughout the Greek world.
The expulsion of Hippias in 510 B.C.E. brought on
the birth of democracy. The reforms of KLEISTHENES (1)
(508 B.C.E.) broke the aristocracy’s residual influence by
means of administrative changes based on the redivision
of the population into 10 new tribes. A citizens’ COUNCIL
of 500 became the guide and executive for the popular
assembly, which in practice numbered about 5,000 men.
The assembly held regular meetings in the Pnyx (“pack-
ing place”), a hollowed-out hillside about 500 yards west
of the acropolis. In around 507 B.C.E. the Athenians
repulsed an attack by the Spartan king KLEOMENES (1)
that was aimed at dismantling the fledgling democracy.
The optimism of the following years helped the Atheni-
ans to repel a Persian invasion force at the Battle of
MARATHON, outside Athens (490 B.C.E.).
By 500 B.C.E., the physical city had begun to take on
its classical layout. Probably by then a surrounding wall
had been built (although only later walls have survived in
remnants). Atop the acropolis, which was sacred to Athena
and other gods, old temples of wood or limestone were
being replaced by marble structures. At the acropolis’s
southeast base stood an open-air THEATER dedicated to the
god DIONYSUS, where performances of the newborn Athe-
nian art-forms of tragedy and comedy were held. North-
west of the acropolis lay the AGORA—the city’s commercial
center. Some distance northwest of the agora, beyond the
Dipylon Gate, stood an industrial suburb, the Kerameikos
(“potters’ quarter”), at the outer edge of which lay the aris-
tocratic families’ elaborate graveyards, still visible today.
Under leadership of the left-wing statesman THEMIS-
TOKLES, the Athenians developed PIRAEUS as a seaport
and amassed the biggest navy in Greece, 200 warships.
This navy played a paramount role in defending Greece
against the invasion of the Persian king XERXES (480
B.C.E.). Athens was evacuated before the advancing Per-
sians—who burned and sacked the empty city twice, in
480 and 479 B.C.E.—but the Athenians fought on in their
warships and helped destroy the Persian navy at the sea
battle of Salamis.
Athens
59

The defeat of Xerxes’ invasion created an outpouring
of confidence—and an influx of money—that made
Athens into the cultural capital of the Greek world. First
the city wall, torn down by the Persians, was rebuilt and
enlarged, despite Spartan objections (479 B.C.E.); rem-
nants of this four-mile-long “Themistoklean Wall” sur-
vive today. In the Greek naval counteroffensive against
Persian territories, Athens now took the lead, organizing
the Greek city-states of the AEGEAN SEA and the Asia
Minor coast into an Athenian-controlled coalition, the
DELIAN LEAGUE (478 or 477 B.C.E.). The league’s most
prominent officer was the conservative Athenian states-
man KIMON. Delian member states paid dues—in the
form of silver or military service—which in time came to
be used strictly for Athens’s advantage.
Athenian aggressions in mainland Greece—against
AEGINA, BOEOTIA, PHOCIS, and CORINTH—brought Athens
into intermittent conflict with those states’ powerful ally,
Sparta (459–446 B.C.E.). Meanwhile the left-wing states-
man Perikles became heir to Themistokles’ policies of sea
empire and resistance to Sparta. Perikles tightened
Athens’s control over the Delian allies, and he built the
LONG WALLS, connecting Athens to its naval base at
Piraeus in a continuous fortification (461–456 B.C.E.).
After arranging peace with PERSIA, he initiated a building
program (448 B.C.E.) to replace the temples destroyed in
480–479 B.C.E. This program, supervised by the sculptor
PHEIDIAS, turned Athens into the grandest city of the
Greek world. Among the famous constructions still
standing today are the PARTHENON, Propylaia, Erech-
theion, and Temple of Athena Nik¯e (all on the acropolis),
and the admirably preserved temple of the god HEPHAIS-
TOS in the agora.
The middle and late 400s B.C.E. saw the Athenian
high noon. The tragic playwrights AESCHYLUS, SOPHOK-
LES, and EURIPIDES, the painter Polygnotus, the intellec-
tual movement of the SOPHISTS, the comic playwright
ARISTOPHANES, the historian THUCYDIDES (1), and the
West’s first great ethical philosopher, SOCRATES, all lived
in Athens during these years. From other Greek cities
craftsmen, poets, and businessmen flocked to Athens,
swelling Attica’s population to over 200,000 (including
SLAVES) and making the city fully dependent on imports
of Ukrainian grain, supplied by Perikles’ far-reaching
naval program.
Fear of Athenian expansionism led Sparta, Corinth,
and Boeotia to start the Peloponnesian War (as we call it),
in 431 B.C.E. Despite the outbreak of plague (430 B.C.E.
and later), the Athenian navy and maritime network could
have brought the city safely through the conflict, had the
citizens not wasted lives and resources in a vainglorious
attempt to conquer SYRACUSE, in Greek SICILY (415–413
B.C.E.). This calamitous defeat threw Athens on the defen-
sive, while the Spartans, with the help of Persian money,
were able to develop a navy, subvert Athens’s Delian allies,
and attack the Athenian lifeline in the Hellespont. With
their fleet destroyed (405 B.C.E.), the Athenians surren-
dered after an eight-month siege (404 B.C.E.). The victori-
ous Spartans pulled down the Long Walls. Despite urgings
from the Thebans and Corinthians to destroy Athens, the
Spartans spared the city, installing the short-lived dictator-
ship of the THIRTY TYRANTS.
Athens quickly recovered, joining another war
against Sparta (395–387 B.C.E.) and organizing another
maritime coalition, the SECOND ATHENIAN LEAGUE (377
B.C.E.). In spite of the eloquent harangues of the states-
man DEMOSTHENES (1), the Athenians proved ineffectual
against the military-diplomatic campaigns of King PHILIP
II of MACEDON. After sharing in the defeat of CHAIRONEIA
(338 B.C.E.), Athens received lenient treatment as Philip’s
subject city; the league, however, was disbanded. Athens
revolted against Macedonian rule after the death of
ALEXANDER THE GREAT (323 B.C.E.), but defeat brought an
end to Athens’s foreign policy ambitions, and a Macedo-
nian garrison was then installed at Piraeus (322 B.C.E.).
Under the Macedonian king KASSANDER, Athens was gov-
erned by the enlightened Demetrius of Phaleron
(317–307 B.C.E.). Liberated by the warrior prince
DEMETRIUS POLIORKETES, Athens reverted periodically to
Macedonian control, until the coming of ROME broke
Macedon’s power (167 B.C.E.).
The 300s B.C.E. marked the greatest days of Athenian
philosophy, starting with the establishment of PLATO’s
school of higher learning, the ACADEMY (ca. 385 B.C.E.).
In 335 B.C.E., Plato’s former pupil ARISTOTLE opened a
rival school, the LYCEUM. Among other influential philo-
sophical movements to emerge at that time at Athens
were EPICUREANISM (ca. 307 B.C.E.) and STOICISM (ca. 300
B.C.E.). Athens still retained a foremost position in the
arts, producing, among other talents, the sculptor PRAX-
ITELES (ca. 350 B.C.E.) and the playwright MENANDER (ca.
300 B.C.E.).
The HELLENISTIC AGE saw Athens’s creative output
begin to diminish as new centers of wealth and patronage
arose, including ALEXANDRIA (1) and PERGAMON.
In 86 B.C.E., Athens revolted in an attempt to free
itself from Roman rule, but the general Sulla sacked the
city and demolished the fortification walls that had been
build under Themistokles four centuries earlier. In the
Imperial period, Athens regained some of its former glory,
being appreciated by the Romans for its rich cultural his-
tory and becoming a prestigious center of EDUCATION.
The philosophical schools continued to be active until
529 C.E., when they were closed by the emperor Jus-
tinian. Athens remained an important city in the Byzan-
tine Empire until 1204. It was subsequently occupied by
the Franks until 1456 and then by the Turks until 1821.
At this time, the Greeks finally obtained their freedom,
and in 1833 the city of Athens was proclaimed the new
nation’s capital.
See also CORINTHIAN WAR; PAINTING; PERSIAN WARS;
POLIS; TRADE; TYRANTS.
60
Athens

Further reading: John Travlos, Pictorial Dictionary of
Ancient Athens (New York: Hacker, 1980); John McK.
Camp, The Archaeology of Athens (New Haven, Conn.:
Yale University Press, 2001); Mark Munn, The School of
History: Athens in the Age of Socrates (Berkeley: University
of California Press, 2003).
Atlantis
The legend of Atlantis (“island in the
Atlantic”) first appears in two dialogues, the Timaeus and
the Critias, written in about 355 B.C.E. by the Athenian
philosopher PLATO. Plato describes Atlantis as a vast,
wealthy island or continent that had existed 9,000 years
before in the Atlantic Ocean. This domain was an ideal
society, inhabited by an advanced and virtuous people
who conquered eastward to Europe and Africa. But their
greed for power grew, until the angry gods sent a deluge
to submerge the island.
Despite our modern-day fascination with this legend,
it seems clear that Atlantis never existed as described.
Plato probably made up the tale as a parable of self-
destructive pride. Some modern scholars believe that
Plato’s story may record some 1,100-year-old folktale
telling of the decline of MINOAN CIVILIZATION in the
Aegean region. ARCHAEOLOGY has yielded information
about the volcanic island of Thera (modern Santorini),
which was under the influence and/or control of the
Minoans and was destroyed by a massive eruption of its
volcano in the 1600s B.C.E. This eruption caused most of
the island to become submerged, and it created tidal
waves and clouds of ash throughout the eastern Mediter-
ranean, including on the island of CRETE. Plato’s Atlantis
may be a distorted memory of the destruction of Thera or
the downfall of Minoan Crete, projected beyond the
Mediterranean world.
See also HUBRIS; THERA.
Further reading: Lewis Spence, The History of
Atlantis (New York: Gramercy Books, 1996); Rodney Cas-
tleden, Atlantis Destroyed (New York: Routledge, 1998);
Richard Ellis, Imagining Atlantis (New York: Alfred A.
Knopf, 1998).
Atlas
In MYTH, Atlas was one of the TITANS (the race of
demigods that ruled the universe before the emergence of
the Olympian gods). After the Titans’ overthrow by the
gods, Atlas was condemned by ZEUS to hold up the sky
on his shoulders for eternity. The Greeks associated Atlas
with the far West. By the mid-400s B.C.E. he was identi-
fied with the Atlas mountain range in North Africa, and
his name had been given to the Atlantic Ocean (Greek
Atlantikos, “of Atlas”).
Atlas was said to be the father of the HESPERIDES
(daughters of Evening), who tended the fabled garden in
the West where golden apples grew. When the hero HER-
AKLES arrived to fetch a few such apples for his twelfth
Labor, Atlas offered to get them for him if he would
kindly support the sky in the meantime. Returning with
three golden apples, Atlas intended to leave Herakles
holding up the celestial canopy, but Herakles was able to
trick Atlas into resuming his assigned burden. The inci-
dent is portrayed on a famous marble relief carving from
the Temple of Zeus at OLYMPIA.
See also OLYMPUS, MT.
Atreus
This mythical king of MYCENAE was the father
of the heroes AGAMEMNON and MENELAUS, who in poetry
are often referred to as the Atreidai (the sons of Atreus).
Atreus and his brother Thyestes labored under a
hereditary curse received by their father, PELOPS. The
events of their own lives perpetuated this curse. Thyestes
offended Atreus by seducing his wife and stealing a
golden ram, a token of the kingship. Atreus banished his
brother, but then, pretending to be reconciled, invited
him to a banquet. At the feast, Atreus treacherously
served the cooked flesh of Thyestes’ own children, which
the unwitting guest ate. Upon realizing the horror,
Thyestes invoked a curse on his brother and departed.
This curse was fulfilled when Thyestes’ surviving son
Aegisthus helped murder Agamemnon after the latter’s
return from the TROJAN WAR. The banquet of Atreus and
Thyestes was a favorite reference in later Greek and
Roman poetry. The Roman statesman-philosopher Seneca
(ca. 60 C.E.) wrote a tragedy Thyestes, presenting the
monstrous events onstage.
See also CLYTAEMNESTRA; ORESTES.
Further reading:
Maria H. Lübeck, Iphigeneia,
Agamemnon’s Daughter: A Study of Ancient Conceptions in
Greek Myth and Literature Associated with the Atrides
(Stockholm: Almqvist & Wiksell International, 1993).
Attalus
See PERGAMON.
Attica
Attica refers to the territory of ATHENS. Named
perhaps from the Greek word akt¯e, “promontory,” it is a
triangular peninsula in southeast-central Greece, extend-
ing southward into the AEGEAN SEA. The peninsula’s neck
is bordered by BOEOTIA (to the north and northwest) and
by the territory of MEGARA (1) (to the northwest). Attica’s
western sea is the Saronic Gulf, containing the islands
SALAMIS (1) and AEGINA, among others.
With 1,000 square miles, Attica is about half the size
of Massachusetts. The mountainous terrain reaches four
separate peaks: Mt. Hymettus in the southwest (near
Athens); Mt. Pentelicus halfway up the east coast; Mt.
Parnes in the north-central area; and Mt. Laurion at the
southern tip.
Attica’s natural resources played vital roles in making
Athens a major commercial power, starting in the 500s
B.C.E., particularly significant was the SILVER mined at
Laurion. An admired marble was quarried at Pentelicus
and Hymettus, and the superior clay in the Attic soil was
Attica
61

important for Athens’ domination of the Greek POTTERY
market in the 800s–700s and 500s–400s B.C.E.
The mountains and hills of Attica enclose four dis-
crete farming plains, which from prehistoric times deter-
mined the groupings of settlement. There is (1) the large
plain of Athens, (2) the southern plain of the Mesogeia
(“midland”), (3) the small northeastern flatlands of
MARATHON and Aphidna, and (4) the one truly fertile
plain, at Eleusis in the west. The prominence of Eleusis
as a food source is reflected in the ancient, state-run
ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES, which celebrated the goddess
DEMETER’s gift of grain to humankind. Other crops
grown in the rather thin Attic soil included vines, figs,
and olives.
Among other important locales was Sounion, at
Attica’s southern tip, where a famous temple of Poseidon
was built in the 440s B.C.E.
See also ATHENA; KLEISTHENES (1); DEME; DEMOC-
RACY; PELOPONNESIAN WAR; PERSIAN WARS; PIRAEUS; THE-
SEUS.
Further reading: Studies in Attic Epigraphy, History,
and Topography: Presented to Eugene Vanderpool (Prince-
ton, N.J.: American School of Classical Studies, 1982);
Erika Simon, Festivals of Attica: An Archaeological Com-
mentary (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1983);
Mark Munn, The Defense of Attica: The Dema Wall and the
Boiotian War of 378–375 B.C. (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1993).
62
Attica

B
63
Bacchae
See EURIPIDES; MAENADS.
Bacchus
See DIONYSUS.
Bacchylides (ca. 515–450 B.C.E.) Greek lyric poet from
the island of Keos
Bacchylides’ work survives mainly in the form of 20
choral poems—14 victory odes and six dithyrambs—dis-
covered in an Egyptian papyrus in 1896 C.E. He is known
to have written many other verses for choruses, including
hymns that survive in a few fragments. Despite his lack of
genius, Bacchylides showed genuine artistic virtues,
including clarity of expression and a talent for narrative.
Bacchylides seems to have been born sometime
between 515 and 506 B.C.E. He was the nephew (sister’s
son) and protégé of the famous poet SIMONIDES, and it was
to Simonides’ sponsorship that Bacchylides owed much of
his worldly success. He seems to have followed his uncle’s
footsteps from early on and to have been employed by
some of the same patrons. Like Simonides, Bacchylides
wrote dithyrambs for poetry competitions at ATHENS. (The
dithyramb, a precursor of Athenian stage tragedy, was a
narrative poem on a mythological subject; it was sung in
public performance by a chorus, one of whose members
would take on a solo role in character.) Two of Bacchylides’
extant dithyrambs present imaginative episodes from the
life of the Athenian hero THESEUS. In around 476 B.C.E.,
Bacchylides accompanied the 80-year-old Simonides to the
court of HIERON (1), ruler of the Sicilian-Greek city of
SYRACUSE. There Bacchylides and Simonides are said to
have been engaged in an unfriendly rivalry with the The-
ban poet PINDAR, who was visiting Sicily in those years and
was probably close to Bacchylides’ age.
Bacchylides was greatly admired in antiquity for his
elegant and polished writing style. In the Hellenistic
period, he was considered by the scholars of Alexandria
to be one of the nine canonical Greek lyric poets. He was
a brilliant storyteller, and his poems were often focused
on moments of intense emotion or suspenseful action. He
seems to have been influenced by contemporary Greek
tragedy, for he incorporates genres such as the dramatic
dialogue into his poems. Modern knowledge of Bac-
chylides’ work was greatly increased by a papyrus discov-
ery in 1896, which expanded the surviving corpus of his
poetry from approximately 100 fragments to over 1,000
lines of verse.
Bacchylides and Pindar both composed victory odes
for Hieron. Hieron’s victory in the horserace at the
OLYMPIC GAMES (476 B.C.E.) is commemorated in Bac-
chylides’ Ode 5 as well as in Pindar’s Olympian Ode 1;
similarly, Hieron’s victory in the chariot race at the
PYTHIAN GAMES (470 B.C.E.) produced Bacchylides’ Ode
4 and Pindar’s Pythian 1. But when Hieron won his cov-
eted Olympic chariot victory in 468 B.C.E., it was Bac-
chylides, not Pindar, who was assigned to write the
celebratory ode.
This poem, Ode 3, is Bacchylides’ most successful
work. It addresses a rich dictator who, although at his
peak of prestige, was in failing health, with only a year to
live. The poem is full of sad reminders of human tran-
sience, couched in terms that are lovely despite being
wholly conventional: Life is short and troubled, the poet
says, in essence, and hope is treacherous. Be ready for death
tomorrow or 50 years hence. The best a mortal man can do
is worship the gods and live a good life. The poem is spun
around the central legend of the Lydian king CROESUS,

who fell from wealth and power to defeat, before being
saved by the god APOLLO. The ode’s consolation in the
face of death and its muted warning against the sin of
pride may have proved poignant to Hieron. In closing,
the poet refers to himself as the “the nightingale of
Keos”—a charmingly modest and apt self-description.
See also HUBRIS; LYRIC POETRY; THEATER.
Further reading: A. P. Burnett, The Art of Bacchylides
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1985);
David Campbell, ed., Greek Lyric: Bacchylides, Corinna,
and Others. Loeb Classical Library, no. 461 (Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1992); Charles Segal,
Aglaia: The Poetry of Alcman, Sappho, Pindar, Bacchylides,
and Corinna (Lanham, Md.: Rowman and Littlefield,
1998); Ilja Leonard Pfeijffer and Simon Slings, eds., One
Hundred Years of Bacchylides: Proceedings of a Colloquium
Held at the Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam (Amsterdam: VU
University Press, 1999); G. O. Hutchinson, Greek Lyric
Poetry: A Commentary on Selected Larger Pieces (New
York: Oxford University Press, 2001).
Bactria
Corresponding roughly to what is now north-
ern Afghanistan, Bactria was an important province of the
Persian Empire in the mid-500s to mid-300s B.C.E. In 330
B.C.E. the region was captured by the Macedonian king
ALEXANDER THE GREAT, during his conquest of the Per-
sian domain. Bactria’s significance for Greek history is
that, after being assigned heavy settlements of Alexan-
der’s veteran soldiers, the region developed into a far-
eastern enclave of Greek culture.
Following Alexander’s death (323 B.C.E.), Bactria
passed into the east Greek SELEUCID EMPIRE, but by 255
B.C.E. it had revolted under a leader named Diodotus,
who became its first king. Prospering from its central
Asian TRADE routes, this Greek kingdom lasted for over
a century and enveloped what is now southern
Afghanistan, western Pakistan, southern Uzbekistan, and
southeastern Turkmenistan. The Bactrian kings—of
which there seem eventually to have been two rival
dynasties, reigning out of different capitals—minted a
superb COINAGE, stamped with royal portraits. Today sur-
viving Bactrian coins provide some of the most realistic
portraiture from the ancient Greek world.
Among the principal Bactrian cities were two named
ALEXANDRIA
(2)—modern Kandahr and Herat, in
Afghanistan. The remarkable remnants of a Greek-style
GYMNASIUM and temple discovered at Aï Khanoun, in
northern Afghanistan, mark the site of another city—
probably also named Alexandria—that thrived under Bac-
trian kings. But by 100 B.C.E. Bactria had fallen, overrun
by Asian nomads.
See also HELLENISTIC AGE.
Further reading: Paul Bernard, Ai Khanum on the
Oxus: A Hellenistic City in Central Asia (London: Oxford
University Press, 1967); W. W. Tarn, The Greeks in Bactria
and India (Chicago: Ares Publishers, 1985); Frank Lee
Holt, Alexander the Great and Bactria: The Formation of a
Greek Frontier in Central Asia (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J.
Brill, 1988); C. C. Lamberg-Karlovsky, Bactria: An Ancient
Oasis Civilization from the Sands of Afghanistan (Venice:
Erizzo, 1988); Frank Lee Holt, Thundering Zeus: The
Making of Hellenistic Bactria (Berkeley: University of Cali-
fornia Press, 1999); H. Sidky, The Greek Kingdom of Bac-
tria: From Alexander to Eucratides the Great (Lanham,
Md.: University Press of America, 2000).
Bassae (Bassai)
This site in southwest ARCADIA, con-
tains a remarkable temple to APOLLO EPIKOURIOS, now
reconstructed. Bassae (meaning “ravines”) is located on
the remote slopes of Mt. Cotilion. The austere Doric-style
temple was begun in about 450 B.C.E. and completed per-
haps 30 years later. It was designed by Iktinus, the archi-
tect of the Athenian PARTHENON and almost certainly
predates the Parthenon (begun in 447 B.C.E.).
Built atop a narrow mountain ridge, the temple nec-
essarily has a north-south orientation (as opposed to the
64
Bactria
The Temple of Apollo at Bassae is a Doric-style temple begun
in 450 B.C.E. A single Corinthian column once stood in this
interior. (Alison Frantz Photographic Collection, American
School of Classical Studies at Athens)

typical east-west). Instead of using marble that would
have had to be transported to the remote site, the temple
is built of gray local limestone. Its most famous feature is
the single Corinthian-style column that stands in the
back of the interior. The column’s original capital disap-
peared in the 19th century C.E. but was previously noted
and sketched as having acanthus-leaf decorations on four
sides. This makes it the earliest known example of a
Corinthian column.
The temple is adorned by SCULPTURES, figures carved
in relief on a continuous frieze that ran around the inte-
rior of the cella. This frieze, stripped off and carted away
in the 19th century, now stands in the British Museum in
London. The style of the frieze suggests that it may have
been carved some years after the temple itself was com-
plete, perhaps in the early fourth century B.C.E. The sub-
ject of the Bassae frieze depicts scenes of battle between
Greeks and AMAZONS and between Lapiths and CEN-
TAURS. These two favorite subjects of Greek temple carv-
ing convey the theme of (Greek) order versus (barbarian)
chaos and are thus appropriate to a Greek god of culture
such as Apollo. Similar images existed also among the
sculptures of the Parthenon.
The interesting combination of orders on the Temple
of Apollo at Bassae—Doric columns and proportions,
Ionic-style continuous frieze, and Corinthian interior col-
umn—shows a sense of experimentation and innovation
on the part of the architect, Iktinos. Similar features are
also present in the Parthenon, which is also a mostly
Doric building with an Ionic-style sculpture frieze.
See also ARCHITECTURE.
Further reading: Fred Cooper, “The Temple of
Apollo at Bassai. Observations on Its Plan and Orienta-
tion,” AJA 72 (1968): 103–111; Fred Cooper, The Temple
of Apollo Bassitas (Princeton, N.J.: American School of
Classical Studies, 1992); I. Jenkins and D. Williams, “The
Arrangement of the Sculptured Frieze from the Temple of
Apollo Epikourios at Bassai,” in Sculpture from Arcadia
and Laconia. Proceedings of an International Conference
Held at the American School of Classical Studies at Athens,
April 10–14, 1992, edited by O. Palagia and W. Coulson
(Oxford: Oxbow Books, 1993), 57–77; N. Kelly, “The
Archaic Temple of Apollo at Bassai. Correspondences to
the Classical Temple,” Hesperia 64 (1995): 228–277.
Bellerophon
This mythical hero came to be associated
with a flying horse named Pegasus, who was created
when PERSEUS cut off the head of the Gorgon MEDUSA.
The goddess ATHENA helped Bellerophon capture and
tame Pegasus by giving him a golden bridle; the three fig-
ures are frequently shown together in Greek art. Pegasus
is not mentioned, however, in the earliest surviving refer-
ences to Bellerophon, found in Homer’s Iliad (written
down around 750 B.C.E.). Another myth about the hero
says that he tried to ascend Mt. Olympus on his winged
steed but was struck down by ZEUS, angered at the mor-
tal’s HUBRIS.
Like HERAKLES and other Greek heroes, Bellerophon
was assigned a series of impossible-seeming tasks, which
he accomplished. His adventures began when he resisted
the advances of Anteia (or Stheneboea), the wife of King
Proteus of ARGOS (or TIRYNS). Humiliated, she claimed he
had tried to seduce her, and so Proteus sent him away
with an encoded letter for the king of Lycia, in ASIA
MINOR. The letter requested that the king kill the bearer.
Obligingly, the king sent Bellerophon to fight the
Chimera and the AMAZONS, among other hazards. But the
hero triumphed and eventually married the king’s daugh-
ter, Philonoë.
Later versions of the MYTH—such as in the poet PIN-
DAR’s 13th Olympian ode (466 B.C.E.)—had Bellerophon
assisted by the winged Pegasus. Bellerophon was honored
as a hero in the city of Corinth, and Pegasus appeared as
a symbol of the city on Corinthian COINAGE.
Further reading: M. Low Schmitt, “Bellerophon and
the Chimaera in Archaic Greek Art,” American Journal of
Archaeology 70 (1966): 341–347; K. Schefold, Gods and
Heroes in Late Archaic Greek Art, translated by Alan Grif-
fiths (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1992); H.
Hoffman, “Bellerophon and the Chimaira in Malibu. A
Greek Myth and an Archaeological Context,” in Studia
Varia from the J. Paul Getty Museum (Malibu, Calif.: J.
Paul Getty Museum, 1993), 63–70.
Bion
See CYNICS.
Bion
65
On the inside of this Spartan kylix, or cup, the hero
Bellerophon battles the Chimera, a fire-breathing monster.
Bellerophon holds the reins of his horse, Pegasus, while Pega-
sus strikes at the Chimera with his hooves and Bellerophon
uses his spear. (The J. Paul Getty Museum)

birth control
Women in ancient Greece generally mar-
ried at a young age, and their primary functions in society
were to maintain the household and to bear children. At
the same time, parents preferred to produce small numbers
of their children because they would need to provide
dowries for each daughter and to divide their estates
equally among all their sons. The high infant mortality
rate, however, as well as the chances that a grown child
would die in childbirth or in battle, led parents to conceive
extra children to safeguard the future of the family estate.
In the 400s B.C.E., the Athenian statesman Perikles recog-
nized that the increasing population was a problem for the
maintenance of personal estates, and he enacted a citizen-
ship law intended to stem the growth of the population.
In the medical treatise Nature of Women by the Greek
physician HIPPOCRATES (ca. 460–390 B.C.E.), there is only
a brief discussion of contraception. It advises that a
woman should drink a thick mixture of beans and water,
which will prevent her from getting pregnant for a year.
Other ancient medical writers such as Dioskorides and
Soranos provide evidence for herbal oral contraceptives,
most of which have been tested in modern times and
seem to be truly effective.
In addition to actual contraceptives, the ancient
Greeks utilized several other means of population con-
trol, including homosexuality, anal intercourse, and
extramarital sex with prostitutes or slaves. Although Hip-
pocrates was philosophically against the idea of inten-
tional abortion, it was certainly practiced, as was
exposure of unwanted infants (or an infant of an
unwanted gender).
See also MARRIAGE; MEDICINE; PROSTITUTES.
Further reading: Agnus McLaren, A History of Con-
traception from Antiquity to the Present Day (Oxford: Basil
Blackwell Press, 1990); J. M. Riddle, Contraception and
Abortion from the Ancient World to the Renaissance (Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1992); J. M. Rid-
dle, Eve’s Herbs: A History of Contraception and Abortion in
the West (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1997).
black peoples
The ancient Greeks were acquainted
with people of the Negroid race. During the second and
first millennia B.C.E. the Greeks had periodic contact with
EGYPT, culminating in ALEXANDER THE GREAT’s conquest
of the land in 322 B.C.E. Although most Egyptians were of
Semitic blood, some were of Negroid blood, with also an
intermingling of the two races. As is the case in Egypt
today, many inhabitants may have had dark skin, with
Semitic or Negroid physical features in varying degrees.
People of black African descent played important roles as
soldiers, administrators, priests, and sometimes pharaohs.
Moreover, the Greeks knew about Egypt’s southern
neighbor—the powerful nation called Nubia or Kush
(also spelled Cush). Located along the Nile in what is
now northern Sudan, Nubia was inhabited by black
Africans, with possibly an admixture of Semitic blood.
Nubia was a trading partner and periodic enemy of the
pharaohs’ Egypt; during the third to first millennia B.C.E.
the two nations warred intermittently over a shared,
shifting frontier that lay south of the first Nile cataract
(modern-day Aswan). Nubia was an important supplier
of GOLD ore to Egypt, and Nubian troops often served as
mercenaries in Egyptian service.
By the mid 700s B.C.E. the Nubians had reorganized
themselves and had begun a large-scale invasion of Egypt,
the conquest of which was completed in around 715 B.C.E.
by the Nubian ruler Shabako (or Shabaka). The period
from about 730 to 656 B.C.E., when Nubian pharaohs
ruled part or all of Egypt, is called by modern historians
the 25th Dynasty of Egypt. But Assyrian invaders toppled
the dynasty, and Egypt passed to other hands.
In the early 500s B.C.E. Nubia came under military
pressure from a resurgent Egypt. The Nubians removed
their capital southward to Meroë, situated between the
fifth and sixth Nile cataracts (about 120 miles north of
modern-day Khartoum). This “Meroitic” Nubian kingdom
flourished for 900 years as an African society independent
of Egypt and of Egypt’s successive conquerors—the Per-
sians, the Greco-Macedonian Ptolemies, and the Romans.
Among the Greeks, such facts became the stuff of
legend. HOMER’s epic poems, the Iliad and Odyssey, writ-
ten down around 750 B.C.E., make reference to a people
known as Aithiopes (Greek: “burnt-face ones”). Beloved
of the gods, they dwelt far to the south, in the land called
Aithiopia. It was the force of the southern sun, the early
Greeks believed, that crisped these people’s faces. Greek
MYTH told of an Aithiopian king, MEMNON, who led an
army northward to help defend TROY during the TROJAN
WAR but was killed in single combat with the Greek hero
ACHILLES. This episode (not described by Homer) was
recounted in a now-vanished Greek epic poem usually
called the Aethiopis. It is not known whether this legend
contains any kernel of historical truth.
Homer and other early writers give no clear location
for Aithiopia. But by the early 400s B.C.E. the Greeks had
come to equate it specifically with the nation of Nubia,
south of Egypt. The Greek historian HERODOTUS, visiting
Egypt circa 450 B.C.E., heard tales about Aithiopia-Nubia.
According to Herodotus, the Aithiopians were said to be
“the tallest and most attractive people in the world”
(book 3). Herodotus also mentions that Aithiopian
troops, armed with spear and bow, served in the Persian
king XERXES’ invasion of Greece in 480 B.C.E. (Although
not part of the Persian Empire, Nubia seems to have been
enrolled as a diplomatic friend of PERSIA.)
In modern times, the place-name Aithiopia (latinized
to Ethiopia) has been applied to an African nation located
far southeast of ancient Nubia. Confusingly, however,
modern historians of the ancient world sometimes use
the terms Ethiopia and Ethiopian in the old, Greek sense,
66
birth control

to denote ancient Nubia. Egypt’s 25th Dynasty is often
referred to as the Ethiopian Dynasty.
As a result of contact with black people of Egypt and
Nubia, ancient Greek artists began portraying blacks in
statuary, metalwork, vase paintings, and the like; the ear-
liest surviving examples date from the 500s B.C.E. One of
the finest pieces is an Athenian clay drinking cup, realis-
tically shaped and painted to represent the head of a
black youth (ca. 525 B.C.E.). The hero Memnon appears
on several extant vase paintings; usually he is shown with
distinctly Negro facial features.
Another black man in Greek art was the evil Busiris.
According to Greek legend, Busiris was an Egyptian king,
a son of the god POSEIDON; capturing any foreigners who
entered Egypt, he would sacrifice them on the altar of the
god ZEUS. But at last the Greek hero HERAKLES arrived
and—in a scene popular in vase paintings—killed Busiris
and his followers. This odd tale may distortedly recall
Greek relations with Egypt amid the downfall of the 25th
(Nubian) Dynasty in the mid 600s B.C.E.
Alexander the Great’s conquest of the Persian Empire
brought Egypt into the Greek world, thus opening Nubia
and other parts of West Africa to Greek exploration and
TRADE. Around 280–260 B.C.E. Egypt’s king PTOLEMY (2) II
sent explorers and merchants sailing along the Red Sea
coast as far as modern-day Somalia, and up the Nile to
Nubian Meroë and beyond. Ptolemy’s goal was the acquisi-
tion of gold and other goods, particularly live African ele-
phants for military use. Subsequent Ptolemies maintained
these African trading and diplomatic ties, which incidently
brought Greek influences to the ruling class in Nubia. We
know, for example, that the Greek name Candace was used
by Nubian queens from this era until the 300s C.E.
See also NAUCRATIS; POTTERY; XENOPHANES.
Further reading: Joyce L. Haynes, Nubia: Ancient
Kingdoms of Africa (Boston: Museum of Fine Arts, 1992);
Stanley Burstein, ed., Ancient African Civilizations: Kush
and Axum (Princeton, N.J.: M. Wiener, 1998).
Black Sea
This modern name refers to the 168,500-
square-mile oblong sea bordering ASIA MINOR on the
south and Ukraine and southwestern Russia on the
north. Attractive for its access to Asia Minor’s metal
TRADE and Ukraine’s vast wheatfields, the Black Sea
became ringed by Greek colonies, from around 700
B.C.E. onward. The Greeks called it Pontos Euxeinos,
“the hospitable sea.” But this name was intentionally
euphemistic, insofar as fierce native inhabitants and a
cold and stormy climate might make the region dis-
tinctly inhospitable.
The Black, or Euxine, Sea was opened up by explor-
ers from the Greek city of MILETUS, on the west coast of
Asia Minor. The Milesians’ first goal was to acquire cop-
per, tin, GOLD, and other raw metals of interior Asia
Minor, and one of their early colonies was SINOPE, located
halfway along the southern Black Sea coast. In the next
100 years, colonies from Miletus (and a few other east
Greek cities) arose around the entire Black Sea.
Along the northern coastlines, the principal Greek
cities were Olbia (meaning “prosperous”), at the mouth
of the River Bug, and PANTICAPAEUM, on the east coast of
the Crimean peninsula. These sites offered the very valu-
able resource of grain, grown as surplus by farmers in
the interior and purchased by the Greeks for export to
the hungry cities of mainland Greece. By 500 B.C.E. the
north Black Sea coast was a major grain supplier, espe-
cially for ATHENS. This shipping route placed strategic
importance on two narrow waterways—the BOSPORUS
and the HELLESPONT—that help connect the Black Sea to
the AEGEAN SEA.
See also AMAZONS; COLONIZATION; HECATAEUS; HER-
ODOTUS; JASON (1); SHIPS AND SEAFARING.
Further reading: Marianna Koromila, The Greeks in
the Black Sea: From the Bronze Age to the Early Twentieth
Century (Athens: Panorama, 1991); Neal Ascherson,
Black Sea (New York: Hill and Wang, 1995); Gocha R.
Tsetkhladze, ed., The Greek Colonisation of the Black Sea
Area: Historical Interpretation of Archaeology (Stuttgart:
Franz Steiner, 1998).
Boeotia
This northwest-southeast-elongated region of
central Greece is bordered by PHOCIS to the northwest, by
the Straits of EUBOEA to the northeast, and by the
Corinthian Gulf to the southwest. Central Boeotia con-
sists of a mountain-girt plain that provided rich FARMING
and the raising of horses. In the plain’s southeast corner
lay the major Boeotian city, THEBES. The second city was
Boeotia
67
Boeotian artwork circa late 700s B.C.E. used decorative
repeated patterns. The painted swastikas represent the good
magic of rotating wheels or drills for making fire. (Alison
Frantz Photographic Collection, American School of Classical
Studies at Athens)

ORCHOMENOS, in the plain’s northwest corner, opposite
Thebes.
South of Thebes, Boeotia shared an ill-defined border
with the Athenian territory, along the east-west line of
Mt. Parnes and Mt. Kithairon. The historically important
Boeotian town of PLATAEA lay just north of Kithairon.
Farther northwest stood Boeotia’s tallest mountain, Heli-
con (about 5,800 feet).
The Boeotian heartland comprised one of the centers
of MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION (around 1600–1200 B.C.E.)—
as suggested by Thebes’s prominent place in Greek MYTH.
The name Boeotia refers to the raising of cattle (boes) and
specifically commemorates the Boiotoi, a Greek people
who invaded the region, migrating south from THESSALY
circa 1100 B.C.E. The Boeotians of historical times spoke a
form of the Aeolic dialect, related to the dialect of Thes-
saly and that of the east Aegean island of LESBOS. Boeo-
tians were reputed to be boorish and ignorant, although
prosperous. “Boeotian pig” was a Greek epithet. But
Boeotia’s literary tradition produced the poets HESIOD,
PINDAR, and CORINNA.
With the exception of Plataea, the Boeotian towns
followed Thebes as enemies of ATHENS, starting in the
late 500s B.C.E. Boeotia was a target of Athenian expan-
sionism, and the Athenians actually occupied Boeotia for
a decade, 457–447 B.C.E. Soon thereafter the towns
formed a Boeotian League, under Theban dominance, for
mutual defense and a jointly decided foreign policy. The
Boeotian army then emerged as one of the best in
Greece, distinguished by a large CAVALRY force in addi-
tion to strong infantry. At the Battle of Delium in 424
B.C.E., during the PELOPONNESIAN WAR, the Boeotians
defeated the invading Athenians and ended their hope of
reconquering the region. Later, under the Theban com-
mander EPAMINONDAS, the Boeotian League broke the
might of SPARTA (371 B.C.E.) and became the foremost
power in Greece, before falling to Macedonian conquest
(338 B.C.E.).
Boeotia’s central location and flat interior often
made it a battleground—“the dancing floor of War,”
Epaminondas called it. Famous Boeotian battlefields
included Plataea (479 B.C.E.), LEUCTRA (371 B.C.E.), and
CHAIRONEIA (338 B.C.E.).
See also GREECE, GEOGRAPHY OF; GREEK LANGUAGE;
MUSES; PERSIAN WARS; PLATAEA, BATTLE OF; WARFARE; LAND.
Further reading: Albert Schachter, Cults of Boiotia
(London: University of London, Institute of Classical
Studies, 1981); John M. Fossey, Topography and Popula-
tion of Ancient Boiotia (Chicago: Ares Publishers, 1988).
Bosporus (Bosphorus)
This narrow, zigzagging, 18-
mile-long channel flows southwestward from the BLACK
SEA to the SEA OF MARMARA. Beyond the Marmara, the cur-
rent continues south and west through the HELLESPONT
channel to the AEGEAN SEA. Like the Hellespont, the
Bosporus borders part of northwestern ASIA MINOR; it was
considered to be a dividing line between EUROPE AND ASIA.
Shorter and generally narrower and swifter-flowing
than the Hellespont, the Bosporus ranges in width from
2.5 miles to 400 yards. Its name, “cow ford” or “ox ford,”
was in ancient times said to refer to the mythical wander-
ings of IO, a woman loved by the god ZEUS and trans-
formed into cow by Zeus’s jealous wife, HERA. But the
name may refer to a more mundane cattle crossing.
Around 513 B.C.E., the Persians under King DARIUS
(1)—preparing to cross from Asia to Europe for their
invasion of Scythia—spanned the Bosporus with a pon-
toon bridge consisting of about 200 ships anchored in a
row. This was a remarkable engineering feat in the
ancient world, although not as amazing as the Persians’
bridging of the Hellespont, a wider channel, 30 years
later. In modern times the Bosporus, now a part of
Turkey, was not bridged until 1973.
The Bosporus and Hellespont were the two bottle-
necks along the shipping route between the Black Sea and
the Aegean. This route had become crucial by about 500
B.C.E. when ATHENS and other cities of mainland Greece
were becoming dependent on grain imported from the
northern Black Sea coast. As a natural site where shipping
could be raided or tolled, the Bosporus, like the Helles-
pont, offered wealth and power to any state that could
control it. This, combined with the excellent commercial
fishing in the strait and its value as a ferry point, helps to
explain the prosperity of the Bosporus’s most famous city,
BYZANTIUM, located at the southern mouth. Athens con-
trolled the Bosporus in the 400s B.C.E. by holding Byzan-
tium as a subject ally.
See also THRACE.
Further reading: John Freely, The Bosphorus (Istan-
bul: Redhouse Press, 1993); Yusuf Mardin, Bosphorus
Through the Ages (Ankara: T. C. Kültür Bakanligi, 1995);
Rhonda Vander Sluis, From the Bosphorus: A Self-guided
Tour (Istanbul: Çitlembik, 2000).
boul¯e
See COUNCIL.
boxing
An important SPORT among the ancient Greeks,
boxing was however less popular than the two other
combat sports, WRESTLING and PANKRATION.
Our knowledge of Greek boxing comes mainly from
extant literature, artwork, and inscriptions (on tombs and
religious offerings). Because HOMER’s epic poem the Iliad
describes a boxing match in book 23, we know that the
Greeks were practicing boxing by at least the mid-700s
B.C.E., when the Homeric poems were written down. Pos-
sibly the early Greeks learned the sport from MINOAN
CIVILIZATION of the ancient Aegean region (2200–1400
B.C.E.). A surviving fresco from Minoan THERA, painted
around 1550 B.C.E., shows two boys engaging in what
appears to be a stylized form of boxing.
68
Bosporus

The sport’s patron god was APOLLO, a deity of the
civilizing arts. During historical times boxing was the
sort of discipline that a wealthy young man in a Greek
city-state might practice at a local GYMNASIUM. Like other
Greek sports of the pre-Roman era, boxing was purely an
amateur pastime. The best boxers could hope to compete
in the men’s or boys’ category at the OLYMPIC GAMES or at
one of the other great sports festivals.
The Greeks had no boxing rings; official contests
might take place on an unfenced sand floor in an outdoor
stadium, where the referee would keep the two oppo-
nents in a fighting proximity. More brutal than today’s
sport, Greek boxing did not recognize different weight
classes; the advantage tended to go to the heavier man.
The match had no rounds, but continued until one man
either lost consciousness or held up a finger, signaling
defeat. Boxers were allowed to gouge with the thumb but
were forbidden to clinch or grab. Certain vase paintings
show a referee using his long stick to beat a clinching
boxer.
Down through the 400s B.C.E. boxers often wore pro-
tective rawhide thongs wrapped around their hands. Dur-
ing the 300s B.C.E. the thongs developed into a heavier,
more damaging form, with a hard leather knuckle pad.
For practice only, boxers might use soft gloves similar to
our modern boxing gloves. Boxers tended to attack the
face—ancient artwork and inscriptions commemorate
broken noses and damaged eyeballs. It was not unusual
for a boxer to die from injuries. A wonderful artistic rep-
resentation of a Greek boxer is a bronze statue from the
Hellenistic period, now in the Terme Museum in Rome.
Here, the athlete is seated on a rock after his event,
bruised and bloodied, still wearing the leather strips
wrapped around his knuckles, his ears and nose swollen
from having received many blows in his career.
Although champions came from all over the Greek
world, boxing was particularly associated with the grim
discipline of SPARTA. The Athenian philosopher PLATO’s
dialogue Gorgias (ca. 386 B.C.E.) mentions “the boys with
the cauliflower ears,” referring to the antidemocratic,
upper-class Athenian youth who practiced boxing in imi-
tation of Spartan training.
See also EDUCATION; OLIGARCHY.
Further reading: Nancy B. Reed, More Than Just a
Game: The Military Nature of Greek Athletic Contests
(Chicago: Ares, 1998); William Blake Tyrell. The Smell of
Sweat: Greek Athletics, Olympics, and Culture (Wauconda,
Ill.: Bolchazy-Carducci Publishers, 2004); Stephen G.
Miller, Ancient Greek Athletics (New Haven, Conn.: Yale
University Press, 2004).
Brasidas (d. 422 B.C.E.) Dynamic Spartan general of the
PELOPONNESIAN WAR
His successes against Athenian holdings on the north
Aegean coast in 424–422 B.C.E. helped to offset Athenian
victories elsewhere and bring about a mood of stalemate,
resulting in the Peace of NIKIAS. Brasidas’s great triumph
was his capture of the vital Athenian colony of AMPHIPO-
LIS (early 423 B.C.E.). He died at the Battle of Amphipolis,
successfully defending the city from an Athenian army
under KLEON.
Brasidas saw that the way to attack an impregnable
ATHENS was to destroy its northeastern supply lines. His
northern campaign was an early, crude, land-bound ver-
sion of the strategy that would later win the war for
SPARTA, in the naval campaigns of 413–404 B.C.E.
See also THUCYDIDES (1).
Further reading: G. Wylie, “Brasidas. Great Com-
mander or Whiz-kid?” Quaderni urbinati di cultura clas-
sica 41 (1992): 75–95; Donald Kagen, The Peloponnesian
War (New York: Viking, 2003).
bronze
An alloy of copper and tin, usually in a nine-to-
one ratio, bronze supplied the most useful metal known
during the third and second millennia B.C.E. It replaced
prior uses of copper in weaponry, tools, and artwork
throughout the Near East and Mediterranean.
Fortified by its measure of tin, bronze is harder than
copper, but it melts at the same relatively low tempera-
ture—2,000 degrees Fahrenheit. Molten bronze can be
intricately shaped by casting—that is, by being poured
into a mold. Once cooled, the bronze item can be sharp-
ened or shaped further.
This technology was invented in the Near East before
3000 B.C.E. and had spread to Minoan CRETE by around
2500 B.C.E. Whether the first arriving Greek tribesmen of
about 2100 B.C.E. already had their own bronze weapons
is unknown, but in the centuries after they occupied
mainland Greece they steadily increased their bronze-
working skill, especially for warfare. As shown by
ARCHAEOLOGY, bronze was providing the Greek MYCE-
NAEAN CIVILIZATION with swords and spear-points before
1500 B.C.E., and by 1400 B.C.E. Mycenaean metalsmiths
had mastered the technique of casting bronze plates, then
hammering them out to make helmets and body armor.
The Mycenaeans used bronze plowshares, sickles, orna-
ments, and vessels for drinking and cooking.
The potential disadvantage of bronze was that one of
its two component metals, tin, could be difficult for the
Greeks to acquire. Whereas the Greeks mined copper on
the islands of EUBOEA and CYPRUS, tin had to be pur-
chased through expensive, long-range TRADE with ASIA
MINOR and western Europe. Tin was mined intensively by
native peoples in what is now Cornwall, in southwest
England; it then traveled overland—brought by non-
Greek middlemen—to trade outlets on the Mediterranean.
The collapse of Mycenaean society and the invasion
of mainland Greece by the DORIAN GREEKS (around
1100–1000 B.C.E.) temporarily destroyed in the tin
routes. Compelled to find a replacement for bronze, the
bronze
69

Greeks began mining and working IRON. Just as bronze
had supplanted copper, so iron now replaced bronze in
many objects, such as plowshares and sword blades. But
bronze working returned, alongside ironworking, once
the tin supplies were renewed. In ancient technology,
bronze was far more malleable than iron, and bronze
remained essential wherever shaping or thinness was
required.
During the great trading expansion of the 800s–500s
B.C.E., the mainland Greeks imported and copied the art-
ful bronzework of cauldrons, hand mirrors, and other
artifacts from the Near East. Bronze helmets, breastplates,
and shield facings were standard equipment for Greek
HOPLITE armies (around 700–300 B.C.E.). The foremost
Greek city of about 700 B.C.E. was CHALCIS, whose name
probably refers to bronze (Greek: chalkos). Now and
later, bronze provided a favorite material for SCULPTURE;
one technique was to pour the molten metal into a wax
mold that had a clay or plaster core, to produce a hollow
statue.
Tin supplies were always a concern. The lure of tin
brought Greek traders into the western Mediterranean by
600 B.C.E., when the Greek colony of MASSALIA was
founded. A major tin supplier was the Celtic kingdom of
Tartessus, in southern Spain. (Perhaps none of this tin was
mined locally; it may all have come from Cornwall.) Com-
petition over metal supplies brought the western Greeks
into conflict with similarly aggressive traders—the
Carthaginians. Around 500 B.C.E. the Carthaginians prob-
ably destroyed Tartessus, but by then the Greeks had
found new tin suppliers, in ITALY and what is now France.
Bronze objects generally do not survive as well in the
archaeological record as artifacts made of stone, terra-
cotta, or glass. This is due in part to corrosion of the
metal and in part because many bronze objects were
melted down in later periods for reuse. A large percentage
of surviving bronzes come from ancient shipwrecks such
as the one discovered near Cape Artemision, which
yielded numerous significant bronze artifacts, including
the famous over-life-size statue of ZEUS now in the
National Museum in Athens.
See also BRONZE AGE; CARTHAGE SCULPTURE; SINOPE;
WARFARE, LAND.
Further reading: Caroline Houser, Greek Monumental
Bronze Sculpture (London: Thames and Hudson, 1983);
Carol Mattusch, Classical Bronzes (Ithaca: Cornell Uni-
versity Press, 1996); Veronica McGeehan Liritzis, The
Role and Development of Metallurgy in the Late Neolithic
and Early Bronze Age of Greece (Jonsered, Sweden: Paul
Aströms Förlag, 1996); Conrad M. Stibbe, The Sons of
Hephaistos: Aspects of the Archaic Greek Bronze Industry
(Rome: L’Erma di Bretschneider, 2000).
Bronze Age
This term used by modern archaeologists
and historians describes the phase of Asian and European
human prehistory that falls roughly between 3500 and
1000 B.C.E. Coming after the Neolithic or New Stone Age,
the Bronze Age is considered to have spread from Near
East to various other regions over several centuries. The
era was marked by improved metallurgy that produced
the alloy BRONZE as the prime substance for tools of war,
agriculture, and industry. For the kings and lords who
could produce or buy it, bronze replaced copper, obsid-
ian, and flint. IRON—destined to replace bronze for many
uses—was not yet in use.
The Bronze Age saw the birth of the earliest great civ-
ilizations of the Near East and the eastern Mediterranean.
These include the Sumerian kingdom in Mesopotamia
(which arose around 2800 B.C.E.), the Egyptian Old King-
dom (ca. 2660 B.C.E.), the MINOAN CIVILIZATION in CRETE
(ca. 2000 B.C.E.), the Hittite kingdom in ASIA MINOR (ca.
1650 B.C.E.), and the MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION of main-
land Greece (ca. 1600 B.C.E.).
By scholarly convention, the Bronze Age in mainland
Greece is divided into three phases, called Early Helladic
(ca. 2900–1950 B.C.E.), Middle Helladic (ca. 1950–1550
B.C.E.), and Late Helladic (ca. 1550–1100 B.C.E.), with
each phase subdivided into stages I, II, and III. Much of
70
Bronze Age
A bronze statue of a youth, formed by casting the molten
bronze in a mold, early 400s B.C.E. (Alison Frantz Photo-
graphic Collection, American School of Classical Studies 
at Athens)

Early Helladic covers an epoch prior to the Greeks’
appearance on the scene, when mainland Greece was still
inhabited by a non-Greek people (who used bronze,
although not extensively). The violent arrival of the first
primitive Greeks is usually placed between Early Helladic
II and III, around 2100 B.C.E. The flowering of Greek
Mycenaean culture corresponds to the Late Helladic era.
The Mycenaeans’ downfall marks the end of the Bronze
Age and the advent of the DARK AGE in Greece.
Further reading: J. Lesley Fitton, The Discovery of the
Greek Bronze Age (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1996); Donald Preziosi and Louise Hitchcock,
Aegean Art and Architecture (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1999); Curtis N. Runnels and Priscilla Murray,
Greece Before History: An Archaeological Companion and
Guide (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2001);
Keith Branigan, ed., Urbanism in the Aegean Bronze Age
(London: Sheffield Academic Press, 2001); Tracey Cullen,
ed., Aegean Prehistory: A Review (Boston: Archaeological
Institute of America, 2001).
Bucephalus
See ALEXANDER THE GREAT.
building
See ARCHITECTURE.
burial
See FUNERAL CUSTOMS.
Byblos
This city was the northernmost of ancient
PHOENICIA’s three major seaports, together with Sidon
and Tyre. Today the site of Byblos is about 26 miles north
of Beirut, in Lebanon.
Called Gebal (“citadel”) by the Phoenicians, Byblos
was one of the earliest cities of the Near East probably
occupied by around 5000 B.C.E. In the Phoenician heyday
of the 900s–700s B.C.E., Byblos was the nation’s capital,
with a powerful navy and TRADE routes extending to
Greece and EGYPT.
Contact between Greek and Bybline traders, at such
ports as AL MINA, in Syria, and Citium, in CYPRUS, was a
crucial factor in transmitting certain Near Eastern advan-
tages to the emerging Greek culture, including the ALPHA-
BET (around 775 B.C.E.). Byblos at this time was the major
export center for papyrus (primitive “paper” made from
the pith of Egyptian water plants and used as a cheap
substitute for animal skins in receiving WRITING). Byblos’s
monopoly in this trade is commemorated in the early
Greek word for papyrus, biblos. That word, in turn,
yielded Greek biblion, “book,” and bibliotheka, “library,”
which survive in such familiar words as Bible, biblio-
phile, and French bibliothèque (“library”).
Byblos’s political fortunes in the era 700–300 B.C.E.
followed those of greater Phoenicia, and the city quickly
faded in importance after the founding of the nearby
Seleucid-Greek city of ANTIOCH (300 B.C.E.).
A French archaeologist, Ernest Renan, did some
investigating of Byblos in 1860, but systematic excavation
did not begin until the 1920s. The ruins visible today
represent a long series of successive cultures present at
the site: Phoenician, Egyptian, Assyrian, Persian, Roman,
Arab, Crusader, and Ottoman. There is abundant evi-
dence of trade from all periods; Byblos appears always to
have been a major commercial center and an important
link between the Near East and the Mediterranean.
See also ADONIS.
Further reading: Maurice Denand, Byblos: Its History,
Ruins, and Legends, translated by H. Tabet (Beirut:
Catholic Press, 1964); Nina Jidejian, Byblos through the
Ages, 2d ed. (Beirut: Dar el-Machreq, 1971); Alessandra
Nibbi, Ancient Byblos Reconsidered (Oxford: D. E. Publica-
tions, 1985).
Byzantium
A celebrated Greek city on the European
side of the southern mouth of the BOSPORUS channel,
Byzantium is now the Turkish metropolis of Istanbul.
Founded in the mid-600s B.C.E. by Greeks from
MEGARA (1), the city was called Buzantion in Greek. Sup-
posedly it took its name from the colonists’ leader, Buzas;
more probably, it was the name of a preexisting settle-
ment of native Thracians. The Greek city thrived amid
Thracian tribes hungry for Greek goods.
Byzantium enjoyed a superb location on a peninsula
jutting between the Bosporus mouth and the Sea of MAR-
MARA. Alongside the peninsula’s landward base lay the
mouth of the Golden Horn River, providing rich fishing
and access to the interior. More important, Byzantium
controlled the Bosporus. Greek merchant ships—full of
precious grain from the BLACK SEA coast, bound for cities
of mainland Greece—would sail south through the chan-
nel. Byzantium’s navy was able to impose tolls on this
passing traffic.
Byzantium was held as a strategic point by successive
imperial powers: PERSIA (ca. 513–478 B.C.E.), ATHENS
(478–404 B.C.E.), and ROME (mid-100s B.C.E. onward). As
a member of the Athenian-dominated DELIAN LEAGUE in
the 400s B.C.E., Byzantium played a vital role in Athens’s
control of the Black Sea grain route. We know that in 457
B.C.E. wealthy Byzantium was paying a relatively high
yearly Delian tribute—15 TALENTS. The city revolted
unsuccessfully against Athens twice (440 and 411 B.C.E.).
Passing to Spartan influence at the end of the PELO-
PONNESIAN WAR (404 B.C.E.), the Byzantines soon became
disenchanted with their new masters. By about 377 B.C.E.
they were again Athenian allies. The Macedonian king
PHILIP II unsuccessfully besieged Byzantium in the winter
of 340–339 B.C.E.
Amid the wars of the DIADOCHI in the late 300s
B.C.E., Byzantium was able to keep its independence.
The city suffered attacks from the CELTS, who invaded
much of the Greek world in the early 200s B.C.E., and
Byzantium
71

eventually Byzantium seems to have paid ransom to
keep them away. The city went to war in 220 B.C.E.
against the emerging naval power of RHODES over the
issue of Byzantium’s Bosporus tolls.
In 330 C.E. Byzantium became a foremost city
of the world when the Roman emperor Constantine
made it the eastern capital of his empire and renamed it
Constantinople.
See also THRACE.
Further reading: Michael Angold, Byzantium: The
Bridge from Antiquity to the Middle Ages (London: Wei-
denfield and Nicolson, 2001); John Haldon, Byzantium: A
History (Stroud, U.K.: Tempus, 2002); Anthony East-
mond and Liz James, Icon and Word: The Power of Images
in Byzantium. Studies Presented to Robin Cormack
(Burlington, Vt.: Ashgate, 2003).
72
Byzantium

C
73
Cadmus (Greek: Kadmos)
In Greek MYTH, Cadmus
was a prince of the Phoenician city of Tyre and founder of
the Greek city of THEBES. Young Cadmus’s sister at Tyre
was EUROPA, whom the god ZEUS abducted in the shape
of a bull. Cadmus was assigned by his father, King
Agenor, to find the vanished Europa. Leading a band of
men to central Greece, he consulted the god APOLLO
through the oracle at DELPHI. Apollo advised Cadmus to
abandon the search and instead follow a cow that he
would find outside the temple; he should establish a city
wherever the cow lay down to rest. Accordingly, the cow
led Cadmus to the future site of Thebes, about 50 miles
away. There Cadmus built the Cadmea, which became the
citadel of the later city.
Several adventures accompanied this foundation. To
gain access to the local water supply, Cadmus had to slay
a ferocious serpent, the offspring of the war god ARES.
When Cadmus consecrated the dead monster to the god-
dess ATHENA, she appeared and told him to sow the ser-
pent’s teeth in the soil. Immediately there sprang up a
harvest of armed men to oppose him, but Cadmus clev-
erly threw a stone into their midst, thereby setting them
to fight one another. The surviving five of these warriors
joined Cadmus’s service and became the ancestors of the
Theban nobility, known as the Sown Men.
After enduring eight years’ servitude to Ares in expia-
tion for having killed his serpent son, Cadmus was
allowed to marry Harmonia, daughter of Ares and
APHRODITE. As a wedding gift, Harmonia received a won-
drous necklace that bestowed irresistible attraction on its
wearer; this necklace would play a role in the next gener-
ations’ misfortunes, in the adventure of the SEVEN
AGAINST THEBES.
Reigning as king of Thebes, Cadmus civilized the
crude local Greeks by teaching them how to write. He
and Harmonia had four daughters, all of whom suffered
unhappy fates: Semele (later the mother of the god
DIONYSUS); Ino (who was driven mad by the goddess
HERA); Agave (whose son PENTHEUS would be destroyed
by Dionysus); and Autonoe (whose son Akteon would be
destroyed by the goddess ARTEMIS). In old age, Cadmus
and Harmonia emigrated to the northwest, where they
ruled over the Illyrians and eventually were changed into
serpents.
The Cadmus legend—a Phoenician prince civilizing
and ruling part of Greece—presents an odd combination.
Although the Greeks had extensive contact with the
Phoenicians in the 900s–700s B.C.E., this myth seems to
commemorate an earlier period of Greek contact with the
Near East, possibly during the Mycenaean era (around
1200 B.C.E.).
See also ALPHABET; ILLYRIS; MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION;
PHOENICIA.
Further reading: Ruth Edwards, Kadmos the Phoeni-
cian: A study in Greek Legends and the Mycenaean Age
(Amsterdam: Adolf M. Hakkert, 1979).
calendars
Each city-state in the ancient Greek world
had its own calendar, generally based on the cycles of the
Moon and closely connected to the various religious festi-
vals that took place in each city-state throughout the
year. Best known today is the Athenian calendar, recon-
structed from evidence provided by ancient Greek
inscriptions and literary references.
The Athenian calendar year consisted of 12 months,
each containing either 29 or 30 days, depending on the

timing of the new moon. These months had the following
names: 
Hekatombaion, 
Metageitnion, 
Boedromion,
Pyanepsion, Maimakterion, Posideon, Gamelion, Anthes-
terion, Elaphebolion, Mounichion, Thargelion, and Skiro-
phorion. The Greeks considered certain days each month
to be sacred to various divinities; for example, the sev-
enth day of each month was sacred to Apollo. Other
major festivals took place annually; the primary celebra-
tion dedicated to Athena, the PANATHENAIA, occurred on
the 28th day of Hekatombaion, though the festival proba-
bly lasted for three or four days.
Since having 12 months of 29 or 30 days resulted in
354-day-long years, the Athenians would occasionally
have an “intercalary year” of 13 months, to keep the festi-
vals aligned with the course of the seasons. Sometimes
they would even insert extra days into their regular
months, so that the festivals would remain in accord with
the lunar cycles.
The Athenians also had another, civil calendar that
coexisted with the festival calendar. It was based on pry-
tanies: periods of time in which each of the Athenian
tribes served as prytanies, or committees, of the COUNCIL.
The prytany calendar consisted of 366 days, divided into
six prytanies that were 37 days in length and four that
were 36 days.
Another useful chronological tool for classical
Athens is the so-called ARCHON list. In the Classical
period, the city was ruled by an archon, elected annually,
whose name would be used to designate the year of his
office. Ancient authors including Diodorus of Siculus
compiled lists of the Attic archons for chronological pur-
poses, and modern scholars have utilized them as an
important source for reconstructing the ancient Athenian
calendar.
Hellenistic and Roman authors also used another
way of reckoning time in ancient Greece: the Olympiad.
This term referred to the four-year span including the
year in which the OLYMPIC GAMES were held, plus the
three following years until the next Games.
Further reading: W. Kendrick Pritchett and O.
Neugebauer, The Calendars of Athens (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1947); Benjamin Meritt, The
Athenian Year (Berkeley: University of California Press,
1961); Alan Samuel, Greek and Roman Chronology: Calen-
dars and Years in Classical Antiquity (Munich: C. H. Beck,
1972); Jon Mikalson, The Sacred and Civil Calendar of the
Athenian Year (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
Press, 1975).
Callias
See KALLIAS.
Callimachus (Greek: Kallimachos) (ca. 310–240 B.C.E.)
The most admired lyric poet of the HELLENISTIC AGE
Born in the Greek city of CYRENE (1) in North Africa, Cal-
limachus lived and wrote at Egyptian ALEXANDRIA (1)
during the brief literary golden age under King Ptolemy II
(reigned 285–274 B.C.E.). Of Callimachus’s voluminous
output—a reported 800 scrolls’ worth—only six hymns
and some 60 epigrams survive whole. Several dozen frag-
ments of other poems exist, and more of his verses are
being discovered in the sands of Egypt. (One sizable frag-
ment was published from papyrus in 1977.) Callimachus’s
best-known work, now lost, was the Aetia (Origins), a col-
lection of narrative elegies in four books totaling about
7,000 lines; this erudite and digressive poem presented
MYTHS and descriptions explaining the origins of places,
rites, and names throughout the Greek world.
Callimachus was the Alexandrian poet par excel-
lence: witty, scholarly, and favoring brief forms and cere-
bral topics. He was an “in” poet, composing for an “in”
group of sophisticated readers or, more accurately, listen-
ers, to whom he would read aloud. Among his pupils
were APOLLONIUS of Rhodes, Eratosthenes, and Aristo-
phanes of BYZANTIUM. A bitter rivalry existed between
Callimachus and Apollonius; their dispute, based partly
on differing poetic tastes, was the most famous literary
quarrel of the ancient world. Callimachus’s work
remained immensely popular in later literary circles; 200
years after his death, his style and values were influenc-
ing such Roman poets as Catullus, Propertius, and Ovid.
Emigrating from Cyrene to EGYPT, the young Calli-
machus began his career as a schoolteacher in a suburb of
Alexandria. Eventually attracting royal patronage, he was
installed at Alexandria’s famous Library, with the huge
job of cataloguing the several hundred thousand books
there. His resultant catalogue, called the Pinakes, or
Tablets, supposedly ran to 120 volumes and must have
taken 10 years; it would have included lists of titles, bio-
graphical sketches of authors, and literary criticism.
Apparently it was an admirable piece of scholarship, and
it testifies to the scholarly, cataloguing urge that also
infused his poetry.
Callimachus never reattained the prestigious post of
director of the Library, but rather was passed over in
favor of Apollonius after the retirement of the director
Zenodotus. This development sparked or fueled the two
men’s quarrel. The enmity was part of a larger literary dis-
pute between the writers of lengthy, narrative EPIC
POETRY, based on HOMER’s Iliad and Odyssey, and poets
such as Callimachus, who considered epic irrelevant to
modern society. “A big book is a big evil,” Callimachus
wrote. Although he did compose certain lengthy poems
toward the end of his life, he seems to have objected
specifically to the continuous plot and familiar subject
matter of the Homeric-style epic; rather, Callimachus’s
longer poems were innovative and episodic.
Callimachus’s epigrams have been praised for their
sincere emotion and their charming word use; they
include epitaphs and expressions of sexual desire. The
most admired epigram poignantly describes the writer’s
feelings on learning of the death of his fellow poet Hera-
74
Callias

clitus. One of Callimachus’s surviving hymns, known
today as Hymn 1, describes the mythical birth and rear-
ing of the god ZEUS. Famous in antiquity, this Hymn to
Zeus set a standard of court poetry by drawing subtle par-
allels between the king of the gods and King Ptolemy II.
No information exists regarding a wife or children
for Callimachus. He seems to have been one of those
strictly homosexual Greek men who shunned MARRIAGE.
Of his surviving epigrams, every one of the erotic poems
celebrates the charms of boys. He lived to about age 70,
highly esteemed and enjoying the patronage of Ptolemies;
certain of his verses, such as his poem on Queen Arsi-
noë’s death (270 B.C.E.), sound like the public presenta-
tions of a court poet laureate.
See also HOMOSEXUALITY; LYRIC POETRY.
Further reading: Peter Bing, The Well-Read Muse:
Present and Past in Callimachus and the Hellenistic Poets
(Göttingen, Germany: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht,
1988); Stanley Lombardo and Diane Rayor, trans., Calli-
machus: Hymns, Epigrams, Select Fragments (Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1988); G. O. Hitchinson,
Hellenistic Poetry (New York: Clarendon Press, 1990); M.
A. Harder, R. F. Regtuit, and G. C. Wakker, eds., Calli-
machus (Groningen, Netherlands: Egbert Forster, 1993).
Callinus (Greek: Kallinos) (mid-600s B.C.E.) One of
the earliest Greek lyric poets whose work (in part) has come
down to us
Callinus was a native of the Greek city of EPHESOS in ASIA
MINOR and wrote patriotic verses encouraging his coun-
trymen in their defense against the Kimmerians, a
nomadic people from southwestern Russia who were rav-
aging Asia Minor in those years. In the single substantial
fragment by him that survives, Callinus reminds his audi-
ence how honorable it is to fight for city and family and
how death finds everyone eventually.
Callinus is the first known writer of the verse form
known as the elegy, which was intended for recital to
flute accompaniment.
See also LYRIC POETRY; MUSIC.
Further reading: Douglas E. Gerber, ed., A Compan-
ion to the Greek Lyric Poets (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J.
Brill, 1997); ———, ed. and trans., Greek Elegiac Poetry:
From the Seventh to the Fifth Centuries B.C. (Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1999).
Calydonian Boar Hunt
One of many Greek MYTHS
recounting the destruction of a local monster. King
Oeneus of Calydon (a region in AETOLIA) offended the
goddess ARTEMIS by forgetting to sacrifice to her. In retali-
ation, she sent a monstrous boar to ravage the country-
side. To hunt the beast, Oeneus’s son Meleager collected a
band of heroes, including the virgin huntress ATALANTA,
with whom Meleager was in love. After much effort, the
heroes succeeded in killing the creature, the honor of the
first spear thrust going to Atalanta. At Meleager’s insis-
tence, she then received the edible portions of the boar.
But this insulted Meleager’s maternal uncles, who were
also part of the hunt, and in the ensuing fight, Meleager
slew them.
Upon hearing the news, Meleager’s mother, Althaea,
took vengeance on her son. She had in her possession a
half-burned log, with the following significance: years
before, just after Meleager’s birth, Althaea had been vis-
ited by the three goddesses of FATE, the Moirai, who
informed her that her baby son would live only until the
log then on the fire should be burned away. Subverting
the prophecy, Althaea had quenched the fire and pre-
served the half-burned log in a chest. Now, in anger at
her brothers’ murder, she threw the log on the fire, and
Meleager died.
The boar hunt was a favorite subject in vase painting
and other artwork. Among surviving representations is a
panel on the Athenian black-figure François vase (ca.
570 B.C.E.).
See also POTTERY.
Further reading: Daniel Butterly, The Reckless Heart:
Meleager and Atalanta (Oak Park, Ill.: Bolchazy-Carducci,
1986); Judith Barringer, “Atalanta as Model: The Hunter
and the Hunted,” Classical Antiquity 15.1 (1996): 44–76.
Calypso
This beautiful nymph played a role in the
MYTH of ODYSSEUS, as told in HOMER’s epic poem the
Odyssey (book 5). The name Kalupso means “concealer.”
A daughter of ATLAS and the sea goddess Thetis, she lived
alone on a remote island, where she received the ship-
wrecked Odysseus. As Odysseus’s lover, she detained him
for seven years, promising to make him immortal if he
stayed; but he insisted on returning to his wife and king-
dom. At ZEUS’s command, Calypso helped him build a
boat on which to put to sea.
In the structure of the Odyssey, Calypso supplies a
benevolent doublet to the sinister CIRCE (who also detains
Odysseus seductively, for one year). Odysseus’s seven
years with Calypso can be interpreted as representing the
distractions of pleasure versus the duties of leadership.
See also NYMPHS; WOMEN.
Further reading: Thomas Gelzer, How to express emo-
tions of the soul and operations of the mind in a language
that has no words for them as exemplified by Odysseus and
Calypso (Odyssey V, 1–281)
(Berkeley: Center for
Hermeneutical Studies in Hellenistic and Modern Cul-
ture, 1988); Gregory Crane, Calypso: Backgrounds and
Conventions of the Odyssey (Frankfurt am Main, Ger-
many: Athenaeum, 1988).
Cappadocia
See ASIA MINOR.
Caria
See ASIA MINOR.
Caria
75

Carthage
This major non-Greek city of North Africa is
located about 10 miles from the modern city of Tunis.
Carthage was founded by Phoenician settlers from Tyre
around 800 B.C.E. to be an anchorage and trading post for
Phoenician merchant ships in the western Mediterranean.
The Phoenician name Kart Hadasht means “New City”; the
Greeks called it Karchedon and the Romans, Carthago.
Governed as an OLIGARCHY under two presiding offi-
cials called shophets, Carthage thrived by commerce. It
became a foremost power of the ancient world, with a
feared navy to protect its trading monopolies in the west-
ern Mediterranean. The Carthaginians maintained trad-
ing bases such as Gades and Malaca (modern Cadiz and
Malaga, both in southern Spain), from which they
acquired valuable raw metals. The Carthaginians traded
with the Greeks, as indicated by the troves of Corinthian
POTTERY discovered at Carthage by modern archaeolo-
gists. But Carthage is important in Greek history mainly
as an enemy and occasional overlord of the Greek cities
in Magna Graecia.
Greeks and Carthaginians had first come into con-
flict when the Greeks intruded into Carthaginian trading
waters in the western Mediterranean. Around 600 B.C.E. a
Carthaginian fleet was defeated by Phocaean Greeks in
the vicinity of MASSALIA (modern-day Marseille, in south-
ern France). About 60 years later a joint fleet of
Carthaginians and ETRUSCANS successfully drove the
Greeks away from Corsica.
The Greeks and the Carthaginians fought intensely
for almost 300 years over the territory of Sicily, whose
coast lies about 130 miles from Carthage. This conflict
eventually ended in favor of the Carthaginians, who also
dominated the island of Sardinia. Carthage’s greed for
Sicily, however, eventually brought on conflict with the
rising Italian city of ROME. The resulting three Punic
Wars (264–241 B.C.E., 218–201 B.C.E., and 149–146
B.C.E.) ended in the complete destruction of Carthage by
the Romans.
Prosperous Carthage won the admiration of the
philosopher ARISTOTLE (mid-300s B.C.E.), whose treatise
Politics contains a remarkable section that favorably com-
pares the Carthaginian government with that of certain
Greek cities. But another Greek writer describes—and
ARCHAEOLOGY confirms—the gruesome Carthaginian cus-
tom of sacrificing upper-class children in time of public
crisis, to ensure the god Baal-Ammon’s care of the city.
Carthage’s ancient monuments are poorly preserved
today because the city’s ruins were pillaged by many dif-
ferent groups as sources of marble; the Cathedral of Pisa
is one of many later structures said to be built largely out
of Carthaginian spoils. In modern times, further destruc-
tion to the remains of Greek and Roman Carthage has
been done by the construction of the Tunisian railroad
system. The most impressive of the surviving monuments
from that era is the aqueduct, over 50 miles long.
See also AGATHOCLES; BRONZE; DIONYSIUS (1); GELON;
HIMERA; PHOCAEA; PHOENICIA; SILVER; TRADE.
Further reading: David Soren, Aicha Ben Abed Ben
Khader, and Hedi Slim, Carthage: Uncovering the Myster-
ies and Splendors of Ancient Tunisia (New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1990); Serge Lancel, Carthage (Paris: Fayard,
1992); Henry R. Hurst, The Sanctuary of Tanit at Carthage
in the Roman Period: A Reinterpretation. Journal of Roman
Archaeology Supplement no. 30 (Portsmouth, R.I.: Journal
of Roman Archaeology, 1999); Dexter Hoyos, Hannibal’s
Dynasty: Power and Politics in the Western Mediterranean,
247–183 B.C. (London: Routledge, 2003).
caryatid
The Greeks used this name for their type of
decorative pillar represented as a clothed woman, holding
up a ceiling structure with her head. The most famous
caryatids are the six in marble from the south porch of
the Athenian Erechtheion (built in 421–406 B.C.E.); the
best preserved one of these is now in the British Museum
in London. The Greeks also made hand mirrors that
76
Carthage
Marble caryatids holding up the south porch of the 
Athenian Erechtheion, built 421–406 B.C.E. (Alison Frantz
Photographic Collection, American School of Classical
Studies at Athens)

scholars call “caryatid mirrors,” because the handle is in
the form of a woman, with the reflective disk of the mir-
ror above her head.
Supposedly the name caryatid referred to the region
of Caryae in LACONIA, where WOMEN traditionally danced
with baskets on their heads. In any case, the sight of
women carrying water pitchers or laundry baskets in this
way was a familiar one in the ancient Greek world and
certainly contributed to the design. The male equivalents
of caryatids were called Atlantes, from the mythological
figure ATLAS, who held up the heavens with his head.
See also ARCHITECTURE.
Further reading: Lamia Doumato, The Erechtheum
(Monticello, Ill.: Vance Bibliographies, 1980); Lenore O.
Keene Congdon, Caryatid Mirrors of Ancient Greece: Tech-
nical, Stylistic, and Historical Considerations of an Archaic
and Early Classical Bronze Series (Mainz am Rhein, Ger-
many: Philip von Zabern, 1981).
Cassander
See KASSANDER.
Cassandra (Greek: Kassandra, Alexandra)
In MYTH,
Cassandra was a daughter of King PRIAM of TROY. She is
mentioned in HOMER’s Iliad simply as the loveliest of
Priam’s daughters, but later writers—particularly the
Athenian playwright AESCHYLUS, in his Agamemnon (458
B.C.E.)—present her as a tragic heroine. Cassandra was
beloved by the god APOLLO, who wooed her by offering
her the power of prophecy. She accepted the gift but still
refused his advances. Apollo could not revoke his gift,
but he decreed vindictively that no one would ever
believe her predictions.
In the TROJAN WAR, the Trojans ignored Cassandra’s
frantic plea not to take the Greeks’ giant wooden horse
into the city. When the Greeks emerged from the horse
to sack Troy, Cassandra was dragged away from the altar
of the goddess ATHENA and raped by AJAX (2) the
Locrian. Afterward, Cassandra was allotted as concubine
to the Greek grand marshal, King AGAMEMNON. On her
arrival with Agamemnon at his kingdom of MYCENAE,
Cassandra and Agamemnon were murdered by Agamem-
non’s wife, KLYTEMNESTRA. Naturally, Cassandra foresaw
her own and Agamemnon’s death but was unable to pre-
vent them.
Cassandra is a frequent figure in Greek art, especially
in Athenian vase paintings. The scene most commonly
depicted shows the young princess kneeling and holding
on to the statue of Athena, as Ajax drags her away. She is
usually shown nude in these scenes—even in periods
when Greek artists almost always depicted women fully
clothed—in order to convey that Ajax is about to rape
her. Cassandra also appears often in Greek and Roman
literature; in addition to Aeschylus’s drama, her tragic
story is also told by APOLLODORUS, Vergil, and Pausanias.
Our modern expression “to be a Cassandra” or “to
play Cassandra” is applied to someone who habitually
predicts that bad things will happen.
See also PROPHECY AND DIVINATION.
Further reading: J. B. Connelly, “Narrative and
Image in Attic Vase Painting. Ajax and Kassandra at the
Trojan Palladion,” in Narrative and Event in Ancient Art,
edited by Peter J. Holliday (New York: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1993), 88–129; H. Jackson, “A Black-Figure
Neck-Amphora in Melbourne. The Nudity of Kassandra,”
Mediterranean Archaeology 9–10 (1996–1997): 53–75; M.
Maaskant-Kleibrink, “Bearers of Idols. Iphigeneia, Kas-
sandra, and Aeneas,” in La Glyptique des mondes clas-
siques. Mélanges en homage á Marie-Louise Vollenweider,
edited by Mathilde Avisseau Broustet (Paris: Bibliothéque
nationale de France, 1997), 23–34.
Castor and Polydeuces
These mythical twin heroes
were worshipped as gods, especially at SPARTA and other
Dorian-Greek cities. The cult of Castor and Polydeuces
was an early cultural export to the Romans, who latinized
the youths’ names to Castor and Pollux.
The distinction between mortal hero and immortal
god played a central role in the MYTH. According to the
story, the Spartan king Tyndareus had a wife, LEDA,
whom the god ZEUS raped or seduced. Leda bore two
pairs of twins: the girls KLYTEMNESTRA and Helen (later
known as HELEN OF TROY) and the boys Castor and Poly-
deuces. One version says that both boys were the immor-
tal sons of Zeus—hence they were called the Dioskouroi,
“the youths of Zeus.” But a different tradition says that
only Polydeuces was Zeus’s child and thus immortal,
while Castor, fathered by Tyndareus, was doomed to die
like other humans.
The boys grew up inseparable and devoted to each
other. Polydeuces became a champion boxer, Castor a
famous horseman. They had three major adventures: they
raided Athenian territory to rescue their sister Helen after
she was kidnapped by the Athenian king THESEUS; sailed
with the Argonauts under the Thessalian hero JASON (1)
to capture the Golden Fleece; and abducted the two
daughters of the Messenian nobleman Leucippus, who
sent in pursuit his nephews Idas and Lynceus (to whom
the young women had been betrothed). In the ensuing
fight, Idas, Lynceus, and Castor were all killed. But Poly-
deuces prayed to his father, Zeus, who resurrected Castor
on the condition that the twins thereafter divide their lot,
living together one day among the gods and the next day
in the Underworld. HOMER’s epic poem the Odyssey men-
tions that “the grain-giving earth holds them, yet they
live . . . One day they are alive, one day dead” (book 11).
Like HERAKLES (another hero turned god), the Dios-
kouroi were thought to be sympathetic to human needs
and were worshipped widely by the common people. As
patron gods of seafarers, they averted shipwreck, and
Castor and Polydeuces
77

their benevolent presence supposedly was indicated by
the electrical phenomenon that we call St. Elmo’s fire
(whereby the mast and rigging of a sailing ship would
seem to sparkle during a thunderstorm). They also were
identified with the constellation known as the Twins
(Gemini).
Often pictured as riding on white horses, the Dios-
kouroi embodied the spirit of military youth. At the Bat-
tle of the Sagras River (late 500s B.C.E.), the divine twins
were believed to have appeared in person to aid the army
of LOCRI (a Dorian-Greek city in south ITALY) against the
army of CROTON (a nearby Achaean-Greek city). This
miracle was copied by the Romans, who claimed that the
Dioskouroi helped them to win the Battle of Lake
Regillus against the Latins in about 496 B.C.E.
See also AFTERLIFE; BOXING; DORIAN GREEKS; ROME;
SHIPS AND SEAFARING.
Further reading: E. A. Mackay, “The Return of the
Dioskouri. A Reinterpretation of the Scene on the Reverse
of the Vatican Amphora of Exekias,” American Journal of
Archaeology 83 (1979): 474–476; P. J. Connor, “Twin Rid-
ers. Dioskouri?” Archäologischer Anzeiger (1988): 27–39;
H. A. Shapiro, “Cult Warfare. The Dioskouri between
Sparta and Athens,” in Ancient Greek Hero Cult. Proceed-
ings of the Fifth International Seminar on Ancient Greek
Cult, Göteborg, 21–23 April 1995, edited by Robin Hägg
(Stockholm: Svenska Institutet I Athen, 1999), 99–107.
Catana (Greek: Katane)
This Greek city on the east
coast of SICILY is situated at the foot of volcanic Mt. Etna.
Set at the northeastern rim of a large and fertile plain, this
site is now the Sicilian city of Catania. The locale was
seized in about 729 B.C.E. by Greek colonists from the
nearby city of NAXOS (2), who drove away the region’s
native Sicels. This attack was part of the Greeks’ two-
pronged capture of the plain; the other captured site was
Leontini.
Catana possessed one of the Greek world’s first law
codes, drawn up by a certain Charondas, probably in the
early 500s B.C.E. As an Ionian-Greek city, Catana took
part in ethnic feuding between Ionians and DORIAN
GREEKS in Sicily. By 490 B.C.E. the city had fallen under
the sway of its powerful Dorian neighbor to the south,
SYRACUSE. In 476 B.C.E Syracusan tyrant HIERON (1) emp-
tied Catana, exiling its inhabitants to Leontini, and
repopulated the site with his Greek mercenary troops.
The “new” city, renamed Aetna, was celebrated by the vis-
iting Athenian playwright AESCHYLUS in a play (now
lost), titled Women of Aetna. But after Hieron’s death, the
former Catanans recovered their city by force and gained
independence (461 B.C.E.).
Catana provided the Athenians with a base against
Syracuse in 415 B.C.E., during the PELOPONNESIAN WAR.
In 403 B.C.E. Catana was recaptured by the Syracusans
under their tyrant DIONYSIUS (1). For the next 150 years,
despite moments of independence provided by such sav-
iors as the Corinthian commander TIMOLEON (339 B.C.E.)
and the Epirote king PYRRHUS (278 B.C.E.), Catana
remained a Syracusan possession. Seized by the Romans
in 263 B.C.E., during the First Punic War, Catana become
an important city of the Roman Empire.
See also COLONIZATION; IONIAN GREEKS; LAWS AND
LAW COURTS; ROME.
Further reading: Tobias Fischer-Hansen, ed., Ancient
Sicily (Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press, 1995);
Giovanni Pugliese Carratelli, ed., The Greek World: Art
and Civilization in Magna Graecia and Sicily (New York:
Rizzoli, 1996).
cavalry
Although citizens wealthy enough to own
horses were socially important in ancient Greek cities
such as Athens (called hippeis, “knights”), ancient Greek
warfare generally emphasized the foot soldier over the
horse soldier. It took the tactical genius of the Macedo-
nian kings PHILIP II and his son ALEXANDER THE GREAT
(mid-300s B.C.E.) to raise cavalry to even a prominent
secondary position. One reason for cavalry’s inferior sta-
tus lay in the mountainous terrain of mainland Greece,
which was resistant to the strategic movement of horse-
men and to horse-breeding itself; in most regions, only
the very rich could afford to raise horses.
During the 700s to 300s B.C.E., when Greek citizen-
soldiers supplied their own equipment, a city’s cavalry
typically consisted of rich men and their sons. Cavalry
contingents were therefore small in most Greek armies.
Only on the horse-breeding plains of THESSALY, BOEOTIA,
and Greek SICILY did large cavalry corps develop.
In those days, cavalry was not so effective a “shock”
troop as it would become in later centuries. The Greeks
knew nothing of the stirrup—a vital military invention
that enables a rider to “stand up” in the saddle and lean
forward strenuously without falling off. (The stirrup
probably came out of Siberia around 550 C.E.) Nor had
the horseshoe or the jointed bit yet been invented. The
Greeks knew only small breeds of horses prior to the late
300s B.C.E. (when Alexander’s conquests introduced
larger breeds from the Iranian plateau). Therefore, in bat-
tle, cavalry was not usually strong enough to ride directly
against formations of infantry. The juggernaut charges of
medieval Europe’s armored knights were still 1,500 years
in the future.
Ancient Greek artwork and certain writings—such as
the historian XENOPHON’s treatise On Horsemanship (ca.
380 B.C.E.)—suggest what a horse soldier looked like. He
might wear a corset of linen or leather, with a BRONZE hel-
met (open-faced, to leave his vision clear). He probably
carried no shield, or at most a small wooden targe
attached to his left forearm. The Greek cavalry weapon
was a spear for jabbing (not usually for throwing); unlike
the long lance of a medieval knight, this spear was only
78
Catana

about six feet long. We know from battle scenes in Greek
art that the horseman used his spear for a downward
thrust, often overhand from the shoulder: the spear was
not couched in the armpit for the charge, since the impact
probably would have knocked the stirrupless rider off his
horse. If the spear was lost, the horseman would rely on
the IRON sword tied into a scabbard at his waist. As in
other eras of military history, the preferred cavalry sword
was a saber—that is, it had a curved cutting edge,
designed to slash downward rather than to stab.
Horsemen of the 500s and 400s B.C.E. were needed
for scouting and supply escort, and in combat they had
the job of guarding the vulnerable infantry flanks. When
one side’s infantry formation began to dissolve into
retreat, the cavalry of both sides might have crucial roles
to play, either in running down the fleeing enemy, or (on
the other side) in protecting the foot soldiers’ retreat.
Descriptions of ancient battles make clear that a disor-
derly retreat could become a catastrophe once the with-
drawing infantry was overtaken by enemy horsemen.
Among such examples is the plight of Athenian HOPLITES
pursued by Boeotian cavalry after the Battle of Delium
(424 B.C.E.), during the PELOPONNESIAN WAR.
The kingdom of MACEDON had a strong cavalry in
its horse-breeding barons, whom King Alexander I (ca.
480 B.C.E.) organized into a prestigious corps of King’s
Companions. Whereas cavalry had previously formed
only a small part of the Greek military, it made up nearly
one-sixth of Alexander’s forces on his Asiatic expedi-
tions. The Macedonian army included an equal number
of heavy and light cavalry; the light were armed with a
special lance (the sarissa), while the heavy-armed riders
were accompanied by a mounted servant and probably
another freight-bearing horse. The subsequent innova-
tions of Philip and Alexander brought cavalry into the
heart of battle. Cavalry became the offensive arm, to
complement the more defensive role of the heavy-
infantry PHALANX. The Macedonian phalanx would stop
the enemy infantry attack and rip gaps in its battle order,
and the cavalry would then attack these vulnerable gaps
before the enemy could reorganize. In this case cavalry
could charge against massed infantry, since the charge
was directed not against the enemy’s waiting spear-points
but against open ground. Into such a gap Alexander led
the Macedonian cavalry at the battles of CHAIRONEIA
(338 B.C.E.) and Gaugamela (331 B.C.E.). Prior to
Alexander’s conquests, the Persians possessed the most
numerous and formidable cavalry known to the Greeks.
All noble-born Persian boys were taught to ride and
shoot with the bow.
cavalry
79
This marble carving from the Parthenon frieze, circa 432 B.C.E., shows Athenian cavalry cadets. These wealthy young men 
supplied their own horses and drilled at local riding tracks and in countryside maneuvers. (Alison Frantz Photographic 
Collection, American School of Classical Studies at Athens)

During the HELLENISTIC AGE (300–150 B.C.E.), the
importance of cavalry generally declined in favor of
heavy-armed infantry forces. Alexander’s successors in
the eastern Mediterranean did experiment with such Per-
sian-influenced cavalry as mounted archers and javelin
men. They also developed horse and rider teams pro-
tected by chain-mail armor and known as kataphraktai,
“enclosed ones.” These cataphracts pointed the way
toward the Parthian heavy cavalry of the Roman era and
the armored knights of the Middle Ages.
See also PERSIA; WARFARE, LAND.
Further reading: I. G. Spence, The Cavalry of Classi-
cal Greece: A Social and Military History with Particular
Reference to Athens (New York: Oxford University Press,
1993); Leslie J. Worley, Hippeis: The Cavalry of Ancient
Greece (Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 1994); John
McK. Camp II, Horses and Horsemanship in the Athenian
Agora (Athens: American School of Classical Studies at
Athens, 1998); Robert E. Gaebel, Cavalry Operations in
the Ancient Greek World (Norman: University of Okla-
homa Press, 2002).
Celts (Greek: Keltoi)
This race of people speaking an
Indo-European language emerged from central Europe in
a series of invasions after about 750 B.C.E. Among the
places they occupied were France, Spain, and Britain.
Today Celtic languages and culture still exist in Ireland,
Scotland, Wales, and Britanny (in France), and the Celts
are commemorated in place-names such as Galicia (in
modern Spain) and Gaul (Gallia, the Roman name for
ancient France). The Celts were known for their physical
size and beauty, their natural spirituality, and their undis-
ciplined fierceness in battle. The distinctive Celtic arma-
ment was the long, oblong shield.
Celtic society was tribal and agricultural, with walled
towns for commerce and defense, but few cities.
Although not a literary people (at that time), they devel-
oped an admirable material culture, especially in metal-
lurgy. Early Celtic culture reached maturity around
400–100 B.C.E., in the La Tène style of art and metal
design (named for an archaeological site in Switzerland).
By 600 B.C.E. Greek merchants in the western
Mediterranean were dealing with Celtic peoples in Spain
and France in order to acquire metals such as tin and SIL-
VER. The Spanish Celtic kingdom of Tartessus had
friendly dealing with Greek merchants from PHOCAEA.
From the Phocaean colony at MASSALIA (modern Mar-
seille), Greek goods and culture slowly spread inland
among the Celts of Gaul, prompting the subsequent
emergence of the La Tène civilization.
But the Greeks and Celts collided in the 200s B.C.E.,
when Celtic tribes descended the Danube, invaded main-
land Greece from the north, and overran the sanctuary at
DELPHI (279 B.C.E.). Another column of invaders crossed
the HELLESPONT to attack ASIA MINOR, where they were
contained after being defeated in battle by the Seleucid
king Antiochus I (ca. 273 B.C.E.). The Greeks admired the
valor of the Celts even while they considered them to be
brutish barbarians, memorializing them in Hellenistic
Greek statues like the Dying Gaul, erected in the city of
PERGAMON and known today from later Roman copies.
Settling in north-central Asia Minor, immigrant Celts
formed the kingdom of Galatia. Amid the neighboring
Greeks and Phrygians, the Galatians maintained Celtic
customs and language for centuries. In the first century
C.E. Galatia contained an early Christian community, and
these Galatians are commemorated in the New Testa-
ment, as recipients of a letter from St. Paul.
See also BRONZE; CARTHAGE; TRADE; WINE.
Further reading: David Rankin, Celts and the Classi-
cal World (London: Routledge, 1996); Peter Berresford
Ellis, Celt and Greek: Celts in the Hellenic World (London:
Constable, 1997); John Collis, The Celts: Origins and Re-
inventions (Stroud, U.K.: Tempus, 2003); Barry W. Cun-
liffe, The Celts (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003);
Peter Berresford Ellis, The Celts: A History (New York:
Carroll and Graf, 2004).
centaurs (Greek: kentauros)
These legendary crea-
tures were part human, part horse; usually imagined as
having a male horse’s body with a male human torso and
head emerging above the horse’s chest. This shape is por-
trayed on the earliest surviving likeness of a centaur—a
baked-clay figurine from the 900s B.C.E., decorated in
Geometric style, discovered at LEFKANDI, in central
Greece. However, certain other early images in art show
human forelegs, with a horse’s body and rear legs. The
original meaning of the Greek word is not clear to us.
In Greek MYTH, centaurs had occupied the wild
regions of THESSALY and ARCADIA in the old days; they
represented the uncivilized life, before the general estab-
lishment of Greek laws and city-states. Although capable
of wisdom and nobility, they were fierce, oversexed, and
prone to drunkenness. The best-known myth about the
centaurs, mentioned in HOMER’s Iliad and Odyssey, is their
battle with the Lapiths, a human tribe of Thessaly. The
gathering began as a friendly banquet to celebrate the
wedding of the Lapith king Perithoos, but the centaurs
got drunk on WINE and tried to rape the Lapith women.
In the ensuing brawl, the centaurs were defeated. As a
symbol of savagery versus civilization, this battle was a
favorite subject of Classical Greek art. It appeared, for
instance, in the architectural SCULPTURES on the Athenian
PARTHENON and on the Temple of ZEUS at OLYMPIA (mid-
400s B.C.E.).
Another myth tells how a centaur named Nessos
offered to carry HERAKLES’ second wife, Deianeira, across
a river but then tried to rape her. Herakles shot the crea-
ture with poisoned arrows, but before Nessos died he
gave to Deianeira the poisoned blood-soaked garment
80
Celts

that would later cause Herakles’ death. A more benevo-
lent centaur was Chiron, or Cheiron, the wise mountain-
dweller who served as tutor to heroes, including JASON,
ASKLEPIOS, and ACHILLES.
See also AMAZONS; GIANTS.
Further reading: P. B. C. Baur, Centaurs in Ancient
Art, the Archaic Period (Berlin: K. Curtius, 1912); A.
Lebessi, “The Relations of Crete and Euboea in the Tenth
and Ninth Centuries B.C. The Lefkandi Centaur and his
Predecessors,” in Minotaur and Centaur. Studies in the
Archaeology of Crete and Euboea Presented to Mervyn
Popham, edited by Doniert Evely, Irene Lemos, and Eliza-
beth S. Sherratt (Oxford: Tempus Reparatum, 1996),
146–154; J. Michael Padgett et al., The Centaur’s Smile:
The Human Animal in Early Greek Art (New Haven,
Conn.: Yale University Press, 2003).
Chaironeia (Chaeronea)
The northernmost town of
BOEOTIA, Chaironeia is located in the Kephissos River
valley, on the main route between central and northern
Greece. There in the summer of 338 B.C.E. the Macedo-
nian king PHILIP II defeated an allied Greek army, to
make Greece a subject state of MACEDON.
The decisive Battle of Chaironeia was one of the most
consequential fights of ancient history—not only for poli-
tics, but for the development of battlefield tactics. The
Greek army, comprised mainly of contingents from Boeo-
tia and ATHENS, had a slight advantage in numbers:
35,000 HOPLITES (heavily armed infantry) against Philip’s
30,000, with about 2,000 CAVALRY on each side. The
allied Greeks comfortably guarded the route southward—
their battle line filled the valley side to side, from the
town’s citadel on their left, to the river on their right. The
Athenian hoplites, 10,000 strong, occupied the army’s left
wing; in the center were various levies and a company of
5,000 mercenaries; and on the right wing were 12,000
Boeotians, including the men of THEBES, the best soldiers
in Greece. The position of honor, on the extreme right
wing, was given to the Theban Sacred Band, an elite bat-
talion of 300, consisting entirely of paired male lovers.
Philip, on horseback behind his army’s right wing,
brought his men southward through the valley in an
unusual, slantwise formation, which was destined to
become a model Macedonian tactic. The Macedonian
PHALANX was angled so that the right wing advanced
ahead of the center and the center ahead of the left wing.
Holding back on the Macedonian left wing was the cav-
alry, commanded by Philip’s 18-year-son, Prince Alexan-
der (later known to history as ALEXANDER THE GREAT).
Philip’s battlefield plan was a refinement of tactics
used by the Thebans themselves at LEUKTRA more than
30 years before. Like the Thebans at Leuktra, Philip
planned to hit his enemies at their strongest point: their
right wing. But Philip’s inspired innovation was to pre-
cede this blow with a disruptive feint against the enemy’s
left wing in the hope of creating a gap along the long line
of massed Greek soldiery.
According to a statement by a later ancient writer, it
is possible that Philip staged a retreat of his right wing
during the battle. Presumably the Macedonians withdrew
by stepping backward in good order, with their 13-foot-
long pikes still facing forward. The disorganized Atheni-
ans followed, in deluded triumph. But in fact, the
overexcited Athenians were drawing their army’s left
wing forward, with the Greek troops in the center follow-
ing suit. Eventually gaps appeared in the Greek battle
line, as various contingents lost contact with one another.
On the Greek far right, the Theban Sacred Band stood
isolated from the rest of the army. It was then that Prince
Alexander led his cavalry charging down the valley, fol-
lowed by the reserve Macedonian infantry.
The Sacred Band was surrounded and overrun by
Alexander’s cavalry. Meanwhile Philip, off on the Macedo-
nian right, ordered an end to his false retreat. His men
pressed forward against the Athenians, who scattered and
fled. The Macedonians pursued, killing 1,000 Athenians
Chaironeia
81
The Lion of Chaeroneia watches over the graves of the 
Sacred Band and the burial mound of the Macedonian dead.
(Alison Frantz Photographic Collection, American School 
of Classical Studies at Athens)

and taking 2,000 prisoners. Among the fugitives was
DEMOSTHENES (1), the great Athenian orator and enemy
of Philip’s.
After the battle, the corpses of the Sacred Band lay in
the serried ranks of their disciplined formation. Of their
300 men, only 46 had survived. The rest were buried on
the battlefield, where their 254 skeletons were discovered
by archaeologists in the 19th century. The Battle of
Chaironeia marks an important point in Greek military
history, since it demonstrated the vast superiority of orga-
nized forces such as the Macedonian phalanx over tradi-
tional Greek hoplite warfare. This victory also established
Macedonia as the supreme power in Greece. The defeated
Athenians, treated relatively leniently by their con-
querors, dissolved their naval confederacy and joined
Philip’s new Hellenic League. The Macedonians next
marched into the Peloponnese and easily established con-
trol there before moving forward with Philip and Alexan-
der’s ultimate plan of invading Persia.
Today the site of Chaironeia is marked by an 18-foot-
tall marble lion, sculpted in ancient times, overlooking
the Sacred Band’s graves and the burial mound of the
Macedonian dead. The lion was discovered in pieces in
1818 and restored on a 10-foot-tall plinth. In addition to
the graves of the Thebans, excavated in 1879 by George
Soteriadis, archaeological investigations at Chaironeia
have revealed the ancient theater and the acropolis with
its Hellenistic fortification walls, as well as occupation
remains from the prehistoric period.
See also HOMOSEXUALITY; WARFARE, LAND.
Further reading: Hugo Montgomery, The Way to
Chaeronea: Foreign Policy, Decision-making, and Political
Influence in Demosthenes’ Speeches (Irvington-on-Hudson,
N.Y.: Columbia University Press, 1983).
Chalcedon
See BYZANTIUM.
Chalcidic¯e
The northwestern coast of the AEGEAN SEA,
Chalcidic¯e is located in what eventually became Macedo-
nian territory, north of Greece proper. It is distinguished
by three peninsulas, each about 30 miles long, jutting into
the Aegean and providing harbors and natural defenses.
These three, west to east, were called Pallene, Sithonia,
and Acte (meaning “promontory” in Greek).
Originally inhabited by Thracians, the region was
colonized in the latter 700s B.C.E. by Greeks from the city
of CHALCIS; they established about 30 settlements and
gave the region its Greek name, “Chalcidian land.”
Among later Greek arrivals were Corinthians who,
around 600 B.C.E., founded the important city of POTI-
DAEA on the narrow neck of the Acte peninsula. Another
prominent city was OLYNTHOS, founded in the 400s B.C.E.,
north of Potidaea.
Chalcidic¯e offered precious TIMBER, SILVER ore, and
SLAVES, and controlled the coastal shipping route to the
HELLESPONT.
The prosperous Chalcidic towns had
become tribute-paying members of the Athenian-domi-
nated DELIAN LEAGUE by the mid-400s B.C.E., but in the
spring of 432 B.C.E. Potidaea revolted unsuccessfully
against the Athenians. More revolts followed the arrival
of the Spartan general BRASIDAS in 432 B.C.E., during the
PELOPONNESIAN WAR. The town of Scione, recaptured by
the Athenians in 421 B.C.E., was treated with exemplary
cruelty: All men of military age were killed and the
WOMEN and children were sold as slaves.
Chalcidic¯e endured a generation of Spartan rule after
SPARTA’s victory in the Peloponnesian War (404 B.C.E.), yet
meanwhile the Chalcidic towns organized themselves into
a federation, with a shared citizenship and government
and with Potidaea as the capital (ca. 400 B.C.E.). In the
370s B.C.E. this Chalcidic League joined the SECOND ATHE-
NIAN LEAGUE. But renewed Athenian interference with
Potidaea drove the Chalcidic Greeks to make an alliance
with the ambitious Macedonian king PHILIP II (356 B.C.E.).
Resistance to Philip led to war, in which Philip captured
and destroyed Olynthus and Potidaea (348 B.C.E.). Hence-
forth the region was ruled by MACEDON.
Chalcidic¯e revived under the Macedonian king Kas-
sander (reigned 316–298 B.C.E.). He built a grand new
city, Kassandreia, on the site of the ruined Potidaea.
See also ARISTOTLE.
Further reading: J. A. Alexander, “Cassandreia dur-
ing the Macedonian Period: An Epigraphical Commen-
tary,” in Archaia Macedonia, edited by V. Laourdas and C.
Makaronas (Thessaloniki, 1970).
Chalcis
This important city is situated midway along
the west coast of the large inshore island called EUBOEA,
in east-central Greece. Chalcis was strategically located
on the narrow Euripus channel, so it was able to control
all shipping through the Euboean Straits. Inland and
southward, the city enjoyed the fertile plain of Lelanton.
Inhabited by Greeks of the Ionian ethnic group,
Chalcis and its neighbor ERETRIA had emerged by about
850 B.C.E. as the most powerful cities of early Greece.
Chalcis—its name refers to local copper deposits or to
worked BRONZE (both: chalkos)—thrived as a manufac-
turing center, and its drive for raw metals and other
goods placed it at the forefront of Greek overseas TRADE
and COLONIZATION ca. 800–650 B.C.E. Seafarers from
Chalcis and Eretria established the first Greek trading
depot that we know of, at AL MINA on the north Levan-
tine coast (ca. 800 B.C.E.). A generation later, in western
ITALY, they founded the early Greek colonies PITHECUSAE
and CUMAE.
Around 735 B.C.E. the partnership of Chalcis and
Eretria ended in conflict over possession of the Lelantine
plain. Chalcis apparently won this LELANTINE WAR (by
680 B.C.E.), and the city and its new ally CORINTH then
dominated all Greek westward colonization. Among the
82
Chalcedon

westward colonies founded by Chalcis in this era were
RHEGIUM, in southern Italy, and NAXOS (2) and ZANCL¯E,
in SICILY. In the late 700s B.C.E., Chalcis also sent
colonists to the north Aegean region eventually known as
CHALCIDIC¯E (Chalcidian land). BUT
BY
THE
MID-600S
B.C.E. Chalcis was being eclipsed in commerce by
Corinth.
According to tradition, Chalcis’s last king was killed
in the Lelantine War, after which the city was governed as
an ARISTOCRACY led by the hippobotai (horse-owners),
Chalcidian nobles. In 506 B.C.E. these aristocrats, with
help from nearby BOEOTIA, made war on ATHENS and its
newly democratic government. Chalcis was completely
defeated, and a portion of the hippobotai’s land was con-
fiscated for an Athenian garrison colony.
Chalcis contributed 20 warships to the defense of
Greece in the PERSIAN WARS (480–479 B.C.E.). Soon after,
Chalcis and all the other Euboean cities were compelled
to join the Athenian-led DELIAN LEAGUE. In 446 B.C.E.,
Chalcis led a Euboean revolt from the league, but Athens
crushed this harshly, exiling the hippobotai. A successful
revolt followed later, amid the Delian uprisings of the
later PELOPONNESIAN WAR (411 B.C.E.). However, after a
bitter taste of Spartan overlordship, Chalcis joined the
SECOND ATHENIAN LEAGUE (378 B.C.E.).
The Macedonian king PHILIP II conquered the Greeks
in 338 B.C.E. and placed a garrison in Chalcis. For the
next 140 years or more, Chalcis served as a Macedonian
stronghold—one of the Macedonians’ four “fetters” of
Greece.
In 194 B.C.E. the Romans ejected the Macedonian
garrison; however, as a member of the anti-Roman
Achaean League, Chalcis was besieged and captured by
the Romans in 146 B.C.E. The city recovered, to play a
role in the empire of ROME.
See also ACHAEA; ALPHABET; GREECE, GEOGRAPHY OF;
IONIAN GREEKS; MACEDON.
Further reading: S. C. Bakhuizen, Studies in the
Topography of Chalcis on Euboea: A Discussion of the
Sources (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 1985); E.
Sapouna-Sakellaraki, Chalkis: History, Topography, and
Museum, translated by W. Phelps (Athens: Ministry of
Culture, Archaeological Receipts Fund, 1995).
chariots
The chariot—an axled, two-wheeled vehicle
typically pulled by horses—played a small but picturesque
role in Greek history. Around 1600–1200 B.C.E., the kings
of the MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION kept fleets of war chari-
ots, as indicated by archaeological evidence (including
Mycenaean grave stones and wall paintings and texts of
LINEAR B tablets listing inventories of chariots and chariot
parts). The Mycenaean chariot was probably made of
wood plated with BRONZE, with upright sides and front. It
was drawn by two horses and carried two soldiers—the
driver and a passenger armed with spears or arrows.
Although the chariot would have served well for dis-
play and for sportsmanlike Mycenaean battles on the
plains of ARGOS, BOEOTIA, and THESSALY, it must have had
very limited use elsewhere, in the hilly Greek terrain. Mod-
ern scholars believe the Mycenaean copied the chariot’s use
from Near Eastern armies—either from the Hittites of ASIA
MINOR or the New Kingdom Egyptians—without them-
selves having a clear tactical need for such a vehicle. Evi-
dently the Mycenaeans were attracted to the machine’s
pure glamour.
Mycenaean chariots are commemorated in HOMER’s
Iliad (written down around 750 B.C.E. but purporting to
describe events of around 1200 B.C.E.). Homer describes
chariots as two-horse, two-man vehicles that bring aristo-
cratic heroes such as ACHILLES and HECTOR to and from
the battle. For actual fighting, the warrior leaps to the
ground while the driver whisks the chariot to the side-
lines. Modern scholars doubt that this poetic picture is
accurate. Homer, presumably without realizing his mis-
take, has represented Mycenaean chariots as being used
exactly as horses were used in his own day—to carry
chariots
83
This helmet, with its elaborate decoration, was probably cere-
monial not battle armor. It is a light Chalcidian helmet, with
hinged cheekpieces. The griffin on top and the wings over the
ears are usually associated with gods and heroes. (The J. Paul
Getty Museum)

noble champions to battle. In fact (says the modern the-
ory), like their Hittite and Egyptian counterparts, Myce-
naean chariots seem to have taken part directly in
combat—in charges, sweeps, and similar tactics—with an
archer or spearman stationed inside each vehicle.
After the destruction of Mycenaean society and the
ensuing DARK AGE (ca. 1100–900 B.C.E.), the Greek char-
iot became used purely for SPORT, in races held at the
great religious-athletic festivals. Because of this new func-
tion, the chariot evolved a new design. They were usually
one-man vehicles drawn by four horses or, sometimes, by
four mules. During the 700s–100s B.C.E., the most presti-
gious competition in the entire Greek world was the race
of horse chariots at the OLYMPIC GAMES. Coming last in
the sequence of Olympic events, this race involved
dozens of chariots in 12 laps around the stadium’s elon-
gated track, for a total distance of almost nine miles. Like
the later chariot races of imperial ROME, the Greek sport
offered considerable danger of collisions and other
mishaps. For instance, at the PYTHIAN GAMES of 482
B.C.E., the winning chariot finished alone in a starting
field of 41 vehicles.
The official competitors in a chariot race were not
usually the drivers (who were professionals), but the peo-
ple sponsoring the individual chariots. It was a sport for
the rich, requiring large-scale breeding and training of
horses. For Greek aristocrats and rulers, an Olympic
chariot victory was the crowning achievement of public
life. To help celebrate such a triumph, a winner might
commission a lyric poet such as PINDAR (ca. 476 B.C.E.)
to write a victory song.
Among the more famous chariot owners was the
flamboyant Athenian politician ALCIBIADES.
For the
Olympic Games of 416 B.C.E., he sponsored no less than
seven chariots, which finished first, second, and fourth.
See also ARISTOCRACY; PELOPS; WARFARE, LAND.
Further reading: P. A. L. Greenhalgh, Early Greek
Warfare: Horsemen and Chariots in the Homeric and
Archaic Ages (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1973); J. H. Crouwel, Chariots and Other Means of Land
Transport in Bronze Age Greece (Amsterdam: Allard Pier-
son Museum, 1981); J. H. Crouwel, Chariots and Other
Wheeled Vehicles in Iron Age Greece (Amsterdam: Allard
Pierson Museum, 1992); Robert E. Gaebel, Cavalry Oper-
ations in the Ancient Greek World (Norman: University Of
Oklahoma Press, 2002).
Charon
See AFTERLIFE; FUNERAL CUSTOMS.
Charybdis
See SCYLLA.
Chersonese
The Cherson¯esos (“peninsula”) was a 50-
mile-long arm of the northeastern Aegean coast, alongside
northwestern ASIA MINOR. The peninsula’s eastern shore
forms the western side of the HELLESPONT—the 33-mile-
long strait that was a crucial part of the ancient TRADE
route to the BLACK SEA. To control the Hellespont, great
powers such as ATHENS and MACEDON sought to hold the
Chersonese. In modern times this region is known as Gal-
lipoli, the scene of bloody fighting in World War I.
Although part of the non-Greek land of THRACE, the
Chersonese began receiving Greek colonists from LESBOS
and MILETUS by the 600s B.C.E. Athenian settlers arrived
in the early 500s B.C.E. The elder Miltiades, an Athenian,
ruled most of the Chersonese as his private fief (mid-
500s B.C.E.). His nephew and successor, the famous MIL-
TIADES, abandoned the area to Persian invasion.
After the PERSIAN WARS, the Chersonese settlements
were dominated by Athens through the DELIAN LEAGUE.
In 338 B.C.E. the region passed to the Macedonian king
PHILIP II. Thereafter it was held by various Hellenistic
kingdoms, until the Romans conquered Greece and
Macedon in the mid-100s B.C.E.
The Chersonese had two chief cities, both Greek: SES-
TOS, which was the commanding fortress of the Helles-
pont; and Cardia, on the peninsula’s western side.
Further reading: A. J. Graham, “A Dedication from
the Chersonese at Olympia,” in Nomodeiktes. Greek Stud-
ies in Honor of Martin Ostwald, edited by Ralph M. Rosen
and Joseph Farrell (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
Press, 1993), 331–338; G. Greatrex, “Procopius and
Agathias on the Defenses of the Thracian Chersonese,” in
Constantinople and Its Hinterland. Papers from the Twenty-
seventh Spring Symposium of Byzantine Studies, Oxford,
April 1993, edited by Cyril Mango and Gilbert Dagron
(Brookfield, Vt.: Variorum, 1995), 125–129.
Chilon (500s B.C.E.) Spartan EPHOR who is credited with
certain developments in SPARTA’s government and foreign
policy
Apparently, Chilon increased the ephors’ power to coun-
terbalance the two Spartan kings, and he probably
launched Sparta’s policy of hostility to TYRANTS through-
out Greece. He also organized Sparta’s individual alliances
with other states—including CORINTH and SIKYON—into
a permanent network of mutual defense, which modern
scholars call the Peloponnesian League.
Revered at Sparta after his death, Chilon was counted
as one of the SEVEN SAGES of Greece. His political heir
was the Spartan king KLEOMENES (1), who reigned ca.
520–489 B.C.E.
Further reading: Constantine Cavarnos, The Seven
Sages of Ancient Greece: The Lives and Teachings of the Ear-
liest Greek Philosophers, Thales, Pittacos, Bias, Solon,
Cleobulos, Myson, Chilon (Belmont, Mass.: Institute for
Byzantine and Modern Greek Studies, 1996).
Chios
This large Aegean island, 30 miles long and
8–15 miles wide, lies close to the coast of ASIA MINOR.
The main city, also named Chios, was situated on the
84
Charon

island’s east coast (five miles across from the Asian main-
land) and was one of the foremost Greek city-states. The
island, known for its scenic beauty, is extremely moun-
tainous; its highest peak is Mt. Elias, with an elevation of
4,160 feet. Agricultural products from Chios are similar
to those in mainland Greece, including olives, figs, grapes
(for making wine), and mastic. Herds of sheep and goats
graze everywhere. The island also has some good marble
quarries and other geological natural resources.
Occupied around 1000 B.C.E. by IONIAN GREEKS from
mainland Greece, Chios thrived as a maritime power
whose exports included a renowned WINE as well as tex-
tiles, grain, figs, and mastic (a tree resin used for var-
nish). Chios figured prominently in the cultural
achievements of the east Greek region known as IONIA.
The island is said to have been the birthplace of the poet
HOMER (born probably around 800 B.C.E.); in later cen-
turies a guild of bards, the Homeridae, or sons of Homer,
were active there. Chios was also known as an interna-
tional slave emporium, supplying the markets of Asia
Minor and itself employing many SLAVES for FARMING and
manufacturing.
During the Greek wars of the 700s–600s B.C.E.,
Chios tended to ally itself with MILETUS, against such
nearby rivals as Erythrae and SAMOS. In government, the
emergence of certain democratic forms at Chios is shown
in an inscription (ca. 560 B.C.E.) that mentions a “Peo-
ple’s Council”—possibly a democratically elected COUN-
CIL and court of appeals. This democratic apparatus may
have been modeled on the recent reforms of SOLON at
ATHENS.
Like the rest of Ionia and Asia Minor, Chios fell to
the conquering Persian king CYRUS (1) in around 545
B.C.E. In the ill-fated IONIAN REVOLT against Persian rule,
Chios contributed 100 warships, which fought gallantly
at the disastrous Battle of Lade (494 B.C.E.). Later the
avenging Persians devastated Chios.
Following the liberation of Ionia during the PERSIAN
WARS (479 B.C.E.), Chios became a prominent member of
the Athenian-dominated DELIAN LEAGUE. Chios chose to
make its Delian annual contributions in warships rather
than in SILVER—one of the few league members to do so.
For 65 years Chios proved the most steadfast of any
Athenian ally. The Athenians paid Chios the compliment
of coupling its name with that of Athens itself in public
prayer at each Athenian ASSEMBLY. But in 412 B.C.E., with
Athens’s power dissolving during the PELOPONNESIAN
WAR, Chios initiated the revolt of the Delian subject
cities. Chios staved off the vengeful Athenians, and by
411 B.C.E. the island was firmly controlled by Athens’
enemy, SPARTA.
After 30 years of Spartan domination, the Chians
joined the SECOND ATHENIAN LEAGUE, but in 354 B.C.E.
revolted from Athens again. During the 200s B.C.E., in
resistance to the SELEUCID EMPIRE’s designs, Chios joined
the Aetolian League. The island passed to Roman control
in the next century.
The archaeological remains of ancient Chios are
sparse and poorly preserved, primarily because its major
city is located beneath the island’s modern capital. Some
rescue excavations hare have revealed bits and pieces
from antiquity, and sporadic archaeological investigations
have also been carried out in other parts of the island.
See also AETOLIA; DEMOCRACY.
Further reading: John Boardman, Excavations in
Chios, 1952–1955: Greek Emporio (London: Thames and
Hudson, 1967); Charalampos Bouras, Chios, translated by
David Hardy (Athens: National Bank of Greece, 1974);
Sinclair Hood, Excavations in Chios, 1938–1955: Prehis-
toric Emporio and Ayio Gala (London: Thames and Hud-
son, 1981); Michael Balance, Excavations in Chios,
1952–1955: Byzantine Emporio (London: Thames and
Hudson, 1989); Anna Lemos, Archaic Pottery of Chios:
The Decorated Styles (Oxford: Oxford University Com-
mittee for Archaeology, 1991).
choral poetry
See LYRIC POETRY.
chorus
See LYRIC POETRY; THEATER.
Cilicia
See ASIA MINOR.
Cimon
See KIMON.
Circe (Greek: Kirke)
In MYTH, a beautiful goddess and
witch, was the daughter of the sun god HELIOS and his
wife, Perse. Circe dwelt on a magical island in the West,
in a stone house with enchanted wolves and lions. Her
name seems derived from kirkos, “hawk.”
Circe plays a sinister but exciting role in Homer’s
epic poem the Odyssey (book 10). When the homeward-
bound Greek hero ODYSSEUS brings his ship to her island
and sends half his crew ashore to scout, she welcomes
them with a magic drink that turns them into pigs.
Odysseus goes to their rescue, armed with a magical herb
called moly (molu)—the gift of the god HERMES—that
makes him immune to Circe’s spells. Odysseus forces her
to restore his men’s human shapes. Then, at her invita-
tion, he lives with her for a year as her lover, but finally
demands that she give him directions for his continued
voyage home. Circe’s advice (book 12) enables Odysseus
to resist the deadly SIRENS and avoid other dangers. Circe
is one of two supernatural women who became
Odysseus’s lovers during his wondrous voyage; the other
is CALYPSO.
Generations of Greeks after Homer elaborated Circe’s
story. Her home was sometimes identified with Monte
Circeo, a promontory midway along the west coast of
ITALY. According to one story, she bore Odysseus’s son
Circe
85

Telegonus, who later unwittingly killed his father. In
APOLLONIUS’s epic poem, the Argonautica, Circe welcomes
JASON (1) and MEDEA after their escape from the king-
dom of Colchis.
Further reading: Gregory Crane, Calypso: Back-
grounds and Conventions of the Odyssey (Frankfurt am
Main, Germany: Athenaeum, 1988); Judith Yarnall,
Transformations of Circe: The History of an Enchantress
(Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1994).
city-state
See POLIS.
Cleisthenes (1)
See KLEISTHENES (1).
Cleisthenes (2)
See KLEISTHENES (2).
Cleomenes (1)
See KLEOMENES (1).
Cleon
See KLEON.
Cleopatra (Kleopatra) Dynastic female name of the
Macedonian royal family in the 300s B.C.E., later used by the
Macedonian-descended Ptolemies of EGYPT.
The name means “glory of her father” in Greek. The
famous Cleopatra—Cleopatra VII, daughter of Ptolemy
XII—was the last Ptolemaic ruler of Egypt and also the
last Hellenistic ruler outside Roman control. Upon her
death in 30 B.C.E., Egypt was annexed by ROME.
See also HELLENISTIC AGE; PTOLEMY (1).
Further reading: S. B. Pomeroy, Women in Hellenistic
Egypt: From Alexander to Cleopatra (New York: Schocken
Books, 1984); Lucy Hughes-Hallett, Cleopatra: Histories,
Dreams, and Distortions (New York: Harper and Row, 1990);
Michael Grant, Cleopatra (London: Phoenix Press, 2000);
Susan Walker and Peter Higgs, eds., Cleopatra of Egypt:
From History to Myth (London: British Museum, 2001);
Michel Chauveau, Cleopatra: Beyond the Myth, translated by
David Lorton (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2002).
clothing
The ancient Greeks did not have a commer-
cial fashion industry; most clothing, typically made of
linen, cotton, or wool, was woven in the home. Wives
and their female servants often spent much of their day
indoors, spinning yarn and weaving cloth on a loom.
Greek women were very skilled in the arts of weaving
and embroidery, and garments often included elaborate
border designs. Clothing was simple and loose-fitting,
with only a few basic forms and much similarity between
outfits worn by men and women.
Scholars today have several sources for obtaining
information about ancient Greek clothing, including
written documents and images in Greek SCULPTURE and
vase painting. Both men and women wore a tunic, gener-
ally sleeveless, which was called a chiton. This garment
was created from a rectangular piece of cloth (usually
linen or cotton) that was folded in a certain way around
the body and pinned on one shoulder. The woman’s tunic
generally reached to the floor and would frequently be
worn under a mantle or cloak (known as a himation),
which was also created from a rectangle of woven cloth,
usually wool. The man’s tunic could either fall to the feet
(in Ionian fashion) or merely to the knees or above (in
the Dorian fashion). The shorter tunic was often worn by
workmen, farmers, and soldiers, who wore it underneath
their body armor. Like women, men might also wear a
himation. For horseback riding, younger men often wore
a distinctive wide cloak known as a chlamys.
For women, the chiton and himation combination
was an Ionian style that became popular in mainland
Greece in the early fifth century B.C.E., after the Persian
invasion. Earlier, women generally wore a simple woolen
garment called a peplos. This dress was also created from
a large rectangle of cloth, and it was usually fastened at
the shoulders and belted at the waist.
86
city-state
This maiden is called the Peplos Kore because she wears the
long flowing woman’s tunic called a peplos. Notice her long
plaited hair, fashionable for both men and women. (Alison
Frantz Photographic Collection, American School of Classical
Studies at Athens)

Greek men, who spent much of their day outdoors in
the hot Mediterranean sun, often wore various types of
hats. Travelers, workmen, and sailors might wear a conical
cap known as a pilos; ODYSSEUS is frequently shown wear-
ing one of these. Travelers, hunters, and others sometimes
wore a low, broad-rimmed hat called a petasos; one is often
seen on the head of the messenger god HERMES. The
footwear of choice for heavy walking was either sandals or
leather boots; otherwise, clogs or slippers were worn.
See also POTTERY.
Further reading: David Symons, Costume of Ancient
Greece (New York: Chelsea House Publishers, 1988);
Ioanna Papantoniou, Greek Dress: From Ancient Times to
the Early 20th Century, translated by David A. Hardy
(Athens: Commercial Bank of Greece, 2000); Lloyd
Llewellyn-Jones, ed., Women’s Dress in the Ancient Greek
World (London: David Brown Book Co., 2002).
Clytaemnestra
See KLYTEMNESTRA.
Cnidus
See KNIDOS.
coinage
The first coins came into use in the 600s B.C.E.
But long before then the ancient Greeks traded (by
barter) and understood the concepts of value and profit.
Among the Greeks, the forerunners of the coin were cer-
tain implements used for representing high value. One
such was the bar of SILVER, usually called an ingot. Sev-
eral ingots might comprise the monetary unit known as
the TALENT (Greek talanton, “weight”), equivalent to just
under 58 pounds of silver. Another precious metal of
those days was IRON. The Greeks developed a high-level
currency based on the iron rods (oboloi), traded by the
handful (drachm¯e). These rods remained in circulation
down through the 500s B.C.E. and even later in the reclu-
sive city of SPARTA.
The invention of coins—easily stored, transported,
and counted—marked an improvement over ingots or
rods. The first nation on Earth to mint coins was most
likely the kingdom of LYDIA in ASIA MINOR, around 635
B.C.E. The Lydians were not Greek, but the Greeks seem to
have imported and studied this new Lydian invention.
Modern archaeologists have uncovered Lydian coins com-
posed of electrum (an alloy of silver and GOLD) at the
ancient Greek city of EPHESOS, in Asia Minor. Stamped
with a lion figure “seal of approval” as a royal guarantee of
weight and purity, these Lydian coins may have been given
to pay large groups of artisans or mercenary soldiers, who
surely included Greeks. Before long, Greeks were minting
their own coins, copied from the Lydian ones.
According to ancient writers, the first Greek minting
state was AEGINA (probably around 595 B.C.E.). The
Aeginetan coins were silver, in three sizes that cleverly
employed the denominations already existing for iron
rods. The smallest coin was called the obol, the next the
drachm, and the largest the didrachm (two drachmas), or
stat¯er. The Aeginetan stat¯er showed a sea turtle, the city
symbol. The other two early Greek coining states were
ATHENS (ca. 575 B.C.E.) and CORINTH (ca. 570 B.C.E.)—
both, like Aegina, trading and maritime powers.
By the 400s B.C.E., every important Greek state was
minting its own coins, as a sign of independence and an
aid to TRADE. There was not yet a uniform system of
denominations; rather, each city tended to follow one of
two available systems. Silver remained the prime coining
metal (gold being a scarce resource for the Greeks). But
coinages of BRONZE, to cover lower denominations, began
in the mid-400s B.C.E. By the mid-300s B.C.E., gold coins
were being minted by certain states such as MACEDON,
which had local supplies of gold ore.
Unlike some modern currency, a Greek coin was
intended to contain an unadulterated amount of precious
metal equal to the face value: The stamp on the coin was
meant to guarantee this. The earliest Greek coins were
stamped on only one side. To prepare such a coin, the
smith would place a blank, heated disk of metal on an
anvil atop a shallow die bearing the engraved shape of the
intended imprint. The disk was then punched into the
coinage
87
From the Parthenon frieze, a rider wearing a petasos, the
low, broad-rimmed hat worn by travelers, hunters, and others
to keep off the hot Greek sun (Alison Frantz Photographic
Collection, American School of Classical Studies at Athens)

die by a rod (Greek: charakt¯er), hammered at one end.
The resulting coin would bear a relief created by the die
on one side (the “obverse”) and a mere indentation on
the other (the “reverse”). By about 530 B.C.E. the Greeks
had learned to make two-sided coins by using a rod
whose lower end also bore an engraved die.
To judge from the hundreds of specimens surviving
today, Greek coins were intended as objects of beauty and
as means of civic propaganda. Extant coins bear such
charming or stirring emblems as the Athenian owl, the
Corinthian winged horse Pegasus, and the man-faced,
bull-bodied river god of GELA. In the Hellenistic period,
coins also became a medium for accurate profile portrai-
ture; it is from coins that we know what certain ancient
personages looked like. In the late 300s B.C.E., for instance,
the successors of ALEXANDER THE GREAT paid homage to
his memory—and laid claim to his empire—by issuing
coins showing his portrait and, later, their own. This was a
dramatic change from earlier Greek numismatic conven-
tion, which was generally to depict deities, heroes, or their
attributes, never portraits of real people. The Hellenistic
coin portraits also served as objects of political propa-
ganda, since Alexander and the DIADOCHOI were shown
wearing divine attributes, such as HERAKLES’ lion skin,
DIONYSUS’s leopard skin, and ZEUS Ammon’s bull’s horns.
Greek coinage changed at this time, in the aftermath of
Alexander’s conquest of the Persian Empire. Under Hel-
lenistic kings ruling vast territories in an enlarged Greek
world, there arose uniform coinages used over large areas
and not necessarily differing from city to city. Of the older
Greek states, only Athens and Rhodes continued minting.
Important coining states of the 200s and 100s B.C.E.
included Macedon, the SELEUCID EMPIRE, Hellenistic EGYPT,
PERGAMON, and the Greek leagues of ACHAEA and AETOLIA.
Also, the Greco-Macedonian kings of BACTRIA commemo-
rated themselves in a series of remarkably vivid personal
portraits on coins. The naturalism in these representations
had a significant influence on the super-realistic portraiture
of Republican Rome that would develop in the 100s B.C.E.
Most Greek coinage ceased during the Roman con-
quests in the two centuries before Jesus. Henceforth the
Greeks relied mainly on coins minted by the imperial city
of ROME.
See also ATHENA; BELLEROPHON; HELLENISTIC AGE;
HIMERA.
Further reading: Gilbert K. Jenkins, Ancient Greek
Coins, 2d ed. (London: Seaby, 1990); Otto Mørkholm,
Early Hellenistic Coinage: From the Accession of Alexander
to the Peace of Apamea (336–188 B.C.) (New York: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1991); John Melville-Jones, Testi-
monia numaria: Greek and Latin Texts Concerning Ancient
Greek Coinage (London: Spink, 1993); Ian Carradice,
Greek Coins (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1995);
Glyn Davies, A History of Money: From Ancient Times to
the Present Day (Cardiff: University of Wales Press, 2002).
colonization
Even prior to the conquests of ALEXANDER
THE GREAT (ca. 334–323 B.C.E.), the ancient Greek world
stretched from Libya and southern France to CYPRUS, ASIA
MINOR, and the Crimean peninsula. This Greek prolifera-
tion around the Mediterranean and BLACK SEA took place
during the great colonizing era of the 700s through the
500s B.C.E., when Greek cities extended their TRADE routes
(and alleviated domestic food shortages and other popula-
tion problems) by sending out shipborne expeditions of
young male colonists. Sailing along sea routes already
scouted by Greek traders, these colonists might travel con-
siderable distances to descend on a land typically occupied
by a vulnerable, non-Greek people (such as in eastern
SICILY). But coasts defended by powerful kingdoms such as
EGYPT or Assyria were never colonized by early Greeks.
The colonists’ new city would retain the laws, tradi-
tions, and religious cults of the mother city, or m¯etropolis.
Metropolis and colony would typically enjoy cordial rela-
tions and trade agreements; for example, SYRACUSE, in
Sicily, was surely bound to export surplus grain to its
hungry mother city, CORINTH.
The earliest Greek colonizing took place during the
MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION around 1600–1200 B.C.E. The
Mycenaean Greeks founded settlements on Cyprus and on
the west coast of Asia Minor. But the great age of coloniza-
tion began in the mid-700s B.C.E., after trade and improved
seamanship had begun the expansion of the Greek world.
Parts of HOMER’s epic poem the Odyssey (written down
circa 750 B.C.E.) seem colored by a contemporary interest
in trade and exploration around Sicily and the Adriatic Sea.
Most modern knowledge of this period comes from archae-
ological evidence—building sites, POTTERY types, occa-
sional inscriptions—and from literary sources such as the
fifth-century-B.C.E. historians HERODOTUS and THUCYDIDES
(1) and the Roman geographer Strabo.
The earliest datable colony was established circa 775
B.C.E. by Greeks from the commercial cities of CHALCIS
and ERETRIA, in central Greece. It was a trading station
on the island of PITHECUSAE, six miles off the Bay of
Naples, on the central west coast of ITALY. The location
reveals a purely mercantile motive; the settlement was
intended as a safe haven for trade with the ETRUSCANS of
mainland Italy. Later the Pithecusans crossed to the main-
land, to found CUMAE.
In the 730s B.C.E. expeditions from mainland Greece
ventured to the fertile east coast of Sicily; NAXOS (2) and
ZANCL¯E were founded by Chalcis, and Syracuse by
Corinth. By then the colonists were setting sail primarily
for farmland. The later 700s B.C.E. saw colonies planted
in southern coastal Italy: RHEGIUM (from Chalcis), TARAS
(from SPARTA), and SYBARIS and CROTON (from ACHAEA).
The colonists’ hunger for Italian grainfields is symbolized
in the ear-of-wheat emblem on coins minted by the
Achaean colony of Metapontum, on the Italian “instep.”
In time, the entire southern Italian coastline, from “heel”
to “toe,” became dotted with Greek cities.
88
colonization

The north Aegean coast of THRACE received colonists
by the late 700s B.C.E. Ousting the native Thracians,
Greeks mainly from Chalcis occupied the region subse-
quently called the Chalcidian land—CHALCIDIC¯E. Not far
away, the island of THASOS was occupied by Greeks from
the island of Paros. Later colonies on the Thracian coast
included ABDERA, AENUS, and AMPHIPOLIS. The region
offered farmland and valuable resources for export: grain,
TIMBER, SLAVES, SILVER, and GOLD.
Farther east, the Black Sea and its approaches were
colonized almost single-handedly by MILETUS. Of perhaps
two dozen Milesian colonies here, the most important
included SINOPE (founded circa 700 B.C.E.), CYZICUS
(circa 675 B.C.E.), and PANTICAPAEUM (late 600s B.C.E.).
But the city with the grandest destiny was BYZANTIUM,
founded circa 667 B.C.E. by colonists from MEGARA (1).
Among the assets of the Black Sea region were the bound-
less wheatfields of the Ukraine and the metals trade of
Asia Minor.
Circa 730 B.C.E. the Corinthians established CORCYRA
(modern Corfu) on the northwestern coast of GREECE, 80
miles across the Adriatic from the “heel” of Italy. Later
the Corinthians compensated for a Corcyrean rebellion
by creating new northwestern colonies, including AMBRA-
CIA, APOLLONIA, and Leucas (630–600 B.C.E.).
The North African Greek city of CYRENE (1), des-
tined for commercial greatness, was founded by colonists
from the humble island of THERA, circa 630 B.C.E. To the
northwest, Greeks from PHOCAEA endured Carthaginian
hostility in order to establish MASSALIA (modern Mar-
seille, in southern France) and other far-western Greek
colonies, circa 600 B.C.E.
Like other great endeavors in the ancient world, col-
onization was a mixture of the utilitarian and the reli-
gious. The mother city would appoint an expedition
leader, or “oikist” (oikist¯es), who would organize the
departure, lead the conquest of new land, and rule the
new city as king or governor. Before departure, the oikist
would seek approval for the project from the god
APOLLO’s oracle at DELPHI. Apollo was the patron of
colonists—one of his titles was Archaget¯es, “leader of
expeditions”—and several colonies were named for him,
including Apollonia on the Adriatic and Apollonia on the
Black Sea. He was the only god who could sanction a col-
onizing expedition, and it was probably by careful poli-
ticking that the priesthood at Delphi was able to make its
oracle of Apollo more important than any other. In the
late 500s B.C.E. a Spartan prince Dorieus set out to found
a colony without gaining Delphi’s approval; eventually he
and his followers were massacred by non-Greeks in west-
ern Sicily.
By the 500s B.C.E. colonizing had become regulated
as a tool of imperialism, with great powers planting garri-
son colonies in militarily desirable areas. Athenian
designs on the HELLESPONT in the late 500s B.C.E. brought
Athenian colonists to Sigeum, in northwest Asia Minor,
and to the Thracian CHERSONESE. The imperial ATHENS of
the 400s B.C.E. punished its rebellious subject allies by
establishing cleruchies (kl¯erouchiai), which were land-
grabbing Athenian colonies that acted as garrisons.
Among the states to receive these onerous colonies were
Chalcis, AEGINA, and LESBOS.
The use of military colonies was developed in the
330s–320s B.C.E. by Alexander the Great. He established
over 70 new cities in the wake of his conquests, including
several named ALEXANDRIA (1 and 2). These foundations
were intended to settle veterans while also guarding lines
of supply. The far-flung Greco-Macedonian settlements—
such as the ancient city represented by Greek-style ruins
at Aï Kanoun, in northern Afghanistan—played a crucial
role in hellenizing the East during the HELLENISTIC AGE
(300–150 B.C.E.).
Alexander’s successors in EGYPT and the SELEUCID
EMPIRE continued his practice of founding garrison settle-
ments, either within the kingdom or along a frontier. The
most successful of such foundations was the Seleucid city
of ANTIOCH (330 B.C.E.). In many instances, they
renamed and gave generous benefactions to existing cities
rather than founding entirely new settlements. A major
purpose of Hellenistic rulers’ colonization was to allow
the valuable Greco-Macedonian soldier class to breed and
create a new generation to become heavy infantry.
See also BOSPORUS; BRONZE; ILLYRIS; MARMARA, SEA
OF; SHIPS AND SEAFARING.
Further reading: Irad Malkin, Religion and Coloniza-
tion in Ancient Greece (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J. Brill,
1987); Carol Dougherty, The Poetics of Colonization: From
City to Text in Archaic Greece (New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1993); Jack Cargill, Athenian Settlements of the
Fourth Century B.C. (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J. Brill,
1995); A. J. Graham, Collected Papers on Greek Coloniza-
tion (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 2001).
comedy
See THEATER.
commerce
See TRADE.
Conon
See KONON.
Corcyra (Greek: Kerkyra)
This major Greek city of
the Adriatic coast is located on the lush and attractive
inshore island now known as Corfu. The city was situ-
ated on a peninsula on the island’s east coast, opposite
the Greek mainland region called EPIRUS. Corcyra was
one of the earliest Greek colonies, founded around 734
B.C.E. by settlers from CORINTH.
Located only 80 miles across the Adriatic from the
Italian “heel,” Corcyra provided a vital anchorage on the
coastal TRADE route from Greece to ITALY and SICILY. Cor-
cyra also enjoyed local trade with the Illyrians, a non-
Greek people who supplied SILVER ore, TIMBER, SLAVES, tin
Corcyra
89

(for BRONZE making), and wildflowers (for perfume-mak-
ing). Agriculturally, the island was (and is) known for
dense growths of olive trees.
Unlike most Greek colonies, Corcyra rebelled vio-
lently against its mother city. In 664 B.C.E., as mentioned
by the Athenian historian THUCYDIDES (1), Corcyra and
Corinth fought the first sea battle on record; Thucydides
neglects to state who won. Around 610 B.C.E., the
Corinthian tyrant PERIANDER brought Corcyra temporar-
ily to heel. At some point the two cities cooperated in
founding the Adriatic colony of EPIDAMNOS, but Corinth
continued to establish its own colonies in the area, partly
to guard against Corcyrean hostility.
It was at prosperous Corcyra around 580 B.C.E. that
the first large, all-stone Greek building was erected—a
temple of ARTEMIS, designed in the newly emerging Doric
style. This building has been called the Gorgon temple, on
account of its pedimental sculptures showing the Gorgon
MEDUSA flanked by beasts. Today the temple survives only
in its west pediment, preserved in the Corfu Museum.
Despite having one of the most powerful navies in
Greece, Corcyra remained neutral in the PERSIAN WARS.
Later its bitter relations with Corinth played a role in
igniting the PELOPONNESIAN WAR (431–404 B.C.E.). These
events began in 435 B.C.E., when Corcyra was drawn into
conflict with Corinth over relations with Epidamnus. A
Corcyrean fleet of 80 ships defeated 75 invading
Corinthian ships at the Battle of Leukimme, off Corcyra’s
southeast coast. To defend against retaliation, the Cor-
cyreans allied with the powerful city of ATHENS. The next
episode saw 10 Athenian warships ranged alongside 110
Corcyrean ships against a Corinthian fleet of 150. This
was the important Battle of Sybota (433 B.C.E.), fought off
the mainland near Corcyra and ending in a Corinthian
victory. As a consequence of this battle, Corinth urged
SPARTA to declare war against Athens.
Corcyra fought in the Peloponnesian War and suffered
greatly. The city was being governed as a pro-Athenian
DEMOCRACY when a group of Corcyrean right-wingers
launched a coup, hoping to swing Corcyra over to the
Peloponnesian side. The coup failed, bringing on a grue-
some civil war (427–425 B.C.E.). Thucydides’ sympathetic
but objective description of the Corcyrean stasis (civil
strife) is one of the great set pieces in his history of the
Peloponnesian War (book 3).
Later in the war, Corcyra was a staging base for
Athens’s disastrous invasion of SYRACUSE (415 B.C.E.). In
410 B.C.E. Corcyra ended its alliance with Athens. But in
375 B.C.E. Corcyra joined the SECOND ATHENIAN LEAGUE
as protection against Spartan domination.
With its wealth and strategic position, Corcyra
became a bone of contention among the rival dynasts
after the death of the Macedonian king ALEXANDER THE
GREAT (323 B.C.E.). The city was occupied variously by
Macedonians, Syracusans, Epirotes, and Illyrians, before
passing to the empire of ROME (229 B.C.E.). It served for
many years as a Roman naval base.
See also AGATHOKLES; ARCHITECTURE; COLONIZATION;
ILLYRIS; WARFARE, NAVAL.
Further reading: J. B. Wilson, Athens and Corcyra:
Strategy and Tactics in the Peloponnesian War (Bristol,
U.K.: Bristol Classical Press, 1987); Alkestis Spetsieri-
Choremi, Ancient Kerkyra
(Athens: Archaeological
Receipts Fund, 1991); Athena Dountsi, Corfu Island of
Colours, Island of Light (Smyrni, Greece: Topio Publica-
tions, 1996); John Melville-Jones, ed., Studies in the
Architecture of Dalmatia and Corfu (Venice: Filippi,
2001).
Corinna (Korinna) (sixth-fifth centuries B.C.E.?) Female
lyric poet from Tanagra in Boeotia
Corinna is one of the few female authors known from
ancient Greece. Hellenistic and Roman authors believed
her to have been a contemporary and rival of the Theban
poet PINDAR (ca. 518–438 B.C.E.). Some modern literary
scholars, however, date her work as late as the second
century B.C.E., since the earliest sources that mention her
come from the first century B.C.E.
The Roman traveler Pausanias says that Corinna won
a poetry competition against Pindar, and a monument
was subsequently erected in her honor. Aelian says that
she actually defeated Pindar five times, and that he bit-
terly called her a sow.
Fragments of Corinna’s poetry are preserved on
papyrus texts from the Roman era, and these show that
she generally wrote on mythological subjects, often
focusing on local Boeotian legends. One of her poems,
for instance, tells of a singing contest between the per-
sonifications of two Boeotian mountains. Her writing,
as it is preserved for us, uses a Boeotian dialect and
seems to have been elegant but simple and direct in
style.
A marble statuette now in the Musée Vivenel at Com-
piègne, France, is inscribed with the name “Korinna” and
depicts a youthful woman holding a scroll. It appears to
be a Roman period copy of an original statue from around
320 B.C.E., which would suggest that Corinna could not
have lived as late as some scholars believe.
Further reading: Archibald Allen and Jiri Frel, “A
Date for Corinna,” Classical Journal 68 (1972): 26–30; J.
M. Snyder, The Woman and the Lyre. Women Writers in
Classical Greece and Rome (Carbondale: Southern Illinois
University Press, 1989); D. Clayman, “Corinna and Pin-
dar,” in Nomodeiktes: Greek Studies in Honor of Martin
Oswald, ed. R. M. Rosen and J. Farrell (Ann Arbor: Uni-
versity of Michigan Press, 1993); W. S. Henderson,
“Corinna of Tanagra on Poetry,” Archaeologica Classica 38
(1995): 29–42; J. Balmer, Classical Women Poets (Newcas-
tle-upon-Tyne, U.K.: Bloodaxe Books, 1996); C. Segal,
Aglaia: The Poetry of Alcman, Sappho, Pindar, Baccylides,
90
Corinna

and Corinna (Lanham, Md.: Rowman, 1998); A. Stewart,
“Nuggets: Mining the Texts Again,” American Journal of
Archaeology 102 (1998): 271–282.
Corinth (Greek: Korinthos)
This major city of the
northeastern PELOPONNESE was known in antiquity for its
manufacturing and seaborne TRADE. Located on the nar-
row isthmus that connects southern and central Greece,
Corinth prospered in large part because of its geography.
It guarded the land route along the isthmus, and it con-
trolled harbors on both shores: eastward on the Saronic
Gulf and westward on the aptly named Corinthian Gulf.
In addition, the city’s lofty ACROPOLIS—the “Acro-
corinth,” a limestone mountain standing just outside the
lower town—gave Corinth a nearly impregnable citadel.
It was also on top of this peak that the sanctuary to the
city’s patron goddess, APHRODITE, was located.
The area of ancient Corinth was occupied continu-
ously from the Late Neolithic period through the Bronze
and Iron Ages, but no architectural remains from those
periods have been discovered. The city’s peak of prosper-
ity came in the 600s and early 500s B.C.E., when its inter-
national shipping network came to dwarf those of other
mainland Greek cities. Although it lost this preeminence
to ATHENS in the fifth century B.C.E., Corinth remained a
center for commerce and luxury throughout ancient his-
tory. Among its most lucrative tourist attractions were the
sacred PROSTITUTES that belonged to the Temple of
Aphrodite.
The name Korinthos is not originally Greek, contain-
ing as it does the nth sound that identifies certain words
that survive from the language of the pre-Greek inhabi-
tants of Greece. The invading Greek-speaking tribesmen
around 2100 B.C.E. took over an existing, pre-Greek set-
tlement and retained the non-Greek name. After the fall
of the MYCENAEAN
CIVILIZATION, around 1100–1000
B.C.E., the region was inhabited by the DORIAN GREEKS.
Later MYTHS connect the Dorian conquest of Corinth with
that of ARGOS, farther south.
By the 700s B.C.E., the Dorian city eventually became
governed as an ARISTOCRACY, dominated by an endoga-
mous clan called the Bacchiads. It was these rulers,
around 700 B.C.E., who commissioned the first Temple of
APOLLO at Corinth, one of the earliest Greek buildings to
be roofed with terra-cotta tiles. This temple was
destroyed around 580 B.C.E. and replaced a generation
later with a larger building, seven columns of which
remain standing today on the so-called Temple Hill.
Because of these important temples, many scholars today
consider Corinth to be the birthplace of the monumental
ARCHITECTURE that we know as the Doric order; the more
elaborate Corinthian order would emerge much later.
Under the Bacchiads, Corinth was the foremost
Greek port and manufacturing center, known to HOMER
and other poets by the epithet aphneios, “wealthy.”
Corinthian shipbuilding was renowned. Imports included
textiles, worked metal, and carved ivory from the non-
Greek kingdoms of western Asia. Exports included POT-
TERY in the beautiful painted styles now known as
Protocorinthian and Corinthian. This pottery dominated
all markets from about 700 to 550 B.C.E., when it gradu-
ally became superseded by Athenian black-figure ware.
Corinth’s exports traveled beyond the Greek world.
One avid market was the powerful non-Greek people
called the ETRUSCANS, in northern and central ITALY.
Excavations at Etruscan sites have revealed immense
troves of Corinthian pottery; such remains surely indicate
the presence of other export goods that have not survived
in the archaeological record, such as perfumes, textiles,
and metalwork.
To provide anchorages and local depots along the
western trade route, Corinth founded two colonies
around 734 B.C.E., both destined to become great cities in
their own right: SYRACUSE, on the southeast coast of
SICILY, and CORCYRA, on an Adriatic island off the west
coast of Greece. Corcyra, however, rebelled against its
mother city, and Corinthian-Corcyran hostilities would
later be an important cause of the PELOPONNESIAN WAR
(431–404 B.C.E.).
Meanwhile, prosperity brought violent political
change to Corinth in the seventh century B.C.E., as the
middle class chafed under the Bacchiads’ monopoly of
power. In about 657 B.C.E, a revolution toppled the aris-
tocrats and installed a popular leader, KYPSELOS, as dicta-
tor (tyrannos). Kypselos usually is considered to be the
earliest of the Greek TYRANTS; soon this pattern of revolu-
tion swept the other major cities of Greece as well.
Under Kypselos and his son PERIANDER (reigned ca.
625–585 B.C.E.), Corinth prospered and reached new
commercial heights. New northwestern colonies—
AMBRACIA, APOLLONIA, and others—were founded to
develop further the western trade route and guard the
approaches to the Corinthian Gulf. With Periander’s
paving of a five-mile-long dragway across the isthmus’s
narrowest section, merchant ships could be trundled on
trolleys between the eastern and western seas, thus elimi-
nating the long voyage around the Peloponnese and
bringing to Corinth a rich revenue in tolls from non-
Corinthian shipping. The influential ISTHMIAN
GAMES
were also instituted around this time.
After Periander’s death, his successor was quickly
deposed in favor of a constitutional OLIGARCHY that
remained Corinth’s typical form of government down to
Roman times. During the late 500s B.C.E., Athens arose as
Corinth’s commercial rival. The two cities remained
friendly, however, and 40 Corinthian warships fought
alongside the Athenian fleet against the invasion of the
Persian king XERXES in 480 B.C.E.
By the mid-400s B.C.E., however, Corinth (along with
its ally SPARTA) was feeling the threat of an expansionist,
Corinth
91

democratic Athens. Alarmed by an Athenian alliance with
Corcyra (433 B.C.E.), Corinth urged Sparta and the other
Peloponnesian states to declare war on Athens. The
resulting Peloponnesian War enveloped the Greek world
for nearly 30 years and saw Corinthian naval and land
troops in many battles. The fighting ended in defeat for
Athens and exhaustion of Corinth.
Rebelling from the onerous rule then imposed by
Sparta, Corinth fought against its former ally (and along-
side Athens, Argos, and other states) in the CORINTHIAN
WAR of 395–386 B.C.E. In these troubled years the city
also underwent a brief democratic coup. In 338 B.C.E.,
Corinth shared in the failed defense of Greece against
King PHILIP II of MACEDON. Corinth was occupied by a
Macedonian garrison and remained a Macedonian hold-
ing until 243 B.C.E., when it was liberated by the states-
man Aratus for the Achaean League. But in 222 B.C.E.,
Corinth returned again to Macedonian control.
When the Romans took Greece from the Macedo-
nians in 196 B.C.E., Corinth again became the foremost
city of the Achaean League. Greek resistance to Roman
interference, however, led to the disastrous Achaean War
of 146 B.C.E., in which Corinth was captured and sacked
by Roman troops led by consul Lucius Mummius. The
Roman senate decreed that the city should be burned
down and its art treasures be either sold or carried off to
Rome. This pillaged art is said to have increased the
Greek influence on the emerging Roman imperial culture.
The city experienced a period of depopulation and
depression until 44 B.C.E., when it was refounded as a
Roman colony under the direction of Julius Caesar.
Historians usually consider the destruction of
Corinth in 146 B.C.E.—and the associated annexing of
ACHAEA as part of a Roman province—as the end of the
ancient Greek world. Although other Greek cities thrived
under Roman rule and Corinth itself eventually revived,
mainland Greece as a political entity had ceased to exist.
Greece had become part of ROME.
Travelers and archaeologists became interested in the
site of ancient Corinth at an early date, since the ruins of
the Temple of Apollo have remained visible since antiq-
uity. The area surrounding the temple has been exten-
sively excavated under the auspices of the American
School of Classical Studies at Athens ever since 1896.
Artifacts from the site are kept in the Corinth Museum,
and results from the excavations have been published in
the ongoing Corinth series and in the scholarly journals
Hesperia and the American Journal of Archaeology.
See also
BELLEROPHON; COINAGE; COLONIZATION;
GREECE, GEOGRAPHY OF; HOPLITE; LELANTINE WAR.
Further reading: Mario A. Del Chiaro, ed., Corinthi-
aca: Studies in Honor of Darrell A. Amyx (Columbia: Uni-
versity of Missouri Press, 1986); Elizabeth Langridge-Noti,
A Corinthian Scrapbook: One Hundred Years of American
Excavations in Ancient Corinth (Athens: Lycabettus Press,
1996); Richard Rothaus, Corinth, the First City of Greece:
An Urban History of Late Antique Cult and Religion (Leiden,
Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 2000); Charles K. Williams II and
Nancy Bookidis, eds., Corinth, the Centenary, 1896–1996
(Princeton, N.J.: American School of Classical Studies at
Athens, 2003).
Corinthian order
See ARCHITECTURE.
Corinthian War
This name is given by modern histo-
rians to the conflict of 395–386 B.C.E., fought between
SPARTA (with its allies) and an alliance of CORINTH,
ATHENS, BOEOTIA, ARGOS, EUBOEA, and the kingdom of
PERSIA. The grand alliance was remarkable for combin-
ing traditional enemies in a united campaign against
Spartan supremacy. This anti-Spartan axis introduces the
politics of the next generation, when the Boeotian city of
THEBES would emerge to challenge and finally defeat
Sparta (371 B.C.E.).
The background of the Corinthian War is Sparta’s
victory over Athens in the huge PELOPONNESIAN WAR
(404 B.C.E.), which marked the beginning of Sparta’s
oppressive rule over all the Greek states, former friend
and foe alike. Claiming also to protect and rule the Greek
cities of ASIA MINOR, Sparta came into conflict with the
Persian king Artaxerxes II (399–395 B.C.E.). As a result,
Persian funds became available for the anti-Spartan
alliance in Greece.
The course of the war is described in the account
titled Hellenica, by the Athenian historian XENOPHON
(who was present at some of the events). The Spartan
general LYSANDER invaded Boeotia at the head of a Spar-
tan-allied army, but was defeated and killed by the The-
bans at the Battle of Haliartus (395 B.C.E.). The next
summer the Spartans defeated an allied army in battle
outside Corinth, but this was counterbalanced when a
Spartan fleet was destroyed by the Athenian admiral
KONON, leading a Persian-Athenian fleet at the Battle of
KNIDOS, off the coast of Asia Minor (394 B.C.E.).
Meanwhile, the Spartan king AGESILAOS, summoned
home from campaigning against Persian land forces in
Asia Minor, led his army along the north Aegean coast-
line into northeastern Greece. Descending southward, he
invaded Boeotia. At the desperate Battle of Coronea (394
B.C.E.), Agesilaus narrowly defeated an allied army but
then withdrew southward toward Sparta without attack-
ing any Boeotian cities.
Thereafter the war became bogged down with
maneuverings around Corinth and Argos. In around 392
B.C.E. Corinth, traditionally an OLIGARCHY, underwent a
short-lived democratic coup. But the most important
event of the war was its ending: The fighting stopped in
386 B.C.E., when Persia withdrew its support after King
Artaxerxes II had negotiated a separate peace with Sparta.
According to this treaty, known as the KING’S PEACE,
Sparta ceded the Greek cities of Asia Minor and CYPRUS
92
Corinthian order

back to Persian control. This notorious treaty unmasked
Sparta once and for all as an oppressive power, bent on
dominating mainland Greece even at the cost of selling
out the eastern Greek cities. The rise of Thebes in the fol-
lowing years was buoyed partly by widespread anger at
this treaty.
See also EPAMINONDAS; IONIA.
Further reading: Charles D. Hamilton, Sparta’s Bitter
Victories: Politics and Diplomacy in the Corinthian War
(Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1979); John Buck-
ler, Aegean Greece in the Fourth Century B.C.E. (Leiden,
Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 2003).
council
Evidence in HOMER’s epic poems and in the
LINEAR B tablets indicates that a council (boul¯e) of king’s
advisers was an important facet of government in primi-
tive Greek societies (around 1600–1000 B.C.E.). As the
age of kings gave way to the age of ARISTOCRACY (around
1000–600 B.C.E.), a Greek city-state’s council more or less
became the government, combining legislative, executive,
and judiciary powers. In this era ATHENS was governed
by an aristocratic council called the AREOPAGOS, whose
several hundred members, probably serving for life, were
drawn exclusively from the city’s narrow circle of noble
families.
The democratic reforms of KLEISTHENES (1) (ca. 508
B.C.E.) removed the Areopagos from the heart of govern-
ment in Athens and created instead a council of 500
members selected annually from upper- and middle-
income citizens. (By the late 400s B.C.E., lower-income
citizens apparently were admitted.) Under the Athenian
DEMOCRACY of the 400s and 300s B.C.E., the council had
important legislative and executive duties but was always
subordinate to the sovereign ASSEMBLY of citizens.
The most important job of the Athenian council was
to prepare the agenda for the 40 assembly meetings each
year. Specifically, the council drafted the proposals to be
debated at the next assembly—apparently the assembly
could vote only on proposals prepared beforehand by the
council. Council meetings might include debate and vot-
ing, the hearing of citizens’ petitions, the summoning of
witnesses, and other information-gathering, for which the
council had high authority. Like the assembly, the council
had judicial duties. The councillors could act as judge
and jury in trying cases of certain state offenses, such as
misconduct by officials.
The council also served as an executive body, respon-
sible for the enactment and enforcement of the assembly’s
decisions and for much of the day-to-day running of the
state. The council received foreign ambassadors, had
responsibility for the care of public buildings, and over-
saw the construction of new warships and the mainte-
nance of the fleets and dockyards for Athens’s
all-important navy. The council seems to have been espe-
cially important in administering finances: Among other
duties, it audited the books of all outgoing officials who
had handled public funds.
The citizens who served on the council were not
career politicians or public servants, but rather were ama-
teurs fulfilling a public duty not so different from our
modern jury duty. The 500 council members for the year
were selected by lot, in procedures at the 139 local city
wards, or DEMES (d¯emoi). Only male citizens over the age
of 30 were eligible—there, as everywhere else in the
Athenian government, WOMEN were excluded. By the late
400s B.C.E., councillors were receiving state pay for their
service. (This important provision, enabling less-wealthy
citizens to serve, probably began in around 457 B.C.E.
amid the left-wing reforms of EPHIALTES and PERIKLES.)
Each new council began its term in midsummer, at
the start of the Athenian year. Aside from festivals and
days of ill omen, the members met daily, usually in the
council chamber in the AGORA. By nature of its selection,
the council always consisted of 10 50-man contingents
from the 10 Athenian tribes. Each of these 50-man
groups took one turn, through the year, as the council’s
presiding official, or prytaneis.
Although Athens is the place for which we have the
most information about the workings of the government
and the council, almost every ancient Greek city-state
had a council, with similar responsibilities and powers.
At Sparta, for instance, the government was nominally a
joint monarchy. There was also a council that consisted of
the two kings plus 28 aristocrats, all of whom were
retired from military service (thus over 60 years old).
Sparta also had an assembly that consisted of all the Spar-
tan males; this group selected the members of the council
and approved or vetoed council motions. Above all in
terms of power, however, was a small group of five men,
known as the ephorate, which ultimately had supreme
control over all the other governmental branches. Coun-
cils probably played similar roles in other nondemocra-
cies, maintaining a secondary importance to the
omnipotent tyrant, dictator, or monarch.
See also LAW AND LAW COURTS; POLIS.
Further reading: John Thorley, Athenian Democracy
(London: Routledge, 1996).
cremation
See FUNERAL CUSTOMS.
Crete
The largest and southernmost island of the
AEGEAN SEA, Crete is long and thin in shape—about 160
miles long and 30–40 miles wide—and on a map it
extends horizontally east-west. The island’s western shore
lies only about 65 miles southeast of the mainland Greek
PELOPONNESE and about 200 miles northeast of the
Libyan coast. Crete’s eastern shore is 130 miles from the
coast of ASIA MINOR. Due partly to this dominant posi-
tion on the sea routes linking the Aegean with the Egyp-
tian and Near Eastern worlds, Crete in the late third
Crete
93

millennium B.C.E. gave birth to a brilliant BRONZE AGE
culture, the MINOAN CIVILIZATION. The Minoans were not
Greeks, but they are considered as marking the start of
Greek prehistory, since they deeply influenced the emerg-
ing Greek MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION of the mainland.
The traditional Greek name Kr¯et¯e is not a genuine
Greek word and may reflect the vanished language of the
Minoans. Crete’s terrain rises in mountainous humps,
peaking at 8,000 feet mid-island at Mt. Ida and in the
west at the White Mountains. Limestone formations
include caves, some of which housed important religious
cults in antiquity. Arable land is found in small lowland
pockets, where olives, grapes, and grain were farmed, and
the many upland plateaus offered grazing for livestock.
Mountain TIMBER provided shipbuilding material and a
prized export.
Ancient populations tended to favor the warmer and
drier eastern half of the island, especially the flatter north
coast. ARCHAEOLOGY reveals that the humans first came to
Crete in the Neolithic era, around 5000 B.C.E. These
seaborne pioneers, coming perhaps from the Levant,
brought the island’s first pigs, sheep, and cattle. Newcom-
ers arrived around 2900 B.C.E., possibly from Asia Minor,
bringing BRONZE weapons to Crete and intermarrying
with the existing people. From this fusion there arose,
around 2200 B.C.E., the Minoan civilization, the earliest
great nation on European soil. The seafaring Minoans
traded with EGYPT and the Levant, and dominated the
Aegean.
The Minoan kings’ capital was the north-central city
of KNOSSOS, inland of the modern seaport of Irakleion. At
Knossos in 1900 C.E. the British archaeologist Sir Arthur
Evans discovered the remnants of an elaborate palace
complex, begun in around 1950 B.C.E. and reaching its
existing form in around 1700 B.C.E. Other surviving
Minoan monuments on Crete include the palace at Phais-
tos (mid south coast, across the island from Knossos), the
villas at Hagia Triada (Phaistos, harbor town), the palace
at Mallia (eastern north coast), and the remnants of a
Minoan town at Gournia (eastern north coast). Current
knowledge of the Minoans comes largely from the archae-
ology of these sites. Minoan artworks found in excavation
are collected in the Irakleion archaeological museum.
The Minoan sites on Crete tell a tale of vigorous con-
struction after 1950 B.C.E. and of fiery ruin in around
1400 B.C.E. or soon after. The cause of this simultaneous
destruction was probably an invasion of Crete by Myce-
naean Greeks from the mainland. Oddly, the Mycenaeans
seem to have abandoned Crete after the palaces’ destruc-
tion.
In around 1000 B.C.E. a new people occupied the
island. These were the DORIAN GREEKS, who had previ-
ously invaded southward through mainland Greece, over-
running the Peloponnese and continuing their conquests
by sea. For the rest of antiquity, Crete remained a Dorian-
Greek island, with governmental and social institutions
that resembled those at SPARTA.
Dorian Crete was divided into city-states governed as
military aristocracies. The chief of these were Knossos,
CORTYN (in the south-central island), and, later, Kydonia
(modern Khania, on the western north coast). As was the
case at Sparta, Dorian-Greek nobles ruled over a popula-
tion of rural serfs—probably the descendants of the sub-
jugated non-Dorians.
The island was active in the seaborne expansion of
the Greek world in the later 700s and 600s B.C.E. Cretan
colonists helped to found the city of GELA, in southeast-
ern SICILY, and Cretan workshops exported an admired
94
Crete

Geometric-style POTTERY and contributed to the style of
statuary now known as Daedalic. But gradually the Cre-
tan cities withdrew into isolation, and Crete declined
amid internal conflicts, mainly between Knossos and
Gortyn. By the late 200s B.C.E. the island had become
notorious as a haunt of pirates. Order was restored by the
Romans, who annexed Crete in 67 B.C.E. and made it part
of a Roman province.
The Cretans were the best archers in the Greek world
(where archery was generally not practiced), and many
Greek armies from the 400s B.C.E. onward employed Cre-
tan bowmen as mercenaries. Cretans also had the reputa-
tion of being liars.
The RELIGION of Dorian Crete was distinguished by
certain cults and beliefs that probably contained pre-
Greek, Minoan elements. It was said that the great god
ZEUS, as a baby, had been hidden in a cave on Crete’s Mt.
Dicte to save him from his malevolent father, CRONUS.
More amazing to classical Greeks was the Cretans’ claim
that the immortal Zeus was born and died annually on
Crete and that his tomb could be seen at Knossos. This
“Zeus” may have been the surviving form of a mythical
son or consort of the prehistoric Minoan mother goddess.
See also ARISTOCRACY; ARTEMIS; ATLANTIS; COLONIZA-
TION; GREEK LANGUAGE; HELOTS; ROME; SCULPTURE; SHIPS
AND SEAFARING.
Further reading: Adam Hopkins, Crete: Its Past, Pre-
sent, and People
(London: Faber, 1977); Manolis
Andronikos, Herakleion Museum and Archaeological Sites of
Crete (Athens: Ekdotike Athenon, 1985); J. Wilson Myers,
Eleanor Emlen Myers, and Gerald Cadogan, The Aerial
Atlas of Ancient Crete (Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1992); Jan Driessen and Colin F. Macdonald, The
Troubled Island: Minoan Crete Before and After the Santorini
Eruption (Austin: University of Texas at Austin, Program
in Aegean Scripts and Prehistory, 1997); Yannis Hamilakis,
Labyrinth Revisited: Rethinking ‘Minoan’ Archaeology
(Oxford: Oxbow Books, 2002).
Croesus (Greek: Kroisos) (ca. 595–520 B.C.E.) Last
king of LYDIA, a powerful non-Greek nation of west-central
ASIA MINOR
Croesus inherited the throne at age 35 from his father,
Alyattes, and reigned ca. 560–546 B.C.E., until his country
was conquered by the Persian king CYRUS (1).
Croesus’ wealth was proverbial. Friendly toward the
Greek world, he was a patron of the god APOLLO’s shrine
at DELPHI and was the first foreign ruler to form an
alliance with a mainland Greek state, SPARTA. Closer to
home, he subdued the Greek cities of western Asia Minor,
but dealt benevolently with them as subjects.
On his eastern frontier he met disaster. Seeking to
conquer east-central Asia Minor from the Persians, Croe-
sus led an army across the River Halys, the border
between Lydia and the Persian domain. After an inconse-
quential battle against King Cyrus, Croesus returned to
Lydia, where Cyrus, following quickly, defeated and cap-
tured him. Croesus’s subsequent fate is unknown. One
legend says he was carried off by his divine protector
Apollo to safety in the magical land of the Hyperboreans.
Like other Eastern despots, Croesus inspired the
Greek imagination. The tales told about him by the his-
torian HERODOTUS (ca. 435 B.C.E.) are a fascinating mix
of fact and storytelling. With his grand style and sud-
den fall, Croesus represented for the Greeks a real-life
example of HUBRIS—excessive pride that leads to a
divinely prompted blunder in judgment, which leads to
disaster.
One legend claims that, at the height of Croesus’s
reign, he was visited by the Athenian sage SOLON. Croe-
sus asked Solon to name the happiest man he had ever
seen, expecting to hear himself named, but Solon
explained to Croesus that no man may be called “happy”
until he is dead; before then, he is merely lucky. This
Greek proverb later reappears at the end of SOPHOKLES’
tragedy Oedipus the King.
The best-known story tells how, before his campaign
against PERSIA, Croesus consulted the Delphic Oracle. He
was advised that if he crossed the Halys River he would
destroy a mighty empire. Heartened by this prophecy, he
decided to march. Unfortunately, the mighty empire
destroyed turned out to be his own.
See also MIDAS; PROPHECY AND DIVINATION.
Croesus
95
Head and shoulders of the Anavyssos Croesus. Croesus
reigned around 560–546 B.C.E. over the kingdom of Lydia.
(Alison Frantz Photographic Collection, American School of
Classical Studies at Athens)

Further reading: G. M. A. Hanfmann, “On the Palace
of Croesus,” in Festschrift für Frank Brommer, edited by
Ursula Höckmann and Antje Krug (Mainz am Rhein,
Germany: Philip von Zabern, 1977), 145–154; H. W.
Park, “Croesus and Delphi,” Greek, Roman, and Byzantine
Studies 25 (1984): 208–232; H. I. Flower, “Herodotus and
Delphic Traditions about Croesus,” in Georgica: Greek
Studies in Honor of George Cawkwell, edited by Michael A.
Flower and Mark Toher (London: University of London,
Institute of Classical Studies, 1991), 57–77; Andrew
Ramage and Paul Craddock, King Croesus’ Gold: Excava-
tions at Sardis and the History of Gold Refining (Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press for the
Archaeological Exploration of Sardis, 2000); F. Hartog,
“Myth into Logos. The case of Croesus, or the Historian
at Work,” in From Myth to Reason? Studies in the Develop-
ment of Greek Thought, edited by Richard Buxton, 2d ed.
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2001), 183–195.
Cronus (Greek: Kronos)
In MYTH, the primeval king
of the TITANS and father of ZEUS and other gods. Accord-
ing to HESIOD’s epic poem the Theogony, Cronus was born
to GAEA (Mother Earth) and Uranus (Ouranos, “Sky”).
On his mother’s advice, Cronus castrated his father with a
sickle and ruled in his place.
Cronus married his own sister, Rhea, who bore him
the gods HESTIA, DEMETER, HERA, HADES, POSEIDON,
and, last, Zeus. But Cronus had been warned that his
offspring would subdue him, and so he swallowed each
newborn child. Finally, at Zeus’s birth, Rhea tricked her
husband—presenting him with a stone wrapped in
swaddling clothes—and spirited the infant off to CRETE.
Eventually Cronus was made to vomit up all his swal-
lowed children, who (still alive) followed Zeus in revolt
against their father. A different vein of legend, at odds
with this grim picture, described Cronus as supervising
a time of innocence and blessing—if not in heaven, at
least on earth. Cronus’s reign was said to have marked
the Golden Age of human history, when people lived
without greed, violence, toil, or need for laws.
The name seems to have no meaning in the Greek
language. Like other elements of the Greek Creation
myths, the Cronus story may have derived from non-
Greek, Near Eastern sources. Specifically, it resembles the
tale of the Mesopotamian god Kumarbi, which was cur-
rent in the second millennium B.C.E. Modern scholars
believe that the Cronus myth may have come to Greece
via the Phoenicians, with whom the Greeks had extensive
trading contacts in 900–700 B.C.E.
At classical ATHENS there was a feast of Cronus, the
Kronia, celebrated in midsummer, just after the Greek
New Year. The Kronia was probably a harvest festival, and
Cronus was often portrayed in art as carrying a sickle, the
harvester’s tool. (The sickle also was the weapon he used
to castrate his father.)
The primitive figure of Cronus was the object of
attempted rationalization during the Athenian Enlighten-
ment of the 400s–300s B.C.E. A theory claimed that his
name was not really Kronos but rather Chronos, “time,”
and that his myth of impious violence to father and chil-
dren was simply an allegory for the ravages of time. This
confused interpretation created an image that, surviving
2,500 years, can be seen every New Year’s—old Father
Time, holding his emblematic sickle.
See also PHOENICIA; RELIGION.
Further reading: M. van der Valk, “On the God
Cronus,” Greek, Roman, and Byzantine Studies 26 (1985):
5–11; Samuel L. Macey, Patriarchs of Time: Dualism in
Saturn-Cronus, Father Time, the Watchmaker God, and
Father Christmas (Athens: University of Georgia Press,
1987).
Croton (Greek: 
Kroton; 
modern 
Crotone)
This
important Greek city is situated on the southern rim of
the Gulf of Taranto, on the “sole” of south ITALY.
Located high above a small double harbor, near fertile
farmland, Croton was founded by colonists from
ACHAEA, probably around 710 B.C.E. The city carved out
a sizable domain at the expense of the local Italian
inhabitants, the Brutii.
Around 530 B.C.E., the Samian-born philosopher
PYTHAGORAS founded his mystical school of study at Cro-
ton and apparently helped to run the city government, as
an OLIGARCHY. By the late 500s B.C.E., prosperous Croton
had a famous school of MEDICINE, producing, among oth-
ers, the philosopher-physician Alcmaeon. Another distin-
guished citizen of the day was Milon the Strongman, a
champion in WRESTLING at the OLYMPIC and PYTHIAN
GAMES. Several other athletes from Croton also achieved
great success in these Panhellenic festivals from 588
B.C.E. onward.
The city’s zenith came in 510 B.C.E., when it
destroyed its archrival, the Italian Greek city SYBARIS. But
Croton soon was weakened by conflicts with two other
Italian Greek cities, RHEGION and LOCRI, and with the
Brutii. Croton was captured and plundered in 379 B.C.E.
by the Syracusan ruler DIONYSIUS (1). Exhausted by the
wars that accompanied ROME’s expansion through Italy in
the 300s and 200s B.C.E., Croton eventually became a
Roman subject state.
Just outside the city, on the coast, is located the
important Sanctuary to Hera Lacinia, one column of
which remains standing today. This Doric temple reached
its height in the fifth century B.C.E.; later it was sacked by
the Syracusan tyrant Dionysus and, afterward, by the
Romans. Much of the structure was reused as building
material by inhabitants from the Roman era and later. No
other remains from the Greek period at Croton are visi-
ble, but a few buildings from the Roman period have
been located in the Hera sanctuary. Many artifacts were
96
Cronus

excavated there and are now on display in the Crotone
National Archaeology Museum.
Further reading: W. L. Gale, The Sacred Tripod: Kro-
ton and Its Coins (Mosman, N.S.W.: Ocean Spray Pty.,
1995); Roberto Spadea, The Treasures of Hera: Magna
Grecian Antiquities from Southern Italy (Milan: Edizioni
ET, 1998).
Cumae (Greek: Kume)
This ancient Greek city of
Campania, on the west coast of ITALY, is located just
north of the Bay of Naples, 10 miles west of modern-day
Naples.
Cumae was one of the earliest datable Greek colonies,
established by Euboean Greeks who moved ashore from
their nearby island holding of PITHECUSAE around 750
B.C.E. One story claims that the new city included eastern
Greek settlers who named it for their native CYM¯E, in ASIA
MINOR.
The founding of Italian Cumae marks an early mile-
stone in Greek COLONIZATION, namely the decision by a
band of Greeks to make a first landing on the Italian
coast. Possibly they went ashore at the invitation of the
ETRUSCANS, a powerful Italian people who were avid con-
sumers of Greek goods and who had a stronghold at
nearby Capua.
Cumae thrived, supplying the Etruscans with
Corinthian painted POTTERY, Euboean worked BRONZE,
and other wares. It sent out colonists of its own, founding
ZANCL¯E (modern Messina, in SICILY, around 725 B.C.E.)
and Neapolis (“new city,” modern Naples, around 600
B.C.E.), among other settlements. As a northern outpost
of Greek culture in Italy, Cumae played a crucial role in
the hellenization of the Etruscans.
But Cumae’s relations with the Etruscans eventually
worsened, and in the late 500s B.C.E. the Cumaean leader
Aristodemus twice defeated Etruscan armies (and then
made himself tyrant of the city). In 474 B.C.E. in alliance
with the Syracusan tyrant HIERON (1), Cumae won a
great sea battle against the Etruscans and crushed their
power. But in 421 B.C.E. the city fell to another Italian
people, the Samnites, and later passed to the Romans.
Throughout antiquity Cumae was known for its oracle,
told by a priestess called the Sibyl.
The Sibyl of Cumae was a beautiful mortal woman
who obtained her oracular powers after the god APOLLO
became attracted to her and offered to grant any wish if
she would spend a night with him. She asked that she
might live for as many years as grains of sand she could
squeeze into her hand. Apollo agreed, but Sibyl reneged
and rejected his advances. She was therefore cursed with
the literal fulfillment of her wish—eternal life but not
eternal youth. She got older and older, eventually shrivel-
ing into a tiny, frail body that was confined in a jar or a
cage. She did not need to eat or to drink, since she could
not die of hunger or of thirst. She hung from the branch
of a tree at the mouth of a cave and stayed there, uttering
occasional oracles to those who approached. The Romans
kept a sacred collection of her prophecies in their pri-
mary temple, the Capitolium.
European travelers and archaeologists began to
explore Cumae in the middle of the nineteenth century
C.E., hoping to discover the actual site of the Cumeaen
oracle, which had been described in sources from the
fourth century C.E. It was thought several times to have
been found until finally, in 1932, the Italian archaeologist
Amadeo Maiuri discovered a long, trapezoidal-shaped
tunnel that seems to correspond to the late antique
description of the Sibyl’s grotto. The identification of this
tunnel remains controversial, however, and some archae-
ologists believe instead that it served a military function.
See also PROPHECY AND DIVINATION; ROME; TYRANTS.
Further reading: Raymond Schoder, Ancient Cumae
(New York: Scientific American, 1963); A. G. MacKay,
Ancient Campania (Hamilton, Ont.: Vergilian Society,
1972); H. W. Parke, Sibyls and Sibylline Prophecy in Clas-
sical Antiquity, edited by B. C. McGing (London: Rout-
ledge, 1988).
Cyclades
This group of islands in the AEGEAN SEA
roughly forms a circle, kuklos, around the holy isle of
DELOS. Aside from Delos, the major Cyclades were Naxos
(1), Paros, Andros, Keos, THERA, and MELOS. All the
islands are mountainous and arid, with little good agri-
cultural land. Only Naxos and Melos have enough pas-
ture area to produce and export sheep and goat milk
cheeses. Some of the Cyclades (Santorini, Melos) are vol-
canic in origin. Most of them had an economy based on
seafaring and trade. They provided convenient ports of
call for ships en route from Greece to Asia Minor, and
major trading harbors emerged at islands such as Delos
and Syros.
Naxos, the largest and most fertile of the Cyclades,
was known in antiquity for its WINE and its associated
worship of the god DIONYSUS. It also was home to an
important school of SCULPTURE from the Archaic period
onward. In its marble quarries, archaeologists have found
several colossal male statues (kouroi), unfinished and
abandoned. Paros was even more famous for its high-
quality marble, prized in the 500s and 400s B.C.E. as a
material for sculpture due to its fine grain. Melos is per-
haps best known today as the spot where the Louvre
Museum’s statue of APHRODITE (the Venus de Milo) was
found. In antiquity, this volcanic island was an important
source of obsidian, desired for making blades and other
cutting tools as early as 2000 B.C.E.
The Cyclades enjoyed a flourishing civilization in the
third and second millennia B.C.E., well before the Greeks
arrived. Archaeological evidence such as surviving POTTERY
gives a picture of two-way TRADE with Minoan CRETE. By
1600 B.C.E. these pre-Greek Cyclades had come under
Cyclades
97

direct control of Crete. After 1400 B.C.E. the Cyclades seem
to have been ruled by Mycenaean Greeks from the main-
land. Before 1000 B.C.E. most of the Cyclades were occu-
pied by migrating IONIAN GREEKS. For the main centuries
of Greek history, the Cyclades were inhabited by ethnic
Ionian Greeks; of the principal islands, only Melos and
Thera were settled by DORIAN GREEKS.
The Cyclades fell to the invading Persians in 490
B.C.E., Naxos, resisting, was ravaged. At the end of the
PERSIAN WARS, most of the islands joined the DELIAN
LEAGUE, headquartered at Delos but led by ATHENS (478
B.C.E.). The league died with Athens’ defeat in the PELO-
PONNESIAN WAR (404 B.C.E.), but by 377 B.C.E. most of
the islands had joined the SECOND ATHENIAN LEAGUE.
With the rest of Greece, they passed into the hands of the
Macedonian king PHILIP II in 338 B.C.E. During the HEL-
LENISTIC AGE (300–150 B.C.E.), the Cyclades were a bone
of contention mainly between the Greek dynasties of
MACEDON and EGYPT. In the mid-100s B.C.E. they passed
to the domain of ROME.
Further reading: R. L. N. Barber, The Cyclades in the
Bronze Age (Iowa City: University of Iowa Press, 1987);
Ann-Louise Schallin, Islands Under Influence: The
Cyclades in the Late Bronze Age and the Nature of Myce-
naean Presence (Göteborg, Sweden: Paul Aströms Förlag,
1993); Pat Getz-Gentle, Stone Vessels of the Cyclades in the
Early Bronze Age (University Park, Pa.: Pennsylvania
State University Press, 1996); Martin van Schaik, The
Marble Harp Players from the Cyclades (Utrecht: Dutch
Study Group on Music Archaeology, 1998); Cyprian
Broodbank, An Island Archaeology of the Early Cyclades
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 2000).
Cyclops (plural: Cyclopes)
A type of mythical, gigan-
tic, semihuman monster, first described in HOMER’s epic
poem the Odyssey (written down around 750 B.C.E.). The
name Kuklops, “round eye,” refers to the one large eye
that such creatures had in midforehead. Descended from
the earth goddess GAEA and her husband, Uranus (Oura-
nos, “Sky”), the Cyclopes dwelt in a distant land (some-
times identified as eastern SICILY), with no cities or laws.
The Odyssey (book 9) describes the hero ODYSSEUS’s vio-
lent encounter with the Cyclops POLYPHEMOS.
A slightly different tradition, presented in HESIOD’s
epic poem the Theogony (ca. 700 B.C.E.), made the
Cyclopes a guild of supernatural, one-eyed blacksmiths,
who forged thunderbolts for the great god ZEUS. These
Cyclopes were associated with the smith god, HEPHAISTOS.
The classical Greeks ascribed to the Cyclopes the building
of certain ancient walls made of huge blocks without mor-
tar, such as the walls at TIRYNS. In reality, these had been
built by Mycenaean Greeks around 1300 B.C.E., but to
later generations they looked like the work of giants. The
term cyclopean was used to describe such masonry.
See also MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION.
Further reading: Bernard Evslin, The Cyclopes (New
York: Chelsea House, 1987); Warcwick Hutton, Odysseus
and the Cyclops (New York: M. K. McElderry Books,
1995); Anne F. Rockwell, The One-Eyed Giant and Other
Monsters from the Greek Myths (New York: Greenwillow
Books, 1996); Judith Kazantzis, trans., In Cyclops’ Cave:
The Odyssey Book IV Lines 105–566/Homer (Warwick,
U.K.: Greville, 2002).
Cylon
See KYLON.
Cyme
See KYME.
Cynics
The English words cynic and cynicism describe
an informal, embittered frame of mind. But the original
Cynics comprised a major Greek philosophical move-
ment, which arose in the early 300s B.C.E. The name
Kunikoi, “doglike,” derived from one of the movement’s
pioneers, DIOGENES of SINOPE (400–325 B.C.E.), whose
austere and immodest way of life won him the nickname
the Dog (Kuon). Unlike other philosophies, Cynicism
was never organized around a formal place of study.
Although overshadowed in the 200s B.C.E. by two new
and partly derivative schools of thought, STOICISM and
EPICUREANISM,
Cynicism nevertheless continued to
attract a following in response to the spiritual crisis in the
HELLENISTIC AGE (300–150 B.C.E.). In the first century
C.E. the cities of the Roman Empire teemed with traveling
Cynic beggars.
The Cynics taught a radical doctrine of moral self-
sufficiency. They renounced wealth and social conven-
tion, preferring to go homeless, do no work, wear simple
clothes or rags, and avoid such niceties as finding privacy
before relieving themselves. They sought knowledge and
harmony through a liberation from materialism. But, far
from withdrawing to live as hermits, they chose to dwell
in cities and (often) to travel from city to city, preaching.
They would sermonize and hold philosophical discus-
sions on streetcorners and were notorious for their out-
spokenness. Their lampoons against vice and pride were
often directed personally against passersby.
The movement’s roots lay with the Athenian philoso-
pher SOCRATES (469–399 B.C.E.). Although not himself a
Cynic, Socrates was known for his austerity and his habit
of questioning people on the street. After Socrates’ death,
one of his followers, Antisthenes, an Athenian, lived in
exaggerated imitation of Socrates’ plain living. In a modi-
fied Socratic belief, Antisthenes taught that happiness
comes from personal virtue (aret¯e), not from pleasure, and
that the best virtue comes from triumph over hardship.
Antisthenes was the first Cynic, but the movement’s
most famous master was Diogenes, who began as Antis-
thenes’ pupil. Other important Cynics included Bion of
Borysthenes and Menippus of Gadara (early 200s B.C.E.);
Menippus adapted the Cynics’ haranguing speaking style
98
Cyclops

to a written form that was a precursor of the literary
satire later produced by the Romans.
With their doctrine of self-improvement through
painful effort, the Cynics revered the mythical hero HER-
AKLES, whose twelve Labors were seen as an ideal exam-
ple of moral victory and self-liberation.
See also PHILOSOPHY; POLIS.
Further reading: Donald R. Dudley, A History of Cyn-
icism from Diogenes to the 6th Century A.D., reprint
(Chicago: Ares, 1980, 1937); Luis Navia, The Philosophy
of Cynicism: An Annotated Bibliography (Westport, Conn.:
Greenwood Press, 1995); Luis Navia, Classical Cynicism:
A Critical Study (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press,
1996); R. Bracht-Branham and Marie-Odile Goulet-Caze,
eds., The Cynics: The Cynic Movement in Antiquity and its
Legacy (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996);
Luis Navia, Diogenes of Sinope: The Man in the Tub (West-
port, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1998).
Cyprus
This large eastern Mediterranean island, 140
miles long, was an eastern frontier of the Greek world.
Located 60 miles off the coast of northern Syria and 50
miles south of ASIA MINOR’s southern coast, Cyprus
played a vital role in TRADE warfare between East and
West. The island’s Oriental contacts and remoteness from
mainland Greece gave rise to a distinctive, sometimes
peculiar, Greek culture.
As shown by ARCHAEOLOGY, the island was host to a
flourishing non-Greek civilization, derived from Asia
Minor, during the first half of the second millennium
B.C.E. After about 1400 B.C.E. Cyprus was intensively col-
onized by Mycenaean Greeks from mainland Greece.
What lured them to Cyprus was copper—the major com-
ponent of the alloy BRONZE, upon the Mycenaeans
depended for war and FARMING. Cyprus had the richest
copper deposits in the eastern Mediterranean; the English
word copper comes from the Latin term Cyprium aes, “the
Cypriot metal.” A copper ingot eventually became the
island’s emblem on COINAGE.
Greek Cyprus was largely undisturbed by the col-
lapse of MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION in mainland Greece
(around 1200–1000 B.C.E.). The island’s spoken Greek
dialect, unaffected by any change or immigration,
retained certain characteristics of old Mycenaean Greek.
Other Mycenaean survivals included the Cypriot Syl-
labary (as it is now called), a primitive form of writing
using pictograms, employed on Cyprus around 700–200
B.C.E.
In the 800s B.C.E. the seafaring Phoenicians, seeking
copper and shipping stations, established a stronghold in
southeast Cyprus: Kart Hadasht, “new city,” called Kition
by the Greeks and Kittim in the Bible. The Phoenicians,
in steady conflict with the Greeks, remained a powerful
presence and later served as puppets of the Persian over-
lords. Meanwhile Cyprus became a place where Greeks
could observe and imitate Phoenician shipbuilding, trade
techniques, and religious beliefs. The Phoenician cult of
ADONIS may have reached Greece by way of Cyprus, as
probably did a more important religious borrowing from
the Near East—the cult of the goddess APHRODITE.
The Cypriot Greeks became expert seafarers. By 700
B.C.E. their population was centered in eight cities,
roughly ringing the island’s east-south-west perimeter.
Each city had its own king; foremost of these Greek cities
was Salamis (often called Cypriot Salamis, to distinguish
it from the island near ATHENS). Located on a hospitable
bay on Cyprus’s east coast, site of modern Famagusta,
Salamis commanded the shipping run to north Syria. The
ninth city of Cyprus was Phoenician Citium; in later cen-
turies it became partially Greek.
In 525 B.C.E. Cyprus submitted to the conquering
Persians. As Persian subjects, the Cypriots—both Greeks
and Phoenicians—supplied warships and crews for their
overlords’ campaigns. The Cypriot Greeks joined the
IONIAN REVOLT against Persian rule but were defeated (ca.
497 B.C.E.). Modern archaeology at the southwest city of
Paphos has uncovered the lower levels of an ancient Per-
sian siege mound, littered with hundreds of bronze
arrowheads—the remnants of Greek defensive arrow vol-
leys from the city’s walls.
In the mid-400s B.C.E. Cyprus was a bone of con-
tention between the Persians and imperial Athens. The
Athenian commander KIMON had begun a large-scale
attempt to liberate Cyprus when he died there (450
B.C.E.), and the island relapsed into Persian-Phoenician
control, despite the hellenic cultural program of the
dynamic king Evagoras of Salamis (ca. 411 B.C.E.). By the
terms of the KING’S PEACE (386 B.C.E.), the mainland
Greeks recognized Persian mastery of Cyprus.
In 332 B.C.E., after the Macedonian king ALEXANDER
THE GREAT had invaded the Persian Empire, Greek
Cyprus dramatically joined his side and contributed 120
warships for the conqueror’s massive siege of Tyre. After
Alexander’s death, PTOLEMY (1), the Macedonian-born
ruler of EGYPT, captured Cyprus despite suffering a naval
defeat by his enemy DEMETRIUS POLIORCETES off Salamis
(306 B.C.E.). Ptolemy suppressed Cyprus’ traditional nine
kingships, replaced them with democratic forms, and
established an Egyptian overlordship that lasted until 58
B.C.E., when the island was taken over by the Romans.
See also GREEK LANGUAGE; PHOENICIA; SHIPS AND SEA-
FARING; WARFARE, NAVAL.
Further reading: Vassos Karageorghis, The A. G. Lev-
antis Foundation and the Cultural Heritage of Cyprus
(Athens: The Foundation, 1990); ———, Cyprus Museum
and Archaeological Sites of Cyprus, translated by Kay
Cicellis, 2d ed. (Athens: Ekdotike Athenon, 1991); A. T.
Reyes, Archaic Cyprus: A Study of the Textual and Archaeo-
logical Evidence (New York: Oxford University Press,
1994); Veronica Tatton-Brown, Ancient Cyprus, 2d ed.
Cyprus
99

(London: British Museum Press, 1997); Vassos Kara-
georghis, Cypriote Archaeology Today: Achievements and
Perspectives (Glasgow: University of Glasgow, Glasgow
Archaeological Society, 1998); Paul Aström, A Century of
International Cyprological Research (Nicosia: Bank of
Cyprus Foundation, 2000); Vassos Karageorghis, Early
Cyprus: Crossroads of the Mediterranean (Los Angeles: J.
Paul Getty Museum, 2002).
Cypselus
See KYPSELOS.
Cyrene (1) (Greek: Kyrene)
This major Greek city of
North Africa, near modern-day Benghazi in eastern Libya,
was founded by DORIAN GREEKS from the island of THERA
around 630 B.C.E. Located inland, on a hill surrounded by
fertile plains, Cyrene thrived in TRADE with mainland
Greece, which lay 300 miles due north across the
Mediterranean. (CRETE
was 200 miles northeast.)
Through its harbor town of Apollonia, Cyrene exported
grain, woolens, oxhides, and silphium—a local plant,
prized as a laxative and digestive. Far surpassing Thera in
wealth and power, Cyrene established local colonies of its
own and was an important early outpost of the Greek
world.
The circumstances of Cyrene’s foundation are well
known, thanks to an account by the historian HERODOTUS
(ca. 435 B.C.E.) and a surviving inscription, dating from the
300s B.C.E., claiming to record the Therans’ decision to
send out ships of colonists 300 years earlier. The expedi-
tion was organized to relieve overpopulation and water
shortage on Thera. Although volunteers were welcome,
one son from each family was required to join, the penalty
for default being death. The sea route to the intended land-
fall had already been explored by Greek traders from Crete.
The Theran colonists, landing on the then-fertile Libyan
coast, were at first welcomed by the native Libyans.
Cyrene’s foundation offers one of the clearest exam-
ples of the role played by APOLLO, patron god of
colonists, and by Apollo’s oracle at DELPHI, in central
Greece. The Theran expedition and its leader were
approved beforehand by Delphic Apollo, and the new city
was named for the god. (The name Kyr¯en¯e is related to
Kouros, “young man,” a cult title of Apollo.)
Early Cyrene was governed by kings of a family
named the Battiads, or “sons of Battus.” (Battos, “stam-
merer,” was supposedly the name of the original expedi-
tion’s leader.) The dynasty customarily used the royal
names Battus and Arcesilaus (meaning “leader of the peo-
ple”). A prominent king was Battus II, surnamed the
Lucky, under whom the city attracted a new influx of
Greek settlers and fought off a Libyan-Egyptian attack in
about 570 B.C.E. In this era Cyrene founded its own nearby
colonies: Barca and Euhesperides (modern Benghazi). The
territory of these Greek cities, in the “hump” of eastern
Libya, was named Cyrenaica, as it is still called today.
Cyrene submitted to the Persians in around 525
B.C.E., but the Battiads remained in power, amid some
dynastic violence, until about 440 B.C.E., when Arcesilaus
IV was deposed in favor of an Athenian-style DEMOCRACY.
Remote from the political centers of the Greek world,
Cyrene was unaffected by the PELOPONNESIAN WAR
(431–404 B.C.E.) but was absorbed into the domain of
ALEXANDER THE GREAT after he reached EGYPT in his
invasion of the Persian empire (332 B.C.E.). On Alexan-
der’s death in 323 B.C.E. the city passed to PTOLEMY (1),
the Macedonian-born ruler of Egypt. Ptolemy removed
the city’s democracy and installed a liberal OLIGARCHY,
which he could better control.
Under lenient Egyptian rule, the city reached a peak
of prosperity in the late 300s and 200s B.C.E., with a pub-
lic building program and such cultural ornaments as a
native school of PHILOSOPHY—the Cyrenaics, founded by
Aristipus, a follower of SOCRATES. In the mid-200s B.C.E.
the Cyrenaic cities banded into a federation, which
remained part of Egypt until the 100s B.C.E., when the
Romans began to interfere in Egyptian administration. In
74 B.C.E., Cyrenaica became a province of the Roman
domain.
See also COLONIZATION; CYRENE (2); ROME.
Further reading: Charles Hyslop, Cyrene and Ancient
Cyrenaica, a Guidebook
(Tripoli: Government Press,
1945?); Shimon Applebaum, Jews and Greeks in Ancient
Cyrene (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 1979); Graeme
Barkes, John Lloyd, and Joyce Reynolds, eds., Cyrenaica
in Antiquity (Oxford: B. A. R., 1985); S. E. Kane, “Sculp-
ture from Cyrene in Its Mediterranean Context,” in
Ancient Marble Quarrying and Trade. Papers from a collo-
quium held at the annual meeting of the Archaeological
Institute of America, San Antonio, Texas, December 1986,
edited by J. Clayton Fant (Oxford: B. A. R., 1988),
127–138.
Cyrene (2) (Greek: Kyrene)
In MYTH, this nymph was
beloved by the god APOLLO. Cyrene lived in THESSALY,
where she delighted in the woodlands and in hunting
wild beasts.
Apollo spied Cyrene one day as she wrestled with a
lion on Mt. Pelion. He immediately fell in love with her
for her beauty and “manly” strength. The god carried her
off in his golden chariot to Libya in North Africa. There,
on a hill surrounded by fertile plains, Apollo founded the
Greek city that he named CYRENE (1), for her to rule. She
bore him a hero son, Aristaeus, who introduced to
humankind such civilizing arts as beekeeping and cheese
making.
The legend of Cyrene reveals at least two layers. The
earlier layer—describing Apollo and the nymph in Thes-
saly—appears in a fragment by the epic poet HESIOD, who
wrote in about 700 B.C.E. (before the Greeks founded the
city of Cyrene, in about 630 B.C.E.). In the original ver-
100
Cypselus

sion, Apollo probably did not carry his beloved off to
North Africa—a detail not needed for the story. But at
some point, perhaps around 600 B.C.E., the older tale was
developed into a political “foundation myth,” explaining
the origin of the city of Cyrene. This later legend is told
in the poet PINDAR’s ninth Pythian ode, written in abound
474 B.C.E. for an athlete of Cyrene.
See also NYMPHS.
Further reading: Jennifer Larson, Greek Nymphs:
Myth, Cult, Lore (New York: Oxford University Press,
2001).
Cyrus (1) (Greek: Kyros) (ca. 580–529 B.C.E.)
This Persian king and conqueror ruled from 559–529
B.C.E. and built PERSIA into a vast empire. Cyrus also
brought Persia to its first, hostile contact with the Greek
world. Despite this, Cyrus was viewed by later Greek
thinkers as a model of the wise and righteous ruler; the
historians HERODOTUS (ca. 435 B.C.E.) and XENOPHON
(ca. 380 B.C.E.) both wrote about his life in legendary
terms.
Cyrus—sometimes called Cyrus the Great or Cyrus
II—was the grandson of a prior King Cyrus and son of
King Cambyses. He ruled after the death of his father.
The Persians at that time were a simple, seminomadic
people of the southwestern Iranian plateau; they and
their king were subordinate to a kindred people, the
Medes. Cyrus revolted against the Medes, captured their
capital city of Ecbatana, and made himself supreme king.
Henceforth the Persians were the dominant people. The
Medes became their inferiors, and there arose a new
imperial dynasty—Cyrus’s family, called the Achaemenids
(descendants of Achaemenes).
The domain that Cyrus had seized was one of the
three great powers of western Asia; the others were the
kingdoms of LYDIA and Babylonia. Over his 20-year reign,
Cyrus eliminated these two rival kingdoms and carved
out an empire stretching from the AEGEAN SEA to
Afghanistan.
First, provoked by the (undoubtedly welcome)
aggression of the Lydian king CROESUS, Cyrus marched to
ASIA MINOR in 546 B.C.E. and conquered Lydia. It was
then that he encountered the Greek cities of IONIA, in
western Asia Minor, which had been privileged subject
states under Croesus. After some resistance, the Greeks of
Asia Minor submitted to the Persians (around 545 B.C.E.).
These events could be described as the starting point of
the PERSIAN WARS.
Later Cyrus seized the city of Babylon and its
empire—in effect avenging the Babylonian subjugation of
the JEWS—a triumph for which he is praised in the Old
Testament book of Isaiah. He seems to have governed
benevolently, allowing nations to keep their laws and reli-
gious customs once they had offered submission. He died
in battle on his northeastern frontier (perhaps modern-
day Uzbekistan) and was succeeded by his son Cambyses
(530 B.C.E.).
Further reading: A. Cizek, “From the Historical
Truth to the Literary Conventions. The Life of Cyrus the
Great Viewed by Herodotus, Ctesias, and Xenophon,”
L’Antiquité classique (1975): 531–552; H. A. Storck, “The
Lydian Campaign of Cyrus the Great in Classical and
Cuneiform Sources,” Ancient World 19 (1989): 69–76; H.
G. Dakyns, trans., The Education of Cyprus/Xenophon
(Rutland, Vt.: C. E. Tuttle, 1992); Christopher Nadon,
Xenophon’s Prince: Republic and Empire in the ‘Cyropaedia’
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001).
Cyrus (2)
See XENOPHON.
Cyzicus (Greek: Kyzikos)
This Greek seaport of
northwestern ASIA MINOR is situated on the south coast
of the SEA OF MARMARA, about 60 miles east of the
HELLESPONT. Lying in the territory of the non-Greek
Mysians, Cyzicus was founded by Greeks from MILETUS,
around 675 B.C.E. According to legend, the city was
named for an ancient native King Cyzicus, who had been
killed in a mishap involving the Greek hero JASON (1)
and his Argonauts.
Cyzicus was located on the southern tip of an
inshore island called Arctonnessus (“bear island,” now a
peninsula of the Turkish mainland). The site commanded
a double harbor, formed by the narrow channel between
island and shore; this superior anchorage became an
important station along the Greek shipping route to the
BLACK SEA. Cyzicus thrived from TRADE by sea and by the
land routes from interior Asia Minor; it also enjoyed rich
local fisheries.
From the late 500s until the late 300s B.C.E., Cyzicus
minted coins of electrum (an alloy of GOLD and SILVER) in
the high denomination known as the stat¯er. Stamped
with the city’s emblem, a tuna, Cyzicene stat¯ers were
renowned for their beauty and reliable measure.
By about 493 B.C.E. the city had submitted to the
conquering Persian king DARIUS (1). Liberated by the
Greek counteroffensive after 479 B.C.E., Cyzicus joined
the Athenian-led DELIAN LEAGUE and (a sign of its pros-
perity) contributed a sizable annual tribute of nine silver
TALENTS.
Revolting from Athenian rule in the Delian uprising
of 411 B.C.E., during the PELOPONNESIAN WAR, Cyzicus
welcomed a Spartan-Peloponnesian fleet under the Spar-
tan commander Mindarus. The following spring, 410
B.C.E., saw one of the war’s great sea battles, off Cyzicus.
The Athenian commander ALCIBIADES, arriving with 86
warships, surprised the 60 Spartan ships at their naval
exercises and cut them off from Cyzicus harbor. The
Spartans fled in-shore and moored. When Alcibiades
brought some of his ships ashore, the Spartan comman-
der, Mindarus, also led some of his men ashore, but was
Cyzicus
101

killed in the fighting. The Athenians captured the entire
enemy fleet with the exception of one squadron, set afire
by its fleeing crew. The victorious Alcibiades extorted
large sums of money from Cyzicus to pay his crews, but
sailed off without doing other damage to the recaptured
rebel city.
After passing into the empire of ALEXANDER THE
GREAT (334 B.C.E.), Cyzicus was absorbed into the east
Greek SELEUCID EMPIRE around 300 B.C.E. The city con-
tinued to prosper, enjoying good trade relations with the
Seleucids’ rivals, the kings of nearby PERGAMON. Like
other portions of western Seleucid territory, Cyzicus
came under Roman control around 188 B.C.E.
See also COINAGE.
Further reading: Alfred R. Bellinger, Greek Coins
from the Yale Numismatic Collection. III, A Hoard of Bronze
Coins of Cyzicus (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University
Press, 1952); D. M. Bailey, “A Grave Group from Cyzi-
cus,” Journal of Glass Studies 34 (1992): 27–34.
102
Cyzicus

D
103
Daedalus (Greek: Daidalos)
This mythical Athenian
inventor was regarded as a patron hero of craftsmen.
According to legend, Daedalus invented carpentry and
woodworking, among other skills. But he fled from
ATHENS after murdering his nephew-apprentice, who
showed signs of surpassing him in talent. Traveling to
CRETE, Daedalus constructed a number of fabulous
works, including the mechanical cow in which Queen
Pasiphaë was able to quench her unnatural lust for a bull.
Imprisoned by the enraged king MINOS on account of the
Pasiphaë episode, Daedalus and his son, Ikaros, escaped
by flying away on mechanical wings attached to their
arms. But Ikaros, despite his father’s warning, soared too
close to the Sun, which melted the adhesive wax on his
wings, and plummeted to his death in the AEGEAN SEA.
Ikaros’ fatal flight has often been interpreted as a
metaphor for HUBRIS and overreaching ambition.
Landing in SICILY, Daedalus was protected by the
native king Cocalus. The mighty Minos, arriving in pur-
suit, was murdered at Cocalus’s order. Daedalus stayed in
Sicily and built a number of works.
In real life, the classical Greeks—especially the Sicil-
ian Greeks—ascribed to Daedalus many existing ancient
monuments whose origin they could not otherwise
explain. Supposedly he was the first sculptor to free the
statue’s arms from its sides and show the eyes open.
The Athenians commemorated Daedalus in a DEME
(city ward) named Daidalidai, “the descendants of
Daedalus.” The Athenian philosopher SOCRATES (469–399
B.C.E.), a sculptor or stonecutter by profession, claimed
personal descent from Daedalus—perhaps jokingly or
symbolically.
See also LABYRINTH; SCULPTURE.
Further reading: John Boardman, “Daedalus and
Monumental Sculpture,” Panepistemion Kretes. Peprag-
mena tou D’ Diethnous Kretologikou Synedriou (Irakleion
29 August–3 September 1976) (Athens): 43–47; Sarah P.
Morris, Daidalos and the Origins of Greek Art (Princeton,
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1995).
Damokles (300s B.C.E.) Syracusan courtier during the
reign of the tyrant DIONYSIUS (1).
Damokles praised the luxury and power of a ruler’s life,
until one day Dionysius ordered Damokles to be feasted
at a banquet, underneath a downward-pointing sword,
suspended by a single hair. Various Roman authors,
including Horace and Persius, tell this story; the object
lesson was that a ruler’s life, for all its splendors, is
fraught with worry and fear.
Further reading: L. J. Sanders, Dionysius I of Syracuse
and Greek Tyranny (London: Croom Helm, 1987); Brian
Caven, Dionysius I: War-lord of Sicily (New Haven, Conn.:
Yale University Press, 1990).
Danaids
See DANAUS.
Danaus
In Greek MYTH, Danaus and Aegyptus were
brothers who lived in EGYPT and had 50 children each;
Aegyptus had all boys, Danaus, all girls (the Danaidai,
“daughters of Danaus.”) When the children reached matu-
rity, Aegyptus insisted that his sons marry their cousins,
the Danaids. Danaus refused and fled with his daughters
to the Greek city of ARGOS, where they were received as
suppliants. When the sons of Aegyptus arrived in pursuit,
Danaus—to spare the Argives harm—consented to the 50-

fold marriage. But he secretly instructed his daughters to
murder their husbands on their wedding night. All obeyed
except for Hypermnestra (whose name is translatable as
“excessive wooing” or “special intent”); she spared her
husband, Lynceus, and helped him to escape.
Danaus was enraged to learn of Hypermnestra’s dis-
obedience, but she was acquitted by an Argive law court
following a plea by the love goddess APHRODITE. Lynceus
later returned, killed Danaus, ruled Argos with Hyper-
mnestra, and founded a dynasty of Argive kings. The
other Danaids remarried among the Argives; their descen-
dants were known as the Danaans (Danai), a name that in
the epic poems of HOMER simply means “Greeks.” The
tale of the Danaids was the subject of a trilogy by the
Athenian tragedian AESCHYLUS; one play from this trilogy
survives, the Suppliant Maidens (463 B.C.E.).
According to one story, the 49 guilty Danaids were
punished after death for their outrage to the MARRIAGE
bed. In the Underworld, they are forced forever to fetch
water in leaky jars or sieves.
The odd myth of Danaus possibly presents a dis-
torted reflection of some contact between Egypt and the
Mycenaean Greeks, around 1600–1200 B.C.E.
See also AFTERLIFE; MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION.
Further reading: David Grene and Richmond Latti-
more, eds., Aeschylus II: The Suppliant Maidens; The Per-
sians; Seven Against Thebes; Prometheus Bound, 2d ed.
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991).
Dardanelles
See HELLESPONT.
Darius (1) I (ca. 550–486 B.C.E.) King of PERSIA from
522 to 486 B.C.E.
Darius was known for his soldiering and administrative
abilities. His reign saw hostilities intensify between the
Persian Empire and its relatively weak western neighbors,
the Greeks.
Although not the son of a king, Darius was of Persian
royal blood. Coming to the throne at around age 30, fol-
lowing the death of the childless king Cambyses, Darius
soon advanced the empire’s boundaries. On the north-
western frontier, he subdued several eastern Greek states,
including SAMOS, CHIOS, LESBOS, and BYZANTIUM. He was
the first Persian king to cross into Europe, bridging the
BOSPORUS and the Danube and leading an expedition
against the nomads of western Scythia (ca. 512 B.C.E.).
This expedition failed, but Darius did gain the submis-
sion of THRACE and MACEDON, which brought his
domain right up to the northeastern border of mainland
Greece. The Persian Empire had reached its greatest
extent, stretching (in modern terms) from Pakistan to
Bulgaria and southern EGYPT. It was the largest empire
the world had yet seen.
Darius ruled strictly but wisely. He was the first Per-
sian ruler to mint coins, and he reorganized the empire
into 20 provinces, or “satrapies,” each governed by a
satrap, answerable to the king. (In a future century, this
apparatus would be taken over en bloc by the Macedo-
nian conqueror ALEXANDER THE GREAT.) Darius built a
road system with relay stations for mounted messengers;
this Persian “pony express” became a marvel of the
ancient world. He aggrandized the city of Susa as his cap-
ital and began work on a summer capital at Persepolis.
Darius practiced the Zoroastrian faith, but he enforced
Persian tolerance toward the religions of subject peoples,
such as JEWS and Greeks. One ancient Greek inscription
records Darius’s show of respect for the god APOLLO.
Darius employed Greek subjects as soldiers and
craftsmen; his personal physician was a Greek, Demo-
cedes of CROTON. But in 499 B.C.E. the empire’s Greek
cities erupted in rebellion. This IONIAN REVOLT was
finally crushed by Darius (in 493 B.C.E.), but meanwhile
it had drawn in two free cities of mainland Greece to
fight against Persia: ATHENS and ERETRIA. Angry at these
two cities, Darius sent a seaborne expedition to capture
them. At the ensuing Battle of MARATHON (summer of
490 B.C.E.), the Persians were unexpectedly defeated by
the Athenians.
This distant defeat must have mattered little to the
mighty Darius. When he died, it was his son and succes-
sor, XERXES, who mobilized the full strength of Persia
against mainland Greece.
See also PERSIAN WARS.
Further reading: Jack Martin Balcer, The Persian
Conquest of the Greeks, 545–450 B.C.E. (Konstanz: Univer-
sitätsverlag Konstanz, 1995); Philip De Souza, The Greek
and Persian Wars, 499–386 B.C. (New York: Routledge,
2003).
Darius (2) III
See ALEXANDER THE GREAT.
Dark Age
This term is sometimes used by modern his-
torians to describe the time period from approximately
1100 to 800 B.C.E. on mainland Greece, after the fall of
the MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION. The era is called “dark”
because of its grimness—archaeological evidence creates
a picture of widespread destruction, depopulation, and
impoverishment. The literate and artistic culture of the
Mycenaeans seems to have disappeared, and the popula-
tion shifted from cosmopolitan palace sites into small,
isolated villages. Trade with other civilizations of the
Mediterranean ceased. This period was named in imita-
tion of the Dark Ages of medieval Europe (around
476–1000 C.E.), which similarly saw chaos after the fall
of a dominant civilization, the Roman Empire.
The Greek “Dark Age” also makes reference to mod-
ern ignorance of the events of these years, since the
amount of material culture that survives from this period
is very slight. This fact, however, is gradually starting to
change as archaeologists are beginning to learn more
104
Dardanelles

about the era, and many scholars now prefer to use the
term “Iron Age” to describe this period in Greek history.
See also DORIAN GREEKS; IRON; GREEK LANGUAGE;
LEFKANDI.
Further reading: Vincent Robin d’Arba Desborough,
The Greek Dark Ages (London: Benn, 1972).
death
See AFTERLIFE; FUNERAL CUSTOMS; HADES; PHILOS-
OPHY; RELIGION.
Delian League
This is the modern name for the Athe-
nian-controlled alliance of Greek states, mostly in and
around the AEGEAN SEA, that arose at the end of the PER-
SIAN WARS (ca. 478 B.C.E.) and lasted, with much erosion,
until ATHENS’s defeat in the PELOPONNESIAN WAR (404
B.C.E.). The league—based for its first 25 years at the
sacred island of DELOS—was formed as a mutual-defense
pact against PERSIA, but eventually became the basis for an
Athenian naval empire in the Aegean. The number of
league member states swelled to about 200 by the mid-
400s B.C.E. In exchange for Athenian protection, these
member states paid an annual tribute (although a few
powerful allies, such as SAMOS, CHIOS, and LESBOS, chose
to supply warships instead). The allies’ tribute, paid in TAL-
ENTS of SILVER, was originally used to finance league naval
operations, but later came to be used by the Athenians to
aggrandize and fortify their own city. By the start of the
Peloponnesian War (431 B.C.E.), the Delian League had
become an Athenian weapon against not Persia but SPARTA.
The history of the league is one of Athens’s increas-
ing arrogance and authoritarianism toward its subject
allies. The milestones in this process are (1) the removal
of the league treasury from Delos to Athens (454 B.C.E.);
(2) the Peace of KALLIAS, which formally ended hostilities
with Persia but also ended the league’s logical reason for
existence (449 B.C.E.); (3) the revolt of Samos, which,
although not the first rebellion within the league, came
close to succeeding (440 B.C.E.); and (4) the reassessment
of 425 B.C.E., by which league members had their annual
dues doubled or trebled, as Athens strove to raise funds
for the Peloponnesian War. After the Athenian disaster at
SYRACUSE (413 B.C.E.), many league members revolted
and went over to the Spartan side in the war; among
these rebellious states were Chios, MILETUS, BYZANTIUM,
MYTILENE, EPHESOS, THASOS, and the cities of EUBOEA.
But after the war, Spartan domination proved so loath-
some that many former allies returned to Athens to form
a SECOND ATHENIAN LEAGUE.
Partial lists exist of the Delian League members and
their annual tributes for certain years of the mid-400s
B.C.E. These lists were preserved as inscriptions cut into
marble and set up on the Athenian ACROPOLIS. The state
that paid by far the most tribute was Athens’s old enemy
AEGINA—a crushing 30 talents a year. For other states,
the tribute may have been demanding but not punitive:
ABDERA and Byzantium paid 15 talents each in 457 B.C.E.
(more later, after the reassessment); Paros was paying 16
talents by the mid-400s; AENUS, CYM¯E, and Lampsacus
each paid 12 talents; Miletus and Perinthus, 10. League
membership offered many attractions—and not just
access to the cultural glories of Athens. The league was
based partly on the notion that Athenian-style DEMOC-
RACY was available to the member states, and lower- and
middle-class citizens usually supported league member-
ship. (Sparta, on the other hand, always appealed to the
upper class; “liberation” by Sparta meant local rule by an
OLIGARCHY.)
See also ARISTIDES; EGYPT; KIMON; KLEON; THUCY-
DIDES [2].
Further reading: Russell Meiggs, The Athenian Empire,
2d ed. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1979); P. J. Rhodes, The
Athenian Empire (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1985); Robin
Osborne, ed. The Athenian Empire, 4th ed. (London: Lon-
don Association of Classical Teachers, 2000).
Delium
See PELOPONNESIAN WAR; WARFARE, LAND.
Delos
This island in the AEGEAN SEA is situated in the
center of the CYCLADES group. Inhabited by pre-Greek
peoples in the third millennium B.C.E., Delos was occu-
pied around 1050 B.C.E. by IONIAN GREEKS from the
mainland. As the mythical birthplace of the divine
APOLLO and ARTEMIS, Delos eventually became the sec-
ond-greatest sanctuary of Apollo, after DELPHI. By the
700s B.C.E., Delos was the scene of a yearly Aegean festi-
val in the god’s honor.
The island’s scant two-square-mile area contained
temples and monuments, including a famous artificial
lake with swans and geese sacred to Apollo. Much of
ancient Delos can be seen today, thanks to more than a
century of French ARCHAEOLOGY on the site. One of its
most impressive surviving monuments is the famous
Lion Terrace, with its five surviving marble lions from the
600s B.C.E. Other important ruins on the site include the
Temples of Apollo and Artemis, a theater, Sanctuaries of
the Foreign Gods (including cults of Egyptian and Syrian
divinities), workshops, warehouses, and several residen-
tial buildings from the Hellenistic and Roman periods.
Delos’s sanctity made it politically attractive to vari-
ous Greek rulers. Both the Athenian tyrant PEISISTRATUS
(ca. 543 B.C.E.) and the Samian tyrant POLYCRATES (ca.
525 B.C.E.) held public ceremonies there. In 478 or 477
B.C.E., Delos became the headquarters and treasury of the
DELIAN LEAGUE, the Aegean-Greek alliance organized by
ATHENS against PERSIA. But in 454 B.C.E., amid increased
authoritarianism, the Athenians removed the league trea-
sury from Delos to Athens.
However, Athenian stewardship of Delos continued. In
426 B.C.E., during the PELOPONNESIAN WAR, the Athenian
general NIKIAS conducted ceremonies to resanctify the
Delos
105

island in gratitude for Apollo’s ending of the plague at
Athens. The Athenians built a new temple to the god and
inaugurated a new festival, called the Delia, to be cele-
brated every four years.
After Athens’s defeat in the war (404 B.C.E.) and a
generation of hated Spartan rule, Delos in 387 B.C.E.
became the capital of a new Athenian-led alliance, the so-
called SECOND ATHENIAN LEAGUE. In the late 300s B.C.E.
Delos became the center of another Aegean alliance, the
League of Islanders, most likely established by the Mace-
donian commander ANTIGONUS (1). In the 200s B.C.E.
Macedonian kings were patrons of the island; one of their
gifts was the Stoa of PHILIP V, a colonnade that still is
partly standing today. This friendship with MACEDON
brought Delos into hostility with ROME. After their vic-
tory in the Third Macedonian War (167 B.C.E.), the
Romans handed over Delos to their allies the Athenians,
who colonized the island.
Under Roman-Athenian control, Delos became a
thriving free port. In the 100s B.C.E. it was the notorious
center of the Greek slave trade. Later it dwindled in
importance and was abandoned. Today, the island of
Delos can be reached only by caique (a small boat) from
the island of Mykonos. The passage is often rough, and in
certain weather conditions it will not be made.
See also SLAVES.
Further reading: Petros Themelis, Mykonos—Delos:
Archaeological Guide (Athens: Apollo Editions, 1971);
Nicholas Rauh, The Sacred Bonds of Commerce: Religion,
Economy, and Trade Society at Hellenistic Roman Delos,
166–87 B.C. (Amsterdam: J. C. Gieben, 1993).
Delphi
A sanctuary of the god APOLLO in central
Greece, Delphi was the most influential of all ancient
Greek shrines and contained the most famous of the
Greek world’s oracles, or priestly soothsayers. The Del-
phic oracle was a priestess, the Pythia, who would go
into a trance or seizure to speak Apollo’s answers to
suppliants’ questions. During Delphi’s busy heyday, in
the 500s B.C.E., as many as three Pythias held the office
at once.
Located about 2,000 feet above sea level, Delphi sits
on a southern spur of Mt. Parnassus, north of the central
Corinthian Gulf, in the region once known as PHOCIS.
The name Delphi may commemorate Apollo’s cult title
Delphinios (meaning dolphin or porpoise). The site, ter-
raced into the mountainside, was thought to be the cen-
ter of the world, and one of Delphi’s relics was a carved
“navel stone” (omphalos) symbolizing this geographic
position. Delphi served as a meeting place for the AMPH-
ICTYONIC LEAGUE, a powerful coalition of central Greek
states. Because of its oracle and its sports competition
held every four years, the PYTHIAN GAMES, Delphi
attracted religious pilgrims and other visitors from all
over the Greek world.
Delphi’s buildings were ruined by an earthquake
and scavengers in late antiquity but have been exca-
vated and partly reconstructed by French archaeologists
since the end of the 19th century C.E. They now com-
prise the single most spectacular collection of surviving
Greek monuments.
Long before the first Greek invaders arrived around
2100 B.C.E., Delphi was a holy place of the pre-Greek
inhabitants. Modern ARCHAEOLOGY at Delphi has uncov-
ered traces of these people’s religious sacrifices but do not
reveal what kind of deity was worshipped. Perhaps in
those early days Delphi was the seat of a non-Greek orac-
ular priestess. According to Greek tradition, the shrine’s
original name was Pytho. Greek MYTH tells how the
young Apollo took over Pytho after slaying its protector,
the serpent Python. In the Greek historical era (700s
B.C.E.), a sacred serpent was part of Apollo’s cult there.
Also, a second god, DIONYSUS, was said to inhabit Delphi
during the winter months, when Apollo was absent.
It is not known when the earliest temple to Apollo
was built at Delphi but it is known that the building was
replaced twice during historical times. A stone temple,
dating from the 600s B.C.E., burned down in 548 B.C.E.
and was replaced by an elaborate Doric-style building,
completed in about 510 B.C.E. with the help of the power-
ful Alcmaeonid clan of ATHENS. That structure collapsed
in an earthquake in 373 B.C.E. and was replaced by the
Doric-style, limestone temple that partly survives today.
Amid a clutter of smaller buildings, the grand tem-
ple stood atop its terraced platform in the center of a
walled, rectangular, hillside enclosure. The site’s sec-
ondary structures eventually included colonnades, meet-
ing halls, a theater where the Pythian Games’ musical
and dramatic contests were held, and a dozen or so
“treasuries” (small, elegant stone buildings erected by
various Greek states to hold statuary, relics, and other
precious offerings to the god).
Today the Doric-style Treasury of the Athenians is
the only treasury standing, reconstructed by modern
archaeologists to look as it did in 490 B.C.E., when the
Athenians built it to commemorate their victory over the
Persians at MARATHON. Another important treasury was
built in about 525 B.C.E. by the island of Siphnos;
financed by the island’s GOLD mines, this treasury was
meant to surpass all others in size and beauty. The Delphi
Museum now holds part of the Siphnian treasury’s frieze;
its marble carvings, showing the mythical combat
between gods and GIANTS, supply one of the best surviv-
ing examples of early Greek architectural SCULPTURE.
Within the temple was the holy sanctum where the
Pythia gave Apollo’s prophecies. After a ritual purifica-
tion, a suppliant (males only) could enter the Pythia’s
presence and hand over his written question for the god.
Some suppliants might seek guidance on personal mat-
ters—MARRIAGE, business, and the like—while others
would be representing city governments on questions of
106
Delphi

public importance. The Pythia would go into a trance or
fit (it is possible that she inhaled some sort of narcotic
vapor) and would then deliver the god’s answer in some-
times unintelligible exclamations, which an attending
priest would render into hexameter verse.
The facts behind this soothsaying cannot be fully
explained. Clearly some pious fraud was involved. Like
the medieval Vatican, Delphi was a rich, opportunistic
organization, with widespread eyes and ears. The suppli-
ants tended to be wealthy men, whose dealings and affili-
ations might be well known. The priesthood could learn
about upcoming questions while individual suppliants or
their messengers made the long and public pilgrimage to
Delphi. Nor were the god’s answers often clear; of the 75
Delphic responses that are reliably recorded by ancient
historians or inscriptions, most are either vague, com-
monsensical, or nonsensical.
The most notorious answers, as reported by the his-
torian HERODOTUS, were gloriously ambiguous. When the
Lydian king CROESUS inquired in about 546 B.C.E. if he
should invade Persian territory, the oracle replied that if
he did so a mighty empire would be destroyed. So Croe-
sus invaded—but the empire that fell was his own.
Delphi reached its peak of power early in Greek his-
tory. The shrine became important amid the great move-
ment of overseas Greek COLONIZATION, beginning in the
mid-700s B.C.E. Apollo was the god of colonists, and by
skillful politicking, the priests at Delphi were able to
position “their” Apollo as the official sanction for all
Greek colonizing expeditions. Delphi’s prestige was fur-
ther enhanced around 582 B.C.E., when a reorganization
of the Pythian Games made them into a major event of
the Greek world.
By endorsing TYRANTS such as the Corinthian KYPSE-
LOS (mid-600s B.C.E.), the Delphic oracle attracted gifts
and support from this new class of Greek rulers. Delphi
also won the patronage of non-Greek kings in ASIA
MINOR—including Croesus and the Phrygian MIDAS—
who sought to establish contacts and allies in mainland
Greece.
But Delphi’s eastern contacts brought about its undo-
ing, for when the Persians prepared to invade Greece
shortly before 480 B.C.E. the Delphic oracle advised the
Greeks to surrender. The Delphi priesthood may have
hoped to see their shrine become the capital of Greece
under Persian occupation. Several major Delphic prophe-
cies in these years warned (with only slight equivocation)
that Greek resistance would be futile. But in fact the
Greeks triumphed over the invaders in the PERSIAN WARS
of 490–479 B.C.E. The Delphic priesthood was henceforth
stigmatized for its defeatism as well as for its reputed sus-
ceptibility to bribery.
Nevertheless, Delphi remained politically influential
through the 300s B.C.E. and remained a central religious
shrine for more than 600 years after that, down to the
late Roman Empire. The oracle was shut down around
390 C.E. by order of the Christian Roman emperor Theo-
dosius, in his campaign to eliminate pagan rites through-
out his domain.
The site of Delphi began to be investigated by French
travelers, architects, and archaeologists in the 19th cen-
tury C.E. Intensive excavations began in 1892, revealing
and restoring its spectacular ruins and publishing numer-
ous excavation reports and guidebooks. Today, Delphi is
one of the most popular tourist destinations in Greece (as
it was in antiquity), and most of the finds from the site
are displayed in the local museum.
See also ALCMAEONIDS; CELTS; PHILIP II; PROPHECY
AND DIVINATION; RELIGION.
Further reading: T. Dempsey, The Delphic Oracle: Its
Early History, Influence, and Fall (New York: B. Blom,
1972); Petros Themelis, Delphi: The Archaeological Site
and the Museum (Athens, Ekdotike Athenon, 1983);
Catherine Morgan, Athens and Oracles: The Transforma-
tion of Olympia and Delphi in the Eighth Century B.C.
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 1990); Elena
Partida, The Treasuries at Delphi: An Architectural Study
(Göteborg, Sweden: Paul Aströms Förlag, 2000); Manoles
Andronikos, Delphi, translated by Brian de Jongh, 2d ed.
(Athens: Ekdotike Athenon, 1993).
deme (d¯emos)
This term refers to a village or city ward
constituting part of a larger territory. It usually is used to
describe the political wards of ATTICA (the 1,000-square-
mile territory of ATHENS), as organized by the democratic
reformer KLEISTHENES (1) in 508 B.C.E. The Attic demes
numbered 139 and ranged in type from city neighbor-
hoods to townships to patches of rural area.
The demes were the foundation blocks of the Athe-
nian DEMOCRACY: for example, the 500-man Athenian
COUNCIL drew its members from each deme, in propor-
tion to population. The demes’ headquarters maintained
local census figures, with each male citizen formally
enrolling on his 19th birthday. There were kept deeds of
property and other legal documents and there “town
meetings” were held.
Further reading: C. William Eliot, Coastal Demes of
Attika: A Study of the Policy of Kleisthenes (Toronto: Uni-
versity of Toronto Press, 1962); John Traill, The Political
Organization of Attica: A Study of the Demes, Trittyes, and
Phylai, and Their Representation in the Athenian Council
(Princeton, N.J.: American School of Classical Studies at
Athens, 1975); Robin Barrow, Athenian Democracy, rev.
ed. (London: Bristol Classical Press, 1999).
Demeter
One of the 12 Olympian gods, Demeter was
worshipped as the goddess of grain, agriculture, and fer-
tility. For an agrarian society like ancient Greece, this
divinity was clearly of the utmost importance in daily life
and religion. Unlike many other major Greek goddesses,
Demeter seems to have been purely Greek in origin. Her
Demeter
107

name is Greek: “de-meter” probably means “spelt
mother” (spelt is a type of grain). In MYTH, Demeter bore
a daughter to ZEUS, called Kore (“maiden”). At an early
date, however, Kore seems to have been assimilated into a
more complex, pre-Greek deity called Persephone, who
was the queen of the dead.
Demeter’s primary sanctuary was at the town of Eleu-
sis, located 15 miles northwest of ATHENS in the fertile
Thriasian plain. There, the prestigious and stately
ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES were held in honor of Demeter
and her daughter. This cult, celebrating the goddess’s gift
of grain to mortals, surely arose from Eleusis’s importance
as a center of production for barley and wheat.
The most famous myth about Demeter and Kore-
Persephone tells how the young maiden was abducted by
HADES, the Greek god of death and king of the Under-
world. She was gathering flowers in a meadow when the
earth opened and Hades emerged in his fiery chariot and
carried her below. Frantically seeking her missing daugh-
ter, Demeter neglected her duties and let the earth go bar-
ren and the grain wither. Her search eventually brought
her to Eleusis, where, disguised as an old woman, she
was hospitably received at the home of the local king. In
an attempt to restore fertility to the earth, Zeus decreed
that Kore should return to the upper world. Unfortu-
nately, she had eaten several pomegranate seeds while in
Hades’ realm, so she was partly obligated to remain in the
Underworld. Zeus decided that Kore would henceforth
spend four months of every year below ground as Hades’
wife and the other eight months on earth with her
mother. The myth offers an explanation or allegory for
the unproductivity of the soil during the harsh winter
months, when Demeter mourns her child, as well as the
renewal of the land in the spring, when Kore is restored
to her. At the same time, it “explains” why Eleusis is
Demeter’s cult center.
In some versions of the myth, Demeter’s search is
localized in SICILY—for instance, to light her way by
night she lights two torches at volcanic Mt. Etna. Such
details evidently emerged from the important cult of
Persephone observed by the Sicilian Greeks.
See also FARMING; ORPHISM.
Further reading: Kevin Clinton, Myth and Cult: The
Iconography of the Eleusinian Mysteries (Stockholm: Sven-
ska Institutet i Athen, 1992); Kevin Clinton, “The Sanc-
tuary of Demeter and Kore at Eleusis,” in Greek
Sanctuaries: New Approaches, edited by Nanno Marinatos
and Robin Hägg (London: Routledge, 1993); Helene
Foley, ed., The Homeric Hymn to Demeter: Translation,
Commentary, and Interpretive Essays (Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press, 1994); L. Nixon, “The Cults
of Demeter and Kore,” in Women in Antiquity: New Assess-
ments, edited by R. Hawley and B. Levick (London: Rout-
ledge, 
1995); 
Tamara 
Agha-Jaffar, 
Demeter 
and
Persephone: Lessons from a Myth (Jefferson, N.C.: McFar-
land, 2002).
Demetrius Poliorke-te-s (337–283 B.C.E.) Macedonian-
born soldier and ruler
Brilliant but unstable, Demetrius received the surname
Poliork¯et¯es (the besieger) on account of his spectacular
yet unsuccessful siege of the city of RHODES in 305 B.C.E.
Demetrius’s father, ANTIGONUS (1), served as a gen-
eral under the Macedonian king ALEXANDER THE GREAT
and was his governor in ASIA MINOR. After Alexander’s
death (323 B.C.E.), Antigonus sought to maintain Alexan-
der’s empire against the secessionist claims of the other
DIADOCHI (the successors to Alexander), including KAS-
SANDER, PTOLEMY (1), LYSIMACHUS, and SELEUCUS (1).
Demetrius was positioned for power at age 15, when he
married Phila, the daughter of the Macedonian regent
ANTIPATER. By age 25, Demetrius had become his father’s
field commander and admiral, in this doomed cause of
reuniting the empire.
From Antigonus’s base in central Asia Minor,
Demetrius led his fleets to and fro across the eastern
Mediterranean. In 307 B.C.E. he captured ATHENS, ejected
108
Demetrius Poliorke-te-s
Demeter, goddess of grain and fertility, with her daughter
Persephone or Kore (Alison Frantz Photographic Collection,
American School of Classical Studies at Athens)

Kassander’s governor, and proclaimed that Athens was
free. After nearly 17 years of Cassander’s overlordship,
the Athenians welcomed the conquering Demetrius with
adulation.
Demetrius’s most famous victory came the following
spring, 306 B.C.E., in the sea battle off the Cyprian city of
Salamis. With 108 warships, he totally defeated Ptolemy’s
fleet of 140 (albeit smaller) warships. Ptolemy lost 120
ships and thousands of shipboard mercenaries; he also
lost CYPRUS and command of the sea for the next 20
years. On the basis of this victory, Antigonus proclaimed
himself and Demetrius to be joint kings of Alexander’s
empire. However, in the following year (spring of
304–spring 303 B.C.E.) Demetrius failed in his efforts to
capture Rhodes. Rhodes was an important trading city
and potential naval base for Ptolemy, but Demetrius’s
willful decision to waste a year on the siege when he had
already captured the more important island of CYPRUS
demonstrates his flaws as commander.
Meanwhile Demetrius’s enemy Kassander had recap-
tured central Greece and was besieging Athens. With a
fleet of 330 warships and transports, Demetrius sailed
from Rhodes and rescued Athens a second time, then
defeated Kassander’s army at THERMOPYLAE (304 B.C.E.).
Demetrius spent that winter at Athens, carousing with his
courtesans, whom he installed in the PARTHENON. The
following year he liberated central and southern Greece
from Kassander’s troops. Although he still had Phila as
his wife, he also married Deidameia, sister of the Epirote
king PYRRHUS. These years mark Demetrius and his
father’s peak of power.
Soon, however, their enemies had allied against
them. At the huge Battle of Ipsus, in central Asia Minor
(301 B.C.E.), Antigonus and Demetrius were defeated by
the combined forces of Seleucus and Lysimachus.
Demetrius, leading 10,000 CAVALRY, pressed his attacks
too far forward and was cut off by the enemy’s elephant
brigade, containing 480 beasts. Meanwhile Antigonus
was surrounded and killed. Surviving, Demetrius fled to
EPHESOS and rallied a fleet, but the disastrous defeat had
left him a mere pirate, without a kingdom.
Kassander’s death (297 B.C.E.) and the subsequent
turmoil in MACEDON provided an opportunity to acquire
that country’s throne (to which Demetrius had a claim
through his marriage with Phila). By 294 B.C.E. he was
king of Macedon and by 289 had reestablished his old
control over Greece. Yet the following year he lost this
kingdom also, when his foolhardy scheme to attack
Seleucus in Asia Minor resulted in his army’s desertion.
In 285 B.C.E., the 51-year-old Demetrius was captured in
Asia Minor by Seleucus. Comfortably imprisoned,
Demetrius idly drank himself to death with WINE.
Antigonus II, who was Demetrius’s son by Phila, eventu-
ally left a stable dynasty on the Macedonian throne.
See also WARFARE, NAVAL; WARFARE, SIEGE.
Further reading: Christos Patsavos, The Unification
of the Greeks under Macedonian Hegemony (Athens: C.
Cacoulides, 1965); Edward Newell, The Coinages of
Demetrius Poliorcetes
(Chicago: Obol International,
1978).
democracy
The form of government that we call
democracy (Greek: d¯emokratia, “power by the people”)
was invented at ATHENS in the late 500s and early 400s
B.C.E. “It is called a democracy because it is directed, not
by a privileged few, but by the populace,” explained the
Athenian statesman PERIKLES in his Funeral Oration of
431 B.C.E. (as recounted by the historian THUCYDIDES
(1)). The Athenian democracy was a marvel and inspira-
tion to the Greek world, as it remains today; one reason
for Athens’s successful imperialism in the 400s B.C.E. was
the city’s appeal to the underprivileged classes in Greek
cities governed as old-fashioned oligarchies. It was not
the Athenian army and navy that SPARTA feared so much
as the menace of Athenian-sponsored democracies taking
over the rest of Greece.
Current knowledge of the Athenian democracy
comes partly from literary sources, such as the political
speeches of DEMOSTHENES (1) (mid-300s B.C.E.) and
other orators and the comedies of ARISTOPHANES (late
400s B.C.E.). The most important extant literary source is
a treatise preserved among the works of ARISTOTLE (mid-
300s B.C.E.) titled the Constitution of Athens (Ath¯enaion
Politeia), which briefly describes the different branches of
Athenian government. Filling out this meager picture is
the archaeological evidence, such as several dozen surviv-
ing decrees of the Athenians of this era, preserved as
inscriptions in stone.
Democracy at Athens was forged by the political
reforms of SOLON (ca. 594 B.C.E.) and KLEISTHENES (1)
(508 B.C.E.). The immediate purpose was to assuage the
Athenian middle class, who supplied the backbone of the
HOPLITE army and whose discontent was creating the
threat of civil war and of usurpation by TYRANTS. Simi-
larly, lower-class Athenians benefited politically when
Athens’s need to maintain a large navy made the urban
poor important as naval oarsmen (400s B.C.E.). The losers
in these reforms were members of the traditional Athe-
nian ARISTOCRACY, who had previously monopolized
political office and decision making. Yet by the early 400s
B.C.E. individual aristocrats such as THEMISTOKLES and
Perikles had adapted to the new reality and were holding
power as left-wing champions of the common people.
The sovereign governing body of the Athenian
democracy was the citizens’ ASSEMBLY (ekkl¯esia). This was
open to all 30,000 to 40,000 adult male Athenian citizens
but was usually attended by only about 5,000. (Although
individual WOMEN were classed as citizens or noncitizens,
they had no political voice either way.) The assembly
convened 40 times a year, normally in a natural hillside
democracy
109

auditorium called the Pnyx. There, by public debate and
vote, the people directed foreign policy, revised the laws,
approved or condemned the conduct of public officials,
and made many other state decisions. The assembly’s
agenda was prepared by the 500-member COUNCIL
(boul¯e), which also had important executive duties in
enacting the assembly’s decrees. Councillors were ordi-
nary Athenian citizens of the upper or middle classes,
chosen by lot to serve for one year.
It was essential to the Athenian democracy that its
public officials not have much individual power. There
was no such office as president of Athens. Perikles
enjoyed 20 years of nearly unrivaled influence because he
was the leader of a political party (the left wing) and
because he was able to win the people’s trust. But, in
terms of elected office, Perikles was always just a
strat¯egos—a military general, one of 10 such elected
annually at Athens. Having endured the tyrannies of PEI-
SISTRATUS and HIPPIAS (1) (late 500s B.C.E.), the Atheni-
ans feared that other politicians might try to take over the
government, and the odd procedure known as OSTRACISM
existed as a safeguard against anyone even suspected of
thirsting for supreme power.
Aside from the generalships, Athenian state offices
tended to be narrowly defined. The top civilian jobs were
the nine archonships, which by the mid-400s B.C.E. were
filled by lot, annually, from candidates among the upper
and middle classes. An ARCHON might supervise various
judicial or religious procedures; the most prestigious post
was the archon eponymos, where the officeholder’s per-
sonal name was used to identify the calendar year.
Beneath the archonships were the 400-odd lesser execu-
tive jobs for the day-to-day running of the Athenian state,
such as the commissioners of weights and measures and
the commissioners of highway repair. These posts were
filled by Athenian citizens, normally chosen by lot to
serve for one year with pay. The prominent use of lottery
was part of a radical-democratic theory of government
which held that an honest lottery is more democratic
than an election, because lotteries cannot be unduly
influenced by a candidate’s wealth or personality. How-
ever, elections were used to award certain posts, such as
naval architects, army officers, and liturgists.
A liturgy (leitourgia, “public duty”) was a prestigious
service that a rich Athenian might undertake at his own
expense. The most prominent liturgy was the tri¯erarchia,
whereby a citizen would finance, out of pocket, the main-
tenance of a naval warship for a year. In the mid-300s
B.C.E. 1,200 citizens were recognized as rich enough to be
nominated as trierarchs.
Jury duty was a vital aspect of the democracy. Athe-
nian jury panels had considerable courtroom authority
and discretion (more akin to modern judges than modern
juries), and jurymen were paid reasonably well (although
less than an able-bodied man could earn in a day). Con-
sequently, jury duty was known as a resort of old men
wishing to pass the time profitably. This social pattern is
mocked by Aristophanes in his comedy Wasps (422
B.C.E.). Juries were filled by volunteers—male citizens
over age 30—who were enrolled at the start of the Athe-
nian year.
Jury pay, like the salaries for other government jobs,
presented an important political card for Athenian states-
men in the 400s and 300s B.C.E. By increasing such pay-
ments, left-wing politicians could please the crowd and
genuinely broaden the democracy’s base by making such
jobs more accessible to lower-income citizens. Perikles
introduced jury pay (in about 457 B.C.E.) and his imitator
KLEON increased it (in about 423 B.C.E.).
Democracy at Athens was an expensive proposition.
Classical Athens was an imperial power, enjoying mone-
tary tribute from its DELIAN LEAGUE subject cities as well
as a publicly owned SILVER mine. Such revenues financed
the democracy’s programs and helped prevent power
from being monopolized by the wealthiest citizens.
See also DEME; LAWS AND LAW COURTS; OLIGARCHY;
POLIS.
Further reading: Cynthia Farrar, The Origins of
Democratic Thinking: The Invention of Politics in Classical
Athens (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1987); D.
L. Stockton, The Classical Athenian Democracy (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1990); Donald Kagen, Per-
icles of Athens and the Birth of Democracy (New York:
Maxwell Macmillan International, 1991); M. H. Hansen,
The Athenian Democracy in the Age of Demosthenes: Struc-
ture, Principles, and Ideology (Cambridge, Mass.: B. Black-
well, 1991): Edward Harris, Aeschines and Athenian
Politics (New York: Oxford University Press, 1995); Deb-
orah Boedeker and Kurt A. Raaflaub, eds., Democracy,
Empire, and the Arts in Fifth-Century Athens (Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1998); Nicholas F. Jones,
The Associations of Classical Athens: The Response to
Democracy (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999);
Jon Hesk, Deception and Democracy in Classical Athens
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 2000).
Demokritos (Democritus) (ca. 460–390 B.C.E.) Philoso-
pher of the Greek city of ABDERA
Demokritos was born to a noble, wealthy family, and his
education included instruction in astronomy and theol-
ogy by several Chaldaean scholars who were sent to
Abdera by the Persian king XERXES. When grown, he
traveled around the ancient world (including EGYPT,
Ethiopia, PERSIA, and India), searching for wisdom. He
was particularly interested in Pythagorean teachings, and
he studied under the philosopher LEUCIPPUS.
Demokritos and Leucippus together share the credit
for having developed the concept of material PHILOSOPHY
that is now called the atomic theory. In a remarkable
anticipation of 20th-century physics, the atomists
decided that the basic components of matter are tiny par-
110
Demokritos

ticles, which they called atomoi, “indivisible.” These indi-
visible particles, infinite in shape and number, move in
the void and combine variously; their movements and
changes produce the compounds of the visible world.
Modern scholars are unsure how to apportion credit
for the atomic theory between Leucippus and Demokritos.
It was probably the master’s original idea, expanded and
blended into a theory of ethics by Demokritos. He
believed, for example, that moderation and knowledge can
produce happiness because they protect the soul’s atoms
from turmoil. He argued also that nature, space, and
motion were all infinite and eternal. He discussed laws of
movement caused by impact, distinguishing between pri-
mary and secondary motion, action and reaction.
Demokritos was a prolific author, said to have writ-
ten 70 treatises on subjects such as MATHEMATICS and
MUSIC, as well as physics and ethics. His atomist theory
was published in a book called the Little World-system,
probably written to complement Leucippus’s Big World-
system. (Alternatively, both works may have been written
by Demokritos.) None of Demokritos’s works survives.
Although many fragments are quoted by later authors,
these come mostly from the ethical works, not from the
atomist writings.
Within a century of Demokritos’s death, his ideas
greatly influenced the philosopher Epicurus (ca. 300
B.C.E.), the founder of EPICUREANISM. In later centuries,
Demokritos was sometimes remembered as the “laughing
philosopher,” possibly because of his ethical emphasis on
happiness or cheerfulness (euthymie). The Roman author
Seneca says that Demokritos was constantly laughing to
mock the foolishness of humanity.
See also PYTHAGORAS; SCIENCE.
Further reading: Paul Cartledge, Democritus (New
York: Routledge, 1999); C. C. W. Taylor, trans., The Atom-
ists, Leucippus and Democritus: Fragments (Toronto: Uni-
versity of Toronto Press, 1999).
Demosthenes (1) (384–322 B.C.E.) Greatest of the Athe-
nian orators
Demosthenes is best known for opposing the Macedonian
king PHILIP II’s ambitions in Greece in 351–338 B.C.E.
Although his rallying of his countrymen against Philip
brought defeat for ATHENS and could not save Greece
from subjugation, it also produced the finest surviving
political speeches of the ancient Greek world. Demos-
thenes was not a great statesman; his defiance of Philip
led him to urge foolhardy extremes, and he was badly dis-
tracted by Athenian political infighting. But he was a true
patriot, for which, under Macedonian rule, he eventually
paid with his life.
Demosthenes was born into the well-off middle
class—his name means “strength of the people”—but his
father, who owned an arms-manufacturing business, died
when Demosthenes was seven, and the boy’s brothers dis-
sipated the estate. The young Demosthenes’ first public
speech was directed against his brother Aphobus and an
associate, in a lawsuit over Demosthenes’ withheld inher-
itance. Although skinny, awkward, and dour, Demos-
thenes soon gained prominence as a paid attorney in
private cases, and then began serving as an assistant pros-
ecutor in public trials. He also began speaking in the
Athenian political ASSEMBLY on questions of public
importance.
Alarmed by Philip’s aggressions in the northeast,
Demosthenes in 351 B.C.E. delivered his First Philippic,
urging the Athenians to recapture their old colony of
AMPHIPOLIS from the Macedonians. Demosthenes’ military
advice was not heeded. When Philip besieged the Greek
city of OLYNTHOS, in the CHALCIDIC¯E region (349 B.C.E.),
Demosthenes, in his three speeches called the Olynthiacs,
again urged an Athenian military expedition to save the
town; again the Athenians voted down such an action.
Meanwhile, Demosthenes was embroiled in partisan
conflicts with his Athenian enemies, notably Eubulus and
the orator AESCHINES. Demosthenes and Aeschines had
been amicable partners on an embassy to MACEDON to
make peace with Philip in 346 B.C.E. But after Philip made
a mockery of the peace by immediately marching into cen-
tral Greece, occupying THERMOPLYLAE and taking control
of DELPHI, Demosthenes began his long and bitter feud
with Aeschines, denouncing him as Philip’s paid lackey.
In 340 B.C.E. Demosthenes engineered an Athenian
alliance with the vital northeastern city of BYZANTIUM;
this spurred Philip to declare war on Athens and besiege
Byzantium (unsuccessfully). As Philip led his army south
into Greece in 338 B.C.E. Demosthenes proposed and
established an alliance with THEBES, resulting in an Athe-
nian-Theban army that confronted the Macedonian
advance at CHAIRONEIA, in northern BOEOTIA. The Battle
of Chaironeia, fought in the summer of 338 B.C.E., was a
disastrous Greek defeat. Demosthenes fought on the field
as an Athenian HOPLITE and joined the Athenian retreat;
according to one story, when the fleeing Demosthenes’
cloak got tangled in a bush, he shouted, “Don’t kill me!
I’m Demosthenes!”
After the battle, however, he became the leader of the
moment, organizing Athens’s defense and arranging for
grain imports. Demosthenes was not persecuted by the
Macedonians when they came to terms with Athens, and
he was chosen by the city to deliver the funeral oration
for the Athenians slain at Chaironeia. The Athenians later
awarded him an honorific crown or garland for his state
services, and when Aeschines accused him of improper
conduct in this (330 B.C.E.), Demosthenes won such a
resounding acquittal with his extant defense speech On
the Crown that Aeschines emigrated from Athens in
humiliation. Later, however, Demosthenes was con-
demned for embezzlement and was exiled from the city.
Meanwhile, Philip’s son and successor ALEXANDER THE
GREAT had died at Babylon after conquering the Persian
Demosthenes
111

Empire (323 B.C.E.), and the time looked ripe for a Greek
rebellion against Macedonian rule. Recalled to Athens,
Demosthenes helped organize this revolt, which was
crushed by the Macedonian governor ANTIPATER. Demos-
thenes fled from Athens and committed suicide as Antipa-
ter’s men were closing in. He is said to have died by
drinking the poison that he always carried in a pen.
See also FUNERAL CUSTOMS; LAWS AND LAW COURTS;
RHETORIC.
Further reading: Arthur Wallace Picard-Cambridge,
Demosthenes and the Last Days of Greek Freedom, 384–322
B.C. (New York: AMS Press, 1978); Ian Worthington, ed.,
Demosthenes: Statesman and Orator (New York: Rout-
ledge, 2000); Harvey Yunis, ed., On the Crown/Demos-
thenes (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2001).
Demosthenes (2) (d. 413 B.C.E.) Accomplished Athe-
nian general of the Peloponnesian War
By developing the use of light-armed javelin men in hilly
terrain, Demosthenes made a lasting contribution not only
to the Athenian war effort but to the progress of Greek mil-
itary science. He was the first commander to compensate
for the limited mobility of the heavy-infantry HOPLITE.
Defeated by light-armed skirmishers in the hills of
AETOLIA (426 B.C.E.), Demosthenes took the lesson to
heart in his next campaign that same season, against the
northwestern Greek city of AMBRACIA. With a force of
Athenian hoplites and light-armed local allies, Demos-
thenes destroyed nearly the entire Ambracian army.
In 425 B.C.E. came his greatest triumph: the Battle of
PYLOS and the capture of nearly 200 Spartan hoplites on
the inshore island of Sphacteria. Archers and javelin men
played a crucial role in the final assault. The operation
was commanded by the Athenian politician KLEON who
undoutedly used Demosthenes’ troops and battle plan. By
then Demosthenes was acting as Kleon’s unofficial mili-
tary adviser; after Kleon’s death (422 B.C.E.), Demos-
thenes seems to have fallen into disfavor. He was not
elected to another generalship until 413 B.C.E., when he
was sent to reinforce the Athenian general NIKIAS at the
disastrously stalled Athenian siege of SYRACUSE.
There Demosthenes commanded the rear guard in the
calamitous Athenian retreat. Surrounded, he eventually
surrendered, and was later put to death by the Syracusans.
See also WARFARE, LAND.
Further reading:
Joseph Roisman, The General
Demosthenes and His Use of Military Surprise (Stuttgart,
Germany: F. Steiner, 1993); Donald Kagen, The Pelopon-
nesian War (New York: Viking 2003); J. F. Lazenby, The
Peloponnesian War: A Military Study (London: Routledge,
2004).
Diadochoi
This term, meaning “successors,” refers to
the generals of the Macedonian king ALEXANDER THE
GREAT. After Alexander’s death in 323 B.C.E., they
emerged to lay claim to—and fight over—parts of his vast
empire, which stretched from Greece to the Indus River.
The chaotic campaigns and maneuverings of the
Diadochoi lasted for over 25 years and divided Alexan-
der’s empire permanently into smaller Hellenistic king-
doms whose boundaries were more or less settled by
about 280 B.C.E.
ANTIGONUS (1) and his son DEMETRIUS POLIORKETES
were based in ASIA MINOR and sought to preserve and rule
the entire empire as it had been under Alexander. They
failed in this attempt, but retained power in Asia Minor
and founded the Antigonid Dynasty. PTOLEMY (1) seized
EGYPT and founded his dynasty there. SELEUCUS (1) took
control of areas in the Near East and parts of the old Per-
sian Empire, establishing the powerful Seleucid Dynasty.
KASSANDER claimed MACEDON and Greece, and LYSI-
MACHUS took THRACE. The Macedonian regent ANTIPATER
was active in the early years after Alexander’s death, as the
overlord to Antigonus. In addition, an able commander
named Eumenes posed an early threat but was driven
eastward out of Asia Minor by Antigonus, then was killed.
See also HELLENISTIC AGE.
Further reading: R. M. Errington, “Diodorus Siculus
and the Chronology of the Early Diadochoi, 320–311
B.C.,” Hermes 105 (1977): 478–504; Richard Billows,
Antigonos the One-Eyed and the Creation of the Hellenistic
State (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1990);
Helen Lund, Lysimachus: A Study in Early Hellenistic
Kingship (New York: Routledge, 1992).
dialects
See GREEK LANGUAGE.
Diodorus Siculus (first century B.C.E.) Greek historian
born at Agyrium, in central SICILY
Diodorus the Sicilian (as his surname means) lived in the
first century B.C.E. and wrote a world history, from earliest
times to the end of Julius Caesar’s Gallic Wars (54 B.C.E.).
Much of the work is lost, but books 11–20 survive fully
and provide much information (and some misinforma-
tion) about events in Greek history of the 400s and 300s
B.C.E. While Diodorus sometimes relies on inferior source
material, he provides the best available account for many
events of the 300s, such as the wars of the DIADOCHI.
Further reading: R. M. Errington, “Diodorus Siculus
and the Chronology of the Early Diadochoi, 320–311
B.C.” Hermes 105 (1977): 478–504; Kenneth Sacks,
Diodorus Siculus and the First Century (Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press, 1990); P. McKechnie,
“Diodorus Siculus and Hephaestion’s Pyre,” Classical
Quarterly 45 (1995): 418–432; P. J. Stylianou, A Historical
Commentary on Diodorus Siculus, Book 15 (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1998); C. Rubincam, “Did
Diodorus Siculus Take Over Cross-references from His
Sources?” American Journal of Philology 119 (1998):
67–87.
112
Demosthenes

Diogenes (ca. 400–325 B.C.E.) Best known of the Cynic
philosophers
As an extreme devotee of Cynic simplicity and rejection
of social convention, Diogenes voluntarily lived in a
brutish and immodest manner that supposedly won him
the nickname “the Dog” (Kuon). From this, his followers
became known as Kunikoi, or CYNICS. Diogenes did not,
however, start the Cynic movement; it had been founded
by an Athenian, Antisthenes.
Diogenes was born in the Greek city of SINOPE, on
the southern coast of the BLACK SEA. He learned the
Cynic’s creed upon moving to ATHENS in middle age.
According to one story, he was taught by Antisthenes
himself, after pursuing him relentlessly for instruction.
Living homeless and impoverished, sleeping in pub-
lic colonnades or in an overturned clay storage jar (not
exactly the “bathtub” of legend), Diogenes traveled to
CORINTH and probably to other cities, preaching the
Cynic doctrine of spiritual self-sufficiency. Despite his
avowed apathy to social matters, he seems to have been a
skilled exhibitionist, attracting the attention of passersby
while preaching his sermons. He is said to have walked
the streets with a lit lamp in daylight, remarking that he
was searching for an honest man. Another story claims
that he threw away his only possession, a cup, after
watching a boy scoop up cistern water with his hands.
Supposedly Diogenes also had the scandalous habit of
masturbating in the public places where he lived—a prac-
tice he defended by saying he wished he could satisfy
hunger as easily, by just rubbing his stomach.
According to legend, when the young Macedonian
king ALEXANDER THE GREAT visited Corinth in 335 B.C.E.
he found Diogenes at some public haunt and asked if he
could do anything for Diogenes. “Yes,” replied the sage.
“Move a little, out of my sunlight.” Later the king
declared, “If I were not Alexander, I would be Diogenes.”
(That is, If I did not have my conquests to pursue, I
would emulate Diogenes’ asceticism.)
Further reading: Luis Navia, Classical Cynicism: A
Critical Study
(Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press,
1996); Luis Navia, Diogenes of Sinope: The Man in the Tub
(Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1998).
Diomedes
This mythical Greek hero of ARGOS played a
significant role in the TROJAN WAR. He was the son of the
Calydonian hero Tydeus and the Argive princess Deipyle,
and later became the king of AETOLIA. As a young man,
Diomedes avenged his father’s death at THEBES by helping
to capture the city in the expedition of the Epigoni
(Descendants).
In HOMER’s epic poem the Iliad, Diomedes is repre-
sented as one of the bravest of the Greeks, on a par with
AJAX (1) and ACHILLES. He was a favorite of ATHENA, and
he was said to be not only a superb fighter but also
a good councillor. He engaged in single combat with
HECTOR and AENEAS, and he wounded the goddess
APHRODITE and the war god ARES himself, in two sepa-
rate battles (book 5). Along with ODYSSEUS, Diomedes
made a night raid on the Trojan allies’ camp and killed
the Thracian champion Rhesus (book 10). These two
soldiers also joined together in carrying off the Trojan
statue of Athena known as Palladion, one of the fated
preconditions for the city’s capture. In tales told by later
writers, Diomedes and Odysseus were sometimes said to
have brought the wounded hero PHILOKTETES from the
island of Lemnos.
Diomedes survived the war and returned home to
Argos. According to one version, he found when he
arrived that the goddess Aphrodite had caused his wife,
Aegiale, to be unfaithful. Distressed, he departed Greece
again and sailed to Magna Graecia in ITALY, where he
founded a new city called Argyripa and remarried.
See also SEVEN AGAINST THEBES.
Further reading: D. C. Kurtz, “The Man-Eating
Horses of Diomedes in Poetry and Painting,” Journal of
Hellenic Studies 95 (1975): 171–172; B. Kirigin, “Archae-
ological Evidence for the Cult of Diomedes in the Adri-
atic,” in Studi sulla Grecità di Occidente (Rome: L’Erma di
Bretschneider, 1998), 63–110.
Dionysius (1) (ca. 430–367 B.C.E.) Ruthless and dyna-
mic dictator of the Sicilian Greek city of Syracuse
Dionysius reigned from 405 to 367 B.C.E. Like other Sicil-
ian TYRANTS, he was able to seize supreme power largely
due to the external threat of Carthaginian domination. A
brilliant battlefield commander—he introduced the first
Greek use of siege artillery, in the form of arrow-shooting
giant crossbows—Dionysius confined the expansionist
Carthaginians to the western third of SICILY. Ruling also
over Greek southern ITALY, he was, for a time, master of
the Greek West. He is best remembered for briefly hosting
the Athenian philosopher PLATO at his court (387 B.C.E.).
Dionysius became a promising young soldier-politi-
cian in the democratic Syracuse of the late 400s, and he
married the daughter of the statesman Hermocrates.
Amid renewed Carthaginian attacks on the Sicilian
Greeks, Dionysius was elected to the Syracusan board of
generals (406 B.C.E.). Supplanting his colleagues, he eas-
ily convinced the Syracusan people to vote him supreme
powers, for they were seeking a military savior.
Over the next 15 years Dionysius stymied the
Carthaginian advance in Sicily, while quelling uprisings at
home and subduing many Sicilian Greeks and native
Sicels. He destroyed the Sicilian Greek city of NAXOS (2)
and captured and sacked the Carthaginian stronghold of
Moyta, at Sicily’s western tip, after a famous siege (398
B.C.E.). Twice he beat back the Carthaginians from the
walls of Syracuse. By 390 B.C.E., peace had been made
with the island’s two domains—Carthaginian (west) and
Syracusan (east)—now officially recognized.
Dionysius
113

Dionysius next sought conquest over southern Italy.
Allied with the Italian-Greek city of LOCRIS and the native
Lucanii, he destroyed the Italian-Greek city of RHEGIUM
(in about 387 B.C.E.). But a renewed Carthaginian war in
Sicily brought battlefield defeat and loss of territory.
Dionysius’s cruelty and greed were notorious: He
constantly needed money to finance his campaigns. Yet
he was also a cultured man who wrote tragedies and
owned relics (including a desk and writing tablets) that
had belonged to the great Athenian playwrights AESCHY-
LUS and EURIPIDES. Dionysius’s death at about age 64,
supposedly came from the effects of his carousing after
receiving the news that his play Hector’s Ransom had won
first prize at an Athenian tragedy competition.
He was succeeded by his son Dionysius II, a far less
capable leader.
See also CARTHAGE; THEATER; WARFARE, SIEGE.
Further reading: L. J. Sanders, Dionysius I of Syracuse
and Greek Tyranny (New York: Methuen, 1987); Brian
Caven, Dionysius I: War-Lord of Sicily (New Haven,
Conn.: Yale University Press, 1990).
Dionysius (2) II
See SYRACUSE.
Dionysus
This Greek god was associated with several
different spheres of power. On one hand, he was the god
of wine, agriculture, and earthly fertility. He was also the
patron god of theater. Furthermore, he was a god of mys-
tery cults and religious possession. Like the goddess
DEMETER, the cult of Dionysus was more popular among
the Greek common people than among the aristocrats.
The distinguishing feature of Dionysus was that he
inspired humans to escape from daily life through either
physical intoxication or spiritual frenzy. Worshippers
achieved a divinely motivated ecstasy (ekstasis, “standing
outside oneself”), in which the human personality briefly
vanished, supposedly replaced by the identity of the god
himself.
In MYTH, Dionysus was the son of ZEUS and the The-
ban princess Semele (a daughter of CADMUS). Semele was
pregnant with Zeus’s child when Zeus’s jealous wife,
HERA, approached her in disguise and convinced her to
ask Zeus this favor: that he should visit her in his true
shape. When Semele made this request, Zeus reluctantly
appeared to her as a thunderbolt, which killed Semele but
made her unborn child immortal. Zeus incubated the
fetus in his thigh until it was ready to be born. Hera per-
secuted the child by sending monsters, but the young
Dionysus evaded or survived their torments and was at
last welcomed by the other deities as the 12th god on Mt.
OLYMPUS.
In some form, Dionysus probably existed in Greek
RELIGION by about 1200 B.C.E., since his name seems to
appear on LINEAR B tablets from Mycenaean-era PYLOS.
Many modern scholars, however, think that Dionysus
evolved from the fusion of a local Greek nature divinity
with a more complex god imported from ASIA MINOR or
THRACE. Some ancient Greeks also believed that Diony-
sus came from one of these non-Greek, uncivilized lands.
The god’s name may mean “son of Zeus,” or alternatively
it may mean “god of Nysa” (referring to Mt. Nysa in
Phrygia).
The Greeks sometimes called him Bacchos (the name
later adopted as Bacchus when the Romans borrowed the
god for their religion). Greek myth included many stories
of Dionysus’s human female followers called Bacchae or
MAENADS. These women would leave their homes and
roam the mountains in frenzied bands, dancing and
singing in the god’s honor. EURIPIDES’ tragedy The Bac-
chae (405 B.C.E.) recounts how Dionysus returned to his
mother’s city of THEBES to claim divine worship and dis-
covered that his uncle, the Theban king Pentheus
(“lamenting”), had prohibited the god’s worship and per-
secuted his followers. Incensed, Dionysus retaliated by
inspiring the Theban women to wander the countryside
as Maenads, including Pentheus’s own mother, Agave.
Then, in human disguise, the god convinced the young
king to follow them. The women spied Pentheus in a tree
and, in their intoxicated state thought that he was a wild
animal, so they hunted him down and tore him limb from
limb.
In actual Greek ritual, Dionysian worship and pos-
session was not quite as grotesque. No doubt his follow-
ers got agreeably drunk at festivals honoring Dionysus, as
114
Dionysius
This kantharos, a cup with two high handles, has a mask of
Dionysus, the god of wine, on one side. Such an elaborate cup
with molded masks may have been intended for dedication to
the gods in a temple or a tomb rather than for actual use. (The
J. Paul Getty Museum)

people in more recent centuries have done at country
fairs and on St. Patrick’s Day. There was also symbolic
possession in the wearing of masks. Dionysus had several
annual festivals at ATHENS, the most important one being
the City Dionysia or Greater Dionysia, held in early
spring. At this festival in early times, masked worshippers
would impersonate the god, speaking words in his char-
acter. By the late 500s B.C.E., these rites had developed
into the beginnings of Athenian stage comedy.
The main sites of Dionysus’s worship in Greece were
Athens, BOEOTIA, and the Aegean island of Naxos; all
were important vine-growing regions. As a vegetation
god, Dionysus was associated with all fruit-bearing trees
and with the pine and plane trees. His fertility aspect was
suggested in the unquenchable lust of his attendant crea-
tures, the SATYRS and Silenoi. Sexual relations did not play
a major role in his myths (that was the province of the
goddess APHRODITE), but Dionysus did have one well-
known lover, the Cretan princess Ariadne, whom he car-
ried off from Naxos after she had been abandoned there
by the Athenian hero THESEUS.
Dionysus was a popular subject in Attic vase painting.
At first, in the 500s and 400s B.C.E., he was always por-
trayed as a bearded man. Later representations tended to
show him as a beardless youth or child. He is generally
represented wearing a wreath of grape leaves and, like the
Maenads, he carries a special staff with vines wrapped
around one end, called a thyrsos. He also frequently carries
a drinking cup and sometimes rides regally on a leopard.
For the classical Greeks, Dionysus represented the
irrational aspect of the human soul. The frenzies wrought
by Dionysus were the natural complement to the virtues
of reason and restraint embodied in the god APOLLO.
Symbolically, Dionysus was said to inhabit Apollo’s sanc-
tuary at DELPHI during the latter’s annual winter absence.
During the HELLENISTIC AGE (300–150 B.C.E.), amid the
growing hunger for personal religion, Dionysus was one
of the few Greek deities whose worship produced a mys-
tery cult, offering the hope of a happy AFTERLIFE to its
initiates.
See also LYRIC POETRY; MUSIC; NYMPHS; ORPHISM; THE-
ATER; PRAXITELES.
Further reading: Walter F. Otto, Dionysus: Myth and
Cult, reprint, translated by Robert B. Palmer (Dallas,
Tex.: Spring Publications, 1981, 1986); Alain Daniélou,
Gods of Love and Ecstasy: The Traditions of Shiva and
Dionysus
(Rochester, Vt.: Inner Traditions, 1992);
Andrew Dalby, Bacchus: A Biography (London: British
Museum, 2003).
Dioskouroi
See CASTOR AND POLYDEUCES.
dithyramb
See LYRIC POETRY; THEATER.
divination
See PROPHECY AND DIVINATION.
divorce
See MARRIAGE.
Dodona
This famous sanctuary and oracle of the god
ZEUS is located in a region of northwest Greece called
EPIRUS. Although purely Greek in origin, the sanctuary
was very ancient, and it retained primitive aspects in his-
torical times. It lay mainly out in the open, and its central
feature was an ancient oak tree, sacred to Zeus. In
response to an applicant’s questions, the god spoke in the
oak leaves’ rustlings, which were then interpreted by the
priests; a sacred dove may also have been part of the cult.
HOMER’s epic poem The Iliad (written down around 750
B.C.E.) describes Zeus’s priests at Dodona “sleeping on the
ground, with unwashed feet.” By the time of the historian
HERODOTUS (ca. 435 B.C.E.), three priestesses had some-
how replaced the male priests. These priestesses called
themselves “doves” (peleiades).
Although never as influential as the oracle of the god
APOLLO at DELPHI, Dodona was the religious-political
center of northwest Greece. There is evidence of cult
activity at Dodona as early as the eighth century B.C.E.,
but building activity did not begin on the site until the
300s. The cult reached its peak of popularity in the 200s
B.C.E., and the Epirote king PYRRHUS made it the religious
capital of his domain. It was destroyed by the Aetolians
in 219 B.C.E. but rebuilt almost immediately by the Mace-
donian king PHILIP V. Activity continued then until the
Romans destroyed the site again (167 B.C.E.).
The first archaeological investigation of Dodona took
place by N. Karapanos in 1873–1875, confirming the
location of the sanctuary and uncovering numerous arti-
facts. From 1913 to 1932, some additional excavation
was done by the Greek Archaeological Society. Systematic
excavation began in the 1950s under D. Evangelides and
S. Dakaris, and since 1981 the work has continued under
the auspices of the Archaeological Society, funded by the
University of Ioannina. Conservation and restoration
completed since 1961 have focused particularly on the
beautiful theater and stadium. Other monuments whose
remains are visible at Dodona include the Temple of
Zeus, the council house, and the ACROPOLIS.
See also AETOLIA; PROPHECY AND DIVINATION.
Further reading: H. W. Parke, The Oracles of Zeus:
Dodona, Olympia, Ammon (Oxford: Blackwell, 1967);
Sotirios Dakaris, Archaeological Guide to Dodona, trans-
lated by Elli Kirk-Defterou (Ioannina, Greece: Cultural
Society, 1971); Sotirios Dakaris, Dodona (Congleton,
U.K.: Old Vicarage, 1994).
Dorian Greeks
This term refers to one of the three
main ethnic branches of the ancient Greek people; the
other two were the IONIAN and AEOLIAN GREEKS. Archaeo-
logical evidence, combined with a cautious reading of
Greek MYTH, indicates that Dorian invaders overran main-
land GREECE around 1100–1000 B.C.E., in the last wave of
Dorian Greeks
115

violent, prehistoric Greek immigration. Emerging (proba-
bly) from the northwestern Greek region called EPIRUS,
the Dorians descended southward, battling their fellow
Greeks for possession of desired sites. They bypassed cen-
tral Greece but occupied much of the PELOPONNESE and
the isthmus and Megarid. Taking to ships, the Dorians
then conquered eastward across the southern AEGEAN SEA
and won a small area of southwestern ASIA MINOR. The
Dorian invasion obviously was associated with the col-
lapse of MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION, but recent scholarship
considers the invasion to be an effect, rather than a cause,
of the Mycenaeans’ downfall. Similarly, some historians
have believed that the Dorians’ success was due to their
possession of IRON weapons—superior to the defenders’
BRONZE—but it seems equally likely that all Greeks
acquired iron-forging only after the Dorian conquest.
The word Dorian (Greek: Dorieus) may be related to
the Greek word doru, “spear.” Ancient legend also con-
nected the name of the hero Dorus, son of HELL¯EN. A
small Dorian region called Doris, in the mountains of
central Greece, was erroneously thought to be the peo-
ple’s original homeland.
By the classical era (400s B.C.E.), the important
Dorian states included the Peloponnesian cities of
CORINTH and ARGOS, the Aegean islands of CRETE and
RHODES, and the Asian Greek cities of HALICARNASSUS
and KNIDOS. Farther afield, prosperous Dorian colonies
existed in SICILY (particularly SYRACUSE), in southern
ITALY, and in Libya, at CYRENE (1). But the most impor-
tant Dorian site, and the one that other Dorians looked to
as their protector, was the militaristic city of SPARTA, in
the southeastern Peloponnese.
Dorian states were distinguished by their dialect
(called Doric) and by their peculiar social institutions,
including a tripartite tribal division and the brutal prac-
tice—at Sparta, Crete, Syracuse and elsewhere—of main-
taining an underclass of serfs, or HELOTS. Due largely to
the superior armies of Sparta, the Dorians were consid-
ered the best soldiers in Greece, until the 300s B.C.E. saw
the emergence of non-Dorian BOEOTIA.
Although Dorian cities such as Corinth were at the
forefront of Greek TRADE and culture in the 700s and
600s B.C.E. by the following centuries the Dorians had
acquired the reputation for being crude and violent (at
least in the eyes of the Athenians and other Ionian
Greeks). Ethnic tensions between Dorians and Ionians in
mainland Greece and Sicily reached a bloody crisis in the
PELOPONNESIAN WAR (431–404 B.C.E.). During the HEL-
LENISTIC AGE (300–150 B.C.E.), Syracuse, Rhodes, and
Halicarnassus were among the Dorian states important in
commerce and art.
See also ACRAGAS; AEGINA; CORCYRA; DARK
AGE;
GELA; GREEK LANGUAGE; LOCRI; MEGARA (1); MELOS;
MESSENIA; SICYON; TARAS.
Further reading: Elizabeth M. Craik, The Dorian
Aegean (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1980); Kaz-
imierz Lewartowski, The Decline of the Mycenaean Civi-
lization: An Archaeological Study of Events in the Greek
Mainland
(Wroc ⁄law, Poland: Wydawnictwo Polskiej
Akademii Nauk, 1989); Jonathan M. Hall, Ethnic Identity
in Greek Antiquity (New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1997); Irene S. Lemos, The Protogeometric Aegean:
The Archaeology of the Late Eleventh and Tenth Centuries
B.C. (New York: Oxford University Press, 2002).
Doric dialect
See GREEK LANGUAGE.
Doric order
See ARCHITECTURE.
Doris
See DORIAN GREEKS.
Draco (600s B.C.E.) Athenian statesman who supposedly
gave the city its first written code of law, circa 621 B.C.E.
Draco’s laws were aristocratically biased and egregiously
harsh, involving wide use of the death penalty. One later
thinker remarked that the laws had been written in
blood, not ink. Draco’s severity is commemorated in the
English word “Draconian,” used to describe excessively
harsh law or administration. Within 30 years, Draco’s
code was replaced by that of the great lawgiver SOLON
(ca. 594 B.C.E.)
See also ARISTOCRACY; LAWS AND LAW COURTS.
Further reading: Ronald S. Stroud, Drakon’s Law on
Homicide (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1968);
Michael Gagarin, Drakon and Early Athenian Homicide
Law (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1981);
Alexander Tulin, Dike Phonou: The Right of Prosecution
and Attic Homicide Procedure (Stuttgart, Germany: B. G.
Teubner, 1996); Edwin Carawan, Rhetoric and the Law of
Draco (New York: Oxford University Press, 1998).
drama
See THEATER.
116
Doric dialect

E
117
education
Literacy became widespread at a surpris-
ingly early date in the ancient Greek world. Surviving
public inscriptions and historical anecdotes suggest that,
in the more advanced Greek states, a majority of at least
the male citizens could read and write by around 600
B.C.E.—barely 175 years after the Greeks had first
adapted the Phoenician ALPHABET. The impetus for this
learning was probably not love of literature but the neces-
sity of TRADE—a need that included the middle and
lower-middle classes.
As today, literacy and numeracy were taught to boys
at school. The earliest surviving reference to a school in
the Western world occurs in the history of HERODOTUS
(ca. 435 B.C.E.), in reference to the year 494 B.C.E. on the
Greek island of CHIOS. Similarly, school scenes first appear
on Athenian vase paintings soon after 500 B.C.E. Schools
were private, fee-paid institutions. There were no state-
funded schools at this time and no laws requiring children
to receive education. There were separate schools for girls
(coeducation did not exist), but girls’ schooling was gen-
erally not as widespread or thorough as boys’.
In classical ATHENS (400s–300s B.C.E.), a boy’s
schooling usually began at age seven, and many of the
lower-income students probably left after the three or
four years needed to learn the basic skills. For the rest,
there might be as much as 10 years’ elementary school,
under three types of teachers. The grammatist¯es gave
lessons in reading, WRITING, arithmetic, and literature.
Literary studies emphasized the rote memorization of
passages from revered poets, particularly HOMER and (in
later centuries) the Athenian tragic playwrights of the
400s B.C.E., SPORT comprised the second branch of Greek
education, under a coach (paidotrib¯es). WRESTLING and
gymnastics were among the preferred disciplines. Mili-
taristic states such as SPARTA greatly emphasized sports as
a preparation for soldiering; the rugged art of BOXING was
considered a typically Spartan boy’s sport. Sparta was
unusual in encouraging gymnastics training for girls.
The third teacher, the kitharist¯es, gave instruction in
MUSIC—specifically, in singing and playing the lyre for
the recitation of LYRIC POETRY. This branch of Athenian-
style education may have been less esteemed outside of
Athens. Supposedly, the Macedonian king PHILIP II once
rebuked his young son Alexander after the boy’s musical
performance at a banquet. “Are you not ashamed, my
son, to play the lyre so well?” Philip asked the future
king ALEXANDER THE GREAT (340s B.C.E.).
At age 18 an Athenian male became known as an
ephebos (youth) and began two years of military training;
similar programs existed at other Greek states. That a
rich young man might then resume his studies was a
practice that evolved at Athens in the mid- and late 400s
B.C.E. The pioneers in this practice were the SOPHISTS and
teachers of RHETORIC who came flocking to Athens.
Charging high fees, tutors such as PROTAGORAS of ABDERA
and GORGIAS of Leontini gave lessons in disputation and
public speaking to young men planning to enter public
life. The Athenian philosopher SOCRATES
(469–399
B.C.E.), while not himself a sophist, occupies an impor-
tant place in this evolution, as does the Athenian orator
ISOKRATES (436–338 B.C.E.). Such tutors answered a
growing need at Athens for higher education.
Socrates and the sophists paved the way for the
Western world’s first university—the ACADEMY, estab-
lished by the Athenian philosopher PLATO in an area just
outside the city wall, in around 385 B.C.E. The Academy

was known as a school of PHILOSOPHY, but offered lec-
tures and advanced study in many areas that might not be
associated with philosophy, such as MATHEMATICS. An
even broader range of study was offered at the LYCEUM,
founded at Athens by ARISTOTLE (ca. 335 B.C.E.). Two
other major philosophical schools, of EPICUREANISM and
STOICISM, were established at Athens by about 300 B.C.E.
During the HELLENISTIC AGE (300–150 B.C.E.), education
became even more widespread, leading to great advances
in philosophy, mathematics, medicine, and science. New
centers of higher learning arose around the Mediter-
ranean, at cities such as ALEXANDRIA (1) and PERGAMON,
both of which maintained tremendous libraries.
See also ASTRONOMY; HOMOSEXUALITY; SCIENCE; WOMEN.
Further reading: M. L. Clarke, Higher Education in
the Ancient World (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1971); Robin Barrow, Greek and Roman Education (Bas-
ingstoke, U.K.: Macmillan, 1976); Nigel M. Kennell, The
Gymnasium of Virtue: Education and Culture in Ancient
Sparta (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
1995); Martin D. Carcieri, Democracy and Education in
Classical Athens and the American Founding (New York: P.
Lang, 2002).
Egypt
Located in northeast Africa, Egypt was (and is)
a non-Greek land situated approximately 600 miles
southeast of mainland Greece. Its territory includes
about 700 miles of land along the lower Nile River, with
coastlines along the Mediterranean Sea and the Red Sea.
At the beginning of the Greek era, in the second millen-
nium B.C.E., Egypt was already a magnificent kingdom
that was far more culturally advanced than Greece.
When the MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION of mainland Greece
began to emerge around 1600 B.C.E., it was probably
strongly influenced by the Egyptian Middle and New
Kingdoms. The royal tombs at MYCENAE, for instance,
may have been inspired by the pyramids and graves of
the Egyptian pharaohs. The Greek MYTH of DANAUS and
Aegyptus—among other tales—seems to commemorate
some early Greek-Egyptian contact. The Mycenaeans
would have visited Egypt for TRADE purposes, for service
as hired mercenaries, and/or for pirate raids. It is very
probable that the “Sea Peoples” who ravaged Egypt’s
Mediterranean coast around 1100 B.C.E. included groups
of displaced Mycenaeans fleeing from social collapse in
Greece.
For several centuries in the first millennium B.C.E.,
Greek merchants were banned by the Egyptian pharaohs.
As a result, Egypt never influenced the ripening Archaic
Greek culture of the 700s B.C.E. as strongly as did another
Near Eastern civilization, PHOENICIA. Around 650 B.C.E.,
however, the termination of this policy allowed Greek
traders to set up an emporium in the Nile delta. At this
site, called NAUKRATIS, the Greeks offered SILVER ORE and
SLAVES in exchange for Egyptian grain and luxury goods
such as carved ivory. The Greek poet BACCHYLIDES (ca.
470 B.C.E.) mentions grain ships bringing a fat profit
home from Egypt. The Naukratis trade brought Egyptian
artwork in quantity to Greece, to be imitated by Greek
artists. Egyptian statuary, for example, was extremely
influential for the stylistic development of the famous
Greek kouroi statues in the early and mid-500s B.C.E.
Greek soldiers were always more welcome in Egypt
than merchants, and by 600 B.C.E., pharaohs were hiring
Greek HOPLITE mercenaries to fight in their wars. One
piece of evidence for this phenomenon is a graffito
scratched onto a colossal statue at Abu Simbel, 700 miles
up the Nile, by a Greek soldier in about 591 B.C.E.
Egypt was conquered by the Persian king Cambyses
in 525 B.C.E. As a Persian subject state, Egypt contributed
warships and crews in the PERSIAN WARS against Greece.
In 460 B.C.E., a Greek invasion force—120 ships of the
Athenian-led DELIAN LEAGUE—sailed into the Nile to
attack the city of Memphis, held by a Persian garrison.
The invasion was destroyed by the Persians in 455 B.C.E.,
and Egypt remained securely under Persian control for
another 120 years.
In 332 B.C.E., the Macedonian king ALEXANDER THE
GREAT captured Egypt as part of his conquest of the Per-
sian Empire. On Egypt’s Mediterranean coast, Alexander
founded a city destined to be one of the greatest of the
ancient world, ALEXANDRIA (1).
When Alexander died, one of his successors, a Mace-
donian general named PTOLEMY (1), took control of
Egypt and founded a dynasty there. With its brilliant cap-
ital at Alexandria, Ptolemaic Egypt became the wealthiest
and most important kingdom in the HELLENISTIC AGE
(300–150 B.C.E.). Culture thrived, attracting philosophers
and poets from all over the Mediterranean. The Ptolemies
adopted the apparatus of the pharaohs and modernized
it, creating an immense, efficient civil service for drawing
taxes from the Egyptian peasantry who worked the fertile
Nile valley.
In foreign affairs, another of the Hellenistic king-
doms soon emerged as the enemy of Ptolemaic Egypt: the
Syrian-based SELEUCID EMPIRE. Between 274 and 168
B.C.E., these two kingdoms fought the six Syrian Wars,
disputing their common boundary in the Levant. The
Ptolemies continued to rule Egypt until the Roman con-
quest of 30 B.C.E. The last Ptolemaic ruler was the famous
Cleopatra VII.
See 
also
BLACK
PEOPLES;
DIADOCHOI; 
GOLD;
HERODOTUS; PTOLEMY (2) II; SCULPTURE; WARFARE, LAND;
WARFARE, NAVAL.
Further reading: Shelley Wachsmann, Aegeans in the
Theban Tombs (Leuven: Peeters, 1987); Jaromir Málek,
Egyptian Art (London: Phaidon, 1999); Sally-Ann Ash-
ton, Ptolemaic Royal Sculpture from Egypt: The Interaction
between Greek and Egyptian Traditions (Oxford: Archaeo-
press, 2001).
118
Egypt

ekklesia
See ASSEMBLY.
Elea
See PARMENIDES.
Electra (Elektra)
In MYTH, Electra was a daughter of
King 
AGAMEMNON
of 
MYCENAE
and 
his 
queen,
KLYTEMNESTRA. Not mentioned by HOMER, her first
known literary appearance comes in STESICHORUS’s poem,
The Oresteia (ca. 590 B.C.E.). In Classical Athenian
tragedy, she appears as a main character in the story—
retold by each of the three great tragedians—of how her
brother ORESTES avenged Agamemnon’s murder by slay-
ing Klytemnestra and her lover, Aegisthus.
In AESCHYLUS’s play The Libation Bearers (458 B.C.E.),
Electra welcomes Orestes and supports his scheme to kill
their hated mother and Aegisthus. In SOPHOKLES’ Electra
(ca. 418–410 B.C.E.), she acts similarly and is the primary
focus of the play. In EURIPIDES’ Electra (ca. 417 B.C.E.),
however, she appears obsessively hateful and jealous of
her mother, who has denied Electra the chance to marry,
thereby punning on her name: alektron (“without mar-
riage”). In this version, Electra wields an ax and actually
helps Orestes to kill Klytemnestra (offstage), then goes
wild with guilt. Euripides’ treatment of Electra’s character
provides one of the best extant examples of that play-
wright’s innovative interest in psychology and the plight
of WOMEN in Greek society.
Further reading: Friedrich Solmsen, Electra and
Orestes: Three Recognitions in Greek Tragedy (Amsterdam:
Noord-Hollandsche U.M., 1967); Leona MacLeod, Dolos
and Dike in Sophokles’ Elektra (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J.
Brill, 2001).
elegy
See LYRIC POETRY.
elephants
Although elephants were not native to
Greece, elephant ivory was used for carving as early as
the late Bronze Age (ca. 1400 B.C.E.). The raw material
was imported from Syria, Egypt, and/or North Africa. The
animal itself is first mentioned in Greek sources by
Herodotus, writing in the fifth century B.C.E., although
the historian does not appear to have ever seen one him-
self. Slightly later, in the late fifth and early fourth cen-
turies 
B.C.E.,
Ctesias wrote extensively about the
elephants he saw in Persia and India while he was court
physician for the Persian king Artaxerxes II. The fourth
century B.C.E. scholar Aristotle was also familiar with ele-
phants and describes them in several passages.
Hannibal of Carthage is famous for having used ele-
phants successfully in battle against the Romans during
the Punic Wars. In fact, there were precedents for Hanni-
bal’s actions in the military tactics of ancient Greece.
Alexander the Great encountered elephants in battle sev-
eral times. The first instance occurred in 331, when he
fought the Persian king Darius at Gaugamela, although
the animals do not appear to have taken part in the fight-
ing at this battle, and Alexander does not seem to have
been fazed by them. He encountered them several more
times during his subsequent conquest of India and needed
to devise new strategies for these encounters, since his
horses would not willingly face the Indian elephants. Dur-
ing the Indian conquest, Alexander received numerous
elephants as tribute for his victories and began to use
them for hauling heavy equipment and possibly even in
the front lines of subsequent battles. Coins minted under
Alexander frequently feature elephants, and some show
the conqueror wearing an elephant-skin helmet instead of
his customary Herakles-like lion’s skin. After Alexander’s
death, his successors fought fiercely over his territory, and
historians tell us that elephants were featured in several of
these battles. At the Battle of Ipsus (301 B.C.E.), for exam-
ple, the 480 elephants of King SELEUCUS (1) helped to
destroy his enemy, ANTIGONUS (1).
The Greeks acquired their elephants from India as
well as from Africa. Typically ridden by a handler and an
archer or javelin man, the war elephant provided a kind
of live “tank.” Deployed usually to screen the PHALANX
and charge ahead, elephants were effective mainly as
weapons of terror, to scare horses and soldiers not accus-
tomed to them.
In 280 B.C.E., King Pyrrhus of Epirus used 20 ele-
phants in his war against the Romans. At first, this strat-
egy was successful because few Italians had seen the huge
animals before, and they tended to panic at the sight. The
elephants could be used to frighten the horses of the
Roman cavalry and send them into a stampede. By 275
B.C.E., the Roman warriors had learned that they could
defeat Pyrrhus and his troops by wounding the elephants
with their spears, causing them to run around in pain and
to trample their own men. The use of these unmaneuver-
able beasts diminished by the mid-200s B.C.E. By that
time many commanders had learned to deflect their
charges with arrow or javelin volleys or to let them pass
harmlessly through by having the troops open corridors
in their path.
Further reading: H. H. Scullard, The Elephant in the
Greek and Roman World (London: Thames and Hudson,
1974).
Eleusinian Mysteries
This important Athenian reli-
gious cult in honor of the grain goddess DEMETER was
observed at the town of Eleusis (which lies 15 miles
northwest of ATHENS, in the region’s main wheat- and
barley-growing plain). The cult was given the title “Mys-
teries” (must¯eriai, from must¯es, “an initiate”) because of
its secretive nature. Only those who had been formally
initiated could participate, and details of the rites (which
seem to have been harmless enough) were forbidden to
be revealed publicly. The Eleusinian Mysteries were a rare
form of worship in classical Greece (mid-400s B.C.E.),
Eleusinian Mysteries
119

where city-states emphasized public cults; later, however,
in the HELLENISTIC AGE (300–150 B.C.E.), mystery reli-
gions began to proliferate.
The cult was run by the Athenian state and was offi-
ciated by two noble families of Eleusis: the Eumolpidae
and the Kerykes. Despite the emphasis on secrecy, the
requirements for initiation were lenient: Anyone of Greek
speech and without blood guilt was eligible to join. This
inclusion of SLAVES and WOMEN is remarkable. The initi-
ate’s oath of secrecy was taken seriously; no knowledge-
able ancient writer has left us a description of the rites,
and in the 400s B.C.E. such prominent men as the play-
wright AESCHYLUS and the politician ALCIBIADES were
investigated or prosecuted for supposedly revealing the
mysteries. Clearly the initiates’ conduct was thought to
affect the goddess Demeter’s goodwill and the all-impor-
tant fertility of the grainfields.
The “bible” of the mysteries was the central myth of
Demeter. According to legend, the death god HADES stole
away Demeter’s daughter Kor¯e (also called PERSEPHONE).
Demeter searched the world for her, letting the fields go
barren in her grief; and the god ZEUS restored order by
allowing Kor¯e-Persephone to remain with her mother for
eight months out of every year.
The mysteries probably reenacted this story every
spring, as a kind of pageant, with dance and incantation.
At the climactic, secret, nocturnal ceremony in Demeter’s
temple, the priest would hold up an ear of grain amid
reverent silence. The “doctrine” of the mysteries was
probably very simple: thanksgiving for Demeter’s gift to
the living and the hope that she and her daughter Perse-
phone would take further care of the initiates’ souls in
the Underworld. This hope of a happy AFTERLIFE became
a cornerstone of later mystery cults.
See also DEMETER; ORPHISM.
Further reading: Robert F. Healey, Eleusinian Sacri-
fices in the Athenian Law Code (New York: Garland,
1990); Kevin Clinton, Myth and Cult: The Iconography of
the Eleusinian Mysteries: The Martin P. Nilsson Lectures on
Greek Religion, Delivered 19–21 November 1990 at the
Swedish Institute at Athens (Stockholm: Svenska Institutet
i Athen, 1992); Maureen B. Cavanaugh, Eleusis and
Athens: Documents in Finance, Religion, and Politics in the
Fifth Century B.C. (Atlanta, Ga.: Scholars Press, 1996);
Margaret M. Miles, The City Eleusinion (Princeton, N.J.:
American School of Classical Studies, 1998).
Eleusis
See ATTICA; ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES.
Elis
In about 471 B.C.E., the inhabitants of this plain in
the western PELOPONNESE established a city, also called
Elis, as their political center. The Eleans had charge of
the highly important OLYMPIC GAMES, the sports-and-reli-
gious festival held every four years in honor of the god
ZEUS. The actual site of the games was the sanctuary and
sports complex known as OLYMPIA. Since Olympia lay
closer to the city of Pisa than to the city of Elis, there was
intermittent strife between Elis and Pisa for control.
Formidable soldiers, the Eleans remained staunch
allies of SPARTA until 420 B.C.E., when events led them to
make alliances with Sparta’s enemies ATHENS and ARGOS,
in the PELOPONNESIAN WAR. Later, still an enemy of
Sparta, Elis made an alliance with ARCADIA (369 B.C.E.).
In the 200s B.C.E. it was an enemy of Arcadia and a mem-
ber of the Aetolian League.
See also AETOLIA; PHEIDON.
Further reading: N. B. Crowther, “Elis and the
Games,” L’Antiquité classique 57 (1988): 301–310; J. Roy,
“The Perioikoi of Elis,” in The Polis as an Urban Centre
and as a Political Community, Symposium August 29–31,
1996, edited by Mogens Herman Hansen (Copenhagen:
Munksgaard, 1997), 282–320; Nicholas F. Yalouris,
120
Eleusis
Demeter, the goddess of agriculture, sits on a rock; her
daughter Kore stands behind her holding the key to the 
temple. These deities were worshipped by the cult Eleusinian
Mysteries in hopes of a better afterlife. (The J. Paul Getty
Museum)

Ancient Elis: Cradle of the Olympic Games (Athens: Adam
Editions, 1996); J. Roy, “Thucydides 5, 49, 1–50, 4. The
Quarrel Between Elis and Sparta in 420 B.C. and Elis’
Exploitation of Olympia,” Klio 80 (1998): 360–368; N.
Yalouris, “The Cultural and Intellectual Dimension of
Ancient Elis and Olympia,” in Homère chez Calvin, edited
by Pierre Lipschutz (Geneva: Droz, 2000), 435–443.
Empedokles (ca. 495–430 B.C.E.) Influential early
philosopher
Empedokles was born to an aristocratic family of the
Sicilian Greek city of ACRAGAS. As a thinker, poet, states-
man, and physician he became a semilegendary figure
among his contemporaries. He is plausibly said to have
helped establish DEMOCRACY at Acragas after the expul-
sion of the reigning tyrant, in about 472 B.C.E., and he
supposedly declined a public offer of kingship. He is said
to have later been exiled from Acragas. He was an
admired orator, who reportedly tutored the greatest
Greek orator of the next generation, GORGIAS of Leontini.
His philosophy, partly inspired by the Italian-based
Greek philosophical schools of PARMENIDES and PYTHA-
GORAS, was presented in two epic poems in hexameter
verse, On Nature and Purifications; he is said to have
recited the latter at the OLYMPIC GAMES. About 450 verses
of these poems (approximately one-tenth of their com-
bined total) survive today as quotations in works by later
writers. The poems’ ideas had a profound effect on subse-
quent thinkers, including ARISTOTLE.
On Nature introduced the concept, later fundamental
to Aristotle’s physics, that all matter derives from four
elements: air, water, fire, and earth. These elements are
eternal and unchanging; apparent creation and destruc-
tion in the world merely indicates the ceaseless reorgani-
zations of these four elements into new ratios. Love
(Philia) and Strife (Neikos) are cosmic forces seeking to
unify and divide, respectively. Empedokles’ theory of ele-
ments has been interpreted as a correction of Parmenides’
belief that ultimate reality is unified and immobile. Here
Empedokles probably helped inspire the elemental theo-
ries of the early “atomists,” DEMOCRITUS and LEUCIPPUS.
The Purifications was concerned with humankind’s
Original Sin and restoration—ideas that had already been
developed in the mystic ORPHISM of Acragantine aristo-
cratic circles. Empedokles apparently identified the pri-
mal sin as the first shedding of blood and eating of meat.
Tainted by this ancestral pollution, the individual human
soul must be purified through a series of incarnations,
bringing the soul through the round of elements to a
renewed state of bliss. In the Purifications’ most famous
verse, Empedokles declares, “Already I have been a boy
and a girl, a bush and a bird, and speechless fish in the
sea.” The Orphic-derived notion of the soul’s transmigra-
tion was also a feature of Pythagorean belief, taught at
certain Greek cities of nearby southern ITALY. While not a
Pythagorean himself, Empedokles was clearly influenced
by such teachings.
See also AFTERLIFE; MEDICINE; SCIENCE.
Further reading: Raymond A. Prier, Archaic Logic:
Symbol and Structure in Heraclitus, Parmenides, and Empe-
docles (The Hague: Mouton, 1976); Peter Kingsley,
Ancient Philosophy, Mystery, and Magic: Empedocles and
Pythagorean Tradition (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1995).
Epaminondas (Greek: Epameinondas) (ca. 410–362
B.C.E.) Brilliant Theban statesman and general
Epaminondas engineered the rise of THEBES as the fore-
most Greek city, in defiance of SPARTA. He destroyed the
legend of Spartan military invincibility and ended Sparta’s
domination of Greece that had lasted for 35 years since
Sparta’s victory in the PELOPONNESIAN WAR.
Epaminondas became involved in Thebes’s public
affairs in 379 B.C.E., from which time onward he became
the city’s primary statesman. His main interest was in
having Thebes control the other cities of BOEOTIA, and he
did this by engaging in war with the seemingly omnipo-
tent Spartans. As an elected commander in 371 B.C.E.,
Epaminondas quarreled with the Spartan king AGESILAOS
at a peace conference. The resulting Spartan invasion of
Theban territory, however, ended in an unexpected The-
ban triumph, due to Epaminondas’s brilliant strategy at
the Battle of LEUKTRA.
After this victory, the Thebans began to assert them-
selves further against powerful Spartan dominance of
mainland Greece. Marching into the PELOPONNESE in the
winter of 370–369 B.C.E., Epaminondas liberated ARCA-
DIA from Spartan overlordship and (then or later) estab-
lished his “big city,” Megalopolis, to be the center of an
Arcadian league.
Soon afterward, Epaminondas entered the Spartan-
ruled region of MESSENIA, where he founded another city,
Messene, to be a political center against Sparta. The Theban
liberation of Messenia had a devastating effect on Sparta,
which had traditionally relied for subsistence on Messenian
grain, grown by the Messenian serfs known as HELOTS.
Epaminondas’s later exploits included further inva-
sions of the Peloponnese and a naval expedition against
the Athenians. In 362 B.C.E. he again led an army into the
Peloponnese, to oppose a Spartan threat against Arcadia.
Although the Battle of MANTINEIA was another Theban
victory, Epaminondas died there from wounds. He was
the greatest leader to emerge in the tumultuous half cen-
tury between the end of the Peloponnesian War (404
B.C.E.) and the rise of MACEDON (350s B.C.E.).
See also WARFARE, LAND.
Further reading: Victor Davis Hanson, The Soul of
Battle: From Ancient Times to the Present Day, How Three
Great Liberators Vanquished Tyranny (New York: Anchor
Books, 2001).
Epaminondas
121

Ephesos
This Greek city of IONIA, on the central west
coast of ASIA MINOR, was known for its TRADE and its
elaborate cult of the goddess ARTEMIS. Founded around
1050 B.C.E. by IONIAN GREEKS from mainland Greece,
Ephesos lay at the mouth of the Cayster River, at a site
that commanded the coastal farming plain, the riverine
route inland, and the sea passage to the nearby Greek
island of SAMOS.
Ephesos was one of the Greek world’s foremost cities
during the Ionian heyday of the 600s and 500s B.C.E.
Although never a great seagoing power like its neighbor
and trade rival MILETUS, Ephesos thrived as a terminus
for caravans from the Asian interior and as an artisan
center; its ivory carving was famous. In the mid-600s
B.C.E. Ephesos withstood attack by a nomadic people, the
Kimmerians, who had swept westward through Asia
Minor. Patriotic resistance was urged in verses by the
Ephesian poet CALLINUS (whose surviving fragments are
among the earliest extant Greek LYRIC POETRY). But Eph-
esos’s most famous resident was the early Greek philoso-
pher HERAKLEITOS (ca. 500 B.C.E.).
Around 600 B.C.E. the city’s oligarchic government
gave way to a line of TYRANTS. This regime, however, was
relatively short-lived and ended in the mid-500s B.C.E.
when, along with the rest of Ionia, Ephesos fell to the
Lydian king CROESUS. Soon thereafter, the city was again
conquered by an outside force, this time the Persian king
CYRUS (1).
The city fared better than other Ionian cities under
the Persians. Although it joined in the ill-fated IONIAN
REVOLT of 499 B.C.E., it apparently made a timely surren-
der and avoided the worst retaliations, while the Persians’
sack of Miletus in 494 B.C.E. removed Ephesos’s main
rival. In 479 B.C.E. Ephesos was liberated, along with the
rest of Ionia, by the mainland Greeks.
Ephesos then became part of the Athenian-controlled
DELIAN LEAGUE (478 B.C.E.), but joined the general
Delian revolt against ATHENS toward the end of the PELO-
PONNESIAN WAR (in 411 B.C.E.). As an important Spartan
naval base, Ephesos served the commander LYSANDER in
his defeat of an Athenian fleet at the nearby Battle of
Notion (406 B.C.E.), and after the war Ephesos continued
as a Spartan base for sea operations against PERSIA. But
with the KING’S PEACE of 386 B.C.E., Ephesos and all
other Asian Greek cities passed back to Persian rule, until
they were again liberated in 334 B.C.E., by ALEXANDER
THE GREAT.
The city then embarked on its second era of great-
ness. Rebuilt at a new site by the Macedonian dynast
LYSIMACHUS around 294 B.C.E., Ephesos became an empo-
rium of the HELLENISTIC AGE, rivaled only by ALEXANDRIA
(1) and ANTIOCH. Ephesos passed into the influence of
the Seleucid kings in the mid-200s B.C.E., then to the
kingdom of PERGAMON and, finally, in 133 B.C.E., to
ROME. In Roman times it continued to be a great city of
the East. One of the most important features of Ephesos
was its cult of Artemis, which had originated in the 700s
B.C.E. and lasted through the Roman period. The image of
the goddess known from dozens of Roman-era copies is
very different from typical Greek representations of
Artemis as the virgin huntress. The Artemis of Ephesos
stands very rigidly upright and her dress is covered with
many round objects, often described as female breasts but
more recently thought to be bulls’ testicles (in any event,
symbols of fertility).
The earliest cult structure at Ephesos consisted of a
marble platform and altar, constructed in the early sixth
century B.C.E. In about 560 B.C.E., under one of the
tyrants, a magnificent new temple was begun, later con-
sidered one of the SEVEN WONDERS OF THE WORLD. This
temple, known as the Artemision, was the largest Greek
building of its day, measuring 358 feet in length and 171
feet in width. It was designed by two prominent Cretan
architects, Chersiphron and Metagenes. Apparently not
completed until about 430 B.C.E., it was burned down in
356 B.C.E. by an arsonist who wanted his deed to be
remembered forever.
The Ephesians soon rebuilt the Artemision, involving
several of the best Greek sculptors of the day in its design
and decoration. This second temple was burnt by the
Goths in 263 C.E. and later completely destroyed by the
Christians.
Archaeological research at Ephesos was begun in
1863 by an English architect, John Turtle Wood, who was
looking for the site of the famous Artemision. He discov-
ered its marble platform finally in 1869. Investigations by
the Austrians began in 1895 and have continued to the
present day, only interrupted by the two world wars.
Today, excavation is combined with programs of conser-
vation and restoration to further enrich visitors’ under-
standing of the site; approximately 2 million tourists
walk among the ruins each year.
Further reading: Recep Meriç, Ephesus: Archaeologi-
cal Guide (Izmir, Turkey: Ticaret Matbaacilik, 1971); S.
Erdemgil, et al., The Terrace Houses in Ephesus (Istanbul:
Hitit Color, 1987); Ephesus Museum Catalogue (Istanbul:
Hitit Color, 1989); Sabahattin Türkoglu, The Story of Eph-
esus, translated by Bahar Atlamaz (Istanbul: Arkeoloji ve
Sanat Yayinlari, 1995); Peter Scherrer, ed., Ephesus: The
New Guide (Istanbul: Ege Yayinlari, 2000).
Ephialtes (b. ca. 500 B.C.E.) Left-wing Athenian states-
man and mentor of PERIKLES
Born into a humble family, Ephialtes arose in the 460s
B.C.E. as the democratic leader against the conservative
party of KIMON; in this, he was the political heir of
THEMISTOKLES.
In 462 B.C.E., taking advantage of Kimon’s recent dis-
grace, Ephialtes and Perikles proposed stripping the pow-
ers and jurisdictions from the conservative law court
122
Ephesos

known as the AREOPAGOS. The proposals were passed, but
within a year Ephialtes was dead—probably murdered by
political reactionaries. The mantle of leadership of the left
wing passed to Perikles.
See also DEMOCRACY.
Further reading: D. W. Roller, “Who Murdered
Ephialtes?” Historia 38 (1989): 257–266; L. A. Jones,
“The Role of Ephialtes in the Rise of Athenian Democ-
racy,” Classical Antiquity 6 (1987): 53–76; L. G. Hall,
“Ephialtes, the Areopagos, and the Thirty,” Classical Quar-
terly 40 (1990): 319–328; E. G. Bloedow, “Pericles and
Ephialtes in the Reforms of 462 B.C.,” Scholia 1 (1992):
85–101; J. L. Marr, “Ephialtes the Moderate?” Greece and
Rome 40 (1993): 11–19; James L. O’Neil, The Origins and
Development of Ancient Greek Democracy (Lanham, Md.:
Rowman & Littlefield, 1995); T. E. Rihill, “Democracy
Denied. Why Ephialtes Attacked the Areiopagus,” Journal
of Hellenic Studies
115 (1995): 87–98; Anthony J.
Podlecki, Perikles and His Circle (London: Routledge,
1998); H. F. Mueller, “Ephialtes Accusator. A Case Study
in Anecdotal History and Ideology,” Athenaeum 87 (1999):
425–445.
ephor
The title of an annually elected chief official at
SPARTA and other Dorian Greek states. This term suggests
“one who watches over.” The Spartan ephors, who num-
bered five by the 400s B.C.E., served as an important
counterweight to the two Spartan kings. The ephors over-
saw the kings’ administration and personal conduct; they
could summon the kings to their presence or prosecute
them. Two ephors always accompanied a king on cam-
paign (a sign of the Spartan fear of the corrupting outside
world). Every month ephors and kings exchanged oaths
to observe each other’s authority.
See also CHILON; LYKOURGOS (1).
Further reading: P. A. Rohe, “The Selection of
Ephors at Sparta,” Historia 29 (1980): 385–401; P. J.
Rhodes, “The Selection of Ephors at Sparta,” Historia 30
(1981): 498–502; Michael Whitby, Sparta (Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press, 2002).
epic poetry
The earliest and greatest works of extant
Greek literature are the two long narrative poems titled
the Iliad and Odyssey, ascribed to the poet HOMER.
Employing dactylic hexameter verse and a distinctive,
elevated vocabulary, the Iliad and Odyssey typify the
Greek literary genre called epik¯e (from epos, “word”).
Today most scholars recognize that the Iliad and
Odyssey—written down around 750 B.C.E., soon after the
invention of the Greek ALPHABET—represent the final
stage in a prior tradition of unwritten verse composition,
stretching back some 500 years to the second millennium
B.C.E. This unwritten poetry-making is today known as
oral composition. The foremost geographic region for this
poetic tradition was the eastern Greek area called IONIA.
In preliterate cultures, poetry serves a mnemonic
purpose: The rhyme and rhythm of a poem or song make
the words easier to remember. Many preliterate societies
have used poetry (in unwritten forms) for the memoriza-
tion and recital of legends and folktales. In the early
Greek world, oral poetry typically recounted tales from
Greek MYTH—tales of olden-day heroes and their interac-
tions with the gods.
These stories were preserved and retold by a profes-
sional class of bards or minstrels known as aoidoi or rhap-
soidoi (rhapsodes, “song-stitchers”). The skill of these
bards lay in their knowledge of the vast mythological
material and in their ability to select and shape episodes
for public recitation. This oral poetry was sung or recited
in the flowing rhythm of dactylic hexameter. (Greek
poetry did not employ rhyme; the GREEK LANGUAGE had
too many natural rhymes for this to be considered beauti-
ful.) An idea of the bard’s function is communicated in
book 8 of the Odyssey, where the blind minstrel Demod-
ocus recites to his own accompaniment on the lyre at a
royal feast. The technique by which a bard might draw on
familiar subject matter while composing individual lines
spontaneously from a mental trove of formulaic expres-
sions has been illuminated in modern times by Milman
Parry’s studies of oral composition in Serbia and Croatia
in the 1930s C.E.
The second well-known Greek epic poet is HESIOD
(ca. 700 B.C.E.). The rural, middle-class Hesiod was an
individualist in the art: In his Works and Days he fitted
the epic verse form to a most unusual content, a moraliz-
ing farming calendar.
But the main epic tradition is exemplified by Homer’s
poems of aristocratic war and voyaging. We know that,
by about 550 B.C.E., there existed about 10 other epic
poems—written down after the Iliad and Odyssey, shorter
than they, and probably inspired by them. Known collec-
tively as the epic cycle (epikos kuklos), these poems taken
together recounted a loose mythical world history from
the Creation to the aftermath of the TROJAN WAR. Among
the non-Homeric epics were the Oedipodia, the Thebaïd,
and the Epigoni, recounting the tragic history of the rul-
ing house of the city of THEBES (including the tales of
OEDIPUS and of the SEVEN AGAINST THEBES). But most of
the epic cycle described episodes of the Trojan War not
recounted in Homer; these poems included the Cypria,
Little Iliad, Destruction of Troy, and Homecomings.
Today the non-Homeric epics exist only in frag-
ments quoted by later writers. But many of the legends
that they described have been preserved for us—in Athe-
nian stage tragedy (400s B.C.E.), in the prose works of
ancient scholars, and in such later epics as the Roman
Ovid’s Metamorphoses.
By the mid-500s B.C.E., epic composition had died
out in favor of newer forms, such as LYRIC POETRY and
then THEATER. Epic was revived in a more self-conscious,
epic poetry
123

literary form in the mid-200s B.C.E. by the Alexandrian
poet APOLLONIUS. The Alexandrian epic tradition strongly
affected Roman literature, culminating in the Roman poet
Vergil’s patriotic masterpiece, the Aeneid (ca. 20 B.C.E.).
See also ACHILLES; JASON (1); MUSIC; ODYSSEUS.
Further reading: G. B. Nussbaum, Homer’s Metre: A
Practical Guide for Reading Greek Hexameter Poetry (Bris-
tol, U.K.: Bristol Classical Press, 1986); Chet A. Van
Duzer, Duality and Structure in the Iliad and the Odyssey
(New York: P. Lang, 1996); Barbara Graziosi, Inventing
Homer: The Early Reception of Epic (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2002).
Epicureanism
This influential Greek philosophical
school of the HELLENISTIC AGE (300–150 B.C.E.) and after
was founded by Epicurus. Born at SAMOS to an Athenian
father in about 341 B.C.E., Epicurus (Greek: Epikouros)
resided at ATHENS from the late 300s B.C.E. until his death
in 270 B.C.E. There he and his followers lived in privacy
and simplicity on his property (a house and garden),
where he taught pupils. The fact that these pupils
included SLAVES and WOMEN is a sign of Epicurus’s inno-
vative and liberal outlook, by ancient Greek standards.
His doctrine of Epicureanism was a daring intellec-
tual breakthrough. For the Epicureans, the purpose of life
was pleasure (h¯edon¯e), as derived from a simple, even
ascetic, mode of existence. Pursuits that brought pain, ill
health, frustration, anxiety, or unending desire were not
considered appropriate pleasures. Since the chief cause of
pain is unsatisfied desire, Epicureans were taught to limit
their desires rather than seeking to satisfy each one. The
ideal state of the soul is freedom from agitation
(ataraxia); this can be achieved through temperance and
study. Teaching his followers to renounce political ambi-
tion, with its cares and corruptions, Epicurus went boldly
against the traditional grain of the Greek city-state and
anticipated the more personal, individualistic values of
Hellenistic society.
On the metaphysical side, Epicureanism relied on the
atomist theory of DEMOKRITOS and LEUCIPPUS. Epicurus
concluded that, because the human soul is composed of
atoms like the body, these atoms must disperse at the per-
son’s death. In other words, the soul dies with the body.
And thus there is no such thing as an AFTERLIFE. It was
this revolutionary idea that led to much criticism of Epi-
cureanism by religious circles in the ancient world.
Also offensive to religious thinkers was the Epi-
curean idea that the gods, although they exist, are com-
pletely detached from human events. Like good
Epicureans themselves, the gods live in contentment and
self-restraint. Humans should revere them, but not hope
for favors or fear their anger.
Although it remained overshadowed by the rival
school of STOICISM, Epicureanism did influence later
thinkers, such as the Roman poets Lucretius and Horace
(who lived more than 200 years after Epicurus). Ironically,
because Epicurus’s own voluminous writings have been
lost to us, scholars have relied largely on Lucretius’s philo-
sophical epic poem De Rerum Natura (On the Nature of
Things) in order to reconstruct the tenets of Epicureanism.
Epicureanism suffered from “bad press” through the
centuries, insofar as its beliefs flatly contradicted both
ARISTOTLE and Christianity. The Epicurean doctrine of
pleasure has been misunderstood as vulgar hedonism,
and this is reflected in our modern English word epicure,
meaning someone with well developed tastes in food,
wine, and the like.
Further reading: Elizabeth Asmis, Epicurus’ Scientific
Method (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1984);
Richard Hibler, Happiness Through Tranquility: The School
of Epicurus (Lanham, Md.: University Press of America,
1984); Robert Strozier, Epicurus and Hellenistic Philosophy
(Lanham, Md.: University Press of America, 1985); R. W.
Sharples, Stoics, Epicureans, and Sceptics: An Introduction
to Hellenistic Philosophy (London: Routledge, 1996);
Diskin Clay, Paradosis and Survival: Three Chapters in the
History of Epicurean Philosophy (Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press, 1998); Dane R. Gordon and David B.
Suits, eds., Epicurus: His Continuing Influence and Contem-
porary Relevance (Rochester, N.Y.: RIT Cary Graphic Arts
Press, 2003); Norman Lillegard, On Epicurus (Belmont,
Calif.: Wadsworth/Thompson Learning, 2003).
Epicurus
See EPICUREANISM.
Epidamnos
This Greek city is located on the eastern
Adriatic shore, at the site of modern-day Durazzo in
Albania. Founded in the late 600s B.C.E. by colonists from
CORCYRA and CORINTH, Epidamnos occupied an isthmus
beside a harbor in the non-Greek region known as
ILLYRIS. The city was ideally located as an anchorage on
the coastal route to ITALY and as a depot for TRADE with
the Illyrians. Prosperity eventually brought class warfare,
however, as Epidamnus’s middle class rose up against
their aristocratic rulers.
By 435 B.C.E. the citizens had established a DEMOC-
RACY and expelled the aristocrats, who in turn besieged
the city. The democrats appealed to Corinth for help. But
nearby Corcyra sent out its powerful navy, which cap-
tured Epidamnos for the aristocrats and also defeated the
Corinthian fleet at the sea battle of Leukimme (435
B.C.E.), fought off of Corcyra island. This conflict
between Corinth and Corcyra was an important cause in
igniting the PELOPONNESIAN WAR (431–404 B.C.E.).
Epidamnos itself remained remote from the great
events of the 400s and 300s B.C.E. Eventually known by a
new name, Dyrrhachium, the city passed to King
PYRRHUS of EPIRUS (ca. 280 B.C.E.) and thereafter into the
expanding empire of ROME.
See also ARISTOCRACY.
124
Epicureanism

Further reading: S. C. Bakhuizen, “Between Illyrians
and Greeks. The Cities of Epidamnus and Apollonia,”
Iliria 16, no. 1, (1986): 165–177.
Epidaurus
This city in the northeastern Peloponnese,
facing the Saronic Gulf, was famous in antiquity for its
sanctuary of the physician hero-god ASKLEPIOS. The cult
was established as early as the sixth century B.C.E., but its
peak popularity was reached in the fourth and third cen-
turies B.C.E. A great temple of Asklepios was built in the
300s B.C.E. as the center of a large complex devoted to
healing and worship. Inside the temple was a huge GOLD-
and-ivory statue of the god, shown seated with two of his
emblems: a staff in one hand and a serpent under the
other. The site also included a GYMNASIUM, baths, hostels,
lesser shrines, and a magnificent THEATER for dramatic
presentations.
As the focus of pilgrimages by invalids seeking cures
from the hero-god, Epidaurus combined aspects of a
modern spa with those of medieval healing shrines. Sup-
pliants would spend the night in a dormitory associated
with the temple, and there (supposedly) they would be
visited by the god in a dream. This process, known as
incubation, is attested in many surviving inscriptions of
the ancient Greek world. The next morning, the priests of
Asklepios would give the worshipper specific medical
advice, including regimens to be followed in the nearby
facilities.
In modern times, large numbers of tourists con-
stantly visit Epidaurus to view the ruins of the sanctuary,
particularly, the magnificent and well-preserved theater.
Built in two stages, during the late 300s B.C.E. and the
mid-100s B.C.E., this building was already praised in the
second century C.E. by the Roman traveler Pausanias.
Today, the theater is the venue for a festival of modern
theatrical performances every summer.
Systematic archaeological excavation of Epidaurus
was begun in 1879 by the Greek Archaeological Society,
under the direction of P. Kavvadias. Work on the sanctu-
ary took place in several phases: 1879–1926, 1942–1943,
1948–1951, and 1974–present. Since 1985, significant
conservation and restoration efforts have been under-
taken.
See also MEDICINE; PELOPONNESIAN WAR.
Further reading: Alison Burford, The Greek Temple
Builders at Epidauros; A Social and Economic Study of
Building in the Asklepian Sanctuary, during the Fourth and
Early Third Centuries B.C. (Toronto: University of Toronto
Press, 1969); Theodore Papadakis, Epidauros: The Sanctu-
ary of Asclepios, 5th ed. (Munich: Verlas Schnell &
Steiner, 1976): R. A. Tomlinson, Epidauros (Austin: Uni-
versity of Texas Press, 1983); S. E. Iakovidis, Mycenae-
Epidaurus, Argos-Tiryns-Nauplion: A Complete Guide to the
Museums and Archaeological Sites of the Argolid, translated
by Kay Cicellis (Athens: Ekdotike Athenon, 1990); Lynn
LiDonnici, The Epidaurian Miracle Inscriptions: Text,
Translation, and Commentary (Atlanta, Ga.: Scholars
Press, 1995).
Epirus (Greek: epeiros, “the mainland”)
This north-
west region of mainland Greece is bordered on the west
by the Adriatic Sea and on the east by the Pindus moun-
tain range. Epirus was a humid and forested region,
inhabited by 14 tribes or clans, some of Dorian-Greek
descent and others of non-Greek, Illyrian blood. The rul-
ing clan, the Molossians, claimed to be descended from
the hero NEOPTOLEMOS.
Epirus contained two primitive but important reli-
gious sanctuaries: the ancient oracle of ZEUS at DODONA;
and an oracle of the dead, situated along the River
Acheron, where an entrance to the Underworld was
believed to be.
A political backwater for most of Greek history,
Epirus came into prominence briefly under its dynamic
Molossian king PYRRHUS (319–272 B.C.E.), who made
AMBRACIA his capital. Later Epirus sided with MACEDON
against the encroaching Romans. After the Roman victory
in the Third Macedonian War (167 B.C.E.), Epirus passed
to Roman rule.
See also AFTERLIFE; DORIAN GREEKS; ROME.
Further reading: N. G. L. Hammond, Epirus: The
Geography, the Ancient Remains, the History and Topogra-
phy of Epirus and Adjacent Areas (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1967); Arthur Foss, Epirus (London: Faber, 1978);
T. J. Papadopoulos, “Tombs and Burial Customs in Late
Bronze Age Epirus,” Aegeum 1 (1987): 137–142; M. B.
Sakellariou, ed., Epirus 4000 Years of Greek History and
Civilization (Athens: Ekdotike Athenon, 1997); N. G. L.
Hammond, “The Ethne in Epirus and Upper Macedonia,”
Annual of the British School of Athens 95 (2000): 345–352;
James Wiseman and Konstantinos Zachos, eds., Landscape
Archaeology in Southern Epirus, Greece I (Princeton, N.J.:
American School of Classical Studies at Athens, 2003).
Erechtheion
See ACROPOLIS; ARCHITECTURE; ATHENA.
Eretria
This city is located on the large island of
EUBOEA, in east-central Greece. Located midway along
the island’s west coast, Eretria was established around
800 B.C.E., apparently by Ionian-Greek refugees from the
nearby site now called LEFKANDI. Eretria allied itself with
its important neighbor, CHALCIS, and together these cities
were among the most prominent in the Greek world dur-
ing the early era of TRADE and COLONIZATION (ca. mid-
800s to mid-600s B.C.E.). The Eretrians and Chalcidians
set up trading depots on the coasts of Syria and ITALY, and
founded the first Greek colonies in Italy and SICILY. Later
these two cities warred over the fertile Lelantine plain,
which lay between them; Eretria seems to have fared
somewhat the worse in this LELANTINE WAR (around
Eretria
125

720–680 B.C.E.), and soon both Euboean cities had been
surpassed by CORINTH and ATHENS.
In 499 B.C.E. the Eretrians sent five warships to aid
the Greek IONIAN REVOLT against Persian rule in ASIA
MINOR. This tiny expedition bore disastrous fruit in 490
B.C.E., when a Persian seaborne army captured the city
and burned it in retaliation. After the PERSIAN WARS
(490–479 B.C.E.), Eretria was forced to join the Athenian-
run DELIAN LEAGUE. With the rest of Euboea, Eretria
revolted from Athens unsuccessfully in 446 B.C.E. and
successfully in 411 B.C.E. Chafing under Spartan domina-
tion, Eretria joined the SECOND ATHENIAN LEAGUE (377
B.C.E.) but again revolted (349 B.C.E.). Along with the rest
of Euboea, Eretria came under control of the Macedonian
king PHILIP II in 338 B.C.E. With the rest of Greece, Ere-
tria passed to Roman control in the mid-100s B.C.E.
See also AL MINA; CATANA; CHALCIDIC¯E; CUMAE;
IONIAN GREEKS; MARATHON; NAXOS (2); PITHECUSAE;
ZANCL¯E.
Further reading: Efi Sapouna Sakellaraki, Eretria:
Site and Museum, translated by David Hardy (Athens:
Ministry of Culture, Archaeological Receipts Fund,
1995); N. Toogood, “Athens Aids Eretria: A State’s Juris-
diction over Its Citizens’ Actions,” Classical Quarterly
47 (1997): 295–297; N. G. L. Hammond, “Eretria’s
Colonies in the Area of the Thermaic Gulf,” Annual of
the British School at Athens 93 (1998): 383–399; Keith
Walker, Archaic Eretria: A Political and Social History
from the Earliest Times to 490 B.C. (London: Routledge,
2004).
Erinna (ca. 600 B.C.E.) Female poet who probably lived
on the Greek island of Telos, near the coast of southwestern
ASIA MINOR
Erinna was a friend of SAPPHO and was best known for
her 300-line poem called The Distaff, which was com-
posed in memory of a young woman or girl who had
died unmarried. Only four lines survive, written in
Erinna’s native Doric dialect; these fragments present a
touching picture of the dead girl’s sweet personality and
unfulfilled life. Like her character, Erinna later died
unmarried, at the young age of 19. Our knowledge of her
life comes from a passage by Eustathius, who is unsure
whether the poet came from Telos, Teos, LESBOS, or
RHODES. He also says that the ancient Greeks “thought
her verses rivaled those of Homer.” Since so little is
known of Erinna’s life, its details remain unclear and
controversial; some modern scholars believe that she was
not Sappho’s contemporary but that she lived in the 300s
B.C.E. instead.
Further reading: Diane J. Rayor, Sappho’s Lyre:
Archaic Lyric and Women Poets of Ancient Greece (Berke-
ley: University of California Press, 1991).
Erinyes
See FURIES.
Eros Greek god of love
Eros is often described as the son of the love goddess
APHRODITE. While Aphrodite personified a universal sex-
ual principle, Eros represented more the romantic feelings
that one has for a specific person.
Eros arrived relatively late in Greek religion; he does
not appear in the epic poems of HOMER (written down
around 750 B.C.E.). There, the word eros is simply a com-
mon noun denoting sexual desire. The god first appears
in literature in HESIOD’s epic poem, The Theogony (ca.
700 B.C.E.), where he is described as the most beautiful
of the gods. He is said to have been born from Chaos,
along with the goddess Earth, and is an attendant of
Aphrodite.
Later versions of Greek MYTH make Eros the son of
Aphrodite by either ARES or HERMES, and he is conceived
of as a thoughtless, mischievous child with golden wings.
He appears as such, for example, in the lyric poems of
ANACREON (ca. 520 B.C.E.). His attributes, the bow and
piercing arrows, were first mentioned, as far as we know,
by the Athenian playwright EURIPIDES (ca. 430 B.C.E.).
Eros’s frequent companions included Anteros (god of
mutual love), Pothos (longing), Himeros (desire), Peitho
(persuasion), the MUSES, and the Graces.
As a god of male beauty or of fertility, Eros had cults
in BOEOTIA and at ATHENS; his most important site of
worship was at Thespiae in Boeotia. His cult image there
was an ancient, unworked stone, and every fifth year the
Boeotians held a festival, the Erotia, in his honor. The
love story of Eros and Psyche (soul) was a philosophical
allegory that arose in the 300s B.C.E.
Borrowed by the Romans, Eros became the Roman
god Cupid (Latin cupido, meaning “desire”).
Further reading: James Gollnick, Love and the Soul:
Psychological Interpretations of the Eros and Psyche Myth
(Waterloo, Ontario: Wilfrid Laurier University Press,
1992); Anne Carson, Eros the Bittersweet (Normal, Ill.:
Dalkey Archive Press, 1998); Paul Ludwig, Eros and Polis:
Desire and Community in Greek Political Theory (New
York: Cambridge University Press, 2002); Sonia Cavicchi-
oli, The Tale of Cupid and Psyche: An Illustrated History
(New York: George Braziller, 2002).
Eteocles
See SEVEN AGAINST THEBES.
Ethiopia
See BLACK PEOPLES.
Etruscans
This powerful non-Greek people occupied
the region of northwest ITALY now known as Tuscany. By
the 700s B.C.E. they controlled a domain extending south
to Campania, on the Bay of Naples. When the first Greek
traders began arriving at the Campanian coast after 775
B.C.E., it was probably the Etruscans, as overlords of the
region, who invited the newcomers to make a permanent
colony at CUMAE.
126
Erinna

The Etruscans’ significance for Greek history is
twofold: (1) as avid consumers of Greek goods, they pro-
vided an important overseas market for the Greeks in the
700s–500s B.C.E.; and (2) having imbibed Greek material
culture and RELIGION, they then transmitted aspects of
this to their non-Etruscans subject cities, including the
Latin town of ROME. The Etruscans were a crucial early
link between the Greek and Roman worlds.
The Greeks called the Etruscans Tursenoi and
believed, perhaps rightly, that they had emigrated from
ASIA MINOR. The Etruscans were able seafarers, with a rep-
utation for piracy. Their craving for Greek goods has been
proven by ARCHAEOLOGY. Excavations in Tuscany since the
early 1800s C.E. have unearthed vast troves of Corinthian
POTTERY. This surviving pottery is a clear sign of a much-
larger TRADE in goods that have not survived, such as tex-
tiles, metalwork, and WINE. The importance of this foreign
market for CORINTH can be seen in the systematic found-
ing of Corinthian western colonies—CORCYRA, AMBRACIA,
and others (mid-700s to 600 B.C.E.)—to serve as anchor-
ages on the coastal route to Italy. Later (500s B.C.E.) the
Athenians dominated this market—as evidenced from
archaeological finds of Athenian black- and red-figure pot-
tery in Italy. What the Etruscans may have supplied in
exchange was raw metal: tin (for BRONZE-making), lead,
and SILVER.
The Etruscan culture was extremely rich and is
becoming increasingly illuminated by modern scholars as
new research is done into this fascinating civilization.
Most of our knowledge about Etruscan religious beliefs
comes from excavation of their elaborate tombs, created
(like the Egyptian pyramids) to serve as homes for the
soul in the AFTERLIFE. They had an extensive pantheon,
and many of their deities eventually became associated
with similar Greek gods and goddesses. The Etruscans
believed strongly in predestination and divine will; spe-
cial priests were trained as Augurs to interpret signs and
omens for the general public.
The alphabet is another aspect of the Etruscan civi-
lization that was strongly influenced by the Greeks.
Through interactions with the Greek colonists at Cumae
and at PITHECUSAE in the early and mid-700s B.C.E., the
Etruscans adopted and adapted Greek letters to create
their own writing system. The earliest complete Etruscan
inscription appears on a proto-Corinthian vase found at
Tarquinia, dated to about 700 B.C.E. Earlier than this,
however, are some spindle whorls that have been discov-
ered, marked with the single letter alpha, which date to
about 720–710 B.C.E. It appears, therefore, that the trans-
mission of the alphabet from the Greek colonists to the
Etruscan educated classes probably occurred around 725
B.C.E., and the new style of communication spread
rapidly around Italy. Most Etruscan inscriptions are writ-
ten from right to left, and there is little or no punctua-
tion. Writing seems to have been used primarily for
dedications, proprietary inscriptions, economic transac-
tions, and funerary epitaphs; there may also have been
extensive Etruscan literature, but none has survived.
Eventually the Etruscans came into conflict with
their proliferating Greek guests. In alliance with the
Carthaginians, the Etruscans defeated the Phocaean
Greeks in a naval campaign near Corsica (around 545
B.C.E.). Soon, however, they suffered defeats on land from
the Greek leader Aristodemus of Cumae (524–505
B.C.E.). In 474 B.C.E. the Etruscans lost their claim to
Campania forever, when they were defeated in a sea battle
off Cumae, at the hands of the Syracusan tyrant HIERON
(1). The Etruscans continued as a power in their north-
ern home region for another 200 years but were finally
absorbed by their former subjects, the Romans.
See also CARTHAGE.
Further reading: Mario Torelli, Etruria, 2d ed. (Rome:
Laterza, 1982); Larissa Bonfante, ed., Etruscan Life and
Afterlife: A Handbook of Etruscan Studies (Detroit: Wayne
State University Press, 1986): Anette Rathje, The Etruscans:
700 Years of History and Culture, translated by Judith Green
(Rome: Edizioni daga, 1989); Paula Kay Lazrus, Discover-
ing the Etruscans (Rome: L’Erma di Bretschneider, 1990);
Nigel Spivey and Simon Stoddart, Etruscan Italy (London:
Batsford, 1990); Ellen Macnamara, The Etruscans (London:
British Museum Publications, 1990; Gösta Säflund, Etr-
uscan Imagery: Symbol and Meaning, translated by Peter
Fraser (Göteborg, Sweden: P. Astroms Forlag, 1993);
Sybille Haynes, Etruscan Civilization: A Cultural History
(Los Angeles: J. Paul Getty Museum, 2000).
Euboea
This large inshore Greek island, nearly 100
miles long, runs parallel to the east coast of central
Greece, alongside the regions of LOCRIS, BOEOTIA, and
ATTICA. Euboea lies closest to the mainland at a narrow
channel called the Euripus. There lay the most important
Euboean city, CHALCIS. Close to Chalcis in locale and
importance was ERETRIA; the other significant town was
Karystos, on the island’s southern coast.
The island’s name means something like “rich in cat-
tle.” It emerged from the DARK AGE around 900 B.C.E. as an
Ionian-Greek region. Chalcis and Eretria soon became the
two foremost cities of early Greece, both in TRADE and in
COLONIZATION. Eventually, however, the two cities fought
for possession of the fertile Lelantine plain, which
stretched between them; this LELANTINE WAR (ca. 720–680
B.C.E.) was remembered as the first major conflict in Greek
history. Later the island was a target of Athenian expan-
sionism, as ATHENS and Chalcis became enemies. The
Athenians defeated the Chalcidians and seized part of the
Lelantine plain for Athenian colonists (506 B.C.E.).
During the PERSIAN WARS, the Persians landed an
expedition on Euboea and destroyed Eretria (490 B.C.E.);
in 480 B.C.E. the Euboeans supplied crews and warships
against the invaders, and the major sea battle of ARTEMI-
SION was fought off the northwestern tip of Euboea. After
Euboea
127

the war the Euboean cities were coerced into joining the
Athenian-controlled DELIAN LEAGUE, from which the
whole island unsuccessfully revolted in 446 B.C.E. The
Athenian reconquest of Euboea was personally led by
PERIKLES, who installed Athenian garrison colonies. How-
ever, a successful revolt followed amid Athens’s decline
during the PELOPONNESIAN WAR (411 B.C.E.).
In about 377 B.C.E., after chafing under Spartan dom-
ination, the Euboean cities joined the SECOND ATHENIAN
LEAGUE, but revolted again, in 349 B.C.E. After 338 B.C.E.
the island was under control of the Macedonian king
PHILIP II, who garrisoned Chalcis as one of his strategic
holds on the Greek mainland. Thereafter Euboea
remained in Macedonian hands until 196 B.C.E. Eventu-
ally it became part of the Roman province of Macedonia
(146 B.C.E.).
See also GREECE, GEOGRAPHY OF.
Further reading: Rosalinde Kearsley, The Pendent
Semi-circle Skyphos: A Study of Its Development and
Chronology and an Examination of It as Evidence for
Euboean Activity at Al Mina (London: University of Lon-
don, Institute of Classical Studies, 1989); Sara Wheeler,
An Island Apart: Travels in Evia (London: Abacus, 1993);
Doniert Evely, Irene S. Lemos, and Elizabeth Susan Sher-
ratt, Minotaur and Centaur: Studies in the Archaeology of
Crete and Euboea Presented to Mervyn Popham (Oxford:
Tempus Reparatum, 1996); D. Vanhove, Roman Marble
Quarries in Southern Euboea and the Associated Road Sys-
tems (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 1996).
Eubulus
See AESCHINES.
Euclid (Eukleides)
See MATHEMATICS.
Eumenes (1)
See DIADOCHOI.
Eumenes (2)
See PERGAMON.
Eumenides
See EURIPIDES; FURIES.
Euphorion (b. 276 B.C.E.) Poet and scholar of the HEL-
LENISTIC AGE
Born at CHALCIS, in EUBOEA, Euphorion wrote epic
poems and epigrams, typically short pieces on mythologi-
cal subjects. Although little of his work survives today, it
was influential and admired in the Graeco-Roman world,
and it inspired Roman poets such as Catullus and his cir-
cle (ca. 60 B.C.E.) and Vergil (ca. 30 B.C.E.). He was also
one of the favorite authors of the Roman emperor
Tiberius in the first century C.E.
Some of Euphorion’s compositions included Hesiod,
Alexander, Apollodorus, and Arius. His most ambitious
work was entitled Mopsopia (“Miscellanies”) and con-
sisted of five books; it was a collection of Attic fables and
histories. Although Euphorion was not born wealthy, he
married a rich widow; this enabled him to continue to
pursue his creative endeavors without concern for his
financial state. Upon meeting the Seleucid king Antio-
chos II (223–187 B.C.E.), he was appointed the head of
the library at ANTIOCH.
Further reading: M. Dickie, “Poets as Initiates in the
Mysteries. Euphorion, Philicus, and Posidippus,” Antique
und Abendland 44 (1998): 49–77.
Eupolis (ca. 446–411 B.C.E.) One of the three masters of
classical Athenian comedy, along with ARISTOPHANES and
KRATINUS
Titles of 19 plays by Eupolis are known. None of these
has survived complete, but many fragments of his work
exist, quoted by later writers. In his relatively short career
(429–411 B.C.E.), Eupolis won first prize in annual Athe-
nian drama-competitions at least four times—three times
at the midwinter festival known as the Lenaea and once
at the City Dionysia, a grand event held in early spring.
Eupolis died in the HELLESPONT region, on duty in one of
the Athenian naval campaigns of the later PELOPON-
NESIAN WAR.
In the tradition of comedy under the Athenian
DEMOCRACY, Eupolis’s plays seem to have been political,
obscene, and insulting to various public figures. The
Golden Age (424 B.C.E.) ridiculed the powerful left-wing
politician KLEON. The Demes (412 B.C.E.) showed great
Athenians of bygone years arising from the dead to coun-
sel a city in turmoil.
See also THEATER.
Further reading: Gregory W. Dobrov, The City as
Comedy: Society and Representation in Athenian Drama
(Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1997);
David Harvey and John Wilkins, The Rivals of Aristo-
phanes: Studies in Athenian Old Comedy (London: Duck-
worth and the Classical Press of Wales, 2000).
Euripides (ca. 485–406 B.C.E.) Youngest and most con-
troversial of the three great Athenian tragedians of the
400s B.C.E.
Euripides’ place in literature alongside AESCHYLUS and
SOPHOKLES is due to his insight into human psychology
(especially abnormal psychology, such as madness or
obsessive love), his frequent and sympathetic use of
female characters (unusual for a classical Greek male),
and his bold questioning of the traditional religious ideas
in the Greek MYTHS. His best-known plays include Medea
(431 B.C.E.), Hippolytus (428 B.C.E.), The Trojan Women
(415 B.C.E.), and The Bacchae and Iphigenia in Aulis (both
presented posthumously, perhaps in 405 B.C.E.). These
and other works show protagonists (often female) caught
in the grip of obsession or disaster, in tales that combine
suspense and human detail with brooding questions about
the nature of the universe and of the supposed gods.
128
Eubulus

Criticism of Euripides, both ancient and modern,
often focuses on the playwright’s tendency to distort cer-
tain myths to such an extent that it approaches carica-
ture, with gods sometimes portrayed as repulsive
personalities (e.g., HERA in Herakles Insane and APOLLO
in Ion). Euripides’ contemporaries clearly found his reli-
gious irreverence to be disturbing; although he competed
22 times at Athenian festival drama competitions, he was
awarded first place only five times (as compared with
Aeschylus’s 13 and Sophokles’ 24 in their lifetimes). Still,
he was always considered thought-provoking enough to
be allowed a hearing. The Athenian officials never
rejected his application to compete. The ambivalent
Athenian attitude toward Euripides is shown in ARISTO-
PHANES’ comedy The Frogs (405 B.C.E.), presented soon
after Euripides’ death. In this play, Euripides and Aeschy-
lus hold a contest in the Underworld for the privilege of
returning to ATHENS, and Euripides loses.
Euripides was said to have written 120 plays, of
which 80 titles are known. More of his works are pre-
served today than of any other Athenian playwright: 18
tragedies and one satyr play by Euripides have survived
complete, as opposed to only six or seven by Aeschylus
and seven by Sophokles. This generous legacy has per-
haps hurt Euripides’ reputation among modern thinkers,
since, unlike the other two tragedians, his surviving plays
include work that is not his best.
Little is known about Euripides’ life. He came from a
family of Phyle outside Athens that might have been
wealthy. Tradition holds (probably falsely) that he was
born on the same day as the Greek naval victory over the
Persians at SALAMIS (1) (480 B.C.E.). His first play was
entered in the dramatic competition at Athens when he
was 25 years of age; this drama (The Pleiades), was
awarded third place.
Unlike Sophokles, Euripides was not politically
active, but he did compose a funerary hymn for NIKIAS,
DEMOSTHENES, and the other Athenians slain in the disas-
trous expedition to SYRACUSE during the PELOPONNESIAN
WAR (415–413 B.C.E.). He was very interested in philoso-
phy and was associated with the intellectual movement of
the SOPHISTS, who often presented disturbing ideas to
their contemporaries. It was supposedly at Euripides’
home that the sophist PROTAGORAS recited a treatise that
cast doubt on the existence of the gods. He was also said
to be friends with the philosophers ANAXAGORAS and
SOCRATES, as well as with the politician and general
ALCIBIADES. Like many intellectuals, he was thought to be
hostile to the radical Athenian DEMOCRACY.
These political and philosophical leanings made
Euripides an object of enmity in Athens, and in 408 B.C.E.
he left the city on a self-imposed exile, eventually settling
in Macedonia at the invitation of the Macedonian king
Archelaus, an enthusiastic literary patron. Euripides’
unhappy personal life may have also led him to leave
Athens; twice married, he was supposedly surly and
reclusive. He died and was buried at Pella in 406 B.C.E.,
and a cenotaph was also erected in his honor at Athens. It
is said that Sophokles, at the next Dionysia, dressed his
chorus in mourning for his deceased rival.
Euripides’ surviving plays show a range of subject
matter and philosophical treatment. His object, more
often than not, is emotion. The chorus is used somewhat
differently in his plays than in many of his contempo-
raries’ works; it is generally a nonessential element rather
than a major part of the dramatic action.
Medea, a play about the mythical queen who eventu-
ally kills her children out of obsessive hatred for her hus-
band, is now considered one of the greatest Greek
tragedies. Interestingly enough, however, the Athenian
judges at the City Dionysia drama competition in 431
B.C.E. awarded Medea’s three-play group only third prize.
Euripides did win first prize at the competition in 428
B.C.E., however, with his Hippolytus, an insightful play
that features a psychological portrait of the mythical
queen Phaedra and her hopeless love for her stepson,
HIPPOLYTUS.
The Trojan Women—one of a trilogy of plays about
the TROJAN WAR—was performed in 415 B.C.E., at the
height of the Peloponnesian War. Opening after TROY’s
capture by the Greeks, the play catalogues the woes that
befall the royal Trojan female captives (HECUBA, ANDRO-
MACHE, and CASSANDRA) at the hands of the bullying
conquerors—who are themselves unknowingly doomed
to meet disaster on their voyage home. The play is a
clear protest against Athenian imperialism, including
the Athenians’ contemporary expedition against Syra-
cuse and their destruction of the resistant, helpless
Aegean island of MELOS. The Athenians voted the tril-
ogy second prize.
The Bacchae, produced after Euripides’ death, pre-
sents the story of the god DIONYSUS’s destruction of his
kinsman, the Theban king Pentheus. The play is admired
as a study of human delusion and a disturbing inquiry
into the cruelty of the gods.
See also IPHIGENIA; MAENADS; MEDEA.
Further reading:
Christopher Collard, Euripides
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1981); Shirley A. Barlow, The
Imagery of Euripides: A Study in the Dramatic Use of Picto-
rial Language (Bristol, U.K.: Bristol Classical Press, 1986);
Marc Huys, The Tale of the Hero Who Was Exposed at Birth
in Euripidean Tragedy: A Study of Motifs (Leuven, Bel-
gium: Leuven University Press, 1995); Daniel A. Mendel-
sohn, Gender and the City in Euripides’ Political Plays
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2002); Philip Fre-
und, The Birth of Theatre (London: Peter Owen, 2003).
Europa (Greek Europ¯e, “wide eyes”)
In Greek MYTH,
Europa was a Phoenician princess of the city of Tyre. See-
ing her by the Mediterranean shore, the great god ZEUS
became inflamed with desire. He changed himself into a
Europa
129

handsome bull and enticed her to climb atop his back,
then swam quickly out to sea to the island of CRETE.
There Europa bore the god two sons, the Cretan princes
MINOS and Rhadamanthys. (Some versions add the hero
Sarpedon.) Meanwhile, Europa’s brother KADMOS began a
futile search for her, during which he crossed to Greece
and eventually founded the city of THEBES.
The myth may reflect in some dark way Mycenaean-
Greek relations with the Near East and Crete ca.
1400–1200 B.C.E. The modern English word Europe,
meaning the continent, seems to derive from this mythi-
cal character’s name.
See also EUROPE and ASIA; MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION;
PHOENICIA.
Further reading: P. B. S. Andrews, “The Myth of
Europa and Minos,” Greece and Rome 16 (1969): 60–66;
Judith M. Barringer, “Europa and the Nereids. Wedding
or Funeral?” American Journal of Archaeology 95 (1991):
657–667; Martin Robertson, “Europa and Others. Nostal-
gia in Late Fifth Century Athenian Vase-painting,” in
Kotinos. Festschrift für Erika Simon, edited by Heide Fron-
ing, Tonio Hölscher, and Harald Mielsch (Mainz, Ger-
many: Philip von Zabern, 1992), 237–240; R. S. P. Beekes,
“Where Europa Bathed,” Mnemosyne 48 (1995): 579–581.
Europe and Asia
The English words Europe and Asia
both come from the ancient Greeks. By the 700s B.C.E.
the Greeks had developed the notion that these were two
different continents, separated by the AEGEAN SEA. The
Greek word Europ¯e seems to have been derived from the
name of the mythical princess EUROPA. As used as a
place-name, the word originally referred to central
Greece. Asia originally denoted interior ASIA MINOR, east
of the Greek-settled region called IONIA.
As Greek TRADE and COLONIZATION opened up the
Mediterranean and other waterways (800–500 B.C.E.); the
name Europe was applied to the coastlines of SICILY, ITALY,
France, Spain, and the western and northern BLACK SEA.
Similarly, the region indicated by the name Asia grew
with time. After the Eastern conquests of ALEXANDER THE
GREAT (334–323 B.C.E.), Asia came to include the Near
East, PERSIA, and other lands, east to the Indus and
Ganges River valleys. But EGYPT was usually considered
to be outside both Asia and Europe.
In Greek MYTH, a character named Asia is a nymph,
sometimes described as the wife of PROMETHEUS. In fact,
the Greeks may have taken that name around 1200 B.C.E.
from the Hittites, whose word Assuiuva denoted western
Asia Minor.
See also HECATEAUS; HERODOTUS; NYMPHS.
Eurydice
See ORPHEUS.
Eurypontid clan
The Eurypontids (eurupontidai)
were the junior royal family at SPARTA, a city that had an
unusual government insofar as it was ruled simultane-
ously by two kings. The Eurypontids traced their ances-
try back to a legendary King Eurypontis, one of the sons
of HERAKLES.
Eurypontid kings took second place in protocol to
their partners, the Agiad kings, but they tended to share
power equally. Among the best-known Eurypontids was
the King ARCHIDAMUS who reigned ca. 469–426 B.C.E.
See also AGIAD CLAN; DORIAN GREEKS.
Further reading: E. I. McQueen, “The Eurypontid
House in Hellenistic Sparta,” Historia 39 (1990): 163–181.
Euxine
See BLACK SEA.
130
Europe and Asia

F
131
family
See KINSHIP.
farming
Mainland Greece is a mountainous country,
and ancient Greek society was shaped by the scarcity of
farmland. Individuals owning land in the plains tended to
be much richer and more elevated socially than those
who farmed the foothills. Hilly terrain dictated cultiva-
tion of olive trees, grape vines, and other fruit-bearing
plants that thrive on rough ground.
MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION (1600–1200 B.C.E.) was a
feudal society based on sheep- and cattle-ranching, which
involved baronial estates worked by serfs. Cattle rustling
and meat feasts are two favorite activities of the aristo-
crats in HOMER’s Illiad and Odyssey (written around 750
B.C.E. but reflecting the Mycenaean world of some 500
years prior). The classical Greek religious custom of sac-
rificing cattle and sheep to the gods is clearly a Myce-
naean vestige. Preoccupation with grazing is reflected in
such regional names as EUBOEA and BOEOTIA, containing
the Greek root boes, “cattle.”
The social upheavals of the DARK AGE and years fol-
lowing (around 1100–700 B.C.E.) saw the emergence of
smaller holdings, owned by nobles, yeomen, or poor sub-
sistence farmers. Developments in metallurgy brought an
improved plowshare, tipped with IRON rather than
BRONZE (ca. 1050 B.C.E.). By the start of the historical era
(750 B.C.E.), Mycenaean-style ranches survived mainly on
the plains of THESSALY; elsewhere, a more efficient use of
the land arose in the raising of crops.
Information on Greek farming in this epoch comes
from the Boeotian poet HESIOD’s verse calendar Works and
Days (ca. 700 B.C.E.) and from agricultural writers of later
years. Details are added by archaeological evidence, rang-
ing from farming scenes on vase paintings to recovered
ancient pollen spores. The primary Greek farm crops were
grain, olives, grapes (mainly for winemaking); other fruits
such as apples, pears, figs, and pomegranates; and beans
and other greens. Barley was the most common grain
grown in mainland Greece, but by the 400s B.C.E. imports
of Ukrainian and Sicilian wheat were displacing barley on
the market at many cities. Millet was grown for fodder.
Flax was grown for weaving into linen. The ancient
Greeks knew about cotton, which was cultivated in EGYPT
but could not be grown easily on Greek terrain. However,
North American–type corn (maize) was unknown to the
Greeks, as were tomatoes and potatoes.
Crucial to the ancient Greek economy was olive cul-
tivation, which in the Aegean dates back at least to the
Minoan era (ca. 2000 B.C.E.). Eventually the Greeks had
more than 25 varieties of olive; they used olive oil for
cooking, washing, lamp fuel, religious devotions, and as a
treatment for athletes. Olive oil was a principal export of
the city of ATHENS, where the olive tree was honored in
MYTH as the goddess ATHENA’s gift to the city.
Early Greek farmers had to let a field lie fallow every
other year (or sometimes two years for each one culti-
vated), so the soil could replenish its nutrients. But by
around 400 B.C.E. the Greeks had discovered the much
more productive method of raising different crops in
annual rotation on the same land. The Greeks did their
plowing and grain-sowing in October, at the start of the
rainy season. In order to plow a field, a farmer would
guide a wooden rig behind a pair of yoked oxen. (Ancient
Greek horse breeds were too small for draft, aside from
pulling CHARIOTS.) Plowing was hard work. Unlike the
much-improved plowshare of medieval northern Europe,

the ancient Greek tool did not turn the soil but only
scratched the surface, and the plowman had to keep
pushing the blade into the earth as he proceeded.
Grain grew through the relatively mild Greek winter
and was harvested in May. During the parching Greek sum-
mer the crop was winnowed and stored. September brought
a second harvest—of grapes, olives, and other fruit.
In the HELLENISTIC AGE, the small farms that had
existed in earlier Greek history began to be replaced by
large agricultural estates (which would eventually influ-
ence the development of elaborate villas in the Roman
era). These estates, worked in many instances by slaves
or serfs, helped generate an agricultural surplus. They
generally clustered around newly developed towns and
small cities, whose merchants facilitated the trade of the
farmed goods. This commercial element of Hellenistic
farming went along with the increased internationalism
of the society and the constant trade and communication
that took place among the Mediterranean civilizations.
See also ASTRONOMY; ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES; GREECE,
GEOGRAPHY OF; MINOAN CIVILIZATION; SPORT.
Further reading: Victor Davis Hanson, Warfare and
Agriculture in Classical Greece (Pisa, Italy: Giardini,
1983); Signe Isager and Jens Erik Skydsgaard, Ancient
Greek Agriculture: An Introduction (London: Routledge,
1992); B. Wells, ed., Agriculture in Ancient Greece: Pro-
ceedings of the Seventh International Symposium at the
Swedish Institute at Athens, 16–17 May, 1990 (Stockholm:
Svenska Institutet i Athen, 1992); Alison Burford, Land
and Labor in the Greek World (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1993); Maria S. Marsilio, Farming and
Poetry in Hesiod’s Works and Days (Lanham, Md.: Univer-
sity Press of America, 2000).
fate
This supernatural power is imagined as preordain-
ing certain on all human events. In Greek MYTH and RELI-
GION, a belief in fate paradoxically existed alongside the
belief in the divine guidance and decision making of ZEUS
and his subordinate gods.
The main words for fate were moira and aisa, also
translatable as “lot” or “share”—a person’s fate is what
has been apportioned to him or her. Obviously the final
and most dramatic item of human fate is death. Greek
notions of fate are best understood as elaborating on the
simple knowledge that every person will die and that the
gods are unwilling or unable to prevent this.
The god Zeus was imagined as working in harmony
with fate or somehow causing fate. One of his titles was
Moiraget¯es, “leader of fate.” HOMER’s epic poem the Iliad
(written down around 750 B.C.E.) repeatedly shows Zeus
holding a pair of golden scales and weighing the respec-
tive dooms (k¯eres) of two human antagonists on the bat-
tlefield; the warrior indicated by the heavier pan is
doomed. Zeus will not avert a doomed warrior’s fate—
even his beloved human son Sarpedon is fated to die,
slain by the Greek warrior PATROKLOS (book 16). Con-
versely, the angry god POSEIDON in the Odyssey cannot
completely destroy the hero ODYSSEUS, because Odysseus
is fated to survive his voyage and return home (book 5).
But the hero ACHILLES in the Iliad is aware of a choice in
his fate: He can either stay and die gloriously, fighting at
TROY, or can return home and live to a safe, undistin-
guished old age (book 9).
The personification of fate as three goddesses, the
Moirai, is first clearly described in HESIOD’s epic poem the
Theogony (ca. 700 B.C.E.). Hesiod presents the Moirai as
the daughters of Zeus and the goddess Themis. They are
imagined as working at the womanly task of spinning—
drawing out a thread of yarn that determines or repre-
sents each person’s life. Into the thread may be woven
sorrow, wealth, travel, and the like. Hesiod names the
three fates Clotho (spinner), Lachesis (disposer of lots),
and Atropos (unavoidable). Later writers distinguished
the goddesses’ duties, with Clotho spinning the thread,
Lachesis measuring it out, and Atropos snipping it. Either
the cutting produced the person’s death or, in another
version, the thread was entirely spun out and cut at the
baby’s birth, to contain the person’s future.
The pretty conceit of divine spinners was probably
more important to poets than to the Greek religious pub-
lic. But the Moirai were widely worshipped as goddesses
of childbirth and as promoters of good harvest. Athenian
brides, for instance, brought cuttings of their hair as
offerings to the fates.
See also PROPHECY AND DIVINATION.
Further reading: M. E. Reesor, “Fate and Possibility
in Early Stoic Philosophy,” Phoenix 19 (1965): 285–297;
B. C. Dietrich, Death, Fate, and the Gods. The Development
of a Religious Idea in Greek Popular Belief and in Homer, 2d
ed. (London: Athlone Press, 1967); G. Giannakis, “The
‘Fate-as-Spinner’ Motif. A Study on the Poetic and
Metaphorical Language of Ancient Greek and Indo-Euro-
pean, 1,” Indogermanische Forschungen 103 (1998): 1–27.
food and meals
The people of ancient Greece enjoyed
a flavorsome and extremely varied diet. All around the
hilly countryside, olives, grapes, and figs were harvested,
and in some of the more fertile plains, grains such as
wheat, barley, and millet were grown as well. The olives
were manufactured into olive oil and the grapes into wine.
Herds of goats ranged everywhere and provided milk and
cheese. People also raised chickens and ate eggs fre-
quently. Fish and other kinds of seafood (squid, octopus,
shrimp, and the like) were an extremely important part of
the Greek diet. Other types of meat were sometimes avail-
able in the markets of the larger city-states; only the flesh
of animals that had been hunted in the wild was eaten—
never domesticated animals. In general, meat was eaten
rarely and was primarily reserved for religious sacrifices.
The importance of the olive and olive oil in the
ancient Greek diet and economy is illustrated by a MYTH
about the goddess ATHENA. She and POSEIDON were argu-
132
fate

ing over which deity would be the patron of the city of
ATHENS. ZEUS decreed that the winner would be the one
who gave the more valuable gift to the city. Poseidon
struck the ground with his trident, and a salt-water spring
erupted out of the earth. Then Athena produced the olive
tree. Her gift was immediately judged to be the better one,
and Athens was hers. To this day, olive oil remains one of
Greece’s most important agricultural products and exports.
In HOMER’s epics, the Greeks ate their meals while
sitting, but by the Classical period diners regularly
reclined on couches called klinai. When WOMEN were
allowed to be present for meals (only in the home, with
the family), they sat upright while the men reclined.
Women depicted in Greek art as reclining at a meal are
meant to be PROSTITUTES (“hetairai”).
The ancient Greeks did not use knives or forks, eat-
ing primarily with their fingers. They did occasionally
use a spoon or a piece of hollowed-out bread for eating
soups and other liquids. They also used pieces of bread to
wipe their hands after eating (the bread was then given to
dogs); not until the Roman era were napkins used.
See also FARMING.
Further reading: William J. Slater, ed., Dining in a
Classical Context (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
Press, 1991); John Wilkins, David Harvey, and Mike Dob-
son, eds., Food in Antiquity (Exeter, U.K.: University of
Exeter Press, 1995); Andrew Dalby, Siren Feasts: A History
of Food and Gastronomy in Greece (London: Routledge,
1996); Peter Garnsey, Food and Society in Classical Antiq-
uity (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1999).
Four Hundred, The
This Oligarchic committee briefly
seized power at ATHENS in 411 B.C.E., during the PELO-
PONNESIAN WAR. The Four Hundred were led by the
politician Pisander and by the orator ANTIPHON. Taking
advantage of the absence from Athens of large numbers of
working-class, pro-democratic citizens (who were man-
ning the large fleet in operation at SAMOS), the conspira-
tors began intimidating the populace in the spring of 411
B.C.E. with a series of political murders and demonstra-
tions. The coup d’état was performed in June in the Athe-
nian ASSEMBLY. Led by Pisander, the plotters pushed
through a number of revolutionary decrees, amounting to
a dismantling of the DEMOCRACY; all existing executive
posts were abolished and a new COUNCIL, of 400 men
(replacing the democratic council of 500), was appointed.
The conspirators ruled Athens for the duration of the
summer. But the Athenian troops on distant Samos
remained staunchly pro-democratic, perpetuating the
Athenian democracy by holding their own assemblies and
elections. After a home-defense war fleet dispatched by
the Four Hundred was defeated by the Spartans in the
Straits of EUBOEA, the oligarchs were discredited and
overthrown (in September of 411 B.C.E.). Pisander fled to
SPARTA; Antiphon, disdaining to flee, was tried and exe-
cuted under the restored democracy.
See also OLIGARCHY.
Further reading: H. C. Avery, “Critias and the Four
Hundred,” Classical Philology 58 (1963): 165–167; G.
Adeleye, “Theramenes and the Overthrow of the ‘Four
Hundred,’” Museum Africum 2 (1973): 77–8l; G. Adeleye,
“Critias, Member of the Four Hundred?” Transactions of
the American Philological Association 104 (1974): 1–9; G.
Pesely, “Andron and the Four Hundred,” Illinois Classical
Studies 20 (1995): 66–76; Donald Kagen, The Pelopon-
nesian War (New York: Viking, 2003).
funeral customs
Despite the cremation of slain heroes
described in HOMER’s epic poems, the Greeks outside of
the DARK AGE (around 1100–900 B.C.E.) generally buried
their dead. The elaborate tombs of Mycenaen kings have
funeral customs
133
This marble gravestone from about 510 B.C.E. shows a life-
size man named Aristion in soldier’s armor. He may have
died in battle; his name means “one of the noblest.” (Alison
Frantz Photographic Collection, American School of Classical
Studies at Athens)

supplied archaeologists with most of their information
about Greek prehistory for the era 1600–1200 B.C.E. The
Greeks of historical times, after about 750 B.C.E., had
their own burial customs. Their need to cover a corpse
with earth was not simply a matter of hygiene or deco-
rum; it was believed that the sight of a dead body would
offend the Olympian gods, and that the dead person’s
ghost could not enter the Underworld until the body had
been covered. This helps explain the insistence of
SOPHOKLES’ tragic heroine ANTIGONE on sprinkling dirt
over her slain brother’s corpse, although forbidden by a
ruler’s decree from doing so. As Antigone’s action sug-
gests, such a “burial” could be merely ceremonial, per-
formed with a few handfuls of dirt.
For a regular funeral (Greek: taph¯e), the body was
bathed and clothed. At the home, it was laid out and
mourned over by relatives and household (Greek: prothe-
sis). In the Classical period, excessive lamentation actually
was forbidden by law at ATHENS; there seems to have been
a deep-seated fear that WOMEN’s lamenting might bring
the dead back to life. The body would then be carried on a
stretcher to the place of burial (Greek: ekphora), where it
would be placed in a coffin or—for the rich of a certain
era—a stone sarcophagus (“flesh-eater”). Certain marble
sarcophagi, carved with beautiful reliefs showing scenes of
hunting and war, are among the finest Greek SCULPTURE of
the late 300s–200s B.C.E. At the graveside, offerings of
food and drink might be left—to “refresh” the dead in the
grave or for the journey to the Underworld.
After the burial, the grave would receive some kind
of marker. Again, for the wealthy, there was marble—
specifically, the type of monument known as a st¯el¯e, with
an idealized portrait of the dead. At Athens, the Ker-
ameikos district, just outside the northwest city wall,
contained monumental graveyards owned by aristocratic
families, many marked by elaborate stelai. These grave-
stones provide important archaeological evidence about
Athenian family groups and religious customs and
beliefs, as well as artistic styles and development. Sculp-
tured grave stelai in Athens date from the Archaic and
Classical periods; in the 300s B.C.E. such ostentatious
commemorations were outlawed in favor of small, undec-
orated columnar markers.
For public funerals, such as the mass observances by
which the classical Athenians honored their war dead, a
prominent citizen might be chosen to deliver a speech
(or, alternatively, compose a poem) honoring the
departed. This kind of funerary speech was known by the
adjective epitaphios, from which comes our word “epi-
taph.” The most famous funeral oration of the ancient
world was delivered by the Athenian statesman PERIKLES
in the first year of the PELOPONNESIAN WAR (431 B.C.E.).
As recounted by the historian THUCYDIDES (1), Perikles
speech presents a glorification of the Athenian DEMOC-
RACY, for which the men had died.
134
funeral customs
Athenian gravestone, circa 535 B.C.E., standing nearly 14
feet tall. The monument shows a carved likeness of the dead
person topped with a guardian sphinx. (Alison Frantz 
Photographic Collection, American School of Classical 
Studies at Athens) 

See also AFTERLIFE; MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION.
Further reading: Donna Kurtz and John Boardman,
Greek Burial Customs (London: Thames and Hudson,
1971); Ian Morris, Burial and Ancient Society: The Rise of
the Greek City-State (New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1987); William G. Cavanagh and Christopher Mee,
A Private Place: Death in Prehistoric Greece (Jonsered,
Sweden: P. Aströms förlag, 1998); G. J. Oliver, ed., The
Epigraphy of Death: Studies in the History and Society of
Greece and Society of Greece and Rome (Liverpool, U.K.:
Liverpool University Press, 2000); Janet Burnett Gross-
man, Greek Funerary Sculpture: Catalogue of the Collec-
tions at the Getty Villa (Los Angeles: J. Paul Getty
Museum, 2001).
Furies (Greek: Erinues)
In Greek RELIGION and MYTH,
the Furies were horrible female spirits of divine retribu-
tion. Tormenting their victims by nonphysical means—
inciting fear and madness—they especially punished the
crime of murdering a family member. But they might pur-
sue oath-breakers or anyone else who had broken a bond
of society. Their best-known appearance in literature is in
AESCHYLUS’s tragedy Eumenides (458 B.C.E.), where they
constitute the play’s 12-member chorus. In the story, they
torment the hero ORESTES, who has slain his mother.
In HESIOD’s Creation poem, the Theogony (ca. 700
B.C.E.), they are described as being the daughters of GAEA
(Mother Earth), born from the spattered blood of the cas-
tration wound that CRONUS inflicted on his father,
Uranus (Ouranos, “Sky”).
The Furies were usually worshipped under some
euphemistic name; Aeschylus’s title Eumenides means
“kindly ones.” An altar to them as the Dreaded God-
desses, at the foot of the Athenian ACROPOLIS, became
associated with the curse of the Alcmaeoid family.
See also ALCMAEON (1); ALCMAEONIDS; KYLON;
ELECTRA.
Further reading: A. L. Brown, “Eumenides in Greek
Tragedy,” Classical Quarterly 34 (1984): 260–281; H.
Lloyd-Jones, “Erinyes, Semnai Theai, Eumenides,” in
Owls to Athens. Essays on Classical Subjects Presented to
Sir Kenneth Dover (New York: Oxford University Press,
1990), 203–211; S. B. Matheson, “Hounded by Furies,”
Yale University Bulletin (1997–1998): 18–29.
Furies
135

G
136
Gaea (Gaia, Ge)
This goddess was the Greek personi-
fication of the earth (as opposed to the elements of sea
sky), but unlike the grain goddess DEMETER, Gaea was
not a central deity of Greek RELIGION. Her name reflects
the Greek common noun for “land,” ge or ga. Gaea had
several significant cult sites, particularly at the Greek
colonies in SICILY. She was worshipped for her fertility as
kourotrophos, “bearer of children,” and also as a goddess
of mortality. The corresponding goddess in Roman
mythology was called Tellus.
According to the creation myth in HESIOD’s epic
poem The Theogony (ca. 700 B.C.E.), Gaea emerged from
primeval Chaos, then gave birth to Pontos (“Sea”) and
Uranus (Ouranos, “Sky”), whom she married. Their mon-
strous children included the TITANS, the Cyclopes, and
the “Hundred-handed Ones” (Hekatoncheires). When
their son CRONUS castrated his father, fertile Gaea was
impregnated by the spattered blood and gave birth to the
FURIES and the GIANTS. She also bore several children to
Pontos, including Nereus, Thaumas, Phorcys, Ceto, and
Eurybia. Later she also produced other offspring, includ-
ing the giants TYPHON (who had a hundred heads),
Antaeus, and Tityus, and the legendary kings of Athens
Erechtheus and Kekrops.
In Greek MYTH, the Giants and Typhon impiously
attacked the immortal gods atop Mt. OLYMPUS. The sub-
sequent battle between the gods and the Giants (the
gigantomachy) was a frequent subject in Classical art, par-
ticularly in ATHENS, as a symbol of civilization vs. barbar-
ianism.
See also CYCLOPS; ZEUS.
Further reading: Evelyn B. Harrison, “Alkamenes’
Sculptures for the Hephaisteion, 1. The Cult Statues,”
American Journal of Archaeology 81 (1977): 265–287; Th.
Hadzisteliou-Price, Kourtrophos: Cults and Representations
of the Greek Nursing Deities (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J.
Brill, 1978); Mary B. Moore, “Ge,” Lexicon Iconograph-
icum Mythologiae Classicae IV, 1 (Zurich: Artemis Verlag,
1988), 171–177.
Galatea
See POLYPHEMUS; PYGMALION.
Galatia
See ASIA MINOR; CELTS.
Games
See ISTHMIAN GAMES; NEMEAN GAMES; OLYMPIC
GAMES; PANATHENAIA; PYTHIAN GAMES; SPORT.
Ganymede
In Greek MYTH, Ganymede was a hand-
some Trojan prince, son of King Tros. The earliest surviv-
ing mention of him, in HOMER’s epic the Iliad (written
down around 750 B.C.E.) says that Ganymede was
abducted by the gods to be cupbearer for the great god
ZEUS on Mt. OLYMPUS; in exchange, Ganymede’s father
received a herd of wondrous horses.
Later versions add that the boy was stolen by Zeus
himself in the shape of an eagle, or that the eagle was
sent by Zeus. Unlike Homer, poets such as THEOGNIS (ca.
542 B.C.E.) portrayed the abduction as a rape, assuming
that Zeus desired Ganymede sexually. Modern scholars
believe that this sexual nuance is not intended in the
original tale told by Homer; the added homosexual col-
oration would seem to reflect new upper-class values that
arose after Homer’s time, perhaps in the late 600s B.C.E.
The version adopted by the ETRUSCANS of ITALY included
the sexual aspect. The Etruscan rendition of the boy’s
name was Catamitus, a word that eventually went into
Latin and subsequently into our own language as the

pejorative noun catamite, meaning “a male who receives
sexual penetration.”
In Greek vase painting of the 500s and 400s B.C.E.,
Ganymede is portrayed as an idealized youth or boy with
long hair. Sometimes he holds a playing hoop (suggesting
boyhood) and a rooster (Zeus’s courting gift).
See also HOMOSEXUALITY.
Further reading: E. K. Gazda, “Ganymede and the
Eagle. A Marble Group from Carthage,” Archaeology 34
(1981): 56–60.
Gaugmela, battle of
See ALEXANDER THE GREAT.
Gela
This Greek city is situated on the southeastern
coast of SICILY, near the mouth of the river Gelas.
Founded in about 688 B.C.E. by DORIAN GREEKS from
CRETE and RHODES, Gela was a small city on a fertile
plain that enjoyed prosperity. In around 580 B.C.E. it
established its important daughter city, ACRAGAS, farther
west on the south coast. Gela was ruled by a horsebreed-
ing ARISTOCRACY until the late 500s B.C.E., when (like
other cities of the Greek world) it passed into the hands
of TYRANTS.
Gela became the most powerful Sicilian city around
490 B.C.E., after the Geloan tyrant Hippocrates conquered
much of eastern Sicily. But Gela’s preeminence ended
when Hippocrates’ successor, GELON, captured the great
city of SYRACUSE in 485 B.C.E. and made it his capital,
going so far as to transplant the richer half of Gela’s pop-
ulation to Syracuse.
By the mid-400s B.C.E. the tyrants had fallen from
power, but Dorian Gela remained an ally of Dorian Syra-
cuse against the region’s Ionian-Greek cities. Gela assisted
Syracuse’s triumphant defense against the Athenian inva-
sion of 415–413 B.C.E. In the 300s B.C.E., with Sicily a bat-
tleground between the Greeks and the Carthaginians, Gela
suffered from the exploits of Greek tyrants such as AGATH-
OKLES, who executed 4,000 Geloans for suspected treason.
In 311 B.C.E. Gela’s population was entirely transplanted
to a new city by the tyrant Phintias of Acragas.
Further reading: Pietro Griffo, Gela: A Sicilian Town
Founded by the Greeks (Genoa, Italy: Stringa, 1963); Pietro
Griffo and Leonard von Matt, Gela: The Ancient Greeks in
Sicily (Greenwich, Conn.: New York Graphic Society,
1968); G. Kenneth Jenkins, The Coinage of Gela (Berlin:
De Gruyter, 1970); Jaimee Pugliese Uhlenbrock, The Ter-
racotta Protomai from Gela: A Discussion of Local Style in
Archaic Sicily (Rome: L’Erma di Bretschneider, 1988).
Gelon (ca. 540–478 B.C.E.) Dictator or tyrant (turannos)
of the Greek cities GELA and SYRACUSE, in Sicily
An able military commander, Gelon is remembered for
his defeat of the Carthaginians at the Battle of HIMERA
(480 B.C.E.)—an event that made him the most powerful
individual in the Greek world.
As his name suggests, Gelon was descended from the
first Greek colonists of Gela. He was an aristocrat, and
before seizing power he served as a leader of CAVALRY for
the Geloan tyrant Hippocrates (who carved out a small
empire in eastern Sicily). After Hippocrates’ death, Gelon
dispossessed the tyrant’s sons and assumed full power, at
about age 50.
In 485 B.C.E., Gelon captured Syracuse, the foremost
city of Sicily. Making Syracuse his new capital, Gelon
grandiosely transferred the richer half of Gela’s popula-
tion there, as well as the richer citizens of other captured
Greek towns. (Other Sicilian tyrants soon copied this
ruthless new practice of transplantation.) Gelon installed
his brother HIERON (1) as tyrant of Gela and allied him-
self with Theron, tyrant of ACRAGAS, taking Theron’s
daughter Demareta as one of his wives.
Meanwhile, the Greek world was being threatened by
two foreign empires, the Persians in the East and the
Carthaginians in the West. Around 481 B.C.E. a delega-
tion of mainland Greeks went to Syracuse to appeal for
Gelon’s aid against the coming invasion of Greece by the
Persian king XERXES. Gelon offered to contribute a large
force on the condition that he himself receive chief com-
mand of either the Greek army or navy. When these two
options were rejected, Gelon sent the ambassadors away,
remarking that they seemed better equipped with gener-
als than with troops.
In 480 B.C.E.—coinciding with the Persian invasion
of Greece—the Carthaginian leader Hamilcar sailed from
North Africa with an army and landed on Sicily’s north
coast. But a Greek army under Gelon destroyed Hamilcar
and his force at the Battle of Himera.
After making peace with CARTHAGE and imposing on
them a huge indemnity of 1,000 TALENTS, Gelon began a
program of propagandistic cultural display. He dedicated
lavish offerings at the sanctuaries of DELPHI and OLYMPIA,
in Greece; he enlarged and adorned Syracuse with public
building; and he minted a celebrated victory-issue coin,
called the Demareteion (after his wife). When Gelon
died, he was succeeded by his brother Hieron, who
proved to be a less popular ruler.
See also COINAGE; PERSIAN WARS; TYRANTS.
Further reading: A. G. Woodhead, Greeks in the West
(London: Thames and Hudson, 1962); T. J. Dunbabin,
Western Greeks: The History of Sicily and South Italy from
the Foundation of the Greek Colonies to 480 B.C. (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1968); A. M. McCann, “The Riace
Bronzes. Gelon and Hieron I of Syracuse?” in From the
Parts to the Whole. Acta of the 13th International Bronze
Congress. Cambridge, Massachusetts, May 28–June 1, 1996,
edited by Carol Mattusch, Amy Brauer, and Sandra E.
Knudsen (Portsmouth, R.I.: Journal of Roman Archaeol-
ogy, 2000), 97–105.
Geometric pottery
See POTTERY.
Geometric pottery
137

geometry
See MATHEMATICS.
Geryon
See HERAKLES.
Giants
In MYTH, the Gigantes were a primeval race of
monsters who unsuccessfully rebelled against ZEUS and
the other gods, piling Mt. Ossa atop Mt. Pelion in order
to assault Mt. OLYMPUS. In the Creation myth in HESIOD’s
epic poem Theogony (ca. 700 B.C.E.), the Giants are
described as children of Mother Earth, GAEA (her name is
reflected in theirs). She gave birth to them after being
impregnated by the blood of the god Uranus (Ouranos,
“Sky”), which fell to earth when Uranus was castrated by
his son CRONUS. The Giants were sometimes portrayed in
art as large, snake-legged humanoids.
The Gigantomachy (battle with the giants) was one
of the most popular mythological subjects in Greek art
and poetry, symbolizing the victory of civilization over
savagery. On grand artistic vistas, such as the architec-
tural sculptures of the PARTHENON, the battle might be
shown in conjunction with the fight between CENTAURS
and Lapiths or the battle between Greeks and AMAZONS.
The Gigantomachy was also the primary subject of the
wonderful high-relief frieze on the Great Altar of ZEUS
at PERGAMON, one of the major sculptural monuments
of the HELLENISTIC AGE. Later writers embellished the
tale, adding that the gods enlisted the hero HERAKLES
after being warned that they must include a mortal in
order to win.
See also ATHENA; THESSALY; ZEUS.
Further reading: Max Kunze, The Pergamon Altar: Its
Rediscovery, History, and Reconstruction (Berlin: Staatliche
Museem zu Berlin, Antikensammlung, 1991); N. T. de
Grummond, “Gauls and Giants, Skylla and the Palladion.
Some Responses,” in From Pergamon to Sperlonga. Sculp-
ture and Context (Berkeley: University of California Press,
2000), 255–277.
gold
Ancient Greeks prized gold for the casting of pre-
cious SCULPTURE and other artifacts. However, gold as a
mineral deposit was scarce in the Aegean region. The
source for the gold used for the royal tomb offerings at
MYCENAE around 1550 B.C.E. is unknown. The ore may
have come from EGYPT or ASIA MINOR, traveling by way
of TRADE or plunder of war.
By the 600s B.C.E. Greek pioneers were prospecting
for gold at Mt. Pangaeus, on the Aegean coast of THRACE.
Despite the hostility of the native Thracians, the Greeks,
based in the nearby island of THASOS, panned the streams
of Pangaeus and perhaps dug mines; SILVER seems to have
been more abundant there than gold. Eventually Pan-
gaeus was seized by imperial ATHENS (mid-400s B.C.E.)
and then by the Macedonian king PHILIP II (mid-300s
B.C.E.). The nearby Athenian colony at AMPHIPOLIS was
strategic to these interests. Another Aegean gold source,
138
geometry
This golden hairnet was made to be worn over a bun at the
back of the head (ca. 100 B.C.E.). The woman depicted in the
center may be the Ptolemaic queen Arsinoe III. Gold jewelry
was reserved for nobles because of its rarity. (The J. Paul
Getty Museum)

closer to mainland Greece, was the Greek island of Siph-
nos, in the western CYCLADES. The Siphnian mines
financed the construction of an elegant treasury building
at DELPHI, ca. 525 B.C.E. before the mines were ruined by
natural flooding.
Most gold probably reached early Greece through
trade with non-Greek nations beyond the Aegean basin.
Trading partners in the 600s and 500s B.C.E. included the
Asia Minor kingdoms of Phrygia and LYDIA, where gold
could be panned from certain rivers, and where such
kings as MIDAS and CROESUS, fabled for their wealth,
ruled. In Lydia, a gold-silver alloy called electrum—
panned from the rivers where it formed naturally—sup-
plied the metal for the world’s first coins, around 635
B.C.E. The Greeks, however, rarely used gold for their
COINAGE; since gold was so difficult for them to acquire,
they minted with silver and, eventually, with BRONZE.
In the mid-500s B.C.E. the gold fields of Asia Minor
and Mesopotamia passed into the hands of the conquer-
ing Persians, who continued the gold trade. Like other
precious goods, gold became more plentiful for the
Greeks of the HELLENISTIC AGE (around 300–150 B.C.E.),
after the conquests of the Macedonian king ALEXANDER
THE GREAT had opened up the mines and treasure troves
of the Persian empire.
See also PHEIDIAS.
Further reading: Dyfri Williams and Jack Ogden,
Greek Gold: Jewellery of the Classical World (London:
British Museum Press, 1994); Aikaterini Despini, Ancient
Gold Jewellery, translated by Alexandra Doumas (Athens:
Ekdotike Athenon, 1996); Andrew Ramage and Paul
Craddock, King Croesus’ Gold: Excavations at Sardis and
the History of Gold Refining (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press for the Archaeological Exploration of
Sardis, 2000).
Gordian Knot
See ALEXANDER THE GREAT.
Gorgias (ca. 483–376 B.C.E.) Greek orator of the east-
coast Sicilian Greek city of Leontini
Visiting ATHENS on a political embassy in 427 B.C.E., Gor-
gias created a cultural sensation with his highly wrought
style of public speaking. His display pieces, using rhyme,
alliteration, and rhythmical parallel clauses, were soon
widely imitated at Athens; his visit marked a revolution
in ancient Greek RHETORIC. Gorgias periodically returned
to Athens to teach; his greatest pupil was the Athenian
orator ISOKRATES. Gorgias’s influence has been noted in
the works of the historian THUCYDIDES (1) and the play-
wright AGATHON.
Because of his love of the ingenious and shameless
argument, Gorgias was associated with the intellectual
movement of the SOPHISTS.
One of his surviving
speeches, the Encomium of Helen, is a defense of the
mythical HELEN OF TROY and her adulterous, disastrous
elopement with the Trojan prince PARIS. The speech
shows Gorgias’s soothing, jingling style, which apparently
seeks to charm the listener by incantation.
A dignified, amiable Gorgias appears as a character in
PLATO’s fictional dialogue Gorgias (written around 380
B.C.E.).
Further reading: George Kimball Plochmann and
Franklin E. Robinson, A Friendly Companion to Plato’s
Gorgias (Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press,
1988); Robert Wardy, The Birth of Rhetoric: Gorgias, Plato,
and Their Successors (London: Routledge, 1998); Scott
Consigny, Gorgias, Sophist and Artist (Columbia: Univer-
sity of South Carolina Press, 2001); Bruce McComiskey,
Gorgias and the New Sophistic Rhetoric (Carbondale:
Southern Illinois University Press, 2002).
Gorgons
See MEDUSA.
Gortyn
This city of central CRETE was settled by the
DORIAN GREEKS after about 1000 B.C.E. By 500 B.C.E. it
was a flourishing city, the largest on the island. In the
first century B.C.E. Gortyn became the capital of the
Roman province of Crete and Cyrenaica.
Archaeological excavations of the ancient town in the
1880s uncovered the now-famous marble inscription
called the Law Code of Gortyn, carved in about 500 B.C.E.
The code, written in the Doric dialect, addresses such
civil-law issues as land tenure, mortgages, and the status
of SLAVES. Although the surviving inscription contains no
sections on criminal law, the Gortyn code remains the
most important, single, extant source for Greek law prior
to 300 B.C.E.
See also GREEK LANGUAGE; LAWS AND LAW COURTS;
WRITINGS.
Further reading: A. E. Jackson, “The Bronze Coinage
of Gortyn,” Numismatic Chronicle 11 (1971): 37–51; M.
Gagarin, “The Organization of the Gortyn Law Code,”
Greek, Roman, and Byzantine Studies 23 (1982): 129–146;
S. V. Spyridakis, “Notes on the Jews of Gortyna and
Crete,” Zeitschrift für Papyrologie und Epigraphik 73
(1988): 171–175; I. Morris, “The Gortyn Code and Greek
Kinship,” Greek, Roman, and Byzantine Studies 31 (1990):
233–254; M. Gagarin, “The Economic Status of Women
in the Gortyn Code. Retroactivity and Change,” in Sym-
posium 1993. Vorträge zur griechischen und hellenistischen
Rechtsgeschichte. Graz-Andritz, 12–16 September 1993
(Cologne: Böhlau, 1994), 61–71; M. Gagarin, “The First
Law of the Gortyn Code Revisited,” Greek, Roman, and
Byzantine Studies 36 (1995): 7–15; P. Perlman, “Gortyn.
The First Seven Hundred Years, 1,” in Polis and Politics.
Studies in Ancient Greek History. Presented to Mogens Her-
man Hansen on His Sixtieth Birthday, August 20, 2000,
edited by P. Flensted-Jensen, T. H. Nielsen, and L. Ruben-
stein (Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press, Univer-
sity of Copenhagen, 2000), 59–89.
Gortyn
139

grain supply
See BLACK SEA; EGYPT; FARMING; HELLES-
PONT; SICILY; THRACE.
Greece, climate and landscape of
Greece is a penin-
sula in the Mediterranean Sea, flanked to the east by the
Aegean Sea and to the west by the Adriatic. It has an area
of approximately 82,000 square miles and an extremely
variable landscape. Within its boundaries are high moun-
tain ranges such as the Pindus, long valleys, rough hills,
flat plains, and networks of small rivers. The long, mean-
dering coastline is one of the Greek landscape’s most dis-
tinctive features and has always caused its inhabitants to
foster a close relationship with the sea and its bounty.
The Aegean islands are also part of Greece, including
the CYCLADES, the Sporades, and the Dodecanese. The
largest of these islands is CRETE, to the south of mainland
Greece—not far from the coast of EGYPT in North Africa.
There are also many smaller islands, some of which are
virtually uninhabited.
In antiquity, as in modern times, Greece enjoyed a
generally mild climate, with intermittent rain during the
winter and dry heat during the summer. The blazing sun
of the summer months is tempered somewhat by seasonal
winds known as the Meltemia. Some of the highest
mountains receive snow, but the rest of the country rarely
sees temperatures drop much below freezing. The unpre-
dictable amount of rainfall that Greece receives makes its
agriculture-based economy somewhat precarious, and
various systems of irrigation and crop rotation were
therefore developed and refined at a very early date.
The vegetation in Greece is quite extensive and var-
ied, with more than 6,000 indigenous species of plants
having been identified thus far.
Further reading:
Oliver Rackham and Jennifer
Moody, The Making of the Cretan Landscape (New York:
Manchester University Press, 1996); John Victor Luce,
Celebrating Homer’s Landscapes: Troy and Ithaca Revisited
(New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1998); Paul
Halstead and Charles Frederick, Landscape and Land Use
in Postglacial Greece (Sheffield, U.K.: Sheffield Academic
Press, 2000); Guy Hedreen, Capturing Troy: The Narrative
Functions of Landscape in Archaic and Early Classical
Greek Art (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press,
2001); Jamie Morton, The Role of the Physical Environment
in Ancient Greek Seafaring (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J.
Brill, 2001).
Greece, geography of
The key to Greece’s history lies
in its geography. The mountainous terrain compartmen-
talized the country into separate population centers, with
distinctive dialects, cultures, and politics. This is the
background of the Greek “city-state,” or POLIS. The rough
terrain also placed great economic importance on the few
rich FARMING plains. The earliest Greek culture, the
MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION (ca. 1600–1200 B.C.E.) was cen-
tered mainly on the two major farmlands of southern and
central Greece: the Argive plain, containing the cities of
MYCENAE, ARGOS, and TIRYNS; and the twin Boeotian
plains, containing THEBES and ORCHOMENOS.
Threatened by famine, Greek cities fought desperate
wars over farmland. The first fully remembered conflict
in Greek history was the LELANTINE WAR, fought for con-
trol of the plain lying between the central Greek cities of
CHALCIS and ERETRIA (ca. 720–680 B.C.E.). In the south,
the rising state of SPARTA waged a series of wars to annex
the plain of MESSENIA (mid-700s–600 B.C.E.).
Cities unable to retain or capture farmland might take
to shipping—for Greece comprises a large, ragged penin-
sula that juts into the northeastern Mediterranean, and
many Greek cities lie near the sea. After acquiring seafar-
ing skills from the prehellenic inhabitants of the land (sec-
ond millennium B.C.E.), and after copying the technologies
and trade routes of the brilliant Phoenicians (around
900–800 B.C.E.), the Greeks emerged as a great seagoing
people. The vast enlargement of the Greek world through
overseas TRADE and COLONIZATION (around 800–500
B.C.E.) was in part due to individual states using seafaring
to solve their problems of lack of food supply and employ-
ment. The tiny Greek state of AEGINA, perched on a rocky
island, became rich as a middleman in overseas trade
(500s–early 400s B.C.E.). The city of ATHENS became a
superpower through its strong navy (400s–300s B.C.E.).
Cities could prosper by controlling critical points
on a trade route—a sea channel, an anchorage, or a
mountain road. The best example is CORINTH, superbly
located on the narrow isthmus stretching northeastward
from the PELOPONNESE. By land, Corinth commanded
the route north to central Greece. By sea, Corinth pos-
sessed two harbors, facing east and west across the mid-
point of Greece, which enabled the city to develop trade
routes in both directions, to the Near East and to ITALY
and SICILY.
Of strategic importance were the mountains of north-
central Greece. Any invading army marching southward
from the northeast was forced to face a defensible bottle-
neck at the mountain pass of THERMOPYLAE, in southern
THESSALY. Themopylae played a repeated role in Greek
military history, most famously as the site of a failed
Greek defense in the PERSIAN WARS (480 B.C.E.), but also
in the machinations of the Macedonian king PHILIP II (in
346–338 B.C.E.).
The Macedonian kings who kept Greece subjugated
in the 200s B.C.E. recognized four “fetters” or “keys” of
Greece—four critical geographic points, possession of
which were vital for control. The fetters were Corinth,
Chalcis (guarding the narrows of the Euboean Straits),
the Athenian port city of PIRAEUS, and the coastal
stronghold of Demetrias, beside Thessaly’s Gulf of
Pagasae (near modern Volos).
See also ACARNANIA; AEGEAN SEA; AETOLIA; ATTICA;
BOEOTIA; CHALCIDIC ¯E; EPIRUS; EUROPE AND ASIA; EUBOEA;
140
grain supply

IONIAN SEA; LOCRIS; MACEDON; PHOCIS; SHIPS AND SEAFAR-
ING; THRACE.
Further reading: E. H. Warmington, Greek Geogra-
phy (New York: AMS Press, 1973); Patricia Jeskins, The
Environment and the Classical World (London: Bristol
Classical Press, 1998).
Greece, history of
See
ALEXANDER
THE
GREAT;
ATHENS; COLONIZATION; CORINTH; DARK AGE; DIADOCHOI,
HELLENISTIC
AGE;
MACEDON;
MINOAN
CIVILIZATION;
MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION; PELOPONNESIAN WAR; PERSIAN
WARS; ROME; SPARTA; THEBES; TRADE; TYRANTS.
Greek language
The ancient Greek language was one
of the Indo-European family of languages that now
includes English, German, Russian, Persian, and such
Latin-derived romance languages as French, Italian, and
Spanish. These tongues show certain resemblances in
grammar and vocabulary (e.g., English “father,” ancient
Greek patr, ancient Latin pater). According to modern lin-
guistic theory, the prototype of all these languages was
spoken by a group of people living in the Caucasus
region (now in southern Russia) in the third millennium
B.C.E. At some later date, this people—or, at least, their
language—begun to spread outward, presumably by
migration and conquest.
In 1952 C.E., British architect Michael Ventris deci-
phered the LINEAR B language of the MYCENAEAN CIVILIZA-
TION and confirmed that the Mycenaeans of 1400–1200
B.C.E. spoke an early form of Greek. It seems that proba-
bly in about 2100 B.C.E., people coming into Greece from
the Danube basin brought the developing Greek language
with them; these people can be called the first Greeks. In
later centuries, the Greek language continued to contain
many words of non-Greek etymology, presumably derived
from the pre-Greek inhabitants’ language. Often distin-
guished by the endings -nthos, -sos, or -ene, these words
include names of local plants, certain gods’ names, and
many place-names in mainland Greece. Examples include
CORINTH (Korinthos), HYAKINTHOS, acanthus (akanthos),
NARCISSUS (Narkissos), and ATHENA (Athene), as well as
words like thalassa, “sea,” and nesos, “island.”
The final stage of development for the ancient Greek
language came with the end of the Mycenaean civiliza-
tion, soon after 1200 B.C.E. As this society fell, Greece
became subject to a new immigration of Greeks—the
DORIAN GREEKS, speaking their own dialect of the lan-
guage. The story of what happened in the following cen-
turies has been pieced together by ARCHAEOLOGY,
philology, MYTH, and a few precious references by later
Greek authors.
Entering central Greece from the northwest around
1100 B.C.E., the Dorians failed to capture the territory of
ATHENS. Farther south, however, they overran almost all
of the PELOPONNESE (although mountainous ARCADIA
held out), and they continued conquering by sea across a
band of the southern AEGEAN SEA, to CRETE and south-
western ASIA MINOR. In historical times, this swath of ter-
ritory was distinctive for the Dorian culture and Doric
dialect shared by its various inhabitants. The best-known
Dorian city was SPARTA. Modern linguists tend to group
the Doric dialect into a larger category known as West
Greek, which includes the language of the ancient Greeks
around the western Corinthian Gulf.
Meanwhile, around 1000 B.C.E., other migrations
from mainland Greece were taking place. The AEOLIAN
GREEKS of BOEOTIA and THESSALY, buffeted by the invad-
ing Dorians, sent refugees fleeing eastward across the
Aegean to the island of LESBOS and beyond, to northwest-
ern Asia Minor. These disparate areas became known by
their shared Aeolic dialect.
The most fateful migration, however, was of those
Ionian-ethnic Greeks whom the Dorians had chased from
the Peloponnese. These Ionians emigrated across the
Aegean to the central west coast of Asia Minor, where they
eventually flourished as the rich and advanced society of
IONIA. Athens and the CYCLADES islands remained Ionian
territory, all distinguished by their Ionic dialect. The Athe-
nian language developed as a subcategory of Ionic, called
Attic (after the Athenian home territory of ATTICA).
Such were the three main divisions of Greek lan-
guage and culture, although other regional categories
existed as well. The highlanders of Arcadia spoke a very
old form of Greek that retained aspects of ancient Myce-
naean speech and that resembled the speech of another,
but very distant, Greek enclave on the island of CYPRUS.
Modern scholars call this shared dialect Arcado-Cyprian.
See also
ALPHABET; EPIC
POETRY; IONIAN GREEKS;
LABYRINTH; LYRIC POETRY; MYCENAE; RELIGION; SHIPS AND
SEAFARING; TIRYNS; WRITING.
Further reading: P. S. Costas, An Outline of the His-
tory of the Greek Language with Particular Emphasis on the
Koine and Subsequent Periods (Chicago: Ares, 1979);
Leonard R. Palmer, The Greek Language, 2d ed. (Norman:
University of Oklahoma Press, 1996); G. Horrocks,
Greek: A History of the Language and Its Speakers (Lon-
don: Longman, 1997).
gymnasium
Referring to a sports complex, the Greek
word gumnasion comes from the verb gumnazo, “exercise”
(from the adjective gumnos, “naked” or “loinclothed,”
which was how Greek athletes usually trained and com-
peted). Typically located outside a city’s walls, the gymna-
sium featured a running track, a WRESTLING court, and
fields for throwing the javelin and discus; also, rooms for
changing, oiling down, and so on. A more elaborate type
might also include parklands, colonnaded walks, and a
horse-riding track.
Gymnasiums first appeared in the 500s B.C.E. They
were usually state-run institutions open to men and boys
gymnasium
141

of the citizen classes. Within this group, the majority of
regular customers would be aristocrats and other leisured
rich, who did not need to work for a living. The gymna-
sium played a central role in the Greek city-state, foster-
ing male competition and camaraderie. Schoolboys
would receive training in SPORT, and men would pass
their time in exercise and conversation. The gymnasium
was also central to the male-homosexual climate of the
500s–300s B.C.E., the place where men could observe,
and try to meet, boys and youths.
With its gathering of educated people, the gymna-
sium was a natural scene for philosophical discussion—at
least in ATHENS during its age of intellect (400s and 300s
B.C.E.). The Athenian philosopher SOCRATES often could
be found in one or another of the city’s gymnasiums, con-
versing with his following of aristocratic men. Two Athe-
nian gymnasiums, the ACADEMY and the LYCEUM, gave
their names to nearby philosophical schools, set up by
PLATO and ARISTOTLE, respectively (300s B.C.E.). The
intellectual and social-sexual energy of the Athenian
gymnasium is conveyed in certain of Plato’s fictional dia-
logues, such as the Charmides.
See also ARISTOCRACY; EDUCATION; HOMOSEXUALITY;
POLIS.
Further reading: Fikret K. Yegül, The Bath-Gymna-
sium Complex at Sardis (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1986); S. L. Glass, “The Greek Gymnasium.
Some Problems,” in The Archaeology of the Olympics. The
Olympics and Other Festivals in Antiquity. Papers of an
international symposium, Los Angeles, April 5–6, 1984
(Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1988),
155–173; N. B. Crowther, “Euexia, Eutaxia, Philoponia.
Three Contests of the Greek Gymnasium,” Zeitschrift für
Papyrologie und Epigraphik 85 (1991): 301–304; Nigel M.
Kennel, The Gymnasium of Virtue. Education and Culture
in Ancient Sparta (Chapel Hill: University of North Car-
olina Press, 1995).
142
gymnasium
Depiction of youths in a gymnasium. Greek athletes usually trained and competed naked or loinclothed, as shown here. (Alison
Frantz Photographic Collection, American School of Classical Studies at Athens)

H
143
Hades
In MYTH, this was the god of the Underworld
and the brother of ZEUS and POSEIDON. The name Hades
(“the unseen”) properly refers to the god and not his
kingdom. Unlike the Judeo-Christian Satan, Hades is not
evil; as king of the dead, he rules a domain in nature that
complements the happier realm of his brother Zeus.
Hades is, however, rather colorless. He has no MYTH,
except for his abduction of PERSEPHONE. By Zeus’s decree,
she lives with Hades as his queen for four months of
every year.
Hades does not appear as frequently in Greek art as
some of the other divinities. When he is represented, he
is generally shown as an older, bearded god (like his
brothers, Zeus and Poseidon), with gloomy features. He
is sometimes shown standing with the three-headed dog
Kerberos or holding a pickax and cornucopia. Most often,
however, Hades appears in Greek art as the abductor of
Persephone. One of the most spectacular examples of this
scene is the wall painting on one of the tombs at Vergina,
dated around 350 B.C.E.
Like other gods of death or ill omen, Hades often was
worshipped under euphemistic titles. One of the most
common of these was Pluton, “the Rich One,” probably
referring to the rich metal ore in the ground. The early
Romans, in adapting Greek RELIGION to their own use,
adapted this title as the name for their god of the dead,
Pluto.
See also AFTERLIFE.
Further reading: T. A. S. Tinkoff-Utechin, “Ancient
Painting from South Russia. The Rape of Persephone at
Kerch,” Bulletin of the Institute of Classical Studies, Univer-
sity of London 26 (1979): 13–26; B. Lincoln, “The Rape of
Persephone. A Greek Scenario of Women’s Initiation,”
Harvard Theological Review 72 (1979): 223–235; A. D.
Trendall, “A Campanian Lekanis in Lugano with the Rape
of Persephone,” Numismatica e antichità classiche 10
(1981): 165–195; L. Albinus, The House of Hades. Studies
in Ancient Greek Eschatology (Aarhus, Denmark: Aarhus
University Press, 2000).
Halicarnassus
This Greek seaport of southwestern
ASIA MINOR is situated in the non-Greek territory known
as Caria. Founded around 900 B.C.E. by DORIAN GREEKS
from Troezen (in the eastern PELOPONNESE), Halicarnas-
sus lay at the northern shore of what is now called the
Bay of Gökova, in Turkey. As a gateway to and from the
southeastern AEGEAN SEA, the city had a lively commer-
cial culture, combining Carian and Dorian-Greek ele-
ments. Halicarnassus was part of the local Dorian
federation, centered at nearby KNIDOS.
Like other east Greek cities, Halicarnassus flourished
in the 600s and 500s B.C.E., was captured by the Persians
in about 545 B.C.E., and endured a series of Persian-run
Greek TYRANTS. Remarkably, one such tyrant was a
woman, named Artemisia, who accompanied the Persian
king XERXES on his invasion of Greece and led a naval
squadron against the mainland Greeks at the Battle of
SALAMIS (1) (480 B.C.E.).
Halicarnassus’s most famous native—the first known
writer of history, HERODOTUS—fled the city in about 460
B.C.E. after taking part in a failed coup against another
tyrant, Lygdamis. By 450 B.C.E., however, Halicarnassus
was a DEMOCRACY and a member of the Athenian-led
DELIAN LEAGUE. In 412 B.C.E., during the PELOPONNESIAN

WAR, the city became a major Athenian naval base, after
other sites had been lost to widespread revolt by the
Delian allies. Later Halicarnassus reverted to Persian con-
trol, by the terms of the KING’S PEACE (386 B.C.E.).
Under Persian rule, Halicarnassus became one of the
most beautiful and dynamic cities of the Greek world.
The ruler Mausolus—Carian by birth but reigning under
Persian suzerainty—glorified the city as his capital, build-
ing a circuit wall, public monuments, dockyards, and a
citadel (ca. 370 B.C.E.). The crown of the building pro-
gram was his own monumental tomb, the famous Mau-
soleum, planned and begun by Mausolus himself and
continued after his death by his adoring widow, Artemisia
(who was also his sister). It is unclear whether the monu-
ment was ever completely finished.
Now vanished, but described in detail by ancient
authors, the Mausoleum was a colossal structure that tow-
ered over the city of Halicarnassus and its busy harbor. It
measured 120 × 100 feet at its base and stood 140 feet tall.
Because of its tremendous size and splendor, the Mau-
soleum was considered one of the SEVEN WONDERS OF THE
WORLD. It was a squared, pyramidal structure of white
marble with a colonnade at its base, ascending in layers to
a sculpted chariot group at the top, probably representing
the sun god, HELIOS. Mausolus commissioned four of the
greatest Greek sculptors of his time to work on his tomb:
Skopas, Timotheos, Leochares, and Bryaxis, as well as a
famous Greek architect, Pytheos. The building was
adorned with numerous freestanding and relief sculptures
(some now displayed in the British Museum), including a
battle between Greeks and AMAZONS, a battle between
Lapiths and CENTAURS, a hunting scene, and over-life-
sized of Mausolus’s family and ancestors.
The Mausoleum was destroyed by an earthquake in
the 14th century C.E., and many of its stones were taken by
the Knights of Rhodes as building material for the castle
they erected in the harbor of Halicarnassus in 1415–1437.
In 1856, Charles Thomas Newton began exploring the site
of the Mausoleum; he found several sculptures and took
them back to England. Systematic excavation of the site
was later undertaken by Danish archaeologists in 1966 and
has continued to the present day.
Defended by a Persian garrison, Halicarnassus was
besieged and captured by the Macedonian king ALEXAN-
DER THE GREAT in 334 B.C.E., and passed into his empire.
His successors warred over it, with the Ptolemies of
EGYPT eventually winning possession (200s B.C.E.). The
city came under Roman rule in the 100s B.C.E.
Further reading: G. B. Waywell, “The Mausoleum of
Halicarnassus,” in The Seven Wonders of the Ancient World,
edited by Peter A. Clayton and Martin J. Price (London:
Routledge, 1988), 100–123; P. Pedersen, “Town-planning
in Halicarnassus and Rhodes,” in Archaeology in the Dode-
canese [Symposium, Copenhagen, April 7th to 9th 1986],
edited by Søren Dietz and Ioannis Papachristodoulou
(Copenhagen: National Museum of Denmark, 1988),
93–103; Tullia Linders and Pontus Hellström, eds., Archi-
tecture and Society in Hecatomnid Caria: Proceedings of the
Uppsala Symposium 1987 (Uppsala, Sweden: Almquist and
Wiksell International, 1989); Christ Scarre, ed., The Sev-
enty Wonders of the Ancient World: The Great Monuments
and How They Were Built (London: Thames and Hudson,
1999); Diana Bentley, The Seven Wonders of the Ancient
World (New York: Oxford University Press, 2001).
Harmodius and Aristogeiton
Known as the tyranni-
cides (tyrant slayers), these two young male Athenian
aristocrats became semilegendary figures after they died
while assassinating Hipparchus, younger brother of the
Athenian dictator HIPPIAS (1), in 514 B.C.E. Far from end-
ing Hippias’s reign at ATHENS, the assassination brought
on repression from the ruler; but Harmodius and Aristo-
geiton’s bravery and sacrifice—and the fact that the two
men were linked by romantic love—struck a sentimental
chord in their fellow Athenians.
Harmodius and Aristogeiton were kinsmen in an
ancient noble clan. In accordance with the usual pattern of
upper-class Greek homosexual pairings, Aristogeiton was
the protective older lover, perhaps in his late 20s; Harmod-
ius was probably in his late teens. When Harmodius
ignored the unwelcome advances of Hipparchus, the
thwarted Hipparchus insulted Harmodius’s sister in public.
In revenge, Aristogeiton plotted with Harmodius and
a few sympathizers to murder the dictator Hippias and
overthrow the regime. But the plot went awry. At the
summer festival of the PANATHENAIA, Harmodius and
Aristogeiton, attacking with daggers, had the chance to
kill only Hipparchus. The young Harmodius was slain by
bodyguards. Aristogeiton, escaping into the crowd, was
later captured and tortured to death.
After Hippias was expelled from Athens by other
forces in 510 B.C.E, the dead tyrannicides came to be seen
as forerunners of the newly installed DEMOCRACY and
were commemorated with yearly religious sacrifices and a
famous public statue. At the same time, they were viewed
by the upper class as models of aristocratic conduct. One
symposiastic song praised them in mythical terms,
including the stanza “Dearest Harmodius, they say surely
you are not dead but live forever in the Islands of the
Blessed, with swift-footed Achilles and Diomedes.”
The Athenian historian THUCYDIDES (1), in his his-
tory of the PELOPONNESIAN WAR, devotes an unusual
digression to the subject of the tyrannicides, trying to
correct the exaggerated, unhistorical stories about them.
See 
also
ACHILLES; 
AFTERLIFE; 
ARISTOCRACY;
DIOMEDES; HOMOSEXUALITY; SYMPOSIUM; TYRANTS.
Further reading: C. W. Fornara, “The Cult of Har-
modius and Aristogeiton,” Philologus
114 (1970):
155–180; Sture Brunnsåker, The Tyrant-Slayers of Kritios
and Nesiotes: A Critical Study of the Sources and Restora-
tions, 2d ed. (Stockholm: Svenska Institutet i Athen,
144
Harmodius and Aristogeiton

1971); Michael W. Taylor, The Tyrant Slayers: The Heroic
Image in Fifth Century B.C. Athenian Art and Politics, 2d
ed. (Salem, N.H.: Ayer, 1991); Aileen Ajootian, “A Day at
the Races. The Tyrannicides in the Fifth-century Agora,”
in Stephanos. Studies in Honor of Brunilde Sismondo Ridg-
way, edited by Kim Hartswick and Mary Sturgeon
(Philadelphia: University Museum, University of Pennsyl-
vania, 1998), 1–13; K. A. Raaflaub, “Zeus Eleutherios,
Dionysus the Liberator, and the Athenian Tyrannicides.
Anachronistic Uses of Fifth-century Political Concepts,”
in Polis and Politics. Studies in Ancient Greek History. Pre-
sented to Mogens Herman Hansen on his Sixtieth Birthday,
August 20, 2000, edited by P. Flensted-Jensen, T. H.
Nielsen, and L. Rubenstein (Copenhagen: Museum Tus-
culanum Press, University of Copenhagen, 2000),
249–275.
harpies (Greek: harpuiai)
In MYTH, the harpies were
winged female demons who would fly down to steal
food, people, and so on; their name means “snatchers-
away.” They are mentioned in HOMER’s epic poem the
Odyssey (written down around 750 B.C.E.) as carrying off
the daughters of the hero Pandareus. HESIOD’s Theogony
(ca. 700 B.C.E.) describes them as three in number,
named Celaeno (“dark”), Ocypete (“swift-wing”), and
Aello (“storm”). The harpies are most familiar from
APOLLONIUS’s epic poem, the Argonautica (ca. 245 B.C.E.).
There they are said to torment the Thracian king
Phineus on a regular basis by flying down, snatching
away his food, and departing, leaving their feces on
everything.
Possibly the harpies originated as spirits or personifi-
cations of the wind. In their general role as winged,
malevolent females, they resemble the FURIES and the
SIRENS.
Further reading: J. Lerner, “A Note on Sassanian
Harpies,” Iran 13 (1975): 166–171; R. J. Rabel, “The
Harpies in the Eneid,” Classical Journal 80 (1984–1985):
317–325; Ann E. Farkas, Prudence Harper, and Evelyn B.
Harrison, eds., Monsters and Demons in the Ancient and
Medieval Worlds. Papers Presented in Honor of Edith
Porada (Mainz am Rhein, Germany: Philip von Zabern,
1987).
Hecataeus (ca. 550–490 B.C.E.) Early geographer and
“logographer” (travel writer)
Hecataeus lived in the Greek city of MILETUS, in ASIA
MINOR. On the basis of travels in EGYPT, Scythia, the
Persian interior, and elsewhere, he wrote a prose trea-
tise called the Periodos G¯es, or “Trip Around the World”
(which today survives only in fragments quoted by later
writers). The book accompanied a map Hecataeus had
made—perhaps painted onto textile or incised on a cop-
per plate—showing the world as he had encountered it;
although this was not the world’s first map, the map
and book together were revolutionary for Greek learn-
ing. We know that the book gave accounts of local his-
tories, customs, and so on. There were two volumes:
Europe and Asia. Hecataeus is an important forerunner
of the world’s first historian, HERODOTUS (born ca. 485
B.C.E.).
We know almost nothing about Hecataeus’s life. His
father was said to have been a landowner at Miletus, and
Hecataeus must have been wealthy to undertake his trav-
els. He surely had contacts among Miletus’s merchant
community, for his journeys included sites along the
Milesian shipping route northeastward to the BLACK SEA.
Herodotus mentions Hecataeus amid events of the IONIAN
REVOLT against Persian rule (499–493 B.C.E.). He saw that
Hecataeus was present at the first Milesian war council
and advised against the revolt. Herodotus tells us no
more about Hecataeus; perhaps he was killed in the Per-
sian capture of Miletus in 493 B.C.E.
In addition to his travel book, Hecataeus wrote a
treatise called Geneologies, about the legendary pedigrees
of noble Greek families and mythical heroes. The few
surviving fragments of this work suggest a strong ratio-
nalizing purpose: For example, DANAUS could not have
had 50 daughters as the MYTH claims, but perhaps 20.
The book’s opening words announce the writer’s logical
approach: “I write what I believe to be the truth. For the
stories of the Greeks are many and laughable.”
See also EUROPE AND ASIA; IONIA.
Further reading: William A. Heidel, Hecataeus and
the Egyptian Priests in Herodotus, Book II (New York: Gar-
land, 1987); S. West, “Herodotus’ Portrait of Hecataeus,”
Journal of Hellenic Studies 111 (1991): 144–160.
Hecat¯e
This mysterious and sinister goddess was asso-
ciated with night, witchcraft, ghosts, the Moon, and the
supernatural danger of the crossroads. Hecat¯e was very
much a chthonian deity, whom the Greeks attempted to
propitiate by leaving out monthly “Hecat¯e’s suppers.” She
had shrines at crossroads, apparently intended to keep
her away. To our knowledge, she had no MYTH.
Her name means “One Hundred” in Greek and may
have originated as a euphemism for some unspoken
name. Hecat¯e was probably a survival of a pre-Greek god-
dess of black magic.
See also RELIGION.
Further reading: Charles M. Edwards, “The Running
Maiden from Eleusis and the Early Classical Image of
Hekate,” American Journal of Archaeology 90 (1986):
307–318; Bernard Evslin, Hekate (New York: Chelsea
House, 1988); S. I. Johnston, Hekate Soteira. A Study of
Hekate’s Roles in the Chaldean Oracles and Related Litera-
ture (Atlanta: Scholar’s Press, 1990); Stephen Ronan, The
Goddess Hekate
(Hastings, U.K.: Chthonios, 1992);
Robert Von Rudloff, Hekate in Ancient Greek Religion (Vic-
toria, B.C.: Horned Owl Publishers, 1999).
Hecat¯e
145

Hector
In MYTH, this Trojan prince was the eldest son
of King PRIAM and Queen HECUBA, and the commander
of TROY’s forces in the TROJAN WAR. His lasting portrait
occurs in HOMER’s epic poem the Iliad, which reaches its
climax in Hector’s death at the hands of the Greek hero
ACHILLES.
Although Achilles is the Iliad’s protagonist, Hector is
by far the poem’s most sympathetic character—brave,
generous, a devoted husband, father, and son. His poetic
epithets include hippodamos, “tamer of horses.” He is a
civilized figure, remarkably unselfish as compared with
his Greek counterparts. Also unlike them, he is shown as
having a domestic role. One of the most poignant scenes
in the Iliad occurs in book 6, when Hector visits his wife,
ANDROMACHE, and their child, Astyanax, for what will be
the last time. He bids them farewell, revealing his cer-
tainty that doom will overtake him, his family, and the
city of Troy. He tells Andromache how he would much
prefer to die in battle than live to see her captured by the
Greeks: “May I lie dead, and may the heaped-up earth
cover me, before I hear your cries as they drag you into
captivity” (lines 463–464).
Hector’s deeds in the story include his single combat
with the Greek hero AJAX (1) (who gets somewhat the
upper hand before it ends in a draw) and his attack with his
men against the Greeks’ camp and the beached Greek ships
(which he almost succeeds in burning up). In the course of
this action, Hector slays the Greek warrior PATROCLUS, who
has entered the fray dressed in the armor of his friend
Achilles. This fateful act sets the scene for Hector’s single
combat with the enraged Achilles the next day.
In the Iliad’s climactic scene (book 22), Hector waits
for Achilles on the plain in front of Troy, despite the
appeals of his parents from the city walls. But he turns
and flees as Achilles approaches. After a long chase on
foot, the heroes duel. Achilles kills Hector, ties the corpse
to his chariot, and drags it back to camp. Later relenting,
he allows Priam to ransom the body, and the Iliad ends
with Hector’s funeral.
Unlike many of Homer’s Trojans, Hector has a Greek
name (“warder-off”). We know that this name was used
by at least one Greek prince in ASIA MINOR in the 700s
B.C.E.; Hector’s name and portrayal might possibly be
based on some Greek leader living in the era when the
Iliad was written down (around 750 B.C.E.).
Further reading: James Redfield, Nature and Culture
in the Iliad: The Tragedy of Hector (Durham, N.C.: Duke
University Press, 1994); A. T. Murray, trans., Homer, Iliad.
Loeb Classical Library, revised by William F. Wyatt (Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1999).
Hecuba (Greek: Hekab¯e)
In MYTH, Hecuba was the
wife and queen of the Trojan king PRIAM. She was the
mother of the princes HECTOR and PARIS and 18 of
Priam’s other sons. Later writers also assign to her a
daughter, Polyxena.
In HOMER’s epic poem the Iliad (written down around
750 B.C.E.), Hecuba is a secondary character, regal and gra-
cious. Later writers, describing her relentless sorrows and
decline after TROY’s fall, treat her as a symbol of ruined hap-
piness. She is portrayed as a Greek captive in two of
EURIPIDES’ surviving tragedies, Trojan Women (415 B.C.E.)
and Hecuba (424 B.C.E.). Hecuba presents her vengeance on
the Greek champion Polymnestor, who had killed Polyxena
as a sacrifice to ACHILLES’ ghost. Lured into Hecuba’s tent,
Polymnestor is blinded, and his two young sons murdered,
by her waiting women. Later authors, such as the Roman
Ovid, describe Hecuba’s death; forgiven for her violence
against Polymnestor, she was handed over as a prize to
ODYSSEUS. But her hatred of him was such that she was
supernaturally transformed into a snarling, barking dog. In
this shape, she leapt into the sea. Her grave became a land-
mark, Cynos Sema (dog’s tomb), along the HELLESPONT.
Further reading: Judith Mossman, Wild Justice: A
Study of Euripides’ Hecuba (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1995); Timberlake Wertenbaker, trans., Hecuba by Euripi-
des
(Woodstock, Ill.: Dramatic Publishing, 1996);
Nicholas Rudall, trans., The Trojan Women/Euripides
(Chicago: Ivan R. Dee, 1999).
Helen of Troy
In MYTH, this Spartan princess of great
physical beauty was the daughter of the god ZEUS and the
Spartan queen LEDA.
Helen was married to the Spartan king MENELAUS.
But at the prompting of the love-goddess APHRODITE,
Helen eloped with the handsome Trojan prince PARIS.
This infatuation was the cause of the disastrous TROJAN
WAR, which was to end, after a 10-year siege, in Troy’s
destruction and the death of Paris and many others, Tro-
jan and Greek. HOMER’s epic poem the Iliad shows Helen
installed at Troy, protected and admired by the people to
whom she has brought so much trouble. She is portrayed
as a glamorous and gracious lady, well aware of her repre-
hensible position. In one famous scene (book 5), the Tro-
jan elders, admiring her beauty, agree once again that she
is worth fighting for. In Homer’s Odyssey, Helen is shown
living contentedly again with Menelaus back in Sparta,
after the war.
Later writers elaborated on Helen’s story. In one ver-
sion, Menelaus intends to kill her after the Greeks take
Troy, but, on seeing her, forgives her. The most famous
reworking of Helen’s story was the Palinodia of the Sicil-
ian Greek poet STESICHORUS (ca. 590 B.C.E.), which
claimed that Helen had never left Sparta at all; rather, the
gods had sent a phantom-Helen with Paris to Troy, so that
Troy’s doom might be fulfilled.
At SPARTA Helen was worshipped as a goddess associ-
ated with TREES and nature. This divine Helen was proba-
146
Hector

bly a survival of a pre-Greek goddess—one of many who
infiltrated Greek RELIGION in various guises.
See also EURIPIDES; GORGIAS.
Further reading: Jack Lindsay, Helen of Troy: Woman
and Goddess (London: Constable, 1974); George A.
Kennedy, The Story of Helen: Myth and Rhetoric (St. Louis,
Mo.: Washington University Press, 1987); Robert Meagher,
Helen: Myth, Legend, and the Culture of Misogyny (New
York: Continuum Publishing Co., 1995); Robert Meagher,
The Meaning of Helen: In Search of an Ancient Icon (Wau-
conda, Ill.: Bolchazy-Carducci, 2002).
Helios
In MYTH, the god Helios was the personification of
the Sun. Helios was not important in Greek RELIGION,
except for his nationalistic cult on the island of RHODES.
Elsewhere he was more of a poetic fancy—a charioteer who
drives his horses across the sky each day and returns by
night, sailing in a giant cup around the stream of ocean, to
start again next morning. His best-known myth told how
he had a human son, Phaëthon, who won his father’s per-
mission to drive the solar chariot in Helios’s place for one
day. But Phaëthon, unable to control the reins, careened too
close to the Earth, until the god ZEUS was forced to kill him
with a thunderbolt, to save the world from fire.
As the god who sees everything from above, Helios
was sometimes invoked as the guarantor of oaths. Some
myths give him the minor function of bringing news to
the gods of certain events that he has witnessed.
In the philosophical climate of the 400s B.C.E., there
arose a theory identifying Helios with the major god
APOLLO. Later writers of the ancient world sometimes
referred to Apollo as a sun god, and this idea persists in
popular belief today; but in Greek myth the Sun generally
had its own god.
As the patron deity of Rhodes, Helios was honored
with a grand annual festival. This cult was clearly shaped
by non-Greek, Oriental beliefs. The famous Colossus of
Rhodes, built in about 275 B.C.E. outside the harbor of
Rhodes city, was a giant statue of the sun god. It was con-
sidered to be one of the SEVEN WONDERS OF THE WORLD.
See also OCEANUS.
Hellas
See HELL¯EN.
Hell¯en
In MYTH, this figure was the father of the Greek
people. Hell¯en—who should not be confused with the
princess HELEN OF TROY—had three sons: Dorus, Aeolus,
and Xuthus. From these came the main ancient Greek
ethnic branches—the DORIAN
GREEKS,
the AEOLIAN
GREEKS, the IONIAN GREEKS, and the Greeks of ACHAEA
(the latter two categories are named for Xuthus’s sons,
Ion and Achaeus). According to the myth, this is why the
Greek people are known collectively as the Hell¯enes, “the
sons of Hell¯en.”
Hell¯en
147
The art on this lekythos, a container used for precious 
perfumed oils, depicts the moment when Paris, the Trojan
prince, meets Helen, the wife of Spartan king Menelaus. The
goddess of love blesses their meeting as she flies over them in
a chariot. (The J. Paul Getty Museum)

The legend’s purpose was simply to explain the ori-
gins of these various ethnic groups. In true fact the name
Hell¯enes seems to be derived from the word Hellas, which
was the Greeks’ name for mainland Greece.
Hellenistic Age
This term is used by scholars to
describe the era of the enlarged, cosmopolitan Greek
world of approximately 300–150 B.C.E. Unlike the word
Hellenic, which refers straightforwardly to the Greeks,
the word Hellenistic comes from a verb Hellazein, “to
speak Greek or identify with the Greeks,” and refers to
the Greek-influenced societies that arose in the wake of
ALEXANDER
THE GREAT’s conquests (334–323 B.C.E.).
This Hellenistic world extended from southern France to
northern Afghanistan. Its characteristic nature was a
mingling of Greek and Eastern cultures, particularly in
the Near East and in ASIA MINOR. The political units of
the Hellenistic world were the rich and large kingdoms
of Alexander’s successors—MACEDON, Ptolemaic EGYPT,
the SELEUCID EMPIRE, and, eventually, PERGAMON—and
the Syracusan monarchy. Gone was the society built
around the traditional Greek POLIS, or city-state, where
citizens debated public policy in political assemblies and
served as soldiers in time of war. In the Hellenistic
world, kings did the governing, war was the business of
professionals, and citizens turned to more individualistic
pursuits, such as mystery religions and new, more per-
sonal philosophies.
Mainland Greece lay under Macedonian rule for
much of the Hellenistic era. ATHENS, still a revered “uni-
versity town,” was no longer the cultural center of the
Greek world. That honor had passed to Egyptian
ALEXANDRIA (1) and secondarily to ANTIOCH, Pergamon,
and SYRACUSE. At these places, rich kings sponsored
courts full of scientists and poets.
The Hellenistic world was absorbed by ROME in sev-
eral stages. Syracuse fell to Roman siege in 211 B.C.E. The
Romans dismantled the Macedonian kingdom in 167
B.C.E., after the Third Macedonian War. Mainland Greece
was occupied by the Romans in 146 B.C.E., after the
148
Hellenistic Age

Achaean War. In 133 B.C.E. the Greek cities of Asia Minor
were bequeathed to the Romans by the last king of Perga-
mon (effective 129 B.C.E.), and the remnants of the Seleu-
cid kingdom and Ptolemaic Egypt were annexed by Rome
in the first century B.C.E.
See 
also
AFTERLIFE;
APOLLONIUS;
ARCHIMEDES;
ASTRONOMY; BACTRIA; DIADOCHOI; DIONYSUS; EPICURE-
ANISM; KALLIMACHUS; MATHEMATICS; MEDICINE; PHALANX;
RELIGION; RHODES; SCIENCE; SCULPTURE; SKEPTICISM; STO-
ICISM; THEOCRITUS; WARFARE, LAND; WARFARE, NAVAL;
WARFARE, SIEGE.
Further reading: John Onians, Art and Thought in
the Hellenistic Age: The Greek World View, 350–50 B.C.
(London: Thames and Hudson, 1979); Stanley M.
Burstein, ed., The Hellenistic Age from the Battle of Ipsos
to the Death of Kleopatra VII (New York: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1985); J. J. Pollitt, Art in the Hellenistic Age
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 1986); Peter
Green, Alexander to Actium: The Historical Evolution of
the Hellenistic Age, 2d ed. (Berkeley: University of Cali-
fornia Press, 1993); Helmut Koester, History, Culture, and
Religion of the Hellenistic Age, 2d ed. (New York: W. de
Gruyter, 1995).
Hellespont
This thirty-three-mile-long sea strait sepa-
rates the Gallipoli peninsula from the northwestern coast
of ASIA MINOR. Through this channel, which ranges
between one and five miles wide, a strong current flows
southwestward from the Sea of MARMARA to the AEGEAN
SEA. Also known as the Dardanelles, the Hellespont is the
more western of two bottlenecks—the other being the
BOSPORUS—along the shipping route to the BLACK SEA.
Like the Bosporus, the Hellespont traditionally has been
considered a boundary between the continents of EUROPE
AND ASIA.
The ancient Greek name Hell¯espontos, “Hell¯e’s Sea,”
was said to commemorate the young daughter of
Athamas, a mythical king of EUBOEA. According to leg-
end, Hell¯e fell to her death in the strait when she slipped
off the back of the flying ram that was carrying her and
her brother to safety from their stepmother. (This was the
first episode in the story of JASON (1) and the Golden
Fleece.)
As a bottleneck where shipping could be attacked or
tolled systematically, the Hellespont was a critical link in
the eastern TRADE route. The opportunities of this locale,
combined with the channel’s excellent commercial fish-
ing, raised several local cities to wealth and prominence.
The earliest and most important of these was TROY, situ-
ated on the Asian side, just outside the strait’s western
mouth. Archaeological evidence suggests that a wealthy
Troy, inhabited by non-Greeks, was destroyed abruptly
around 1220 B.C.E.—probably by Mycenaean Greeks
driven to remove Troy’s disruption of metal imports to
Greece.
As the Black Sea region began supplying grain for the
cities of mainland Greece, control of the Hellespont
became crucial to the ambitious, food-importing city of
ATHENS. By 600 B.C.E. Athenian colonists were warring
with settlers from LESBOS over possession of Sigeum, near
the old site of Troy. By the mid-400s B.C.E. Athens had a
naval base at the Hellespontine fortress of SESTOS, on the
European shore. There all westbound, non-Athenian,
merchant grain ships were subject to a 10 percent tax,
which would be reimbursed if the ship brought its cargo
to Athens’s port.
During the later PELOPONNESIAN WAR, Athenian and
Spartan navies fought no fewer than three battles in the
Hellespont (411 and 405 B.C.E.), as the Spartans sought
to destroy Athens’s lifeline of imported grain. The third
such battle, the Spartan victory at AEGOSPOTAMI, won the
war for SPARTA.
Besides Sestos, prominent Greek cities of the Helles-
pont included Abydos and Lampsacus, both on the Asian
Hellespont
149
Corinthian-style columns and other Greek architectural
remnants at Palmyra, in the Syrian desert. Palmyra, an
oasis town on the caravan route between Damascus and
Mesopotamia, flourished in the Hellenistic world that arose
in the wake of Alexander’s conquests. From ca. 300 B.C.E.
to 64 B.C.E. Palmyra owed allegiance to the Seleucid kings;
thereafter, it was a half-Greek, half-Syrian frontier city of
the Roman Empire. These columns were part of a
grandiose sanctuary of the local god Bel, built in C.E. 32.
(Margaret Bunson)

shore. The fact that Abydos faced Sestos across the chan-
nel’s narrowest part (one mile wide) helped to inspire the
charming legend of Hero and Leander. This tale described
how a man of Abydos (Leander) swam the Hellespont
every night to visit his mistress in Sestos.
See also ALCAEUS; CHERSONESE; PERSIAN WARS.
Further reading: W. L. Adams, “Cassander and the
Crossing of the Hellespont, Diodorus 17, 17, 4,” Ancient
World 2 (1979): 111–115; N. G. L. Hammond and L. J.
Roseman, “The Construction of Xerxes’ Bridge over the
Hellespont,” Journal of Hellenic Studies 116 (1996):
88–107.
helots
These publicly owned serfs, or noncitizens,
farmed the land in virtual captivity, providing food for the
citizen population of a given state. Unlike SLAVES, these
serfs kept their own language, customs, and communities
on the land (which of course they did not own). They
were typically the descendants of a once-free people,
either Greek or non-Greek, who had been conquered in a
prior era.
The public use of serfs may have been a tradition
specifically of the DORIAN GREEKS, because most of the
attested locales were Dorian (including CRETE and SYRA-
CUSE). The serfs were known by various names; at ARGOS,
for instance, they were called gumn¯etes, or “naked ones.”
But the most notorious use of such people was at SPARTA,
where they were called helotai, or helots. This name sup-
posedly came from the town of Helos (“marsh”), annexed
and subjugated by Sparta in the late 700s B.C.E. By 600
B.C.E. further Spartan conquests had created helots in two
large geographic areas: LACONIA (the territory around
Sparta) and MESSENIA (the large plain west of Laconia’s
mountains). These people were Dorian Greeks, just like
their conquerors, the Spartans.
Although helot farm labor freed Sparta’s citizens to
concentrate on war, this subjugated population had a
warping affect on the Spartan mentality. Between Messe-
nia and Laconia, the helots outnumbered their Spartan
masters, and the fear of a helot revolt—such as that of
464 B.C.E.—kept the Spartan army close to home and
drove Sparta to repressive measures. The Krypteia
(“secret society”) was an official Spartan group dedicated
to eliminating subversive helots.
Helots might accompany Spartan armies to war, serv-
ing as soldiers’ servants or as skirmishers. But such loy-
alty did not win Spartan trust. In 424 B.C.E., during the
PELOPONNESIAN WAR, the Spartans decreed that they
would honor those helots who claimed to have done the
best battlefield service for Sparta. Two thousand helots
came forward in the belief that they would be made Spar-
tan citizens. But the treacherous Spartans, having thus
identified the most spirited of the helots, eventually mur-
dered them.
See also PYLOS.
Further reading: I. M. Diakonoff, “Slaves, Helots,
and Serfs in Early Antiquity,” Acta Antiqua Academiae
Scientiarum Hungaricae 22 (1974): 45–78; L. J. Piper,
“Spartan Helots in the Hellenistic Age,” Ancient Society
15–17 (1984–1986): 75–88; R. J. A. Talbert, “The Role
of the Helots in the Class Struggle at Sparta,” Historia 38
(1989): 22–40; B. Jordan, “The Ceremony of the Helots
in Thucydides, IV, 80,” L’Antiquité classique 59 (1990):
37–69; J. A. Dearman, “Nabis of Sparta and the Helots,”
Palestine Exploration Quarterly 122 (1990): 41–46; M.
Whitby, “Two Shadows. Images of Spartans and Helots,”
in The Shadow of Sparta [Colloquium Cardiff 1991],
edited by Anton Powell and Stephen Hodkinson (New
York: Routledge for the Classical Press of Wales, 1994),
87–126; P. Hunt, “Helots at the Battle of Plataea,” Histo-
ria 46 (1997): 129–144; N. Luraghi and Susan E.
Alcock, eds., Helots and Their Masters in Laconia and
Messenia: Histories, Ideologies, Structures (Washington,
D.C.: Center for Hellenic Studies, Trustees for Harvard
University, 2003).
Hephaistos (Hephaestus)
The lame smith god, patron
of craftsmen, was worshipped mainly at ATHENS and
other manufacturing centers. Hephaistos was also the god
of fire and volcanoes, and this more primitive aspect was
probably his original identity. He had an important cult
on the volcanic Greek island of Lemnos, and he was also
associated with volcanic Mt. Etna in SICILY. To the imagi-
native Greeks, these volcanoes must have suggested a
blacksmith’s furnace.
According to HOMER, Hephaistos was the son of ZEUS
and HERA, though HESIOD calls him only the son of Hera.
He was born ugly and lame, which horrified and embar-
rassed his mother, since the gods were generally beautiful
and perfect. In her shame, Hera threw her son down from
Mt. OLYMPUS into the ocean, where he was rescued and
raised by ocean nymphs. In some versions of the MYTH,
the god was only born ugly (not physically deformed),
and it was the fall from Olympus that lamed him.
While being raised by the nymphs, Hephaistos began
to create many wonderful works of art and craft, includ-
ing a beautiful golden throne with invisible chains that
would entrap the sitter. He sent it to Hera, who sat down
and was immediately imprisoned. The gods then sum-
moned Hephaistos back to Olympus; he did not want to
return, but eventually DIONYSUS got him drunk and man-
aged to bring him back. The return of Hephaistos to
Olympus was a favorite subject in Greek art. Once back
among the gods, Hephaistos took his mother’s side in a
quarrel between her and Zeus, and this time Zeus threw
him down from the mountain. He fell for nine days and
nights and finally landed on the island of Lemnos, which
became a favorite place of his. Some versions of Greek
myth actually attribute Hephaistos’s lameness to this fall
instead of the first one.
150
helots

As the craftsman god, Hephaistos was often closely
linked with ATHENA, and they stood together in the
Hephaisteion in the Athenian AGORA. In the Odyssey, he
was married to APHRODITE; the Greeks found it amusing
to think of the ugliest god wed to the most beautiful
goddess. The love-goddess had many extramarital
affairs, not least of which an ongoing relationship with
the god of war, ARES. Tired of her adulteries, Hephais-
tos fashioned a marvelous chain-link net, with which
he captured his wife and Ares together in bed. Then
he hauled them, netted, before the assembled gods.
Hephaistos also played a minor role in many other
Greek myths, providing such marvelous handiwork as
the invincible armor of ACHILLES. The Romans adopted
Hephaistos’s myth and cult, attaching these to their fire
god, Vulcan (Volcanus).
See also SEVEN AGAINST THEBES.
Further reading: Evelyn B. Harrison, “Alkamenes’
Sculptures for the Hephaisteion, 1. The Cult Statues,”
American Journal of Archaeology 81 (1977): 265–287; H.
A. Shapiro, Art and Cult under the Tyrants in Athens. Sup-
plement (Mainz am Rhein, Germany: Philip von Zabern,
1995).
Hera
One of the most important Greek deities, Hera
was the eldest daughter of CRONUS and Rhea, and she
later married her own brother, ZEUS. She was worshipped
by the Greeks as the patron of WOMEN and MARRIAGE. She
had major cult centers at the city of ARGOS (a very
ancient cult) and on the island of SAMOS, but she was
worshipped throughout the Greek world, particularly in
the PELOPONNESE. Her name means “lady” in Greek. Her
powers in nature complement those of Zeus. She controls
storm clouds and lightning, and her attendants are the
Seasons and Iris, goddess of the rainbow.
In MYTH, Hera cuts a strong figure—an independent
wife, but jealous of Zeus’s many extramarital amours. In
one famous scene in HOMER’s epic poem the Iliad, she
seduces her husband as part of a scheme to distract him
from observing the TROJAN WAR and aiding the Trojans
(book 14). Other stories represent her as oppressively
cruel toward her rivals—that is, toward the female
humans and demigods who involuntarily attracted Zeus’s
lust. Among such persecuted rivals were Leto (who gave
birth to Zeus’s children APOLLO and ARTEMIS) and IO. But
the most important example is Hera’s enmity toward the
hero HERAKLES, son of Zeus and the mortal woman
Alkmene. Hera is Herakles’ constant antagonist and is
reconciled with him only at the end of his labors, at
Zeus’s command.
Hera’s children by Zeus are ARES, HEPHAISTOS, Eilei-
thyia (goddess of childbirth), and Hebe (goddess of
youth). In art, she appears as a mature, physically attrac-
tive woman. She is usually represented seated on a
throne, wearing a diadem and a veil. The cow and the
cuckoo are often associated with her. The Romans identi-
fied Hera with their goddess Juno.
Despite her Greek name and her place in Greek RELI-
GION, Hera was probably not Greek in origin. It has been
plausibly suggested that she is a vestige of the mother
goddess who was the primary deity of the non-Greek
occupants of Greece before the first Greeks arrived
around 2100 B.C.E. The immigrating Greeks conquered
the land and assimilated this goddess’s cult into their own
religion, to a position subordinate to the Greek father
god, Zeus. This goddess’s original name is not known,
nor is it certain whether this assimilation took place
because it was politically expedient or because it was reli-
giously attractive to the early Greeks.
Further reading: Karl Kerényi, Zeus and Hera:
Archetypal Image of Father, Husband, and Wife, translated
by Christopher Holme (London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul, 1976); Joan O’Brien, The Transformation of Hera: A
Study of Ritual, Hero, and the Goddess in the Iliad (Lan-
ham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield, 1993); Isabelle Clark,
“The Gamos of Hera: Myth and Ritual,” in The Sacred and
the Feminine in Ancient Greece, edited by Sue Blundell and
Margaret Williamson (London: Routledge, 1998), 13–26;
Christopher Pfaff, The Architecture of the Classical Temple
of Hera (Princeton, N.J.: American School of Classical
Studies at Athens, 2003).
Heraclitus (Greek: Herakleitos) (ca. 500s B.C.E.) Early
philosopher, of the Greek city of EPHESOS, in western ASIA
MINOR
Almost nothing is known of his life. He is said to have
been of high aristocratic lineage and of an arrogant and
reclusive nature. Some of the writings ascribed to him are
derisive of the democratic politics at Ephesos.
Heraclitus was the last of the great Ionian thinkers
who, in the 500s B.C.E., pioneered the study that we call
PHILOSOPHY. His writings consisted of a collection of
prose proverbs, fashioned in an oracular style. A number
of individual proverbs have come down to us in quota-
tions by later writers. Although often obscure in wording,
these aphorisms seem to show remarkable originality in
their search for universal order amid worldly flux.
Where his Ionian predecessors—THALES, ANAXIMAN-
DER, and ANAXIMENES—had looked for cosmic unity in
some elemental substance such as water or mist, Heracli-
tus sought it in the universe’s defining arrangement
(Greek: logos). He saw everything in the world as part of
single, continuous process of change—“All things flow”
and “You cannot step into the same river twice” are two of
his more famous sayings. This change, he said, is regu-
lated by a balance or measure typically involving the con-
flict of opposing forces. Heraclitus found deep significance
in the opposing tensions employed in the stringing of
the musician’s lyre and the archer’s bow (both of which
were inventions associated with the god APOLLO, lord of
Heraclitus
151

harmony and order). Heraclitus evidently saw the lyre and
bow’s “backward-stretched unity” (Greek: palintonos har-
moni¯e) as a key to understanding the cosmos.
Similarly, many of Heraclitus’s proverbs seek to show
that opposites such as hot and cold are actually related or
connected. “The road up and the road down are one and
the same,” he wrote, apparently referring to a footpath
that leads both ways (so to speak), up and down a moun-
tain. Other surviving proverbs suggest an innovative
belief in one God, reflecting this notion of cosmic
unity—for example, “The god is day, night, winter, sum-
mer, war, peace, satiety, hunger.”
The cosmic order was somehow maintained by fire,
according to Heraclitus. He believed that a person’s soul
was a kind of fire, which could be harmfully “dampened”
by bad behavior such as sexual excess or drunkenness.
Spiritually healthy souls remained dry; after death they
would be able to reach higher places in the heavens.
A brilliant but eccentric thinker, Heraclitus did not
inspire an immediate following. However, in the 200s
B.C.E. the philosophical movement called STOICISM hon-
ored his memory and adapted some of his ideas.
See also IONIA.
Further reading: Joel Wilcox, The Origins of Episte-
mology in Early Greek Thought: A Study of Psyche and
Logos in Heraclitus (Lewiston, N.Y.: E. Mellen Press,
1994); Dennis Sweet, Heraclitus: Translation and Analysis
(Lanham, Md.: University Press of America, 1995);
Richard Geldard, Remembering Heraclitus (Hudson, N.Y.:
Lindisfarne Books, 2000).
Herakles (Hercules)
The most popular of all Greek
mythical heroes, Herakles was famous for his strength,
courage, and generosity of spirit. By virtue of his 12
Labors performed for the good of humankind, Herakles
was worshipped as both god and man throughout antiq-
uity. Philosophical schools such as STOICISM saw him as
an ideal of human fortitude. The early Christians called
him a forerunner of Christ. Better known today by his
Roman name, Hercules, the hero continues to have a life
of his own in such pop culture media as comic books,
films, and advertising. Herakles is one of our single most
vital legacies from ancient Greece.
His name means “glory of HERA.” In the legends that
have come down to us, the goddess Hera is his implaca-
ble enemy. But given the hero’s name, it seems plausible
that at some early stage of Greek mythology (ca. 1200
B.C.E.), Hera was his divine patron and he her servant,
performing his helpful labors at her command. Possibly
the Greek Herakles derived from a pre-Greek god or
hero—a servant or consort of the mother goddess who
was worshipped on the Argive plain long before the first
Greeks arrived, around 2100 B.C.E.
In MYTH, Herakles was associated with both of the
two centers of Mycenaean Greece—the Argive plain and
the Theban plain. Born at THEBES, he was the son of
Alkm¯en¯e, a princess of MYCENAE or TIRYNS. Alkm¯en¯e was
married to Amphitryon, but Herakles’ true father was the
great god ZEUS, who had visited Alkm¯en¯e disguised as her
husband. (Herakles had a mortal twin brother, Iphikles,
begotten by Amphitryon.)
The goddess Hera, chronically jealous of her hus-
band’s infidelities, was Herakles’ enemy from the first.
She sent two snakes to kill the twins in their cradle, but
the baby Herakles strangled them. Hera continued to
plague him throughout his life and was reconciled with
him only after his death and transformation into a god.
As a child at Thebes, Herakles showed strength but
wildness. When his MUSIC teacher tried to beat him for
misbehavior, Herakles brained the man with a lyre. Later
his weapons were the club and the archer’s bow. He
defended Thebes from an attack from the city of
ORCHOMENUS and married the Theban princess Megara.
But when Hera blighted him with a fit of madness, he
killed Megara and their children. (This episode is
described in EURIPIDES’ surviving tragedy Herakles, ca.
417 B.C.E.) Seeking expiation at the god APOLLO’s shrine
at DELPHI, Herakles was instructed by the priestess to
return to his parents’ home region in the PELOPONNESE
and place himself in servitude for 12 years to his kinsman
Eurystheus, king of Tiryns.
The tasks set by Eurystheus comprise the famous 12
Labors (athloi or ponoi), which are the heart of the Herak-
les myth. In each case, Herakles had either to destroy a
noxious monster or to retrieve a prize. The Labors’ objec-
tives begin with the elimination of certain local monsters
in the Peloponnese, but gradually the goals become more
distant and fabular until, by the last two Labors—captur-
ing the monstrous dog KERBEROS from the Underworld and
fetching apples from the supernatural sisters called the
Hesperides—Herakles was symbolically conquering death.
The 12 Labors were (1) kill the lion of Nemea, (2)
kill the hydra (water snake) of Lerna, (3) capture alive
the boar of Erymanthus, (4) capture the hind (female
deer) of Keryneia, (5) destroy the birds of Stymphalia, (6)
cleanse the stables of King Augeas of ELIS, (7) capture the
bull of CRETE, (8) capture the horses of the Thracian king
Diomedes, (9) fetch the belt (“girdle”) of the queen of the
AMAZONS, (10) steal the cattle of the monster Geryon, in
the far West, (11) fetch Kerberos from the realm of
HADES, and (12) bring back some of the golden apples
from the Hesperides’ garden, in the far West. The hero
accomplished these tasks, albeit with the goddess
ATHENA’s occasional help, and so he won purification for
his crime.
Besides the Labors, Herakles had many mythical
exploits, in part because so many Greek cities wanted to
claim an association with him. In a dispute with the Del-
phic oracle, he tried to steal Apollo’s holy tripod from the
sanctuary. He sailed with the Thessalian hero JASON (1) in
the quest for the Golden Fleece. He vanquished the
152
Herakles

wrestler Antaeus, a Giant who was son of POSEIDON. And,
after a quarrel with the Trojan king Laomedon, Herakles
raised an army and captured TROY, in the generation
before the TROJAN WAR.
When Nessos the centaur tried to rape Herakles’ sec-
ond wife, Deianeira, the hero killed him with arrows
dipped in venom of the Lernean hydra. But the dying
centaur gave Deianeira his bloody shirt, convincing her
that it could be used as a love charm on Herakles, if
needed. Later, seeking to retain the love of her unfaithful
husband, Deianeira laid the shirt on his shoulders. Her-
akles died in rage and excruciating pain from the venom-
soaked blood (as described in SOPHOKLES’ tragedy The
Women of Trachis, ca. 429–420 B.C.E.). But on the funeral
pyre Herakles’ mortal part was burned away, and he
ascended as a god to Mt. OLYMPUS. There he was wel-
comed by his divine father, reconciled with Hera, and
married to Zeus and Hera’s daughter, the goddess Hebe.
In art, Herakles usually appears as a strong, bearded
man wearing the skin of the Nemean Lion, which he slew
in his first labor; he also holds a club. He often has the
physiognomy of a boxer, with a broken nose and swollen,
“cauliflower” ears. His 12 labors were extremely popular
subjects for Greek artists, especially vase painters. They
are also depicted on a series of architectural reliefs adorn-
ing the Temple of Zeus at OLYMPIA.
In a politically angled legend, the DORIAN GREEKS
claimed descent from Herakles. Supposedly the Herakli-
dae (the “sons of Herakles”), reclaiming their lost
birthright, had led the Dorians in their invasion of central
and southern Greece, around 1100–1000 B.C.E.
See also AFTERLIFE; AGIAD CLAN; CENTAURS; CYNICS;
EURYPONTID CLAN; GIANTS.
Further reading: Birgitta Bergquist, Herakles on Tha-
sos: The Archaeological, Literary, and Epigraphic Evidence
for His Sanctuary, Status, and Cult Reconsidered, English
text revised by Neil Tomkinson (Uppsala, Sweden:
Almquist & Wiksell, 1973); Gudrun Ahlberg-Cornell,
Herakles and the Sea-monster in Attic Black-figure Vase-
painting (Stockholm: Svenska Institutet i Athen, 1984);
Frank Brommer, Herakles: The Twelve Labors of the Hero
in Ancient Art and Literature, translated by Shirley J.
Schwarz (New Rochelle, N.Y.: A. D. Caratzas, 1986);
Rainer Vollkommer, Herakles in the Art of Classical Greece
(Oxford: Oxford University Committee for Archaeology,
1988); Kathryn Lasky, Hercules: The Man, The Myth, the
Hero (New York: Hyperion Books for Children, 1997);
Mark W. Padilla, The Myths of Herakles in Ancient Greece:
Survey and Profile (Lanham, Md.: University Press of
America, 1998).
Hercules
See HERAKLES.
Hermes
In MYTH, Hermes was the son of the great god
ZEUS and the demigoddess Maia (daughter of ATLAS); he
was also the messenger of the gods. In human society, he
was the patron of land travel, heralds, commerce, weights
and measures, RHETORIC, guile, thieves, WRESTLING, and
other SPORT. Hermes was an attractive and picturesque
deity, somewhat resembling his half brother, the god
APOLLO. As the mythical inventor of the lyre, Hermes was
a minor patron of poetry, which was normally Apollo’s
province.
In origin, Hermes may have been a protector of way-
farers, commemorated by roadside stone piles or carved
images. His name most probably comes from the Greek
word herma (plural: hermai), meaning “pile of marker
stones.” In an era when travel was uncomfortable and
dangerous, Hermes safeguarded travelers and was wor-
shipped at crossroads in particular.
In art, Hermes is portrayed as a beautiful youth,
often in traveler’s or herald’s garb. He frequently wears a
broad-brimmed, flat hat known as a petasos, and his
swiftness is represented by the wings on his golden san-
dals. His primary attribute is a staff known as a caduceus;
it is composed of three pieces, one forming the handle
and the other two entwined in a knot at one end. These
latter two were later replaced by serpents. The caduceus
was a herald’s staff, an emblem of peace and neutrality.
The legend of Hermes’ birth is told in the charming
Homeric Hymn to Hermes, composed around 675 B.C.E.
The god was born at dawn on Mt. Cyllene in ARCADIA. By
noon he was playing music on the lyre, which he had
invented, using a tortoise shell as a sounding board. That
same evening, he ventured out and stole a herd of 50 cat-
tle belonging to Apollo. The story shows the mixture of
creativity and dishonesty that characterized the mythical
Hermes. He was also believed to guide the souls of the
dead to the Underworld. Other legends name him as a
lover of APHRODITE, who bore him a child, an androgy-
nous creature named Hermaphroditus (from which we
get the modern English word “hermaphrodite”).
By the 400s B.C.E., Greek cities such as ATHENS con-
tained stylized hermai, erected at streetcorners and in the
AGORA. These were bronze or marble pillars sacred to the
god, with only the face and genitals sculpted. Shortly before
the Athenian sea expedition against SYRACUSE during the
PELOPONNESIAN WAR (415 B.C.E.), the hermai throughout
the city were mutilated overnight—probably by gangs of
defeatist right-wingers, seeking to cast bad omens over the
expedition by doing outrage to the god of travel.
See also AFTERLIFE; ALCIBIADES; ANDOKIDES; MUSIC.
Further reading: Antoine Faivre, The Eternal Hermes:
From Greek God to Alchemical Magus, translated by Josce-
lyn Godwin (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Phanes Press, 1995).
Herodas (Herondas) (200s B.C.E.) Writer of “mimes”
(Greek: mimiamboi, “satirical sketches”)
Little is known about the life of Herodas, but it is thought
that he lived on the island of Cos. An ancient papyrus
Herodas
153

discovered in the collection of the British Museum in the
1800s C.E. has provided us with seven of his detailed
urban scenes in verse. They range in length from 85 to
129 lines each, and their titles include “The Match-
maker,” “The Pimp,” “The Schoolmaster,” “The Cobbler,”
“The Jealous Woman,” “The Confidantes,” and “A Visit
to Asklepios.” The best of the poems give delightful por-
traits of these interesting and amusing characters.
Further reading: Giuseppe Mastromarco, The Public
of Herondas (Amsterdam: J. C. Gieben, 1984).
Herodotus (ca. 484–420 B.C.E.) Greek historian from
HALICARNASSUS in southwest ASIA MINOR
Herodotus is known for his detailed, surviving account of
the PERSIAN WARS, which had culminated when he was a
child. This lengthy history describes how the Persian
expansion westward after the mid-500s B.C.E. was eventu-
ally defeated by the Greeks’ defense of their homeland in
480–479 B.C.E. Herodotus is considered the world’s first
historian, the first writer ever to make systematic factual
inquiries into the past. He has been called the father of
history.
Prior to him, there had been only “logographers”—
writers of travelogue, recounting local sights and local
histories. Although Herodotus himself traveled widely to
acquire local lore, his major accomplishment was that he
arranged his voluminous material around a central theme
and that he was the first to try to explain historical cause
and effect. This approach is summed up in his opening
words: “Here is the account of the inquiry (Greek: his-
tori¯e) of Herodotus of Halicarnassus, in order that the
deeds of men not be erased by time, and that the great
and miraculous works—both of the Greeks and the bar-
barians—not go unrecorded, and, not least, in order to
show what caused them to fight one another.”
Herodotus was inspired by a predecessor. Forty or 50
years before his time a Milesian Greek logographer named
HECATAEUS had written a travel account of EGYPT, Scythia,
and other locales. Herodotus mentions Hecataeus’s work
with disdain but apparently borrows from it liberally.
Herodotus began by imitating Hecataeus, visiting Egypt
and the Scythian BLACK SEA coast early on. He probably
intended to write a Hecataean-style travelogue. But at
some point Herodotus warmed to a second inspiration—
the mythical TROJAN WAR, as described in HOMER’s Iliad
and other Greek EPIC POETRY. If the Trojan War was seen
as the original clash between East and West, then the Per-
sian Wars could be explained in the same light, as part of
an ongoing, destructive pattern.
Another idea of Herodotus’s, that pride goeth before
a fall, was perhaps borrowed from contemporary Athe-
nian stage tragedy. In Herodotus, the grandeur of monar-
chs often leads to foolhardy decisions resulting in
disaster. This is conveyed clearly in his literary portrait of
the Persian king XERXES, whose vanity and arrogance
resulted in the Persians’ failed invasion of Greece and the
deaths of so many good men on both sides. Herodotus
himself never observed Xerxes, and his treatment of the
king probably owes much to literary imagination.
Herodotus’s lecherous, violent, cowardly but aesthetic-
minded and occasionally gracious Xerxes is one of the
most enjoyable villains in Western literature.
We know little of Herodotus’s life. He was born in
Halicarnassus, a Greek city of international commerce
that at the time was still ruled by Persian overlords and
included a second non-Greek people, called Carians.
Herodotus’s father had a Carian name, Lyxes; the family
was probably an affluent merchant clan of Greek-Carian
blood.
Perhaps around age 25, Herodotus fled into exile
after his involvement in a failed coup against the city’s
reigning tyrant. By 454 B.C.E. the tyrant had fallen and
Halicarnassus was part of the Athenian-controlled DELIAN
LEAGUE. Despite this, Herodotus never returned home,
but rather spent the next decade traveling and writing.
Beside Egypt and Scythia, he evidently journeyed
throughout mainland Greece, Asia Minor, and the Levan-
tine seaboard. His travels were probably helped by a
Persian-Greek peace treaty that ended hostilities at that
time (in about 449 B.C.E.).
Sometime in the 440s–420s B.C.E. Herodotus became
known in the Greek world for giving paid readings aloud
of his work-in-progress. He is said to have sought quick
notoriety by reading at OLYMPIA during the Games. The
Athenians supposedly voted to pay him the astounding
sum of 10 TALENTS out of gratitude for his favorable por-
trayal of their city. He certainly had ties to ATHENS
(which by then had become the cultural center of
Greece). Supposedly, the Athenian playwright SOPHOKLES
wrote verses to Herodotus, and the noble Athenian clan
of the ALCMAEONIDS seems to have been a major source of
information for him. Although Herodotus’s history is gen-
erally respectful of Athens’s rival, SPARTA, he does in one
passage credit Athenian naval resistance as the single fac-
tor that saved Greece in the Persian Wars (book 7).
In 443 B.C.E., Herodotus joined an Athenian-spon-
sored project to colonize a city, Thurii, in southern ITALY.
He died there in around 420 B.C.E. These last 20 years
probably saw him traveling, giving readings, and revising
his work. His history was being published in (or near) its
present form by 425 B.C.E., when the Athenian comic
playwright ARISTOPHANES parodied its opening passages
in his play Acharnians.
Herodotus’s native tongue was probably the Doric
Greek dialect of Halicarnassus, but he wrote his history
in Ionic—the dialect generally used for prose explica-
tion—and used a clear, pleasant, storytelling style. On its
completion, this history was the longest Greek prose
work ever written. Later editors divided it into nine
“books.” Not only is it far and away our major written
source for the Persian Wars and prior events in Greece
154
Herodotus

and PERSIA in the 700s–500s B.C.E., but it also makes for
delightful reading. In telling his story, Herodotus shows
himself interested in war, politics, and the gods, also in
personality, gossip, and sex. Unusual for a classical Greek
writer, Herodotus is fascinated by WOMEN and their influ-
ence in a man’s world both East and West.
Remarkably, a large part of his story is told from the
Persian viewpoint. In this Herodotus was imitating such
Athenian stage tragedy as AESCHYLUS’s play The Persians,
which describes the Battle of SALAMIS (1) from the Per-
sian side. Some of Herodotus’s Persian scenes were surely
fabricated by the author, but it is equally clear that he
conducted original research, interviewing individual Per-
sians as well as Greeks. Despite the fact that Persia was
the Greeks’ enemy, Herodotus portrays many Persians as
brave and noble and shows a deep respect for their cul-
ture. The later Greek writer PLUTARCH accused Herodotus
of being philobarbaros, “overfond of foreigners.”
Literary pioneer though he was, Herodotus shows
certain endearing flaws. He often strays from his main
narrative with digressions. Although dedicated to finding
out historical causes, he sometimes fastens on trivial or
fairytale causes. For example, he claims (in book 3) that
the attack of the great Persian king DARIUS (1) on Greece
was prompted by the bedroom persuasion of his wife.
Further, Herodotus is not above telling the occasional tall
tale—claiming, for instance, that he visited Babylon, even
though his work lacks any description of that majestic
Mesopotamian city. Besides being called the father of his-
tory, Herodotus has also been called the father of lies.
Nevertheless, his history was a monumental achieve-
ment: the first rational inquiry into the past. In this, he
paved the way for his successor, the Athenian historian
THUCYDIDES (1).
See also EUROPE AND ASIA; GREEK LANGUAGE; HUBRIS;
KALLIAS.
Further reading: John Hart, Herodotus and Greek His-
tory (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1982); Kenneth H.
Waters, Herodotos, the Historian: His Problems, Methods, and
Originality (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1985);
John Gould, Herodotus (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson,
1989); J. A. S. Evans, Herodotus, Explorer of the Past: Three
Essays (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1991);
James S. Romm, Herodotus (New Haven, Conn.: Yale Uni-
versity Press, 1998); John L. Myres, Herodotus, Father of
History (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1999).
heroes
See MYTH.
Herondas
See HERODAS.
Hesiod (ca. 700 B.C.E.) Greek epic poet, one of the earli-
est whose verses have survived
Together with HOMER, who lived perhaps 50 years earlier,
Hesiod is often considered a pioneer of early Greek litera-
ture. Two major works by him are extant. One is his
Theogony, or Birth of the Gods, which describes the
world’s creation and the origins of the Olympian gods
and lesser deities. The other is called Works and Days, a
kind of farmer’s almanac laced with practical advice on
how to live a good life through honest work. For modern
readers, Theogony is a treasury of information for Greek
MYTH, while Works and Days provides a unique picture of
early Greek rural society, as well as evidence for Greek
astronomy and timekeeping. In addition to these two
works, we also have preserved the first few lines of a
third poem, The Shield of HERAKLES.
Hesiod’s two surviving poems give some autobio-
graphical details. He lived in the central Greek region of
BOEOTIA, in a town called Ascra (“bad in winter, worse in
summer, not good anytime,” as he describes it in Works
and Days). His father had abandoned a seafaring life and
moved there from CYME, in ASIA MINOR. In Theogony,
Hesiod says that he received the gift of song from the
MUSES when he was tending sheep on Mt. Helicon as a
boy. Later he won a prize in a poetry contest during
funeral games at nearby CHALCIS. Hesiod quarreled with
his brother Perses, who had apparently stolen part of
Hesiod’s inheritance, and Works and Days was written
partly as an instructional rebuke to Perses. The poet’s per-
sonality, as conveyed in the poems, is surly, practical, and
conservative—an old-fashioned Greek yeoman farmer
who happens to have a poetic gift.
Hesiod’s Theogony is a major source for ancient
Greek beliefs about the creation of the world and the ori-
gins of the Greek pantheon. It tells how only Chaos and
Earth existed in the beginning, and how all the gods are
descended from them. Hesiod divides time into five
major epochs: the Golden Age (under CRONUS), the Sil-
ver Age (under ZEUS), the Bronze Age (a period of
upheaval and war), the Heroic Age (the time of the Tro-
jan War), and the Iron Age (his own time, the imperfect
present). In addition to providing facts and genealogies
about the gods, Theogony also supplies evidence of Near
Eastern influence on the formative Greek culture of the
700s and 600s B.C.E., for a number of Hesiod’s myths
closely resemble certain older legends from Mesopotamia.
This influence occurred from Greek TRADE with the Near
East via Phoenician middlemen.
See also CRONUS; EPIC POETRY; PHOENICIA.
Further reading: Robert Lamberton, Hesiod (New
Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1988); Friedrich
Solmsen, Hesiod and Aeschylus (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell Uni-
versity Press, 1995); Carlo Odo Pavese and Paolo Venti, A
Complete Formular Analysis of the Hesiodic Poems: Intro-
duction and Formular Edition (Amsterdam: A. M. Hakkert,
2000); Richard Gotshalk, Homer and Hesiod: Myth and
Philosophy (Lanham, Md.: University Press of America,
2000); Jenny Strauss Clay, Hesiod’s Cosmos (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2003).
Hesiod
155

Hesperides
See HERAKLES.
Hestia
Goddess of the hearth and of domestic fire, Hes-
tia (“hearth”) was the least important of the 12 Olympian
deities. She was the sister of ZEUS, and little MYTH was
attached to her name. Having refused to marry, Hestia
remained a virgin and lived as a kind of respected spin-
ster aunt on Mt. OLYMPUS.
Her cult, however, was important. In an era before
manufactured matches, the hearth was the crucial place
where cooking fire was maintained perpetually, winter and
summer. The hearth helped to preserve order and civiliza-
tion, and many governmental buildings had public hearths
that symbolized the public good. Accordingly, Hestia was
the patron goddess of town halls and similar; one of her
epithets was boulaia, “she of the council house.”
See also COUNCIL.
Further reading: O. Hansen, “Hestia Boulaia at Ery-
thrai,” L’Antiquité classique 54 (1985): 274–276; Helen
North, “Hestia and Vesta: Non-identical Twins,” in New
Light from Ancient Cosa: Classical Mediterranean Studies in
Honor of Cleo Rickman Fitch, edited by Norma Wynick
Goldman (New York: P. Lang, 2001), 179–188; Jean-
Pierre Vernant, “Hestia-Hermes: The Religious Expres-
sion of Space and Movement in Ancient Greece,” in
Antiquities, edited by Nicole Loraux, Gregory Nagy, and
Laura Slatkin (New York: New Press, 2001), 112–133.
hetairai
See PROSTITUTES.
heterosexuality
In ancient Greece, the distinction
between HOMOSEXUALITY and heterosexuality was far less
pronounced than it is in modern society. Most men (we
know less about the sexual habits and inclinations of
Greek WOMEN) were bisexual. It was of utmost impor-
tance in Greek culture for men and women to marry and
produce children. This was the most essential sexual rela-
tionship, but not necessarily the most fulfilling one for all
couples, especially since many marriages were arranged
for political or financial reasons by the prospective hus-
band and the bride’s parents. Wives were often much
younger and less experienced than their husbands, sug-
gesting that men tended to look elsewhere for nonprocre-
ative sexual satisfaction. These extramarital affairs could
be heterosexual (usually involving SLAVES or PROSTITUTES)
or homosexual (usually with younger men or boys).
Further reading: David Konstan and Martha Nuss-
baum, eds., Sexuality in Greek and Roman Society (Provi-
dence, R.I.: Brown University Press, 1990); Natalie
Kampen, ed., Sexuality in Ancient Art: the Near East,
Egypt, Greece, and Italy (New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1996); Bruce Thornton, Eros: The Myth of Ancient
Greek Sexuality (Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 1997);
Ann Olga Koloski-Ostrow and Claire L. Lyons, eds.,
Naked Truths: Women, Sexuality, and Gender in Classical
Art and Archaeology (London: Routledge, 1997); Eva
Cantarella, Bisexuality in the Ancient World, 2d ed., trans-
lated by Cormac O. Cuilleanáin (New Haven, Conn.: Yale
University Press, 2002); Martha Nussbaum and Juha
Sihvola, eds., The Sleep of Reason: Erotic Experience and
Sexual Ethics in Ancient Greece and Rome (Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 2002); Laura McClure, ed., Sex-
uality and Gender in the Classical World: Readings and
Sources (Oxford: Blackwell, 2002).
Hieron (1) (d. 467 B.C.E.) Dictator of the Greek cities
GELA and SYRACUSE in SICILY
Hieron (“holy one”) became the most powerful individual
in the Greek world around 470 B.C.E. He had come to
power under his brother GELON, who ruled in Syracuse
and appointed him as his governor in Gela. On Gelon’s
death, Hieron succeeded as lord (turannos, “tyrant”) of
Syracuse, the foremost city of the Greek West (478 B.C.E.).
Although less popular than his brother, Hieron ruled in
grand style. He formed an alliance with the other great
Sicilian-Greek tyrant, Theron of ACRAGAS. When the
Greeks of CUMAE, in western ITALY, appealed for help
against the encroaching ETRUSCANS, Hieron achieved his
greatest triumph—his sea victory at Cumae, in the Bay of
Naples, which broke the Etruscans’ sea power forever and
removed them as a threat to the Italian Greeks (474 B.C.E.).
At home he consolidated his power through social
engineering and cultural display. He continued the Sicil-
ian rulers’ ruthless practice of transplantation, removing
10,000 citizens of CATANA in order to reestablish the site
as a new, Dorian-Greek city, Aetna. The “founding” of
Aetna was commemorated in the tragedy Women of Aetna
by the Athenian playwright AESCHYLUS, who visited
Hieron’s court at the ruler’s invitation around 470 B.C.E.
Other luminaries of Hieron’s court were the great
Theban choral poet PINDAR and the poets SIMONIDES and
BACCHYLIDES of Keos. Pindar and Bacchylides were com-
missioned to write poems celebrating Hieron’s presti-
gious victories in horse- and chariot-racing at the
OLYMPIC and PYTHIAN GAMES (476–468 B.C.E.). Hieron is
the addressee of Pindar’s famous First Olympian ode and
First Pythian ode.
Hieron died, probably of cancer, and was succeeded
by his son Deinomenes. By 466 B.C.E. however, Syracuse
had overthrown the tyranny and installed a DEMOCRACY
in its place.
See also CHARIOTS; TYRANTS.
Further reading Ralph E. Doty. trans., Hieron: A New
Translation/Xenophon (Lewiston, N.Y.: Edwin Mellen Press,
2003).
Hieron (2) II
See SYRACUSE.
Himera
This Greek city, located midway along the
northern coast of SICILY, was founded in about 649 B.C.E.
156
Hesperides

by colonists from ZANCL¯E in northeastern Sicily. Himera’s
most famous citizen was the poet STESICHORUS (ca, 590
B.C.E.). Himera was a Greek frontier town, close to the
Carthaginian-controlled western part of Sicily. In the late
summer of 480 B.C.E., the vicinity of Himera was the site
of a great battle in which a Greek army totally defeated an
invading force from CARTHAGE.
In the years prior to the battle, the town was ruled by
a Greek tyrant, Terillus, who eventually was ejected by
Theron, tyrant of ACRAGAS. Terillus appealed to his ally,
the Carthaginian leader Hamilcar, and in 480 B.C.E.
Hamilcar sailed from North Africa with a large army to
reinstate Terillus and conquer Greek Sicily. Landing in
Sicily, the Carthaginians marched on Himera, but outside
the town Hamilcar and his army were destroyed by an
allied Greek force under GELON, the tyrant of SYRACUSE.
According to legend, the battle was fought on the very
same day as another great victory of liberation, the sea
battle of SALAMIS (1), against the invading Persians in
mainland Greece.
To commemorate the victory at Himera, Gelon
minted what is perhaps the most beautiful coin of the
400s B.C.E.—the SILVER Syracusan decadrachm known as
the Demareteion.
The Carthaginians’ defeat stymied their ambitions in
Sicily for three generations. But in 409 B.C.E. they cap-
tured Himera and razed it in vengeance.
See also COINAGE; TYRANTS.
Further reading: Colin M. Kraay, The Archaic Coinage
of Himera (Naples: Centro Internazionale di Studi Numis-
matici, 1983).
Hipparchus
See HIPPIAS (1).
Hippias (1) (b. ca. 565 B.C.E.) Athenian dictator who
reigned 527–510 B.C.E.
Hippias was the son and successor of PEISISTRATUS. Suc-
ceeding his father as ruler at about age 40, he aggrandized
ATHENS with public works, ambitious diplomacy, and eco-
nomic projects. Under him, the city continued its emer-
gence as the future cultural capital of Greece. Hippias’s
younger brother Hipparchus brought to Athens two of the
greatest poets of the era: ANACREON and SIMONIDES. But
the days of Greek TYRANTS like Hippias were numbered by
the late 500s B.C.E., and Hippias eventually was ousted by
Athenian opposition and Spartan intervention.
In 510 B.C.E. the Spartan king KLEOMENES led an
army to Athens, against Hippias. The Spartans had been
urged to do so by the oracle at DELPHI, but Kleomenes
himself surely wanted to stop Hippias’s diplomatic over-
tures to the Persian king DARIUS (1). Kleomenes probably
feared that Hippias was planning to submit to Darius in
order to retain personal power.
Aided by Athenians who were hostile to the tyranny,
the Spartans surrounded Hippias and his followers on the
ACROPOLIS. Hippias abdicated in exchange for a safe-con-
duct out. His departure brought to an end more than 35
years of Peisistratid rule at Athens, setting the stage for
the political reforms of KLEISTHENES (1) and the full-
fledged Athenian DEMOCRACY.
Traveling eastward to PERSIA, Hippias became an
adviser at Darius’s court. In 490 B.C.E., when the Persians
launched their seaborne expedition against Athens, Hip-
pias (by now nearly 80) accompanied the Persian army.
Apparently he was intended as the puppet ruler.
He guided the Persian fleet to the sheltered bay at
MARATHON, about 26 miles from Athens. It was there,
more than 50 years before, that Hippias had helped his
father, Pisistratus, bring a different invading army
ashore. But this time fortune favored the defenders, and
the Persian force was totally defeated by the Athenians
at the famous Battle of Marathon. Hippias withdrew
with the Persian fleet and, according to one story, died
on the return voyage.
See also ALCMAEONIDS; HARMODIUS
AND ARISTO-
GEITON; PERSIAN WARS; POTTERY; THEATER.
Further reading R. T. Williams, “The Owls and Hip-
pias,” Numismatic Chronicle 6 (1966): 9–13; W. G. For-
rest, “The Tradition of Hippias’ Expulsion from Athens,”
Greek, Roman, and Byzantine Studies 10 (1969): 227–286;
F. J. Frost, “Toward a History of Peisistratid Athens,” in
The Craft of the Ancient Historian. Essays in Honor of
Chester G. Starr, edited by John Eadie and Josiah Ober
(Lanham, Md.: University Press of America, 1985),
57–78; H. A. Shapiro, “Oracle Mongers in Peisistratid
Athens,” Kernos 3 (1990): 335–345; R. D. Griffiths, “Hip-
pias’ Missing Tooth (Hdt. 6, 107).” Ancient History Bul-
letin 8 (1994): 121–122; John McK. Camp, “Before
Democracy. Alkmaionidai and Peisistratidai,” in The
Archaeology of Athens and Attica under the Democracy. Pro-
ceedings of an international conference held at the American
School of Classical Studies at Athens, December 4–6, 1992,
edited by W. D. E. Coulson (Oxford: Oxbow Books,
1994), 7–12.
Hippias (2)
See SOPHISTS.
Hippocrates (1) (ca. 460–377 B.C.E.) Greek physician
and medical writer
A native of the Dorian-Greek island of Kos, near south-
western ASIA MINOR, Hippocrates is usually considered to
be the founder of scientific medical practice.
Hippocrates was born into an elite family of priests
who had accumulated many traditions of healing and
wellness. As he grew to adulthood, he traveled throughout
Greece to practice healing and to study PHILOSOPHY. He
returned to Kos and established a school of MEDICINE that
became renowned in the ancient world. While not the
first Greek doctor, Hippocrates was apparently the first to
systematize the existing knowledge and procedures and to
Hippocrates
157

ground medical practice in solid observation rather than
theory. The later writer Celsus (ca. 30 C.E.) remarked that
Hippocrates separated medicine from PHILOSOPHY.
Of the 72 medical treatises that have survived from
the Hippocratic school, it is uncertain whether any were
written by Hippocrates himself. These writings do, how-
ever, convey the spirit of the school through certain
shared traits, such as their emphasis on observation and
diagnosis. The treatises include Airs, Waters, and Places,
which describes the effects of different climates on
health and psychology, and The Sacred Disease, a discus-
sion of epilepsy (concluding that there is nothing sacred
about it). Many later Greek physicians, including the
famous Galen, wrote commentaries on the works of
Hippocrates.
All new doctors coming out of the ancient Hippo-
cratic school would take the Hippocratic Oath. In this
vow, the speaker swore to honor the brotherhood of the
school, never to treat a patient with any purpose other
than healing, never to give poison or induce abortion,
and never as a doctor to enter a house with any ulterior
motive, such as seduction of SLAVES. A modified form of
this oath is still administered to medical school graduates
today, 2,400 years later.
Further reading: William A. Heidel, Hippocratic
Medicine (New York: Arno Press, 1981); Owsei Temkin,
Hippocrates in a World of Pagans and Christians (Balti-
more: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1991); Jody Rubin
Pinault, Hippocratic Lives and Legends (Leiden, Nether-
lands: E. J. Brill, 1992); Jacques Jouanna, Hippocrates,
translated by M. B. DeBevoise (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1999); David Cantor, ed., Reinventing
Hippocrates (Burlington, Vt.: Ashgate, 2002).
Hippocrates (2)
See GELA; GELON.
Hippodamus (mid-400 B.C.E.) Town planner, born at
MILETUS but active in the service of Periklean ATHENS
Around 450 B.C.E., Hippodamus designed the grid pattern
for the Athenian port city of PIRAEUS (his design is still in
use there today), and he probably did likewise for the
Athenian-sponsored colony of Thurii, in southern ITALY.
Such urban grid street systems are often today called by
the adjective “Hippodamian.” Hippodamus was one of
the colonists who emigrated to Thurii circa 443 B.C.E.
ARISTOTLE’s Politics (ca. 340 B.C.E.) mentions his affected
physical appearance—long hair and adorned robes in the
Ionian manner.
See also IONIAN GREEKS.
Further reading: Ferdinando Castagnoli, Orthogonal
Town Planning in Antiquity, translated by Victor Caliandro
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1971): H. R. McCredie,
“Hippodamos of Miletos,” in Studies Presented to George M.
A. Hanfmann, edited by David Gordon Mitten, John Grif-
fiths Pedley, and Jane Ayer Scott (Cambridge, Mass.: Fogg
Art Museum, 1971), 95–100; A. Burns, “Hippodamus and
the Planned City,” Historia 25 (1976): 414–428.
Hippolyta
See AMAZONS; HERAKLES; TESEUS.
Hippolytus
In MYTH, Hippolytus was the son of the
Athenian king THESEUS and the Amazon queen Hip-
polyta. After his mother’s death, he grew to manhood at
ATHENS as a hunter and male virgin, devoted to the god-
dess ARTEMIS. The love goddess APHRODITE, irked by Hip-
polytus’s celibacy, caused Theseus’s young wife, the
Cretan princess Phaedra, to fall in love with Hippolytus,
her stepson. Rebuffed by him, she hanged herself but left
behind a letter accusing him of rape. Theseus, not believ-
ing his son’s declarations of innocence, banished him and
then cursed him. The curse was effective (as being one of
three wishes that Theseus had been granted by his
guardian, the god POSEIDON), and a monstrous bull
emerged from the sea while Hippolytus was driving his
chariot on the road. Hippolytus’s terrified horses threw
him from the chariot, and so his death was fulfilled in the
manner suggested by his name: “loosed horse,” or stam-
pede. Theseus learned the truth from Artemis after it was
too late.
Our main source for the legend is the admirable, sur-
viving tragedy Hippolytus (431 B.C.E.) by the Athenian
playwright EURIPIDES. In the play, Hippolytus appears as
priggish and lacking in compassion, while Phaedra is
convincingly imagined as an unhappy woman in the
unwelcome grip of an obsession.
A later legend claimed that Hippolytus was restored
to life by the physician-hero ASKLEPIOS. But then the god
ZEUS, fearing a disruption of natural order, killed both
men with a thunderbolt.
See also AMAZONS.
Further reading: Hazel E. Barnes, Hippolytus in
Drama and Myth (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press,
1960); James L. Sanderson and Irwin Gopnik, eds., Phae-
dra and Hippolytus; Myth and Dramatic Form (Boston:
Houghton Mifflin, 1966).
Hipponax (mid-500s B.C.E.) Greek lyric poet of EPHESOS
Banished by one of the city’s Persian-controlled TYRANTS
around 540 B.C.E., Hipponax supposedly lived as a beggar
in nearby Clazomenae. His wrote satirical poems in vari-
ous meters, with the flavor of the gutter. He was said to
have been the inventor of parody; one of his surviving
fragments is a mock-Homeric description of a glutton.
Hipponax is credited with inventing the skazon, or
“lame” iambic meter—which, to the Greek ear, had a
halting, comic affect, appropriate to satire.
See also IONIA; LYRIC POETRY.
Further reading Carlos Miralles and Jaume Pòrtulas,
The Poetry of Hipponax (Rome: Edizioni dell’Ateneo,
1988).
158
Hippocrates

Homer (Greek: Homeros)
According to tradition,
Homer was the earliest and greatest Greek poet. Two epic
poems were attributed to him: the Iliad and the Odyssey,
which present certain events of the mythical TROJAN WAR
and its aftermath. These two works, totaling about 27,800
lines in dactylic hexameter verse, were fundamental refer-
ences for MYTH in ancient Greece. Greeks of subsequent
centuries looked to them for insight into the gods’ nature,
for answers to moral questions, and for inspiration for
new literature. The Athenian playwright AESCHYLUS (ca.
460 B.C.E.) described his own tragedies as “crumbs from
the banquet of Homer.” It is token of the Greeks’ rever-
ence for the Iliad and the Odyssey that both these long
poems survived antiquity. Each poem’s division into 24
“books,” still used in modern editions, was made long
after Homer’s time by editors at ALEXANDRIA (1) in the
early 100s B.C.E.
Despite a few legends, nothing is known about the
life of Homer, whose name in ancient Greek may mean
“hostage.” Although the Greeks definitely believed that
Homer was a real person, this is less strongly accepted by
modern scholars. It is not impossible, in fact that the Iliad
and the Odyssey were each composed by a different per-
son, since the two poems differ in tone and narrative
style. The Odyssey, which relies far more than the Iliad on
fable and folktale, may have been written much later than
the Iliad. Furthermore, given the collaborative nature of
preliterate Greek EPIC POETRY, either poem or both could
have been created by a group of poets, rather than by a
single author. Assuming that Homer did exist, it is not
even known that “he” was a man, except that the ancient
Greek world’s social structure makes it likely.
If there was a historical figure named Homer, he may
have lived sometime between 850 and 750 B.C.E. The
Iliad and the Odyssey were probably first written down
around 750 B.C.E., after the invention of the Greek ALPHA-
BET, but evidently both poems were fully composed
before that date. They were probably created by the oral
techniques of preliterate Greek epic poetry—that is, by a
centuries-old method of using memorized verses, stock
phrases, and spontaneous elaboration, without WRITING.
Assuming that Homer did exist, it is not known if he
wrote the poems down (or dictated them to scribes) in
the mid-700s B.C.E., or whether he was long dead when
others wrote down his verses, preserved by oral retelling.
He may have been a bard who performed at the court of
some Greek noble or king—much like the character
Demodocus in book 8 of the Odyssey, who earns his
livelihood singing traditional tales to entertain upper-
class men and women.
The Iliad and the Odyssey reveal no autobiographical
information. A single supposed autobiographical item is
found in the Hymn to Delian Apollo, one of 34 choral
songs to the gods that the ancient Greeks ascribed to
Homer. In the hymn, the unnamed poet describes himself
with these words: “If anyone should ask you whose song
is sweetest, say: ‘Blind is the man, and he lives in rocky
CHIOS.’” Many ancient Greeks believed this to be a true
description of the mysterious Homer, although modern
scholars are wary of accepting it. Several cities claimed to
be Homer’s birthplace, and later writers believed vari-
ously that he was from Chios, Smyrna, ATHENS, EGYPT, or
ROME. That Homer lived in the Greek region called
IONIA, on the west coast of ASIA MINOR is suggested by
the mainly Ionic dialect of his poems and by the fact that
Ionia was at that time the most culturally advanced part
of the Greek world. In later centuries Chios was home to
a guild of bards who called themselves the Homeridae
(sons of Homer).
More important than the poet’s identity are the val-
ues and traditions on which his poetry is based. Homer
and other bards of his day sang about an idealized ances-
tral society that was 500 years in the past. Homer’s audi-
ence imagined this bygone era as an Age of Heroes, when
men of superior strength, courage, and wealth lived in
communion with the gods. Homer’s aristocratic protago-
nists—ACHILLES
in the Iliad
and ODYSSEUS
in the
Odyssey—live by a code of honor that shapes all their
actions. For them, disgrace was the worst possible fate—
far worse than death. If a man’s honor was slighted, then
the man was obliged to seek extreme or violent redress.
Although Homer’s poems purport to depict the
ancient Greek society that scholars now call the Bronze
Age—the era of the MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION, they are
actually better illustrations of Homer’s own time. The
institutions of the Greek POLIS that appear in the epic
poems, for example, are those that existed in the 700s
B.C.E., not in the 1200s. On the other hand, the poet does
demonstrate some knowledge of actual Bronze Age prac-
tices and artifacts; the boar’s tusk helmet worn by the
Greek warriors resembles actual helmets found in Myce-
naean tombs depicted on Mycenaean wall paintings and
POTTERY.
Greek MYTH contains hundreds of stories from the
Age of Heroes. Homer’s genius lay in selecting certain
tales and imposing order on the material, to fashion (in
each epic poem) a cohesive, suspenseful narrative, with
vivid character portraits. Contrary to some popular belief,
the Iliad does not describe the entire Trojan War and fall
of TROY. It rather focuses on certain episodes involving
the Greek champion Achilles during the tenth and final
year of the siege; the action of the poem takes place over
a period of only seven weeks. It tells of the “anger of
Achilles”—that is, his quarrel with the Greek commander
AGAMEMNON, after Agamemnon had needlessly slighted
Achilles’ honor. Achilles’ withdrawal from the battlefield
causes difficulty for the Greeks, culminating in the death
of Achilles’ friend PATROKLOS at the hands of the Trojan
prince HECTOR. At the story’s climax (book 22), Achilles
slays Hector in single combat, even though he knows that
this act is ordained by FATE to seal his own doom. The
Iliad ends not with Achilles’ death or Troy’s fall—those
Homer
159

events are still in the future—but with Hector’s funeral,
after Achilles finally allowed the Trojans to ransom back
the corpse.
The Odyssey, although it stands on its own merits,
provides a loose sequel to the Iliad. In this story, the war
has finally ended, Troy having fallen to the Greeks. The
wily and resourceful Greek hero Odysseus, king of
ITHACA, is making his way home to his kingdom amid
supernatural adventures, both violent and sexual. Like
the Iliad, the Odyssey displays narrative skill in maintain-
ing suspense. Daringly not introducing the protagonist
until book 4, the poem opens with the scenes at the dis-
rupted kingdom of Ithaca, where more than 100 arrogant
suitors (assuming Odysseus to be dead) have taken over
the palace and are individually wooing his intelligent and
gracious wife, PENELOPE, while threatening his oldest
son, TELEMACHOS. The reader or listener thus observes
the consequences of Odysseus’s absence and shares in his
family’s longing for his return. We then meet Odysseus,
who is nearing the end of his journey. Aided by the god-
dess ATHENA, he returns to Ithaca in disguise (book 14)
and scouts out the dangerous situation at the palace
before revealing his identity, slaying the suitors, and
reclaiming his wife and kingdom (book 22–23). The sus-
pense that precedes this violent climax is remarkably
modern in tone and explains why Homer’s epics have
remained so popular for so many centuries.
See also GREEK LANGUAGE; WARFARE, LAND.
Further reading: Roberto Salinas Price, Atlas of
Homeric Geography (San Antonio, Tex.: Scylax Press,
1992); Albert B. Lord, Stephen Mitchell, and Gregory
Nagy, eds., The Singer of Tales, 2d ed. (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 2000); Ione Mylonas Shear,
Tales of Heroes: The Origins of the Homeric Texts (New
York: A. D. Caratzas, 2000); Barbara Graziosi, Inventing
Homer: The Early Reception of Epic (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2002); Martin L. West, ed. and trans.,
Homeric Hymns, Homeric Apocrypha, Lives of Homer
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2003).
homosexuality
Ancient Greek literature and art
clearly show that certain types of homosexual relation-
ships were considered natural and even admirable in
many Greek cities during the epoch between about 600
B.C.E. and the spread of Christianity. Especially, male
homosexuality was encouraged in some (not all) forms.
Love between males was seen as harmonious with other
Greek social values, such as athletic skill, military
courage, and the idealization of male youth and beauty
(reflected also in surviving Greek SCULPTURE). Such rela-
tionships provided males with a romance not usually
found in MARRIAGE, since Greek society generally viewed
WOMEN as morally and intellectually inferior.
Female homosexuality was also an approved practice
in some locales, at least in the 600s–500s B.C.E. Extant
verses by the poets SAPPHO and ALCMAN document sexual
feelings and acts between aristocratic young women on
the Aegean island of LESBOS and SPARTA, both around 600
B.C.E. Also, a single sentence in the work of the later
writer PLUTARCH suggest that at Sparta it was usual for
mature women to have affairs with unmarried girls. But
little other information survives regarding love between
women. The silence is due partly to scarcity of extant
writings by Greek women and partly to the fact that
female homosexuality was not encouraged as widely as
its male counterpart. Relations between females may even
have been forbidden in certain cities that had male-
homosexual traditions, such as ATHENS in the 400s B.C.E.
The ancient literary sources for information on
Greek homosexuality include LYRIC POETRY composed
between about 600 and 100 B.C.E., Athenian stage com-
edy of the 400s B.C.E., the works of the philosopher
PLATO and the historian XENOPHON (both of them Athe-
nians writing in the early 300s B.C.E.), and Athenian
courtroom speeches of the 300s B.C.E. The visual evi-
dence consists mostly of vase paintings from the 500s
and 400s B.C.E., some showing courtship or sex between
160
homosexuality
The hero Achilles, at right, bandages a wound for his friend
Patroclus, in a red-figure scene from an Athenian cup, ca.
500 B.C.E. The painting conveys Patroclus’s distress and
Achilles’ sympathetic concentration; the sexuality of the two
men is suggested by the gratuitous peek at Patroclus’s 
genitals. Although the Iliad never portrays Achilles and 
Patroclus as lovers, the Greeks after Homer came to view the
pair as models for aristocratic, military, male homosexuality.
(Margaret Bunson)

males. As is usual for any aspect of ancient Greek society,
much of the extant source material is from Athens. There
is, however, an important series of graffiti inscriptions
from the Aegean island of THERA that provide evidence
for homosexual attractions and relations there. The graf-
fiti are dated to around 600 B.C.E. and include verses
praising certain boys for their beauty and their dancing
ability. Two of the inscriptions, written by the same man,
boast more explicitly about a sexual conquest of a
younger boy. Other Greek states—including Sparta, ELIS,
CHALCIS, and especially THEBES—also had important
male-homosexual cultures, linked to the training and
esprit of citizen armies.
The Thera graffiti supports the theory that homosexu-
ality as a social norm arose in Greece in the late 600s B.C.E.
Modern scholars have found no homosexual content in the
poetry of HOMER (ca. 750 B.C.E.), HESIOD (ca. 700 B.C.E.),
or ARCHILOCHOS (ca. 660 B.C.E.). Expressions of homosex-
ual desire, however, do appear in the extant verses of Sap-
pho (ca. 600 B.C.E.) and SOLON (ca. 590 B.C.E.).
This new social custom probably derived in part
from the military reorganizations that swept Greek cities
after the arrival of HOPLITE tactics in the 600s B.C.E.
Other, related social changes at this time included the
glorification of masculinity and (at Sparta) the elimina-
tion of family life by the mass military training of boys.
The Greeks tended to associate homosexuality with man-
liness and soldiering. Significantly, the IONIAN GREEKS of
ASIA MINOR were reputed to be the softest, the least mili-
tary, and the least interested in homosexual pursuits, of
all Greek peoples.
The ancient Greeks did not classify a person as
strictly homosexual or heterosexual, as modern society
tends to do. The Greeks assumed that an attractive,
young individual of either gender could inspire sexual
desire in either gender. Adult male citizens—the one
class of people who had sexual freedom—often led pri-
vate lives that were bisexual. (Yet not always; the Greeks
did recognize that some men preferred one or the other
gender exclusively.)
Male citizens were expected to marry female citizens
and beget children, but evidently most men were not in
love with their wives, as the society did not encourage
this. Instead, a husband was legally and morally free to
seek partners outside of marriage. (Wives enjoyed no
such privilege.) Possible partners for a married or unmar-
ried man included male or female PROSTITUTES and
SLAVES, who were of the lower social ranks and who
received payment or sustenance in exchange for giving
sexual favors. However, if a male citizen wished for
romance with someone who was his social equal—that is,
if he wished to conduct courtship and seduction, with
the possibility of mutual love and admiration—then his
choices were limited. In most cities, the wives and daugh-
ters of citizens were often kept away from public places,
and their chastity was protected by severe laws. There
was only one kind of publicly approved romance avail-
able for people of the citizen classes—namely, the
romance that might arise between a mature man and
younger male.
This pairing—older male citizen/younger male citi-
zen—was the classic pattern of ancient Greek homosex-
ual love, as idealized in legend and art. This was the love
pursued especially by wealthier and aristocratic citizens.
Perhaps the best-known couple in this tradition were the
Athenian tyrannicides of 514 B.C.E. HARMODIUS AND ARIS-
TOGEITON.
The younger male was typically a well-bred boy
between about 12 and 20 years old—that is, between
early puberty and full maturity. Youths around ages 16
and 17 were considered especially desirable as being in
the prime of beauty. The young man or boy would be the
passive partner, the recipient of the older man’s courtship
and gifts. The most handsome and accomplished youths
became glamorous social figures, over whom men would
conduct fierce rivalries. The teenage aristocrat ALCIBIADES
was one such figure, and Plato’s dialogue Charmides
includes a vivid scene where the teenage Charmides
enters a GYMNASIUM followed by a boisterous crowd of
quarreling admirers. But only citizen males were allowed
to woo such love objects; any male slave who pursued a
citizen boy in this way was liable to dire punishment.
Among the qualities the classical Greeks admired in
their boys were masculinity and bodily strength. Such
attributes are clearly indicated in several hundred surviv-
ing Greek vase paintings showing images of boys or
young men, often labeled with the inscribed word kalos,
“beautiful.” (These are the famous kalos vases, the homo-
sexual “pin-ups” of ancient Greece.) Boys with more fem-
inine bodies or mannerisms were apparently not much
sought after in the 500s and 400s B.C.E., although they
seem to have come into vogue by the late 300s.
Painted scenes of Greek homosexual couples nearly
always show the older male as bearded, indicating adult-
hood. He might be in his 20s, 30s, or possibly 40s—any-
where from about five to 25 years older than his partner.
The younger male always appears as beardless. Written
evidence reveals that—in fifth-century B.C. Athens, but
not always elsewhere—young men were considered no
longer desirable once they began sprouting facial hair.
Probably at around age 20 a young Athenian would feel
social pressure to relinquish his junior sex role. He might
maintain a close friendship with his former lover(s), but
he would now be ready to take on the adult role, as the
active pursuer of a younger male. This change by him
was part of his larger transition to adulthood and to his
full identity as a citizen.
Men could meet boys and youths at public places
and upper-class venues such as gymnasiums, riding
tracks, religious sacrifices and processions, and city
streets where boys traveled to and from school. The sons
of wealthy homes went out accompanied by a paidagogos,
homosexuality
161

a slave whose duties included keeping would-be suitors
away. Part of the pursuer’s challenge might lie in intimi-
dating or evading the paidagogos, in order to make the
boy’s acquaintance.
Once a suitor had won the approval of the boy’s
father, the courtship progressed through stages that
included the suitor giving gifts; a typical gift often
appearing on vase paintings is a live rooster. Together the
two males would partake of upper-class recreations such
as SPORT, hunting, and the drinking party known as the
SYMPOSIUM, where politics or intellectual topics might be
discussed.
In a society that did not foster close ties between
father and son, the suitor served as a role model. He
played a vital part in the boy’s EDUCATION, helping to
improve the boy’s athletic skills, military aptitude, and
general readiness for manhood. At Sparta, for example,
legend claimed that after a boy once cried out in pain
during a fistfight, the boy’s lover was punished for failing
to teach manliness.
Beyond mere instruction, a lover might provide a boy
with financial help and career contacts that supple-
mented, perhaps vastly, what the boy’s family could pro-
vide. At Thebes the lover customarily supplied the
younger man’s first suit of armor (no small expense). At
Athens many a politician, lawyer, and poet seems to have
gotten his career start as a handsome boy, meeting older
men who would become his benefactors and allies.
The relationship between man and boy was thought
to be mutually inspiring; the man strove to be admirable
in his public conduct; the boy strove to be worthy of the
man. In Elis and Thebes, where love relationships often
continued after the younger male reached adulthood, it
was customary to station lovers side-by-side in battle, on
the theory that each would fight more fiercely if observed
by his partner. At Thebes this theory led to the creation,
in around 378 B.C.E., of an elite, 300-soldier unit called
the Sacred Band, comprised entirely of paired lovers.
Exactly what sexual activity was involved in such
relationships is not clear to modern scholars; sexual cus-
toms evidently varied from region to region. In general
the Greeks valued sexual restraint, much as they valued
the ability to endure hunger or fatigue. Apparently one
school of thought believed that lovers should practice
abstinence. Plato, in his dialogue The Symposium, glori-
fies male homosexual love as a search for beauty and
truth, yet he argues that love in its most exalted form
involves no sexual contact—the famous “Platonic love.”
Similarly Xenophon, while describing homosexual pair-
ings at Sparta, makes the surprising statement that Spar-
tan law severely punished any man who had sexual
relations with a boy. On the other hand, extant vase
paintings (mostly from Athens) show more than one
form of general activity between males.
The question is: Was the younger male typically sub-
jected to sexual penetration by the older? The answer
seems to be that at Thebes and certain other Greek cities
this was socially permitted, while at Athens and at many
other cities it was officially discouraged but it sometimes
occurred anyway. At Athens the “better sort” of older
partner did not try to seduce his beloved, as revealed by
an anecdote in Xenophon’s memoirs where the Athenian
philosopher SOCRATES rebukes the young man KRITIAS for
his unseemly lust for the boy Euthydemus. Socrates says
that Kritias wants “to rub himself against Eurthydemus
the way itchy pigs want to rub against stones.” For sexual
outlet, Greek men had recourse to their wives, concu-
bines, and male and female prostitutes and slaves. Citizen
boys—at Athens and Sparta, at least—were supposed to
be kept pure (although that rule might be disobeyed).
This complicated outlook was part of the Greeks’
attitude toward sex in general. Sex was seen as a form of
power: One partner was considered dominant and one
subordinate in any relationship. Typically the dominant
partner was the male whose penis entered a bodily orifice
of the other person. The recipient’s submission was proof
of inferior status. Although there was an awareness that
women could enjoy sex—as suggested in the legend of
the seer TEIRESIAS—the Greeks were uncomfortable with
the idea that any subordinate partner could feel pleasure.
Sex was for the dominant person’s benefit.
In all sexual relations, an adult male citizen was
expected to dominate. Males who willingly received sex-
ual penetration were supposed to be either slaves or pros-
titutes—noncitizens, unlucky in their servitude or
poverty. Any male citizen who wanted to be penetrated
sexually was considered bizarre and morally debased. A
citizen who gave his body for money was deemed a pros-
titute and was liable to lose most of his citizenship rights.
This was the background of the speech Against Timarchus
(346 B.C.E.), in which the Athenian orator AESCHINES
convinced an Athenian court that his enemy Timarchus
had prostituted himself in his younger days.
The contradiction in Greek homosexual love was
that it placed young male citizens in danger of being sex-
ually subordinated and thus dishonored. Any boy might
receive expensive gifts from an admirer; many a boy
probably succumbed to a lover’s seduction. What distin-
guished this behavior from a prostitute’s? The answer lay
partly in monogamy. A boy who gave sexual favors might
avoid disrepute by not being promiscuous and by choos-
ing a worthy, discreet lover. A second way to avoid dis-
honor may have been by limiting sexual contact to an
activity known today as intercrural intercourse (shown
on vase paintings). This involved the two males standing
or lying face to face, with the older man moving his
penis between the younger’s clamped thighs. Because the
younger male was not actually being penetrated, this
submission was probably thought of as being less
degrading.
Modern scholars believe that the homosexual themes
in Greek MYTH all represent a relatively late layer, added
162
homosexuality

after 600 B.C.E. In other words, legends about friendships
between males had existed without homosexual nuance
for centuries prior; these include the tales of GANYMEDE
and the god ZEUS, of PELOPS and the god POSEIDON, and
of the heroes ACHILLES and PATROKLOS. Eventually these
myths received a sexual coloring, reflecting real-life social
norms of the 500s B.C.E. and later. Legend claimed that
Greek homosexual practices had been initiated by the
Theban king Laius (father of OEDIPUS), when he carried
off the boy Chrysippus.
Homosexuality continued to be practiced during the
Roman era, often, but not exclusively, between masters
and slaves. As Christianity grew in popularity and influ-
ence, however, it began to be far less tolerated and moved
out of mainstream society. All major Christian writers of
the 300s and 400s C.E. express an emphatically negative
attitude toward homosexuality.
See also ANACREON; CHAIRONEIA; HYACINTHOS; IBY-
CUS; KALLIMACHUS; PINDAR; POTTERY; THEOGNIS.
Further reading: Kenneth J. Dover; Greek Homosexu-
ality (New York: Vintage Books, 1980); Wayne R. Dynes
and Stephen Donaldson, eds., Homosexuality in the
Ancient World (New York: Garland, 1992); Thomas K.
Hubbard, Homosexuality in Greece and Rome: A Source-
book of Basic Documents (Berkeley: University of Califor-
nia Press, 2003).
hoplite
This term refers to the heavy infantryman of
the Greek world, from about 700–300 B.C.E. The famous
land campaigns of the 400s B.C.E.—in the PERSIAN WARS
and the PELOPONNESIAN WAR—were fought by hoplite
armies. In the late 300s B.C.E., hoplite tactics were
superseded by the tactics of the Macedonian PHALANX.
The early hoplite was named for his innovative
shield, the hoplon, which was round, wide (three feet in
diameter), heavy (about 16 pounds), and deeply concave
on the inside; it was made of wood reinforced with
BRONZE, often with a bronze facing. The soldier held the
shield by passing his left forearm through a loop on the
inside center and then gripping a handle at the far inside
edge. This arrangement helped with the necessary task of
keeping the shield rigidly away from the man’s chest. The
shield was notoriously difficult to hold up for a long
period of time; a hoplite fleeing from battle always threw
away his cumbersome shield, and even victorious soldiers
could lose their shields in the melee. In militaristic soci-
eties such as SPARTA, keeping your shield meant keeping
your honor, as indicated by the Spartan mother’s prover-
bial command to her son: “Return with your shield or
upon it.”
The rest of the hoplite’s armor, or panoply, included a
helmet—typically beaten from a single sheet of bronze
and topped with a crest of bronze or horsehair—and a
bronze breastplate and greaves (metal shin guards);
under the breastplate the man would wear a cloth tunic.
The offensive weapons were a six- to eight-foot-long
spear for thrusting (not throwing) and a sword of forged
IRON, carried in a scabbard at the waist. By various mod-
ern estimates, the whole panoply weighed 50–70 pounds,
and it seems that, on the march and up until the last
moments before battle, much of a hoplite’s equipment
was carried for him by a servant or slave.
A hoplite did not normally fight alone; he was
trained and equipped to stand, charge, and fight side by
side with his comrades, in an orderly, multiranked forma-
tion. The hoplite relied foremost on his spear, thrusting
hoplite
163
Hoplites prepared for battle, carrying the hoplon, or round, wide, heavy shield held by passing the left arm through a loop on the
inside center. (Alison Frantz Photographic Collection, American School of Classical Studies at Athens)

overhand at the enemy while trying to shield himself
from their spear-points. The sword was used if the spear
was broken or lost.
The armor’s weight, plus the need to keep in forma-
tion, meant that hoplites could not charge at full speed
for any distance. Two hundred yards would seem to be
the farthest that hoplites actually could run and still be in
a condition to fight.
Yet this heavy armor did not make the hoplite invul-
nerable. It was not practical for armor to cover a man’s
neck, groin, or thighs, and these were left exposed. Refer-
ences in ancient poetry and art make it clear that deadly
wounds to the neck and groin were common, as were
fatal blows to the head (possibly received from an inward
denting of the helmet). Sometimes the bronze breastplate
could be pierced—as demonstrated by evidence that
includes the recently recovered remains of a Spartan
hoplite, buried at a battle-site with the fatal, iron spear-
point lodged inside his chest.
Hoplites could fight effectively only on level ground;
hilly terrain scattered their formation and left the individ-
ual soldiers open to attacks from lighter-armed skirmish-
ers. Similarly, hoplites who broke ranks and became
isolated—in retreat, for example—were easy prey for
enemy CAVALRY.
On warships, hoplites served as “marines.” There
they were armed mainly with javelins (for throwing) and
were employed in grapple-and-board tactics. Soldiers
unlucky enough to fall overboard would be dragged to
the bottom by their heavy armor.
Hoplite armies began their history as citizen armies.
In most Greek cities, each man up through middle age
who could afford the cost of a panoply was required to
serve as a hoplite if his city went to war. (Alternatively,
those rich enough to maintain horses might serve in the
cavalry.) In states governed as oligarchies, a man had to
be of hoplite status or better in order to be admitted as a
citizen. What distinguished a DEMOCRACY such as ATHENS
was that the Athenian citizenry included men whose
income level was below the hoplite level.
There also existed professional hoplites, recruited for
service in the pay of some other power, whether Greek or
foreign. The best-known mercenary from Greek history is
the Athenian XENOPHON
who, with 10,000 Greek
hoplites, marched deep into the Persian Empire in 401
B.C.E., in the service of a rebel Persian prince.
See also OLIGARCHY; PHEIDON; ARCHILOCHOS; WAR-
FARE, LAND; WARFARE, NAVAL.
Further reading: Antonio Santosuosso, Soldiers, Citi-
zens, and the Symbols of War: From Classical Greece to
Republican Rome, 500–167 B.C. (Boulder, Colo.: Westview
Press, 1997); Anthony M. Snodgrass, Arms and Armor of
the Greeks (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,
1999); Hans van Wees, “The Development of the Hoplite
Phalanx: Iconography and Reality in the Seventh Cen-
tury,” in War and Violence in Ancient Greece, edited by
Hans van Wees (London: Duckworth and the Classical
Press of Wales, 2000), 125–166.
hubris (sometimes written as hybris)
This term refers
to human arrogance or excessive pride, which usually
leads to disaster. Implicit in much of Greek MYTH, the
concept of hubris received its full expression in Greek
tragedy. Typically, a tragic hero would undergo a series of
emotional/psychological stages, including koros (excess,
overindulgence), hubris (pride, arrogance), and ate (ruin,
destruction). A prime example of hubris is AGAMEMNON’s
decision to tread on the purple tapestry in AESCHYLUS’s
tragedy Agamemnon—a wanton desecration of expensive
finery that called down upon Agamemnon the wrath of
the gods. Extreme examples of hubris include mythical
villains such as IXION of SISYPHUS, who betrayed the
friendship of the gods.
In Athenian legal parlance, hubris had a second
meaning: assault against an Athenian citizen. The term
was used in the sense of statutory rape or any kind of vio-
lence. As in the primary definition of hubris, the concept
involved an unacceptable flouting of boundaries.
See also AJAX (2); TANTALUS; THEATER; XERXES.
Further reading: N. R. E. Fisher, “The Law of
‘Hubris’ in Athens,” in Nomos. Essays in Athenian Law,
Politics, and Society, edited by Paul Cartledge, Paul Mil-
lett, and Stephen Todd (New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1990), 123–138; D. Cohen, “Sexuality, Violence,
and the Athenian Law of ‘Hubris’,” Greece and Rome 38
(1991): 171–188; N. R. E. Fisher, Hybris: A Study in the
Values of Honour and Shame in Ancient Greece (Warmin-
ster, U.K.: Aris and Philips, 1992); D. L. Cairns, “Hybris,
Dishonour, and Thinking Big,” Journal of Hellenic Studies
116 (1996): 1–32; J. M. J. Murphy, “‘Hubris’ and ‘Super-
bia’: Differing Greek and Roman Attitudes Concerning
Arrogant Pride,” Ancient World 28 (1997): 73–81.
Hyacinthos (Greek: Huakinthos)
In Greek 
MYTH,
Hyacinthos was a handsome Spartan youth loved by the
god APOLLO. While Apollo was teaching him how to
throw the discus one day, the jealous West Wind god,
Zephyros, sent the discus flying back into the young
man’s skull. Hyacinthos lay dying, and from his blood
there sprang the type of scarlet flower that the Greeks
called the hyacinth (perhaps our iris or anemone, but not
what is called the hyacinth now).
Hyacinthos was honored in a three-day early-sum-
mer festival throughout the Spartan countryside. His
tomb was displayed at Apollo’s shrine at Amyclae, near
SPARTA. One ancient writer noted that Hyacinthos’s statue
at Amyclae showed a bearded, mature man, not a youth.
The name Hyacinthos is pre-Greek in origin, as indi-
cated by its distinctive nth sound. Modern scholars
believe that Hyacinthos’s cult dates back to pre-Greek
164
hubris

times and that he was originally a local non-Greek god,
associated with a local flower but not imagined as a
young man and not yet associated with the Greek god
Apollo. Sometime in the second millennium B.C.E.,
Hyacinthos was adapted to the RELIGION of the conquer-
ing Greeks and was made into a human follower of
Apollo. The element of romantic love between them may
have been added later, after 600 B.C.E.
See also GREEK LANGUAGE; HOMOSEXUALITY.
Further reading:
Machteld Mellink, Hyakinthos
(Utrecht: Kemink, 1943); B. C. Dietrich, “The Dorian
Hyacinthia. A Survival from the Bronze Age,” Kadmos 14
(1975): 133–142; L. Bruit, “The Meal at the Hyakinthia.
Ritual Consumption and Offering,” in Sympotica. A Sym-
posium on the Symposium, Oxford, 4–8 September 1984,
edited by Oswyn Murray (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1990), 162–174.
Hyacinthos
165

I
166
Ibycus (mid-500s B.C.E.) Lyric poet, known particularly
for his love poetry
Coming from the Greek city of RHEGIUM, located in the
“toe” of ITALY, Ibycus supposedly refused an offered dicta-
torship and traveled instead to the east Greek island of
SAMOS, where he flourished at the wealthy court of the
tyrant POLYCRATES, around 535 B.C.E.
Only a few fragments of Ibycus’s verses survive,
either quoted by later ancient writers or discovered
recently in ancient papyri from EGYPT. It is known that
Ibycus’s work featured two very different genres of Greek
LYRIC POETRY: mythological storytelling, as developed pre-
viously by the poet STESICHORUS, another western Greek;
and short, personal love poems.
The love-poem tradition comes from the eastern
Greeks, a product of the sophisticated cities of IONIA
and LESBOS. In keeping with the upper-class tastes of the
time, the feeling expressed in these poems was homo-
sexual. Such poems usually were written by a man of
aristocratic blood to proclaim his infatuation for some
teenager or young man of equal social status. Ibycus
was considered one of the great poets of this genre, and
his articulate poetry shows great passion and sensitivity.
He has the personal reputation of being crazy for the
love of boys.
Ibycus’s verses included choral poetry—poems to be
sung or chanted by choruses at religious festivals or other
great occasions. Recently discovered fragments suggest
that Ibycus pioneered the choral form known as the vic-
tory ode (epinikion), years in advance of the poets
SIMONIDES and PINDAR.
Ibycus is perhaps best known for the dubious story
of his death. He was supposedly attacked by robbers in a
deserted place and died saying that his murder would be
avenged by the cranes that were flying overhead. Later, in
the city, one of the murderers, seeing some cranes,
declared, “Look! The avengers of Ibycus.” The statement
drew an inquiring crowd, and the killers were appre-
hended. Appropriately, Ibycus’s extant verses show a love
of the natural world, especially of birdlife.
See also HOMOSEXUALITY.
Further reading: G. O. Hutchinson, Greek Lyric
Poetry: A Commentary on Selected Larger Pieces: Alcman,
Stesichorus, Sappho, Alcaeus, Ibycus, Anacreon, Simonides,
Bacchylides, Pindar, Sophokles, Euripides (New York:
Oxford University Press, 2001); Bonnie MacLachlan,
“Personal Poetry,” in A Companion to the Greek Lyric
Poets, edited by Douglas E. Gerber (Leiden, Netherlands:
E. J. Brill, 2001).
Icarus
See DAEDALUS.
Iliad
See ACHILLES; HOMER; TROJAN WAR.
Ilium
See TROY.
Illyris
This non-Greek territory of the Adriatic coast,
northwest of Greece, corresponds roughly to modern
Albania. Organized into warlike tribes that were hungry
for Greek goods, the Illyrians played a role in the devel-
opment of northern Greece. The Corinthian colonies EPI-
DAMNOS (founded around 625 B.C.E.) and APOLLONIA
(founded around 600 B.C.E.) conducted TRADE with the
Illyrians, acquiring TIMBER, SLAVES, raw metals, and wild-
flowers (for perfume-making).
In the 300s and early 200s B.C.E., the Illyrians were
enemies of the kings of MACEDON and EPIRUS. The Illyri-

ans raided these kingdoms and, in turn, suffered annexa-
tion of their own territories. By the late 200s B.C.E. the
Illyrians were fighting against Roman armies, until both
Illyris and Macedon were defeated and occupied by the
Romans in the Third Macedonian War (171–167 B.C.E.).
Illyrian territory supplied part of the Roman province of
Illyricum.
See also PHILIP II; PYRRHUS; ROME.
Further reading: John J. Wilkes, The Illyrians (Cam-
bridge, Mass.: B. Blackwell, 1992).
Io
In MYTH, Io was a woman of the city of ARGOS. The
great god ZEUS loved her, but to conceal her from his jeal-
ous wife, HERA, he changed Io into a young cow. After
several misadventures she was restored by Zeus to human
shape in EGYPT, and there bore him a son, whose descen-
dants were the DANAIDS.
This odd myth might possibly reflect Mycenaean-
Greek attempts to connect the Egyptian cow-goddess
Hathor with the Argive worship of Hera in the shape of
a cow.
See also DANAUS; MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION; RELIGION.
Further reading: Robert Duff Murray, The Motif of Io
in Aeschylus’ Suppliants (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 1958); A. M. Dale, “The Transformation of
Io. Ox.Pap. 23, 2369,” Classical Review 10 (1960):
194–195; B. Freyer-Schauenburg, “Io in Alexandria,”
Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archäologischen Instituts.
Römische Abteilung. 90 (1983): 35–49; J. M. Davison,
“Egyptian Influence on the Greek Legend of Io,” in The
Archaeology, Geography, and History of the Egyptian Delta
in Pharaonic Times. Proceedings of Colloquium, Oxford,
29–31 August 1988 (Oxford: Discussions in Egyptology,
1989), 61–74.
Ion (1)
This mythical ancestor of the IONIAN GREEKS
was the son of the god APOLLO. According to legend,
Creusa, daughter of the Athenian king Erechtheus, was
seduced by the god and bore Ion in secret. Apollo took
Ion away. Later Ion discovered the secret of his birth and
subsequently became king of ATHENS. The legend was the
subject of an extant tragedy by EURIPIDES (ca. 410 B.C.E.).
See also HELL¯EN.
Further reading: K. H. Lee, trans., Ion/Euripides
(Warminster, U.K.: Aris & Phillips, 1997); Katarina
Zacharia, Converging Truths: Euripides’ Ion and the Athe-
nian Quest for Self-definition (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J.
Brill, 2003).
Ion (2) (ca. 490–421 B.C.E.) Tragic playwright and social
figure of the island of CHIOS
A wealthy aristocrat, Ion wrote tragedies (all now lost) on
mythological subjects for competition in the theater festi-
vals at ATHENS. In 452 B.C.E., after winning first prize in
two categories (tragedy and dithyramb) at the major
annual festival known as the City Dionysia, he made a
gift of Chian WINE to every Athenian citizen.
Ion was one of the more versatile writers in the Clas-
sical period. In addition to his dramatic plays, he also
composed poetry, historical writings, and a set of lively
memoirs, which survive as fragments quoted by later
authors. Equally at home in Athens or Chios, he hob-
nobbed with some of the greatest Athenians of the mid-
400s B.C.E., including the statesman KIMON (whose
affability Ion contrasts with the coldness of PERIKLES)
and the tragedian SOPHOKLES (whose charm and wit Ion
conveys).
Ion embodied the spirit of the Athenian empire,
which saw cultured and talented people flocking to
Athens from all over the Greek world.
See also LYRIC POETRY; THEATER.
Further reading: D. Thomas Benediktson, Literature
and the Visual Arts in Ancient Greece and Rome (Norman:
University of Oklahoma Press, 2000).
Ionia
This Greek-occupied central part of the west
coast of ASIA MINOR was named for Greeks of the Ionian
ethnic group who invaded around 1050–950 B.C.E., dis-
placing prior, non-Greek inhabitants. In later centuries
the Asian IONIAN GREEKS retained links with the most
important Ionian-Greek city of old Greece, ATHENS.
By the 700s B.C.E. an Ionian League had been formed
from 12 states of the Asia Minor coast. These were: the
islands of CHIOS and SAMOS, and the mainland cities of
PHOCAEA,
Klazomenae, 
Erythrae, 
Teos, 
Kolophon,
Lebedus, EPHESOS, Pri¯en¯e, Myus, and MILETUS. At least
one other local city, Smyrna, could claim Ionian kinship
but was not a league member. The league held meetings at
the Panionium, a sanctuary of the god POSEIDON at Cape
MYCAL¯E. There were internal rivalries and even wars,
especially between the two preeminent powers, Miletus
and Samos.
In TRADE, naval power, and culture, Ionia was at the
forefront of the early Greek world. The poet HOMER lived
and composed in Ionia, possibly in Chios (ca. 750 B.C.E.).
In the 600s and 500s B.C.E., Miletus and Phocaea planted
colonies from the BLACK SEA to southern Spain, and
traded with EGYPT and other non-Greek empires. The
JEWS of the Levant knew Ionia as “Javan”—mentioned in
the biblical book of Ezekiel (early 500s B.C.E.) for its
exports of SLAVES and worked BRONZE. Woolen textiles
were another prized Ionian export.
The term Ionian Enlightenment sometimes is used to
describe the intellectual explosion that occurred, chiefly
at Miletus, in the 500s B.C.E. There Western SCIENCE and
PHILOSOPHY were born together, when THALES, ANAXI-
MANDER, and ANAXIMENES first tried to explain the world
in rational, nonreligious terms. In Ionia there arose the
grandest Greek temples of the 500s B.C.E., at Ephesos,
Samos, and Didyma (near Miletus). The decorative
Ionia
167

schemes developed for such buildings are still employed
today, in the Ionic order of ARCHITECTURE.
But this confident culture existed precariously along-
side the restless Asiatic empires of the interior. The non-
Greek kingdom of LYDIA warred constantly against the
Ionians and finally conquered them under King CROESUS
(mid-500s B.C.E.). Croesus dealt favorably with Ionia, but
in 546 B.C.E. the Persian king CYRUS (1) rode out of the
East to defeat Croesus and seize his kingdom.
Ionia, after brief resistance, became a tribute-paying
part of the Persian Empire. Many Ionians left home; the
populations of Phocaea and Teos sailed away en masse.
Throughout the cities, the Persians installed unpopular
Greek puppet rulers. After the doomed IONIAN REVOLT
(499–493 B.C.E.), Persian rule was harshly reaffirmed.
In the Persian invasions of mainland Greece (490
and 480 B.C.E.), Ionian troops and ships’ crews were
made to fight as Persian levies against their fellow
Greeks. In 479 B.C.E. a seaborne force of mainland Greeks
landed in Ionia, beat a Persian army at the Battle of
Mycale, and liberated Ionia.
The leadership of an exhausted Ionia now passed to
Athens, which established the DELIAN LEAGUE as an
Ionian kinship—based mutual alliance against PERSIA
(478 B.C.E.). Eventually, however, the onus of tribute and
the fading of the Persian threat served to disenchant the
allies. Samos revolted spectacularly (but unsuccessfully)
against Athens in 440 B.C.E., and once the tide had turned
against Athens in the PELOPONNESIAN WAR (after 413
B.C.E.), Chios, Miletus, Ephesus, and other Ionian states
went over to Athens’s enemy, SPARTA.
After Athens’s defeat by Sparta (404 B.C.E.), Ionian
freedom was short-lived. Spartan overlordship was worse
than Athenian, and in 386 B.C.E. Sparta cynically handed
Ionia back to the Persians, by the terms of the KING’S
PEACE. Ionia was liberated again in 334 B.C.E., by
ALEXANDER THE GREAT’s invasion of the Persian Empire.
Under Alexander, the Ionian cities enjoyed DEMOCRACY
and freedom from paying tribute.
Several Ionian cities, notably Ephesus and Smyrna,
went on to thrive in the HELLENISTIC AGE (300–150
B.C.E.) and Roman eras. But Ionia as a distinctive culture
was finished.
See also ANACREON; ANAXAGORAS; HECATAEUS; HERA-
CLITUS; KALLIAS; PERSIAN WARS; PYTHAGORAS; XENO-
PHANES.
Further reading: H. M. Denham, The Ionian Islands
to the Anatolian Coast. A Sea-guide (London: J. Murray,
1982); J. M. Balcer, “Fifth Century B.C. Ionia. A Frontier
Redefined,” Revue des études anciennes 87 (1985): 31–42;
George Bean, Aegean Turkey, 2d ed. (London: Murray,
1989); K. Dimitrov, “The Greek Cities in Ionia, Karia, and
the Western Black Sea Area during the Early Hellenistic
Age,” in 100 Jahre österreichische Forschungen in Ephesos.
Akten des Symposions, Wien 1995, edited by H. Friesinger
and F. Krinzinger (Vienna, 1999), 179–184; C. Souyoud-
zoglou-Haywood, The Ionian Islands in the Bronze Age and
Early Iron Age, 3000–800 B.C. (Liverpool, U.K.: Liverpool
University Press, 1999).
Ionian Greeks
This Greek cultural and linguistic
group is distinct from other ethnic groups, such as the
DORIAN GREEKS and AEOLIAN GREEKS. The adjective Ionic
usually refers to dialect of the Ionians or to the distinctive
architectural style—the Ionic order—that was developed
in Ionia for monumental buildings of stone.
After the collapse of MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION and
the subsequent Greek migrations (around 1150–950
B.C.E.), the Ionians were left occupying various sites in
and around the AEGEAN SEA—namely, ATHENS, EUBOEA,
most of the CYCLADES islands, and IONIA (as it came to be
called), on the west coast of ASIA MINOR. Starting in the
mid-700s B.C.E., Ionian-Greek seafarers colonized parts of
ITALY, SICILY, the BLACK SEA coasts, and the northwestern
Aegean region known as CHALCIDIC¯E, among other
regions.
Claiming descent from a common ancestor, ION (1),
the far-flung Ionian Greeks retained a sense of kinship.
In Sicily and southern Italy, Ionian cities banded
together for protection against hostile Dorian settle-
ments. During the 400s B.C.E., imperial Athens made the
propagandistic claim to be the protector of all the Ionian
Greeks.
In contrast to the stolid Dorians, the Ionians had the
reputation for being intellectual, artistic, unsoldierly,
elaborate in dress, and luxury-loving. Intriguingly, Ionian
societies—other than Athens—were thought to be the
least conducive to HOMOSEXUALITY.
See also ARCHITECTURE; DELIAN LEAGUE; GREEK LAN-
GUAGE.
Further reading: G. L. Huxley, The Early Ionians
(New York: Humanities Press, 1966); H. D. Westlake,
“Ionians in the Ionian War,” Classical Quarterly 29
(1979): 9–44; C. J. Emlyn-Jones, The Ionians and Hel-
lenism: A Study of the Cultural Achievement of Early Greek
Inhabitants of Asia Minor (London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul, 1980); J. H. M. Alty, “Dorians and Ionians,” Journal
of Hellenistic Studies 102 (1982): 1–14; Carl Roebuck,
Ionian Trade and Colonization (Chicago: Ares, 1984).
Ionian Revolt
This failed rebellion of the Greek cities
of ASIA MINOR against the Persian king DARIUS (1) marks
the beginning of the PERSIAN WARS. Emanating from the
prosperous Greek region called IONIA, the revolt lasted
more than five years (499–493 B.C.E.) and might have
succeeded but for internal rifts and weak leadership. The
war demonstrated to the Persians that, in order to secure
their western frontier, they would have to invade and
subjugate mainland Greece itself.
168
Ionian Greeks

In the mid-500s B.C.E. the Greeks of Asia Minor and
the eastern Aegean islands had been engulfed by the Per-
sian Empire. Persian rule was moderate (in the absence
of resistance), but the Greeks had to pay tribute and con-
tribute ships, soldiers, and craftsmen to Persian wars and
other projects. Seagoing states such as MILETUS, which
had previously built up networks of TRADE, found com-
merce dampened by the Persians (who at this stage in
their history were antimercantile). Greek discontent was
rife—particularly against the Greek TYRANTS whom the
Persians had set up as their puppet rulers in the cities.
Information about the revolt comes from the Greek
historian HERODOTUS (ca. 435 B.C.E.). The rebellion
began in an Ionian-Greek fleet that was returning home
from naval duty for the Persians. The ships’ crews and
officers rose up and arrested those tyrants who were serv-
ing aboard as squadron commanders. The ringleader of
this mutiny was Aristogoras of Miletus, himself one of
the tyrants. Advised by his father-in-law, Histiaeus,
Aristagoras became leader of the revolt.
The home cities followed. At SAMOS, CHIOS, LESBOS,
and EPHESOS, tyrants were deposed in favor of DEMOC-
RACY. Two cities of mainland Greece, ATHENS and ERE-
TRIA, sent warships as aid—an anti-Persian act that would
later have dire consequences for both cities.
The Athenians and Eretrians sailed home again after
an allied land raid against Sardis, the Persians’ main base
in Asia Minor (498 B.C.E.). Meanwhile the revolt spread
to other Greek regions under Persian rule: BYZANTIUM,
the HELLESPONT, and the Greek cities of CYPRUS.
The Persians subsequently launched a methodical
counteroffensive. With a navy supplied by their subject
state PHOENICIA, the Persians landed in Cyprus and
besieged the rebel cities. As Persian armies campaigned
through western Asia Minor, the erratic Aristagoras found
himself unpopular with his fellow Greeks. He relin-
quished command and sailed to the north Aegean coast
to prepare a refuge in case of defeat, but he was killed by
native Thracians.
The climactic battle came in 494 B.C.E. Seeking to
destroy the Persians at sea, the Greeks assembled a large
fleet (353 warships) from the nine major states still com-
batant. But the Greek side was divided by jealousies and
mistrust, while the Persians offered preferential treat-
ment for quick surrender. When the Greek fleet rowed
out to fight the Battle of Lade, off Samos, 49 Samian war-
ships hoisted sail and fled. Most of the other Greek ships
followed, leaving only the Chians and Milesians to fight
and lose.
The Persians took fierce vengeance on the defeated
Greeks. Samos was spared, but Miletus was besieged,
sacked, and depopulated, its people transported to inte-
rior PERSIA or sold as SLAVES. Returning eventually to
their more usual leniency, the Persians reduced the cities’
tribute and replaced the old systems of tyrant puppets
with democratic governments. But Ionia—the birthplace
of Western SCIENCE and PHILOSOPHY—had ceased to exist
as a culture or a mercantile power.
See also MARATHON; PHRYNICHUS; WARFARE, NAVAL.
Further reading: Daniel Gillis, Collaboration with the
Persians (Wiesbaden, Germany: Steiner, 1979); P. B.
Georges, “Persian Ionia under Darius: The Revolt Recon-
sidered,” Historia 49 (2000): 1–39.
Ionian Sea
This name, both modern and traditional,
refers to the southward extension of the Adriatic Sea,
which separates western Greece from southern ITALY and
eastern SICILY. Principal islands in this sea are ITHACA and
Corfu (ancient CORCYRA).
Confusingly, the Ionian Sea is nowhere near the
ancient Greek territory of IONIA (located some 300
miles to the east, on the ASIA MINOR coast). Nor was
the Ionian Sea region inhabited by Greeks of the Ionian
ethnic group. The name probably derives from the
Greek term Ionian Gulf (Ionios Kolpos), used by
ancient writers to denote the Adriatic. That term possi-
bly dates back to the 800s–700s B.C.E. when the Adri-
atic was being explored by Ionian-ethnic Greek
seafarers from EUBOEA.
See also COLONIZATION; IONIAN GREEKS.
Further reading: George Gissing, By the Ionian Sea
(London: Richards Press, 1963); John Keahey, A Sweet
and Glorious Land: Revisiting the Ionian Sea (New York:
Thomas Dunne Books, 2000).
Ionic dialect
See GREEK LANGUAGE.
Ionic order
See ARCHITECTURE.
Iphigeneia
In MYTH, she was the daughter of KLY-
TEMNESTRA and AGAMEMNON, king of MYCENAE and
grand marshal of the Greek army in the TROJAN WAR. At
the war’s outset the Greek fleet assembled at Aulis—a
port in BOEOTIA, in the Euripus channel—but departure
for TROY was perpetually delayed by contrary winds, sent
by the hostile goddess ARTEMIS. Agamemnon, learning
through a seer the divine cause of his troubles, agreed to
sacrifice his daughter Iphigeneia to propitiate the god-
dess’ anger. Iphigeneia was summoned to Aulis on the
pretense that she was to marry the Greek champion
ACHILLES; on arrival, she was either killed or (in some
versions) carried away by the goddess Artemis to safety
among the distant Tauroi, a tribe on the Crimean penin-
sula of the northern BLACK SEA. The Athenian playwright
EURIPIDES follows the latter version in his tragedy Iphi-
geneia at Tauris (ca. 413 B.C.E.). In any case, this affair
was the cause of Klytemnestra’s hatred toward her hus-
band, and she then schemed to murder him after his
return from Troy.
Iphigeneia
169

Further reading: C. A. E. Luschnig, Tragic Aporia: A
Study of Euripides’ Iphigenia at Aulis (Berwick, Australia:
Aureal, 1988); W. S. Merwin and George E. Dimock Jr.,
trans., Iphigeneia in Aulis/Euripides (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1992); Richmond Lattimore, trans., Iphi-
geneia in Tauris/Euripides (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1992); Maria Holmberg Lübeck, Iphigeneia,
Agamemnon’s Daughter: A Study of Ancient Conceptions in
Greek Myth and Literature Associated with the Atrides
(Stockholm: Almqvist & Wiksell, 1993).
iron
Cheaper and easier to acquire than BRONZE, iron
began replacing bronze in mainland Greece around
1050 B.C.E. as the metal of choice for swords, spear-
points, ax heads, hammerheads, and other cutting or
striking tools.
As produced by ancient foundries, iron and bronze
were about equal in their toughness; iron’s advantage lay
in the fact that it was far more plentiful than bronze, both
for the Greeks and for other ancient peoples. Bronze, on
the other hand, is an alloy of copper and tin, and tin is
very scarce in the eastern Mediterranean. Ancient Greek
bronze production depended on long-range routes of
TRADE, to provide tin. But iron ore—which needs only
refining, not mixing—could be found in parts of mainland
Greece and ASIA MINOR, among other Mediterranean
locales.
Ancient iron forging involved repeated heating and
hammering of the metal in order to refine it, weld it
into workable quantities, and finally shape it. This pro-
cess—far different from the casting of molten bronze—
apparently was invented around 1500 B.C.E. by non-
Greek peoples in the region now known as Armenia. At
first the technology was kept secret and monopolized
by the Hittite overlords of Armenia and Asia Minor. But
after the Hittite Empire’s collapse around 1200 B.C.E.,
ironworking quickly spread through eastern Mediter-
ranean regions, both Greek and non-Greek. This was
the era of social upheaval and migration that historians
refer to as the early Iron Age. One reason why iron-
working spread amid violence was that iron democra-
tized warfare: A warrior no longer needed to be rich, or
a rich man’s follower, in order to have a superior
weapon.
The arrival of ironworking in Greece can be con-
nected to the final disappearance of MYCENAEAN CIVI-
LIZATION and the invasion of the DORIAN GREEKS around
1100–1000 B.C.E. Either the Dorians used iron weapons
in conquering Greece or (more likely) they arrived with
bronze weapons, but, having destroyed the old Myce-
naean trade routes, found themselves without bronze
supplies and immediately embraced the new metal. The
Dorians possibly learned iron forging via maritime con-
tact with the eastern Mediterranean island of CYPRUS,
which was a meeting place of East and West.
The foremost early Greek ironworking cities
included ATHENS, CORINTH, CHALCIS, and ERETRIA. Iron’s
importance in this economy can be seen in the Greeks’
use of iron rods as a primitive form of currency. Only
gradually were these replaced by the use of coins, in the
500s B.C.E.
By the 600s B.C.E.
the Greeks had developed
seaborne trade routes to major iron sources outside of
Greece, in the western Mediterranean. These locales
included western ITALY (where the ETRUSCANS traded
with iron ore mined on the island of Elba) and southern
Spain.
Ancient foundries never developed the technique,
mastered during the European Middle Ages, of casting
iron—that is, of heating iron hot enough to pour into a
mold. For this application, bronze remained the premier
metal. Throughout antiquity, bronze continued to supply
such items as military breastplates, helmets, decorative
tripods, and SCULPTURE, where casting or intricate shap-
ing was required.
See also COINAGE; HEPHAISTOS; PITHECUSAE; WARFARE,
LAND.
Further reading: Michail Yu Treister, The Role of Met-
als in Ancient Greek History (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J.
Brill, 1996).
Iron Age
See IRON.
Isaeus (ca. 420–350 B.C.E.) Greek orator, active at ATHENS
Isaeus may have been a native Athenian. He is said to
have been a pupil of the orator ISOKRATES and a teacher of
the great DEMOSTHENES (1). Of Isaeus’s speeches, 11 sur-
vive. They are all courtroom speeches, dealing with dis-
puted inheritance and other civil matters. Isaeus provides
us with much of our information about Athenian laws of
inheritance in the 300s B.C.E.
See also LAWS AND LAW COURTS; RHETORIC.
Further reading: Richard F. Wevers, Isaeus: Chronol-
ogy, Prosopography, and Social History (The Hague: Mou-
ton, 1969); John Frederic Dobson, The Greek Orators
(Chicago: Ares, 1974); Stephen Usher, Greek Oratory:
Tradition and Originality (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1999); Deborah Kamen, Isaeus’ Orations 2 and 6
(Bryn Mawr, Pa.: Thomas Library, Bryn Mawr College,
2000).
Ischia
See PITHECUSAE.
Isokrates (436–338 B.C.E.) Influential Athenian orator,
educator, and pamphleteer
Isokrates’ importance for Greek history is in his attempts
to make the Greeks unite in a military crusade against the
Persian empire. His most significant written work was his
Philippus, or Address to Philip (346 B.C.E.). This work,
170
iron

which survives today, was an “open letter” addressed to
King PHILIP II of MACEDON, calling on the king to lead
such a campaign. The letter surely came as a propaganda
blessing to the opportunistic Philip, who was preparing
to subdue Greece. Perhaps it was Isokrates who first
inspired Philip’s further ambition to conquer PERSIA (an
ambition eventually fulfilled by Philip’s son ALEXANDER
THE GREAT).
Born into a wealthy family, Isokrates studied
RHETORIC under the famous GORGIAS. Like certain other
Greek orators, Isokrates wrote speeches for his clients to
deliver themselves. He rarely, if ever, argued in court or
spoke in the Athenian political ASSEMBLY. But his indi-
rect influence was great. His students of rhetoric
included the future historian Androtion and the future
orator ISAEUS. At some point Isokrates had a school on
the island of CHIOS.
It was the news of the humiliating terms of the
KING’S PEACE (386 B.C.E.) that fired Isokrates’ vision of
the Greeks uniting to liberate the Greek cities of ASIA
MINOR. Isokrates’ first published pamphlet on the subject
was the Panegyricus (380 B.C.E.), an idealistic tract that
pictured ATHENS and SPARTA leading the crusade. The
Panegyricus strongly anticipates the letter to Philip, writ-
ten 24 years later. In the intervening years Isokrates
somewhat shamelessly addressed similar pleas to other
rulers of the Greek world, including the Spartan king
AGESILAUS and the Syracusan tyrant DIONYSIUS (1).
But Isokrates’ idealism could not stem Philip’s ambi-
tion of conquering Greece. After the failure of a final plea
following the Battle of CHAERONEA (338 B.C.E.), the 98-
year-old Isokrates starved himself to death.
Ancient writers knew of 60 works by Isokrates; we
possess 21. Six of these are court speeches; the rest are
political pamphlets. He wrote with an elegant, masterful
style, including careful choice of words and expressions.
The rhythm of his prose greatly influenced later writers,
both Greek and Roman.
See also EDUCATION; LAWS AND LAW COURTS.
Further reading: Yun Lee Too, The Rhetoric of Identity
in Isocrates: Text, Power, Pedagogy (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1995); Takis Poulakos, Speaking for the
Polis: Isocrates’ Rhetorical Education (Columbia: Univer-
sity of South Carolina Press, 1997).
Isthmian Games
This was one of the four Greek-
international sports-and-religious festivals; the other
three were the OLYMPIC, PYTHIAN, and NEMEAN GAMES.
The Isthmian Games, or Isthmia, took place every two
years at CORINTH (located on the isthmus of central
Greece). The festival honored the god POSEIDON, and
the ritual prize for the victors was a garland of wild cel-
ery. The games were first organized during the early
500s B.C.E.
Further reading: Elizabeth Gebhard, “The Sanctuary
of Poseidon on the Isthmus of Corinth and the Isthmian
Games,” in Mind and Body: Athletic Contests in Ancient
Greece, edited by Olga Tzachou-Alexandri (Athens: Min-
istry of Culture, 1989).
isthmus
See CORINTH; PELOPONNESE.
Italy
Like SICILY, Italy contained a number of powerful
Greek cities in ancient times. Two separate regions of the
Italian peninsula saw intensive COLONIZATION by the
land- and commerce-hungry Greeks, around 750–550
B.C.E. One region is now called Campania, on the Bay of
Naples on the Italian west coast. There the Euboean set-
tlement of CUMAE became the first Greek landfall in Italy
and one of the very earliest Greek colonies anywhere
(around 750 B.C.E.). The attraction was TRADE with the
powerful ETRUSCANS.
The other major focus of COLONIZATION was in the
south, along the south coast of the Italian “toe” and
“instep.” There the Spartan colony of TARAS (founded
around 700 B.C.E.) occupied the best harbor in Italy, on
what is now called the Gulf of Taranto. Other Greek
cities of south Italy included SYBARIS, CROTON, RHEGIUM,
LOCRI, Metapontum, and Siris. The main attraction at
these sites was farmland, which the Greeks seized from
the native Brutii and Lucanii.
The Greek name Italia—applying originally only to
the south coast of the Italian “toe”—was probably a
Greek rendering of a local Italian place-name: Vitelia,
“calf land.” The “heel” of Italy originally had a different
Greek name, Iapygia. Later the name Italia, passing into
the Latin language of the conquering Romans, came to be
applied to the entire peninsula, north to the Alps.
To the Greeks of southern Italy, coming from moun-
tainous and overpopulated Greece, the land of Italy
seemed to extend forever. The Greeks gave the region a
nickname—Great Greece, Megal¯e Hellas—or (as it has
been more traditionally known, in its Latin name) Magna
Graecia.
By the 400s B.C.E. the Italian Greeks were subject to
influence and control by the successive rulers of the Sicil-
ian-Greek city of SYRACUSE. In the 200s B.C.E., after cen-
turies of war with each other and with their Italian
neighbors, the Greek cities of Italy became absorbed by
the expansionist power of ROME.
See also AGATHOKLES; DIONYSIUS (1); HIERON (1);
PARMENIDES; PITHECUSAE; POSEIDONIA; PYTHAGORAS.
Further reading: Margaret Guido, Southern Italy. An
Archaeological Guide. The Main Prehistoric, Greek, and
Roman Sites (Park Ridge, N.J.: Noyes Press, 1983); S. C.
Bakhuizen, “Italy and Sicily in the Perception of the Early
Greeks,” Mededelingen van het Nederlands Instituut te
Rome 48 (1988): 9–25; S. L. Dyson, “Reconstructing the
Italy
171

Landscape of Rural Italy,” in Earth Patterns. Essays on
Landscape Archaeology (Charlottesville: University Press
of Virginia, 1990), 245–253.
Ithaca
This small (44 square miles) island of the north-
west coast of Greece is located outside the Gulf of Patras.
Beautiful but unfertile, its coastline fretted with inlets of
sea, Ithaca was inhabited throughout ancient times yet
played almost no role in Greek history. It is best remem-
bered as the domain of the Greek king ODYSSEUS. Archae-
ological excavations have uncovered POTTERY and house
foundations from the Mycenaean era, confirming the
172
Ithaca

island’s importance around 1200 B.C.E., when Odysseus
would have lived.
See also IONIAN SEA; MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION.
Further reading:
John Victor Luce, Celebrating
Homer’s Landscapes: Troy and Ithaca Revisited (New
Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1998).
Ixion
A villain of Greek MYTH, Ixion was a prince of
the Lapith tribe of THESSALY who murdered his father-in-
law so as to avoid paying the bride price for the MAR-
RIAGE. Although pardoned by the great god ZEUS, Ixion
next schemed to seduce Zeus’s wife, the goddess HERA.
But Zeus, aware of Ixion’s plan, deceived Ixion with a fac-
simile of Hera, shaped from a cloud. (Supposedly Ixion’s
semen impregnated the cloud-Hera, which gave birth to
the race of CENTAURS.)
At Zeus’s order, Ixion was whipped until he repeated
the words “Benefactors deserve honor.” Then he was tied
to a fiery wheel and sent spinning through the sky—or
through the Underworld—for eternity. Ixion was one of
several great sinners of Greek legend—others include
SISYPHUS and TANTALUS—whose crime involved betraying
the friendship of the gods.
See also AFTERLIFE; HUBRIS.
Further reading: D. R. Blickman, “The Myth of Ixion
and Pollution for Homicide in Archaic Greece,” Classical
Journal 81 (1985–1986): 193–208.
Ixion
173

J
174
Jason (1) (Greek: Iason, “healer”)
In MYTH, this
Thessalian hero led the Argonauts (sailors of the ship
Argo) to the distant land of Colchis, to acquire the fabu-
lous Golden Fleece. The tale of the Argonauts is men-
tioned in HOMER’s Odyssey (written down around 750
B.C.E.) and elaborated in PINDAR’s fourth Pythian ode
(462 B.C.E.), but the main source is APOLLONIUS’s clever
Alexandrian epic, the Argonautica (ca. 245 B.C.E.).
The Argonaut tale seems to combine two different
layers: (1) a very ancient legend going back to Myce-
naean times (second millennium B.C.E.), of significance
for Mycenaean centers in THESSALY and BOEOTIA; and (2)
later traders’ tales of the Sea of MARMARA and the BLACK
SEA, developed during the Greek exploration of that
region in the 700s and 600s B.C.E. In the earlier version
(now lost), the Argonauts may have sailed to a fabled
land called Aea, somewhere at the edge of the world. But
the surviving version has the Argonauts voyaging to
Colchis, a real (although distant), non-Greek region on
the eastern Black Sea. (Colchis was an emporium for car-
avans from north-central Asia, and by the 500s B.C.E. the
Milesian Greeks had a TRADE depot there.)
In the myth, Jason was the son of Aeson and heir to
the kingship of the Thessalian city of Iolcus (modern
Volos, the region’s only seaport). As a child, he was smug-
gled away by his mother after Aeson’s stepbrother Pelias
had seized the throne. Raised in the Thessalian wilds by
the wise Cheiron—the centaur who regularly tutors
mythical young heroes—Jason returned as a young man
to Iolcus, to claim his birthright. He entered the city with
one sandal missing, having lost it crossing a river.
Pelias—knowing by that foretold sign to beware of this
man—immediately persuaded the newcomer to go out in
search of the Golden Fleece.
This fleece was the skin of winged, golden-fleeced
ram, which in prior times the gods had supplied to carry
the young Phrixus and Hell¯e (the children of the Boeo-
tian hero Athamas) away from their evil stepmother. Car-
ried eastward through the sky, Hell¯e had lost her grip and
fallen off, drowning in the waterway thenceforth called
the HELLESPONT (in her honor). Her brother had safely
reached the far-off land of Colchis, where he sacrificed
the ram to ZEUS the Savior.
Jason, aided by his divine patron, HERA, then assem-
bled an expedition consisting of the noblest heroes in
Greece. The roster varies, but the most familiar names
include: the Calydonian hero MELEAGER; the female war-
rior ATALANTA; the brothers PELEUS (father of ACHILLES)
and Telamon (father of AJAX [1]); the Thracian musician
ORPHEUS; the Spartan twins CASTOR AND POLYDEUCES; the
twins Calais and Zetes (sons of the North Wind); and the
greatest of heroes, HERAKLES (who soon gets “written out”
of the story, so as not to monopolize the adventures).
Their ship was the Argo, built by a shipwright
named Argos, who went along on the expedition. The
Argonauts were sometimes called by the name MINYANS
(Minuai), which was also the name of the ruling family
of the Boeotian city ORCHOMENOS. These Boeotian
Minyans may have figured in the early (lost) version of
the myth.
Sailing northeastward from Greece to the Black Sea,
the heroes had several adventures. They dawdled for a
year on the Aegean island of Lemnos, busily impregnat-
ing the man-hungry Lemnian WOMEN, who had all mur-
dered their husbands out of resentment of the latter’s
Thracian slave girls. Finally continuing to the Sea of Mar-
mara, the Argonauts were welcomed by the native king
Cyzicus, but he was killed by them in a mishap. Soon

Herakles was separated from the expedition, having gone
ashore to search for his page, Hylas.
Still in the Marmara, the Argonauts rescued the old,
blind Thracian king Phineus who, for some offense, was
living in eternal torment. The HARPIES, hideous winged
female demons, would relentlessly fly down to snatch
away his food and leave behind their feces. The Argo-
nauts Calais and Zetes, who could fly, chased away the
harpies forever. In gratitude, Phineus gave Jason advice
on how to slip through the Symplegades, the Clashing
Rocks (which are a mythical rendering of the narrow
BOSPORUS channel, leading into the Black Sea).
At the eastward end of the Black Sea, the adventurers
reached Colchis, where the evil king Aeëtes set his condi-
tions for surrendering the fleece. One of the Argonauts
must plow a field with a pair of fire-breathing BRONZE
bulls and sow the magical dragon’s teeth (remnants of the
hero CADMUS’s adventure at THEBES), which Aeëtes had
in his possession. From the seeds, there would arise
armed men, who must be conquered.
Aeëtes was sure that these conditions could never be
met. But his sorceress daughter MEDEA, having fallen in
love with Jason (at APHRODITE’s hand, from Hera’s bid-
ding), provided the hero with a magic ointment to make
him invulnerable for a day. Thus Jason was able to fulfill
Aeëtes’ terms. Then the Argonauts fled Colchis with the
fleece and Medea (who had stolen the fleece for them
after charming to sleep the dragon that guarded it).
Aeëtes led his ships in pursuit. But Medea, who had
brought her young brother Apsyrtus aboard the Argo,
now murdered the child and cut him up, throwing the
body sections into the sea. Aeëtes and his followers
halted, collecting the royal corpse for burial.
The Argonauts returned to Thessaly, either the way
they had come or via a fantastical route up the Danube
and into the Mediterranean. Apollonius’s Argonautica
ends with the return to Iolcus. Other writers describe
how Jason and Medea took vengeance on Pelias by fatally
tricking him into climbing into a cauldron of boiling
water that was supposed to rejuvenate him.
Driven from Iolcus by Pelias’s son, Jason and Medea
hung up the Golden Fleece in the temple of Zeus at
Orchomenos. They settled at CORINTH, where the final
chapter of Jason’s drama was played out, as described in
EURIPIDES’ tragedy Medea (431 B.C.E.). Jason divorced
Medea, intending to marry Glauce, daughter of the
Corinthian king Creon. Medea, insane with rage, avenged
herself by killing Glauce, Creon, and her own two chil-
dren by Jason. She then fled to ATHENS. Jason, mean-
while, had set up the Argo on land and dedicated it to the
god POSEIDON. As he slept beneath the ship’s stern one
day, a section fell off and killed him.
See also CENTAURS; CYZICUS; EPIC POETRY; SHIPS AND
SEAFARING.
Further reading: Tim Severin, The Jason Voyage: The
Quest for the Golden Fleece (New York: Simon and Schus-
ter, 1985); G. J. Smith and A. J. Smith, “Jason’s Golden
Fleece,” Oxford Journal of Archaeology
11 (1992):
119–120; R. L. Hunter, The Argonautica of Apollonius: Lit-
erary Studies (New York: Cambridge University Press,
1993); James J. Clauss, The Best of the Argonauts: The
Redefinition of the Epic Hero in Book 1 of Apollonius’ Argo-
nautica (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993);
Peter Green, trans., The Argonautika by Apollonios Rhodius
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997); Calvin S.
Byre, A Reading of Apollonius Rhodius’ Argonautica: The
Poetics of Uncertainty (Lewiston, N.Y.: Edwin Mellen
Press, 2002).
Jason (2) (d. 370 B.C.E.) Tyrant of Pherae in THESSALY,
reigning ca. 385–370 B.C.E.
In a period of political turmoil throughout Greece, he
united Thessaly under himself and tried to forge it into a
major power. An ally of THEBES, he negotiated a treaty
between Thebes and SPARTA after the Spartan defeat at
LEUKTRA (371 B.C.E.) but was assassinated the following
year. In history he stands as a precursor to the Macedo-
nian king PHILIP II (reigned 359–336 B.C.E.), who may
have modeled himself on Jason to some extent. In war-
fare, Jason developed the use of primitive siege artillery—
a military science later taken up by Philip.
See also TYRANTS; WARFARE, SIEGE.
Further reading: A. G. Woodhead, “IG II2 43 and
Jason of Pherae,” American Journal of Archaeology 61
(1957): 367–373; J. Mandel, “Jason, the Tyrant of Pherae,
Tagus of Thessaly, as Reflected in Ancient Sources and
Modern Literature. The Image of the New Tyrant,” Rivista
storica dell’antichità 10 (1980): 47–77; F. W. Mitchel,
“The Rasura of IG II2 43. Jason, the Pheraian Demos, and
the Athenian League,” Ancient World 9 (1984): 39–58.
Jews
The Jews and the Greeks, despite their respective
importance in ancient history, had little to do with each
other prior to the 300s B.C.E. An independent Jewish king-
dom, with its capital at Jerusalem, ceased to exist in 586
B.C.E, when the Babylonians captured Jerusalem and
removed the population to Babylon. This Babylonian Exile
ended in 539 B.C.E., when the Persian king CYRUS (1) con-
quered much of the Near East. A proponent of religious
freedom, CYRUS permitted his new Jewish subjects to return
to their homeland in the Levant, though not all did so.
It was now that the Jews came into contact with
another subject-people of the Persians—Greeks from
IONIA, in western ASIA MINOR. The biblical prophet
Ezekiel (late 500s B.C.E.) wrote disdainfully of the profit-
minded Greek traders of “Javan” (Ionia), trading in
SLAVES
and worked 
BRONZE.
The Greek historian
HERODOTUS (ca. 435 B.C.E.) knew of the Jews—he called
them “Palestinian Syrians”—and listed them among the
naval levies serving in the Persian king XERXES’ invasion
of Greece in 480 B.C.E.
Jews
175

The destruction of the Persian Empire by the Mace-
donian king ALEXANDER THE GREAT between 334 and 323
B.C.E. left Macedonian and Greek governors over the vari-
ous Jewish pockets of the Near East. By about 300 B.C.E.
Alexander’s domain had fragmented into the large Greco-
Macedonian kingdoms of the HELLENISTIC AGE. Ptole-
maic EGYPT seized Jerusalem and the southern Levant,
while the SELEUCID EMPIRE ruled Babylon and other Jew-
ish-inhabited regions. Consequently Jewish immigrants
flooded such newly founded Hellenistic cities as Egyptian
ALEXANDRIA (1) and Seleucid ANTIOCH. Alexandria in
particular developed an important Jewish minority that
occasionally endured ethnic violence from the Greek
population.
Jewish monotheism was not deeply affected by the
polytheistic RELIGION of the Greeks. However, the glam-
orous Greek style of life attracted many of the wealthier
Jews, creating an assimilated, pro-Greek class. This pro-
cess occurred not only in the Hellenistic cities but also in
Jerusalem itself (where at least one Greek-style GYMNA-
SIUM and THEATER were each built in the 100s B.C.E.).
Greek nomenclature infiltrated Judaism; the word syna-
gogue, for example, is Greek (“assembly place”). Greek
influence can be seen in several surviving customs in the
ceremonial Jewish Passover meal. The ritual drinking of
cups of WINE and the prayerbook references to dining in a
reclining position, for example, are best understood as
elements borrowed from the Greek drinking party known
as the SYMPOSIUM.
With Greek the language of commerce, administra-
tion, and secular law in the Hellenistic kingdoms, the
emigrant Jewish communities began to forget the Hebrew
tongue. In Alexandria this process had taken hold by
around 260 B.C.E., when certain books of the Jewish Bible
began appearing in Greek translation. The complete
Greek translation of the Jewish Bible—a work supposedly
ordered by the Macedonian-Egyptian king PTOLEMY (2) II
and conducted by 70 scholars—became known as the
Septuagint (from the Latin septuaginta, “seventy”). In the
Greco-Roman world of later centuries, the Septuagint
contributed greatly to the survival of Judaism and the
spread of Christianity.
In 198 B.C.E. the Seleucid king ANTIOCHUS (2) III
conquered much of the Levant, including the Jewish
heartland. There the next generation saw the best-known,
tragic encounter between Jews and Greeks—the Mac-
cabean Revolt of 167–164 B.C.E., which is commemorated
in the Jewish festival of Hanukkah. The biblical First
Book of Maccabees describes how certain rural Jews
rebelled after the Seleucid king Antiochus IV tried to
impose Greek religious customs and convert the temple
at Jerusalem into a temple of the Greek god ZEUS. The
spreading revolt was led by Judas Maccabee (“the ham-
mer”), of the priestly Hasmonaean family. Judas defeated
Seleucid armies in battle and recaptured the Jerusalem
temple, but the rebellion decayed into a Jewish civil war
of anti-Greek versus pro-Greek factions. Finally, in 142
B.C.E., the rebels ejected the Seleucid garrison from the
citadel at Jerusalem. For the next 80 years the Jews of the
Levant comprised a sovereign nation ruled by a Hasmon-
aean dynasty. But in 63 B.C.E. the country fell to the
Roman legions of Pompey the Great.
The Romans established local governors to control
their new province of Judea, and the Jews did not fare
well under this management. The Romans desired con-
formity from the inhabitants of their empire, and many
old Jewish customs suffered as a result. Like many other
growing religious sects, including Christianity, Judaism
seems to have been both fascinating and threatening to
the Romans, and Jews were often persecuted for their
beliefs and traditions.
Much of our knowledge about Judaism in the late
first century B.C.E. and first century C.E. comes from a
Greek writer named Philo, called Iudaeus, “the Jew.” He
visited Rome in 39 C.E. as an ambassador to the Emperor
Caligula, representing the Jewish people and their anger
over an imperial edict that they must erect statues of the
emperor in their synagogues. A scholar and philosopher,
Philo wrote several works in the style of Plato, mostly
concerned with blending the tenets of Platonism and
Judaism.
Further reading: M. Stern, Greek and Latin Authors on
Jews and Judaism. Edited with Introduction, Translations,
and Commentary. 1. From Herodotus to Plutarch (Jerusalem:
Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities, 1976); S.
Applebaum, Jews and Greeks in Ancient Cyrene (Leiden,
Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 1979); A. D. Momigliano, “Greek
Culture and the Jews,” in The Legacy of Greece. A New
Appraisal, edited by M. I. Finley (New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1981), 325–346; C. Zuckerman, “Hellenistic
Politeumata and the Jews. A Reconsideration,” Scripta
Classica Israelica 8–9 (1985–1988): 171–185; J. Reynolds
and R. Tannenbaum, Jews and God-fearers at Aphrodisias.
Greek Inscriptions with Commentary (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge Philological Society, 1987); Elias J. Bickerman, The
Jews in the Greek Age (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univer-
sity Press, 1988); D. S. Barrett, “Ancient Hellenism and
the Jews. A Study in Attitudes and Acculturation,” in
Greek Colonists and Native Populations. Proceedings of the
First Australian Congress of Classical Archaeology. Sydney,
9–14 July 1985 (New York: Oxford University Press,
1990), 543–550; D. R. Edwards, Religion and Power.
Pagans, Jews, and Christians in the Greek East (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1996); M. Williams, ed., The Jews
Among the Greeks and Romans. A Sourcebook (Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1998); M. Goodman, ed.,
Jews in a Graeco-Roman World (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1998); H. G. Snyder, Teachers and Texts in the Ancient
World: Philosophers, Jews, and Christians (London: Rout-
ledge, 2000).
Jocasta
See OEDIPUS.
176
Jocasta

K
177
Kallias (Callias) (400s B.C.E.) Athenian nobleman and
diplomat, active in the early and mid-fifth century B.C.E.
Kallias’s family was the richest in ATHENS, renting out
slave labor to the state SILVER mine at Laurion. Despite
his upper-class background, Kallias became a political
follower of the radical democrat PERIKLES. During Perik-
les’ preeminence, Kallias was the foremost diplomat for
Athens.
Kallias made at least one embassy to King Artaxerxes
I of PERSIA, in about 461 B.C.E. Most modern scholars
accept the theory, previously disputed, that in about 449
B.C.E. Kallias negotiated an end to the Greek-Persian hos-
tilities known as the PERSIAN WARS. Apparently the Peace
of Kallias in part protected the Athenian-allied Greek
cities of western ASIA MINOR, prohibiting the Persians
from sailing or marching west past certain set boundaries.
For their part, the Athenians may have agreed to disman-
tle the fortifications of the Asia Minor Greek cities.
See also DELIAN LEAGUE; IONIA; SLAVES.
Further reading: J. Walsh, “The Authenticity and the
Dates of the Peace of Callias and the Congress Decrees,”
Chiron 11 (1981): 31–63; E. Badian, “The Peace of Cal-
lias,” Journal of Hellenic Studies 107 (1987): 1–39; Lisa
Kallet-Marx, “The Kallias Decree, Thucydides, and the
Outbreak of the Peloponnesian War,” Classical Quarterly
39 (1989): 94–113; A. B. Bosworth, “Plutarch, Callis-
thenes, and the Peace of Callias,” Journal of Hellenic Stud-
ies 110 (1990): 1–13; R. A. Moysey, “Thucydides, Kimon,
and the Peace of Kallias,” Ancient History Bulletin 5
(1991): 30–35; L. J. Samons II, “Kimon, Kallias, and
Peace with Persia,” Historia 47 (1998): 129–140.
Kassander (Cassander) (Greek: Kassandros) (ca. 360–
297 B.C.E.) Macedonian general and ruler
Kassander was one of the several DIADOCHI (Successors)
who carved up the empire of ALEXANDER THE GREAT after
the latter’s death in 323 B.C.E. He was the son of the Mace-
donian general ANTIPATER, who served as regent in MACE-
DON during Alexander’s eastward campaigns (334–323
B.C.E.). Kassander joined Alexander’s army in Asia in 324
B.C.E. He and the king seem to have disliked each other
bitterly, and Kassander is mentioned by ancient writers as
a suspect in theories that Alexander died from poisoning.
After Antipater’s death (319 B.C.E.), Kassander seized con-
trol of Macedon and most of Greece. He executed Alexan-
der’s mother, Olympias, Alexander’s widow, Roxane, and
Alexander’s young son, Alexander III.
In the following years Kassander joined the other
secessionist Diadochi—SELEUCOS (1), PTOLEMY (1), and
LYSIMACHUS—in resisting the efforts of ANTIGONUS (1) to
reunite Alexander’s empire. After Kassander died, his
dynasty in Macedon lasted only a few years before falling
to the descendants of Antigonus.
Further reading: Daniel Ogden, Polygamy, Prostitutes,
and Death: The Hellenistic Dynasties (London: Duckworth
with the Classical Press of Wales, 1999).
Kerberos (Cerberus)
In MYTH, this monstrous dog
guarded the inner bank of the river Styx, at the entrance
to the Underworld. According to HESIOD’s epic poem the
Theogony, Kerberos had 50 heads. A later, more familiar
version gave him three heads and outgrowths of snakes.
Kerberos would fawn on the ghosts arriving at the infer-
nal kingdom, but became vicious toward anyone who
tried to leave.
Kerberos was the target of HERAKLES’ eleventh Labor.
The hero visited the Underworld and won permission
from the god HADES to bring the dog temporarily to the

upper world. Dragging Kerberos to the city of TIRYNS,
Herakles mischievously frightened his taskmaster, King
Eurystheus. This was a favorite scene in ancient Greek
artwork. One famous Athenian black-figure vase (530s
B.C.E.), now in the Louvre, shows the timid king hiding
inside a storage jar as the hound of Hell is led in.
See also AFTERLIFE.
Further reading: Bernard Evslin, Cerberus (New
York: Chelsea House, 1987).
Kimon (Cimon) (ca. 505–450 B.C.E.) Athenian soldier
and conservative statesman in the 460s B.C.E.
Kimon briefly dominated Athenian politics but suc-
cumbed to the failure of his pro-Spartan policy. He was
the political enemy of the radical democrats, and his
decline after 462 B.C.E. marked the rise of the young left-
wing politician PERIKLES. In foreign policy, Kimon was
the last great Athenian enemy of PERSIA, and his death
ushered in a Greek-Persian peace treaty that officially
concluded the PERSIAN WARS.
Kimon was born into a rich and eminent family, the
Philaïds. His father was the Athenian soldier MILTIADES;
his mother, Hegesipyle, was daughter of a Thracian king.
By the 470s B.C.E., Kimon was regularly being elected to
the office of general. He assisted ARISTIDES in the organi-
zation of the DELIAN LEAGUE (ca. 478 B.C.E.), and from
476 to 462 B.C.E. he was the premier Athenian soldier,
leading the league’s expeditions against the Persians. He
became known particularly as a sea commander.
Kimon’s height of success came in 469 or 466 B.C.E.
(the exact date is unknown) when, with 200 league war-
ships, he totally destroyed a Persian fleet and army at the
River Eurymedon, midway along the south coast of ASIA
MINOR. In purely military terms, the Eurymedon was the
greatest Greek victory over Persia prior to the campaigns
of ALEXANDER THE GREAT (334–323 B.C.E.).
At home, this success established Kimon in Athenian
politics. Gracious and well-connected (his first or second
wife, Isodice, was of the powerful Alcmaeonid clan),
Kimon now emerged as leader of the conservative opposi-
tion. He blocked left-wing reforms and advocated an old-
fashioned policy of hostility toward Persia and friendship
with SPARTA. He even gave one of his sons the striking
name Lacedaemonius, “Spartan.”
Kimon’s downfall came after he persuaded the ASSEM-
BLY to send him with an Athenian infantry force to assist
the Spartans against their rebellious subjects, the Messe-
nians (462 B.C.E.). This expedition ended in fiasco; the
Spartans—fighting a serf rebellion—apparently found the
Athenian soldiers’ pro-democratic sentiments alarming
and sent the Athenians home. Humiliated, Kimon now
saw his conservative party swept out of power by demo-
cratic reforms sponsored by EPHIALTES and Perikles. In
the following year, 461 B.C.E., the angry Athenians voted
to ostracize Kimon.
Although the OSTRACISM law allowed a victim to
return home after 10 years, this event ended Kimon’s
power and policies. Soon Athens began a full-fledged war
against Sparta and its allies (460 B.C.E.). In 457 B.C.E.,
when the Athenian army was about to battle the Spartans
near Tanagra, in BOEOTIA, the exiled Kimon arrived, ask-
ing permission to fight alongside his countrymen. Per-
mission was refused but, according to one story, he was
specially recalled to Athens soon after.
Kimon died while leading Athenian troops against
the Persians in CYPRUS. He was remembered for his nobil-
ity and bravery, but his policies were at odds with
Athens’s destiny as a radical democracy that would domi-
nate the rest of Greece.
See also ALCMAEONIDS; KALLIAS; MESSENIA; WARFARE,
NAVAL.
Further reading: Plutarch, Life of Kimon, translated
by A. Blamire (London: Institute of Classical Studies,
University of London, 1989); Johan Henrik Schreiner,
Hellanikos, Thukydides and the Era of Kimon (Aarhus,
Denmark: Aarhus University Press, 1997).
King’s Peace
This treaty between SPARTA and the Per-
sian king Artaxerxes II, drawn up in 386 or 387 B.C.E., is
sometimes known as the Peace of Antalcidas (from the
name of a Spartan ambassador). The agreement ended
recent Spartan-Persian hostilities in the CORINTHIAN WAR
and severed PERSIA’s alliance with Sparta’s enemeis,
ATHENS, CORINTH, BOEOTIA, and ARGOS. But the notori-
ous aspect of the treaty was Sparta’s renunciation of its
former claim to protect the Greek cities of IONIA and of
other parts of ASIA MINOR. The King’s Peace ceded the
Greek cities of Asia Minor and CYPRUS back to the Per-
sian king, even though these cities had been liberated by
the Greeks after the PERSIAN WARS.
For the Persians, the King’s Peace marked a high
point in their designs against Greece, a return to the
western conquests of DARIUS (1) (around 500 B.C.E.). For
the Greeks, the peace unmasked the “real” Sparta from its
pretense of being a liberator. Amid the resulting anti-
Spartan anger, Athens was able to attract allies for its new
SECOND ATHENIAN LEAGUE (around 377 B.C.E.), and the
city of THEBES began to emerge as a rival to Sparta. It was
then (380 B.C.E.) that the Athenian orator ISOKRATES
began to publish pamphlets urging the Greeks to unite
and liberate Ionia by invading the Persian Empire—a plea
that would later bear fruit in the conquests of the Mace-
donian king ALEXANDER THE GREAT (334–323 B.C.E.).
Further reading: R. Seager, “The King’s Peace and
the Balance of Power in Greece, 386–362 B.C.”
Athenaeum 52 (1974): 36–63; R. K. Sinclair, “The King’s
Peace and the Employment of Military and Naval Forces,
387–378,” Chiron 8 (1978): 29–54; George L. Cawkwell,
“The King’s Peace,” Classical Quarterly 31 (1981): 69–83;
E. Badian, “The King’s Peace,” in Georgica. Greek Studies
178
Kimon

in Honour of George Cawkwell, edited by Mark Flowers
and Mark Toher (London: University of London, Institute
of Classical Studies, 1991), 25–48.
kinship
From earliest times, Greek society was orga-
nized along multiple levels of kinship. The largest and
simplest divisions were the different Greek ethnic groups,
chiefly the IONIAN, AEOLIAN, and DORIAN GREEKS. All
Dorian and many Ionian settlements were originally sub-
divided into citizens’ groupings called phylai (usually
translated as “tribes”). Dorian cities such as SPARTA or
SYRACUSE had three phylai. Ionian cities such as ATHENS
or MILETUS might have had four or more. Undoubtedly
the phylai predate the Greek cities and reflect the tribal
organizations of a nomadic era in the BRONZE AGE.
Appropriate to this primitive origin, the phylai were
religious-military societies with inherited membership,
centered on aristocratic families. Phylai were themselves
divided into groups called phratriai (brotherhoods),
whose members were phrateres (brothers). This Greek
word—connected in origin to other Indo-European
words such as Latin frater and English brother—described
men who were not literally brothers but who fought
together in the retinue of aristocratic war leaders. In
HOMER’s epic poem the Iliad (written down around 750
B.C.E.), the Greek leader AGAMEMNON is advised to mar-
shal the army into battalions consisting of men from the
same tribe and phratry. Early Sparta (around 700 B.C.E.)
had 27 phratries, probably nine from each tribe.
Like other aspects of Greek citizenship and military
life, the phratry was mainly the province of adult, citizen
males. During the era of Greek aristocratic rule (around
1000–600 B.C.E.), a man did not need to be of noble
blood to belong to a phratry, but he did have to be associ-
ated with one of the aristocratic families—for example, as
a spear-carrier in war. For the individual citizen, the
phratry provided aristocratic patronage and an extended
family, giving assurance of support in legal proceedings,
blood feuds, and similar events.
At the head of each phratry was a genos or (plural)
gen¯e. The genos was an aristocratic clan—a group of kins-
men claiming a single noble ancestor through male
descent. A genos typically had a name formed with a
Greek suffix meaning “the sons of”—for example, the
Athenian Alcmaeonidae (sons of the ancestor Alcmaeon)
and the Corinthian Bacchiadae (sons of Bacchis). As a
center of political power, religious authority, and military
might, the genos dominated the (larger and less elite)
phratry, but presumably a phratry might be headed by
more than one genos. We know the names of about 60
Athenian gen¯e; they were also called by the blanket term
Eupatridai, “sons of noble fathers.”
With the arising middle-class challenge to aristo-
cratic rule in the 600s–400s B.C.E., the old-fashioned,
aristocratic-based phyle and phratry in many Greek cities
were completely reorganized by political decree. At Sparta
this occurred probably under the reforms of LYKOURGOS
(1), around 650 B.C.E. At Athens such revamping was at
the heart of the democratic reforms of KLEISTHENES (1)
(ca. 594 B.C.E.). Abolishing the four traditional Athenian
phylae, Kleisthenes created 10 new phylae and reconsti-
tuted the phratries so as to include newly enfranchised,
lower-income citizens.
In the democratic Athens of the 400s and 300s B.C.E.,
the phratry remained a vital social-political entity, con-
necting the individual citizen with the political life of the
state. As a young child and again as a teenager, the young
male citizen was presented by his father and near kins-
men to his phrateres at the altar of ZEUS Phratrios, the
Zeus of the Phratry. The adolescent presentation—at
which the youth dedicated his newly shorn childhood
hair to the god—signified the young man’s entrance into
the community. Later in the man’s life, his phrateres wit-
nessed his betrothal ceremony and feasted at his MAR-
RIAGE. Less elaborately, it was at the local phratry office
that a female Athenian’s name would be enrolled, thus
assuring her of the rights (regarding marriage, public
assistance, etc.) available to citizen WOMEN.
See also ARISTOCRACY; DEMOCRACY; POLIS.
Further reading: W. E. Thompson, “Attic Kinship
Terminology,” Journal of Hellenic Studies 91 (1971):
110–113; Robert J. Littman, “Kinship in Athens,” Ancient
Society 10 (1979): 5–31; S. C. Humphreys, “Kinship Pat-
terns in the Athenian Courts,” Greek, Roman, and Byzan-
tine Studies 27 (1986): 57–91; Robert J. Littman, Kinship
and Politics in Athens, 600–400 B.C. (New York: P. Lang,
1990); Ian Morris, “The Gortyn Code and Greek Kin-
ship,” Greek, Roman, and Byzantine Studies 31 (1990):
233–254; S. D. Lambert, The Phratries of Attica (Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1998); Christopher
P. Jones, Kinship Diplomacy in the Ancient World (Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1999).
Kleisthenes (1) (Cleisthenes) (ca. 560–500 B.C.E.)
Athenian statesman of the late 500s B.C.E.
Kleisthenes is usually considered to be the father of Athe-
nian DEMOCRACY. He began his career as a privileged aris-
tocrat in a political arena of TYRANTS and aristocrats; but,
whether through pure ambition or genuine convictions,
he used his influence to reorganize the government to
enlarge the common people’s rights.
Born into the noble Athenian clan of the
ALCMAEONIDS, Kleisthenes was the son of the politician
Megakles and of Agariste, daughter of the Sicyonian
tyrant KLEISTHENES (2). The younger Kleisthenes served
as ARCHON (525 B.C.E.) under the Athenian tyrant HIP-
PIAS (1), but was later banished with the rest of the
Alcmaeonids, on Hippias’s order.
After Hippias’s ouster (510 B.C.E.), Kleisthenes
returned to Athens and became leader of one of two rival
Kleisthenes
179

political parties. When his opponent Isagoras was elected
archon (508 B.C.E.), Kleisthenes struck back. According
to the historian HERODOTUS, writing some 70 years later,
Kleisthenes “took the common people (d¯emos) into part-
nership.” Kleisthenes proposed, in the Athenian ASSEM-
BLY, certain radical reforms to increase the common
people’s rights at the expense of the aristocrats. This pro-
gram made Kleisthenes the most powerful individual at
Athens, with all the common people behind him. His
reforms continued a process begun by the lawmaker
SOLON nearly 90 years prior and transformed Athens into
a full democracy, the first in world history.
Kleisthenes’ changes were extensive and complicated.
The enabling first step was to improve the rights of the
mass of poorer citizens (the laborers and peasants, called
th¯etes). The th¯etes were disadvantaged by the traditional
system of four Athenian tribes (phulai or phylai). These
tribes, which supplied the basis for public life in the city,
were traditionally dominated by aristocratic families.
Kleisthenes overhauled the tribal system, replacing the
four old phylai with 10 new ones. Each new tribe was
designed to include a thorough mix of Athenians—farm-
ers with city dwellers, aristocrats and their followers with
middle-class people and th¯etes. The effect was to reduce
greatly the influence of the nobles within each tribe.
To create his new, “mixed-up” tribes, Kleisthenes
reorganized the political map of ATTICA, the 1,000-
square-mile territory of Athens that included all Athenian
citizens. It was now, if not earlier, that Attica became
administratively divided into about 139 DEMES—d¯emoi,
“villages” or local wards. By means of Kleisthenes’ com-
plicated gerrymandering, each new tribe was made to
consist of several demes (an average of about 14, but the
actual numbers varied between six and 21). Typically
these tribal-constituent demes were unconnected by
geography, traditional allegiances, and the like. The new
tribes thus were relatively free from aristocratic domina-
tion and from the localism and feuding associated with
aristocratic domination. Across the map of Attica, the tra-
ditional pockets of local-family influence were, in effect,
broken up.
With his 10 tribes as a basis, Kleisthenes democra-
tized other aspects of the government. The people’s
COUNCIL was enlarged from 400 to 500 members, now
consisting of 50 citizens from each tribe, chosen by lot
from a pool of upper- and middle-class candidates. The
Athenian citizens’ assembly received new powers, such as
the judicial right to try or review certain court cases. But
these radical changes did not go unchallenged. Kleis-
thenes’ rival Isagoras appealed to the Spartan king
KLEOMENES (1), who marched on Athens with a small
Spartan force. Kleisthenes and his followers fled (507
B.C.E.). But when Kleomenes attempted to replace the
new democracy with an OLIGARCHY consisting of Isagoras
and his followers, the Athenian populace rose in resis-
tance. Kleomenes and his army were besieged atop the
Athenian ACROPOLIS, then were allowed to withdraw, tak-
ing Isagoras with them.
Kleisthenes returned to Athens, but soon his promi-
nence was over. He may have involved himself in diplo-
matic overtures to the Persian king DARIUS (1), and if so
he would have been disgraced in the ensuing anti-Persian
sentiment. But when Kleisthenes died, he received a pub-
lic tomb in the honorific Kerameikos cemetery, just out-
side Athens. His democratization of Athens would be
taken further by the radical reforms of EPHIALTES and
PERIKLES, in the mid-400s B.C.E.
See also KINSHIP; OSTRACISM.
Further reading: C. William J. Eliot, Coastal Demes
of Attika: A Study of the Policy of Kleisthenes (Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, 1962); Charles W. Fornara,
Athens from Cleisthenes to Pericles (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1991); Christian Meier, Athens: A Por-
trait of the City in its Golden Age, translated by Robert
Kimber and Rita Kimber (New York: Metropolitan Books,
1998); Sarah Pomeroy et al., A Brief History of Ancient
Greece: Politics, Society, and Culture (New York: Oxford
University Press, 2004).
Kleisthenes (2) (500s B.C.E.) Tyrant of the Pelopon-
nesian city of Sikyon and maternal grandfather of the Athe-
nian statesman KLEISTHENES (1)
Kleisthenes ruled Sikyon from about 600 to 570 B.C.E.,
when the city was one of the foremost commercial and
military powers in Greece. He extended his influence to
DELPHI by leading a coalition against PHOCIS in the First
Sacred War (ca. 590 B.C.E.) and crowned his achieve-
ments with a chariot victory at the OLYMPIC GAMES (ca.
572 B.C.E.). His wealth and prestige are apparent in the
historian HERODOTUS’s tale of how Kleisthenes hosted his
daughter Agariste’s 13 suitors at his palace for a year,
observing them in SPORT, discourse, and so on, and gaug-
ing their aristocratic qualifications for marrying his
daughter. The suitors came from various parts of the
Greek world, but Kleisthenes favored two Athenians:
Megakles, son of Alcmaeon of the clan of the
ALCMAEONIDS, and Hippocleides, son of Teisander of the
Philaïd clan.
On the day appointed to announce his choice, Kleis-
thenes held a great feast, at which the suitors competed
in two final contests, lyre-playing and public speaking.
Hippokleides, who outshone the others, was the one
whom Kleisthenes had by now secretly chosen. But as
more WINE was drunk, Hippokleides requested a tune
from the flute-player and boldly began to dance. Then he
called for a table and danced atop it, while Kleisthenes
watched with distaste. And when Hippokleides started
doing handstands on the table, beating time with his legs
in the air, Kleisthenes cried out, “O, son of Teisander, you
have danced away your wedding!” To which the young
man replied, “Hippokleides doesn’t care” (“ou phrontis
Hippokleidei”).
180
Kleisthenes

The story became proverbial as an example of aristo-
cratic detachment and joie de vivre. Agariste’s hand in MAR-
RIAGE went to Megacles, and their son was Kleisthenes,
the Athenian statesman (born in about 560 B.C.E.).
See also MUSIC; TYRANTS.
Further reading: J. Boardman, “Herakles, Delphi,
and Kleisthenes of Sikyon,” Revue archéologique (1978):
227–234; P. J. Bicknell, “Herodotus 5.68 and the Racial
Policy of Kleisthenes of Sikyon,” Greek, Roman, and
Byzantine Studies 23 (1982): 193–201; D. Ogden, “Cleis-
thenes of Sicyon,” Classical Quarterly
43 (1993):
353–363; V. Parker, “Some Aspects of the Foreign and
Domestic Policy of Cleisthenes of Sicyon,” Hermes 122
(1994): 404–424.
Kleomenes (1) (Cleomenes) (d. 490 B.C.E.) Dynamic
and ambitious king of SPARTA
Kleomenes reigned ca. 520–490 B.C.E. His efforts to
expand Spartan power beyond the PELOPONNESE, along
with his resistance to Persian encroachment, mark him as
one of the dominant personalities of the late 500s B.C.E.
Unfortunately, our major source for his reign, written by
the historian HERODOTUS (ca. 435 B.C.E.), is tainted by
Spartan official revisionism that tries to diminish Kleo-
menes’ importance.
The son of King Anaxandridas of the Agiad royal
house, Kleomenes was awarded the kingship in victori-
ous rivalry against his half brother Doreius. Soon
Kleomenes was taking aim against the Athenian dictator
HIPPIAS (1). Kleomenes wanted to end Hippias’s reign in
order to bring ATHENS into the Spartan alliance. In addi-
tion, Hippias’s diplomatic overtures to the Persian king
DARIUS (1) had made Kleomenes fear that Hippias was
maneuvering to assist a Persian invasion of mainland
Greece. In 510 B.C.E. Kleomenes entered Athens with an
army, ejected Hippias, and withdrew. But Kleomenes was
mistaken in expecting that this would result in an Athe-
nian 
OLIGARCHY
friendly to Sparta. Instead, there
occurred peaceful revolution, producing the Athenian
DEMOCRACY (508 B.C.E.).
Kleomenes returned with an army in 508 or 507
B.C.E., intending to overthrow the new government. He
captured the Athenian ACROPOLIS but found himself
besieged there by the Athenian populace and withdrew
under truce. His later attempt to organize a full Spartan-
allied attack on Athens was blocked by the other Spartan
king, Demaratus, and by Sparta’s ally CORINTH (which at
that time was still friendly with Athens).
Despite a request from the Greek city of MILETUS,
Kleomenes wisely declined to send Spartan troops over-
seas to aid the IONIAN REVOLT against the Persians (499
B.C.E.). He had an enemy nearer home to attend to —
Sparta’s Peloponnesian rival, ARGOS. In 494 B.C.E., at the
Battle of Sepeia, on the Argive plain, Kleomenes obliter-
ated an Argive army and marched his Spartans to the
walls of Argos. But the city withstood Kleomenes’ siege, a
failure that later was to be used against him by his ene-
mies at Sparta.
In around 491 B.C.E. Persian envoys went to Sparta
asking for earth and water, the tokens of submission to PER-
SIA. Probably at Kleomenes’ prompting, the Spartans threw
the Persians down a well, telling them they would find
plenty of earth and water there. But other states, notably
AEGINA, did submit. When Demaratus blocked Kleomenes’
desired retaliation against Aegina, Kleomenes decided to rid
himself of this uncooperative partner. He persuaded
Demaratus’ kinsman Leotychides to claim the kingship on
grounds that Demaratus has been an illegitimate child, and
he bribed the oracle at DELPHI to support this claim.
Demaratus was deposed and succeeded by Leotychides.
Around 490 B.C.E. Kleomenes was in THESSALY.
According to Herodotus, the king was in hiding because
his disgraceful intrigues against Demaratus had been
exposed. However, it seems more likely that Kleomenes
was still at the height of power and working to organize
Greek resistance to Persia. He then visited ARCADIA, a
Peloponnesian region traditionally under Spartan control.
By then he may have been aiming at an ambitious goal—
to resist the Persians by creating a unified Peloponnesian
state, under his personal dictatorship. Possibly he even
tried to gain support from the Spartan serfs known as
HELOTS, promising them freedom in exchange.
After returning to Sparta, Kleomenes died violently.
According to the official version, he took his life in a fit
of insanity. But it looks as if he were assassinated by con-
servative Spartan elements. His successor was his half
brother, Leonidas, who was fated to die at the Battle of
THERMOPYLAE (480 B.C.E.), resisting the Persian invasion
that Kleomenes had tried to prevent.
See also AGIAD CLAN; KLEISTHENES (1); PERSIAN
WARS.
Further reading: Bernadotte Perrin, trans., Plutarch’s
Lives
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1993); William G. G. Forrest, A History of Sparta, 2nd ed.
(London: Bristol Classical Paperbacks, 1995); Robert
Parker, Cleomenes on the Acropolis: An Inaugural Lecture
Delivered before the University of Oxford on 12 May 1997
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998).
Kleomenes (2)
See SPARTA.
Kleon (Cleon) (d. 422 B.C.E.) Athenian demagogue (rab-
ble-rouser) of the early PELOPONNESIAN WAR
For seven years after the death of the statesman PERIKLES
(429–422 B.C.E.), the left-wing Kleon was the foremost
politician in ATHENS. Although not really a soldier, he
was the one person at the time who—by his bold plan-
ning and determination—could have won the war for
Athens. But when he was killed in battle, the Athenian
war leadership passed temporarily to the cautious NIKIAS.
Most information about Kleon comes from the writ-
ten work of his contemporary, the Athenian historian
Kleon
181

THUCYDIDES (1). The normally objective Thucydides
viewed Kleon with distaste and underestimated his
importance. Similarly, Kleon was despised by the Athe-
nian comic playwright ARISTOPHANES, who mocked him
in the Knights (424 B.C.E.) and other comedies as a
crowd-pleasing opportunist. Yet despite the disapproval
of such intellectuals, Kleon probably was widely viewed
as Perikles’ legitimate successor. Although Kleon came to
prominence by attacking the aging Perikles (431 B.C.E.),
he also imitated Perikles in his obsessive loyalty to the
Athenian common people (d¯emos), who were his power
base. That is why, in the Knights, Aristophanes uses the
name Philodemos (lover of the people) for his character
who is a caricature of Kleon.
The son of a rich tanner of hides, Kleon was an
accomplished orator who could whip up public opinion
in the Athenian ASSEMBLY; he is said to have introduced a
more vulgar and demonstrative mode of public speaking.
He reached his peak of power in 425 B.C.E., after Athens
had gained the advantage in the fighting against the Spar-
tans at PYLOS. Accusing the Athenian generals of incom-
petence, Kleon won command of the entire Pylos
campaign by acclamation of the assembly. He journeyed
to Pylos, where—helped by the Athenian general DEMOS-
THENES (2)—he won a total victory over the supposedly
invincible Spartans.
Then preeminent in Athenian politics, Kleon pre-
sumably is the one who prompted the notorious
“Thoudippos Decree” (425 B.C.E.), which authorized a
reassessment of the annual tribute to be paid to Athens
by its DELIAN LEAGUE allies. The decree resulted in a dou-
bling or tripling of the amounts due from individual
allied states. Around the same time, Kleon sponsored a
law increasingly jury pay, to the advantage of lower-
income citizens.
Elected as a general for 422 B.C.E., he led an Athe-
nian army to the north Aegean coast, to recapture the
area from the Spartan commander BRASIDAS. But at the
Battle of AMPHIPOLIS, Kleon was defeated and killed.
Thucydides mentions that he was running away when an
enemy skirmisher cut him down.
See also DEMOCRACY; LAWS AND LAW COURTS; MYTILENE.
Further reading: Lowell Edmunds, Cleon, Knights,
and Aristophanes’ Politics (Lanham, Md.: University Press
of America, 1987); W. Robert Connor, The New Politicians
of Fifth-Century Athens (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1992).
Klytemnestra (Clytaemnestra)
In MYTH, Klytemnes-
tra was the wife and murderer of King AGAMEMNON of
MYCENAE and, according to different versions of the tale,
her father was either the god ZEUS or Leda’s husband, the
Spartan king Tyndareus. Klytemnestra had the famous
HELEN OF TROY for a twin sister and CASTOR AND POLY-
DEUCES for her brothers. Her name, Klutaimn¯estra, proba-
bly means “famous wooing” or “famous intent.”
As Agamemnon’s wife, Klytemnestra bore a son,
ORESTES, and two daughters, ELECTRA and IPHIGENIA. But
she grew to hate her husband when he chose to sacrifice
Iphigenia to appease the goddess ARTEMIS, who was send-
ing contrary winds to block the Greeks’ sailing fleet at the
start of the TROJAN WAR. During Agamemnon’s 10-year
absence at TROY, Klytemnestra became the lover of
Agamemnon’s cousin Aegisthus, and the two plotted to kill
the king on his return. In the act, they also killed the Tro-
jan princess CASSANDRA, whom Agamemnon had brought
home as his war prize.
Afterward, Klytemnestra and Aegisthus ruled as
queen and king at Mycenae. They were eventually killed
in vengeance by Orestes, with Electra assisting.
Klytemnestra’s character shows a growth in strength
and evil during the centuries of Greek literature. Where
she is first mentioned in HOMER’s epic poem the Odyssey
(written down around 750 B.C.E.), she is overshadowed
by the vigorous Aegisthus, who seduces her and plots the
murder. But in AESCHYLUS’s tragedy Agamemnon (per-
formed in 458 B.C.E.), Klytemnestra is the proud and
malevolent prime mover, and Aegisthus is just her effete,
subordinate lover. In the play, she persuades the newly
arrived Agamemnon to tread atop a priceless tapestry; he
thereby unwittingly calls down heaven’s anger on himself.
Then she leads him to his bath, where she murders him
and Cassandra.
Agamemnon is the first play of Aeschylus’s Oresteian
Trilogy. In the following play, the Cho¯ephoroi (or Libation
Bearers), Klytemnestra and Aegisthus are slain by Orestes.
As she dies, she calls down the avenging EURIES upon her
son. A hateful Klytemnestra is portrayed also in SOPHOK-
LES’ tragedy Electra and EURIPIDES’ tragedy Electra (both
ca. 417 B.C.E.). In vase painting, Klytemnestra sometimes
is shown as wielding a double ax against Agamemnon or
Cassandra or (unsuccessfully) against Orestes.
See also HUBRIS; THEATER.
Further reading:
Sally MacEwen, ed., Views of
Clytemnestra, Ancient and Modern (Lewiston: Edwin Mellen
Press, 1990); Francine Viret Bernal, “When Painters Exe-
cute a Murderess: The Representation of Clytemnestra on
Attic Vases,” in Naked Truths: Women, Sexuality, and Gender
in Classical Art and Archaeology, edited by Ann Olga
Koloski-Ostrow and Claire L. Lyons (London: Rout-
ledge, 1997); Kathleen Komar, Reclaiming Klytemnestra:
Revenge or Reconciliation (Urbana: University of Illinois
Press, 2003).
Knidos (Cnidus)
This prosperous Greek city is situ-
ated on the southwestern coast of ASIA MINOR. Founded
around 900 B.C.E. by DORIAN GREEKS from mainland
Greece, Knidos and its neighbor HALICARNASSUS were the
two important Dorian cities of Asia Minor, and were part
of a larger eastern Mediterranean Dorian federation
including the islands of KOS and RHODES.
182
Klytemnestra

Knidos stood on the side of a lofty promontory jut-
ting into the sea, and it thrived as a seaport and maritime
power. In search of raw metals such as tin, the Knidians
founded trade depots on the Lipari Islands and elsewhere
in the western Mediterranean. When the Persians
attacked Asia Minor under King CYRUS (1) in 546 B.C.E.,
the Knidians tried to convert their city into an inshore
island by digging a canal across the peninsula. Finding
the work slow and injurious, they consulted the Oracle of
DELPHI and were told to abandon resistance and make
submission.
After the liberation of Greek Asia Minor in 479
B.C.E., Knidos became a tribute-paying member of the
DELIAN LEAGUE, under Athenian domination. In 413
B.C.E., with ATHENS losing ground in the PELOPONNESIAN
WAR, Knidos joined the general Delian revolt and became
a Spartan ally. In 394 B.C.E., during the CORINTHIAN WAR,
the Athenian admiral KONON destroyed a Spartan fleet in
a battle off Knidos.
Returned to Persian overlordship by the terms of the
KING’S PEACE (386 B.C.E.), Knidos was reliberated in 334
B.C.E. by the Macedonian king ALEXANDER THE GREAT. In
about 330 B.C.E. the city’s public and commercial build-
ings were rebuilt near the tip of its peninsula to take
advantage of the superior harbor there. By then the city
had reached its height of prosperity, being renowned for
its exported WINE and its school of MEDICINE. Knidos
housed a statue that was considered to be the most beau-
tiful in the world: the naked APHRODITE carved in marble
by PRAXITELES in the 360s B.C.E. According to one ancient
writer, people would voyage to Knidos expressly to view
this work.
During the HELLENISTIC AGE, Knidos became subject
to Ptolemaic EGYPT (200s B.C.E.). By the later 100s B.C.E.
the city was part of the empire of ROME.
See also BRONZE; PERSIAN WARS.
Further reading:
Christine M. Havelock, The
Aphrodite of Knidos and Her Successors: A Historical of the
Female Nude in Greek Art (Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press, 1995).
Knossos
This was the chief city of the island of CRETE
for most of antiquity. Located in the north-central part of
the island, about three miles inland, Knossos had a good
harbor—the site of the modern seaport of Irakleion—and
also guarded a major land route southward across the
middle of Crete. Knossos was the capital city of the
MINOAN CIVILIZATION, which thrived on Crete around
2200–1450 B.C.E. and controlled a naval empire in the
AEGEAN SEA. Although the Minoans were not themselves
Greek, they stand at the threshold of Greek history inso-
far as they deeply influenced the emerging Greek MYCE-
NAEAN CIVILIZATION (ca. 1600–1200 B.C.E.). The name
Knossos is in origin a pre-Greek word, probably from the
lost Minoan language.
Knossos today is one of the world’s most important
archaeological sites, containing remnants of the largest
Minoan palace, the seat of the Minoan rulers. First
erected in around 1950 B.C.E. and then rebuilt and
enlarged after earthquakes in around 1700 and 1570
B.C.E., the palace was first revealed to modern eyes by the
British archaeologist Sir Arthur Evans in 1900 C.E. The
building and envisions, excavated almost continuously
since then, have yielded such well-known Minoan art-
work as the Bull’s Head Rhyton and the Toreador Fresco,
now in the Irakleion archaeological museum.
Built mainly of large blocks of Cretan limestone, the
palace survives today mostly as a network of foundations
and wall remnants covering five and a half acres. Around
a central, square courtyard measuring 82 by 180 feet, the
building contained pillared hallways, staircases, and hun-
dreds of rooms and storage chambers in a mazelike con-
figuration. There were two or even three upper floors,
now partly reconstructed. Among the palace’s splendors
was running water, carried in clay pipes. The building’s
size and complexity—unequaled in 1700 B.C.E outside
the urban centers of EGYPT and Mesopotamia—probably
inspired the later Greek legend of the Cretan LABYRINTH.
Remarkably, the palace had no enclosing wall; the
Minoans evidently trusted in their navy for defense. Nev-
ertheless, the palace was completely destroyed by fire in
around 1400 B.C.E. or soon after, and was never rebuilt.
As shown by ARCHAEOLOGY, every other known Minoan
site on Crete also was destroyed at this time. The cause
for such widespread ruin may have been an invasion of
Crete by warlike Mycenaeans from the Greek mainland.
Intriguingly, it seems that the Knossos palace already had
been occupied by certain Mycenaeans prior to its destruc-
tion. This conclusion is reached because the palace debris
of this era has yielded up nearly 4,000 clay tablets,
inscribed with inventory notes written in the Greek LIN-
EAR B script, identical to the script later used at Myce-
naean sites on the mainland. But whoever it was who
destroyed the palace, evidently Knossos and all of Crete
abandoned thereafter by Mycenaeans.
In around 1000 B.C.E., Crete was occupied by new
conquerors—the DORIAN GREEKS, invading from the
PELOPONNESE.
Knossos, with its superior location,
became Dorian Crete’s foremost city-state. Like the other
Cretan cities, it was governed as a military ARISTOCRACY,
with social and political institutions similar to those at
SPARTA. Dorian-ethnic nobles ruled over a rural popula-
tion of non-Dorian serfs.
Knossos shared in Crete’s general decline after the
600s B.C.E. By the late 200s B.C.E. it had fallen into a
debilitating conflict with its Cretan rival city, GORTYN.
When the Romans annexed Crete in 67 B.C.E., they chose
Gortyn over Knossos as their provincial capital.
For the classical Greeks, Knossos kept its associa-
tions with a dimly remembered, fictionalized Minoan
Knossos
183

past. The myths of DAEDALUS, MINOS, and THESEUS
describe Knossos as a city of grandeurs and horrors.
See also GREEK LANGUAGE; HELOTS.
Further reading: Anna Michailidou, Knossos: A Com-
plete Guide to the Palace of Minos, translation by Alexan-
dra Doumas and Timothy Cullen (Athens: Ekdotike
Athenon, 1998); Susan Sherratt, Arthur Evans, Knossos,
and the Priest-king (Oxford: Ashmolean Museum, 2000);
J. A. MacGillivray, Minotaur: Sir Arthur Evans and the
Archaeology of the Minoan Myth (London: Pimlico, 2001).
Konon (ca. 444–390 B.C.E.) Athenian admiral active
from 414–392 B.C.E.
Born into a noble family at ATHENS, Konon commanded
fleets in the final years of the PELOPONNESIAN WAR. At
the disastrous Athenian naval defeat at AEGOSPOTAMI
(405 B.C.E.), Konon alone of all the commanders got his
squadron safely away from the Spartan ambush.
In the CORINTHIAN WAR (395–386 B.C.E.) he was
active in developing the navy of Athens’s ally PERSIA.
Leading an Athenian squadron fighting alongside the Per-
sians, Konon destroyed a Spartan fleet at the Battle of
KNIDOS (394 B.C.E.). With funds from the Persian king
Artaxerxes II, Konon oversaw the rebuilding of Athens’s
LONG WALLS. But his dreams of re-creating the Athenian
empire died when the Persians switched sides in the war
(392 B.C.E.). Konon died soon thereafter.
Further reading: C. D. Hamilton, “On the Perils of
Extraordinary Honors. The Cases of Lysander and Conon,”
Ancient World 2 (1979): 87–90; H. D. Westlake, “Conon
184
Konon
The dolphin fresco in the queen’s great hall or megaron in Knossos, capital city of the Minoan civilization. The site is now a 
modern seaport on Crete, which accounts for the marine life theme. (Alison Frantz Photographic Collection, American School 
of Classical Studies at Athens)

and Rhodes. The Troubled Aftermath of Snyoecism,”
Greek, Roman, and Byzantine Studies 24 (1983): 333–344;
B. S. Strauss, “Thrasybulus and Conon. A Rivalry in
Athens in the 390s B.C.,” American Journal of Philology 105
(1984): 37–48; D. A. March, “Konon and the Great King’s
Fleet, 396–394,” Historia 46 (1997): 257–269.
Kor¯e
See DEMETER; PERSEPHONE.
Kratinus (Cratinus) (ca. 520–422 B.C.E.) One of the
three great comic playwrights of classical Athens, alongside
Aristophanes and Eupolis
Kratinus was Aristophanes’ older contemporary and rival,
and greatly influenced him. Apparently Kratinus’s relied
even more on obscene farce and personal derision of pub-
lic figures than those of Aristophanes.
Kratinus’s comedies, of which 27 titles and some 460
fragments survive, were presented in the mid-400s down
to 423 B.C.E. We know he won first prize nine time in com-
petitions at the two major Athenian drama festivals, the
City Dionysia (in early spring) and the Lenaea (in midwin-
ter). His titles, often styled as plural nouns, include The
Thracian Women, The Soft Fellows, The Dionysuses, and The
Odysseuses
(which apparently used the chorus as
ODYSSEUS’ crew and included a large model of his ship.)
No complete play by Kratinus survives, but there
exists a synopsis of his Dionysalexandros (“Dionysus-
Paris”), performed in about 430 B.C.E. There the god
DIONYSUS substitutes for the Trojan prince PARIS in judg-
ing the famous beauty contest of the three goddesses.
Deciding in Aphrodite’s favor, the god acquires the beau-
tiful HELEN OF TROY as his reward but is terrified by the
approach of Paris himself; farcical action follows, includ-
ing the start of the TROJAN WAR. The play—clearly a
burlesque on the recent outbreak of the very real and
serious PELOPONNESIAN WAR—contained much indirect
ridicule of the Athenian statesman PERIKLES, who was
cast as the meddling Dionysus, while his common-law
wife, ASPASIA, doubtlessly received a few hits as Helen.
Kratinus’s final success came in 423 B.C.E., with his
comedy The Bottle. The year before Aristophanes’ Knights
had publicly mocked Kratinus as a drunken has-been;
this year Kratinus responded with a comic self-portrait
featuring: a character named Kratinus; his estranged wife,
Komoidia (comedy); his sluttish girlfriend, Meth¯e
(drunkenness); and the tempting pretty-boy Oiniskos
(little wine). The play contained the proverb that an artist
who drinks only water can never create anything worth-
while. The Bottle won first place at the City Dionysia, well
over Aristophanes’ Clouds, which took third. Kratinus
died shortly thereafter.
See also THEATER.
Further reading: David Harvey and John Wilkins,
eds., The Rivals of Aristophanes (London: Duckworth and
the Classical Press of Wales, 2000).
Kritias (Critias) (ca. 460–403 B.C.E.) Athenian oligarch
As leader of the THIRTY TYRANTS, who ruled ATHENS by
terror in 404–403 B.C.E., Kritias was one of the true vil-
lains of Athenian history.
Born into an aristocratic clan, Kritias was pupil of
certain SOPHISTS and of the philosopher SOCRATES. Kritias
was an elder kinsman of the philosopher PLATO (specifi-
cally, cousin to Plato’s mother) and was also the uncle
and guardian of Plato’s uncle Charmides. Both Kritias and
Charmides appear as glamorous, youthful figures in sev-
eral of Plato’s (fictional) dialogues, written in the first
quarter of the 300s B.C.E.
As a suspected enemy of the DEMOCRACY, Kritias was
arrested but then released after the incident of the Mutila-
tion of the Herms (415 B.C.E.), during the PELOPON-
NESIAN WAR. Later Kritias proposed to the Athenian
ASSEMBLY the decree recalling the exiled Alcibiades (prob-
ably in 411 B.C.E.), but when the Athenians turned
against Alcibiades again (406 B.C.E.), Kritias apparently
suffered incidental blame and was banished. He went in
exile to THESSALY.
Like other exiles, Kritias was recalled as part of the
peace terms imposed on Athens by the victorious Spartans
at the end of the Peloponnesian War, in 404 B.C.E. He was
then elected to the dictatorial, pro-Spartan government
commonly known as the Thirty Tyrants. The Athenian his-
torian XENOPHON, who lived through these events, portrays
Kritias as leader of the Thirty’s extremist faction, against the
more moderate THERAMENES. Kritias directed the Thirty’s
reign of terror, executing anyone who was likely to organize
resistance or whose personal wealth was attractive. He
eventually denounced his colleague Theramenes and had
him executed. Kritias’s crowning outrage was to arrange the
mass execution of 300 men (probably the entire male citi-
zen population) of the nearby town of Eleusis.
In early 403 B.C.E. the Thirty were toppled. Kritias
was killed, with Charmides and others, in street-fighting
at PIRAEUS. The hatred of Kritias’s memory played a role
in the prosecution of his former teacher Socrates under
the restored democracy (399 B.C.E.).
A man of intelligence and talent, Kritias wrote LYRIC
POETRY, tragedies, and prose. His prose style was admired,
and one of his works, now lost, was titled “Conversa-
tions” (Homilia). It is possible that this was a model for
Plato’s literary dialogues. As a thinker, Plato seems to
have inherited some of his uncle’s authoritarian nature.
Further reading: R. G. Bury, trans., Timaeus; Critias;
Cleitophon; Menexenus; Epistles/Plato, reprint (Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1999, 1929); Tomás
Calvo and Luc Brisson, eds., Interpreting the Timaeus-
Critias: Proceedings of the IV Symposium Platonicum:
selected papers (Sankt Augustin: Academia Verlag, 1997).
Kylon (Cylon) (600s B.C.E.) Athenian aristocrat
Kylon attempted to seize supreme power at ATHENS, in
about 632 B.C.E., at a time when the city was still governed
Kylon
185

as an ARISTOCRACY. He and his followers captured the
Athenian ACROPOLIS. But the common people did not rise
in support, and government forces besieged the conspira-
tors. Kylon escaped but his men were massacred, despite
having claimed sanctuary at religious altars. This mishap
was the origin of the “Alcmaeonid curse”—the taint of pol-
lution considered to lie perpetually on the entire clan of
the ALCMAEONIDS, because one of the clan, Megakles, had
overseen the massacre.
See also FURIES; TYRANTS.
Further reading: D. Harris-Cline, “Archaic Athens
and the Topography of the Kylon Affair,” Annual of the
British School at Athens 94 (1999): 309–320.
Kym¯e
Kym¯e was the southernmost and main city of
AEOLIS, a Greek region on the northwestern coast of ASIA
MINOR. Like other cities of Aeolis, it was settled in about
900 B.C.E. by AEOLIAN GREEKS who had migrated east-
ward, via LESBOS, from mainland Greece. As indicated by
the name (meaning wave or sea), the city was a port,
advantageously located alongside the mouth of the Her-
mus River (which allowed trading contact with interior
Asia Minor).
Kym¯e’s fortunes followed those of the Aeolis region.
Captured by the Persians around 545 B.C.E., Kym¯e took
part in the failed IONIAN REVOLT in 499–493 B.C.E. Liber-
ated by the Greeks at the end of the PERSIAN WARS (479
B.C.E.), Kym¯e became part of the Athenian-controlled
DELIAN LEAGUE. After ATHENS’s defeat in the PELOPON-
NESIAN WAR (404 B.C.E.), Kym¯e reverted to Persian con-
trol by the terms of the KING’S PEACE (386 B.C.E.). By
about 377 B.C.E., Kym¯e had joined the SECOND ATHENIAN
LEAGUE. After ALEXANDER THE GREAT’s death (323 B.C.E.),
Kym¯e passed through the SELEUCID EMPIRE and the king-
dom of PERGAMON, before becoming part of the Roman
Empire in the 100s B.C.E.
Kym¯e’s best-known citizen was the historian Ephoros
(ca. 400–330 B.C.E.), who wrote a world history as well as
a history of Kym¯e, neither of which has survived. An
inferior scholar, Ephorus was notorious for including in
his world history such comments as “In this year the citi-
zens of Kym¯e were at peace.”
See also CUMAE.
Further reading: Jan Bouzek, ed., Kyme I: Anatolian
Collection of Charles University (Prague: Univerzita Karlova,
1974); Jan Bouzek, Philippos Kostomitsopoulos, and Iva
Ondrejová, eds., Kyme II: The Results of the Czechoslovak
Expedition (Prague: Univerzita Karlova, 1980).
Kypselos (Cypselus) (600s B.C.E.) Corinthian dictator
Kypselos reigned ca. 657–625 B.C.E., after seizing the city
from the oppressive, aristocratic Bacchiad clan. CORINTH
was at that time the foremost commercial power in
Greece, and Kypselos gained control by leading a revolu-
tion of the affluent middle class that had previously been
denied political power. Kypselos reigned mildly and is
said to have kept no bodyguard. But as usurper and dicta-
tor, he usually is counted as one of the first Greek
TYRANTS, who began arising in the mid-600s B.C.E. to
wrest power violently from the aristocratic ruling class
throughout the Greek world.
According to a folktale recorded by the Greek histo-
rian HERODOTUS (ca. 435 B.C.E.), Kypselos was born to a
Bacchiad mother and a non-Bacchiad father. Members of
the Bacchiad clan, alerted by a prophecy that the baby
was destined to destroy them, arrived to kill him. But
Kypselos’s mother hid him in a wooden chest (kypsel¯e)
and outwitted the assassins.
This concept of the blessed but hunted infant is a
Near Eastern mythological theme that recurs in the sto-
ries of Moses, Sargon the Assyrian, CYRUS (1) the Persian,
and Jesus. The Greeks—having learned this type of leg-
end from the Phoenicians, around 900–700 B.C.E.—
applied it to certain Greek mythical heroes, such as
OEDIPUS. Herodotus’s tale evidently derives from propa-
ganda that Kypselos himself issued during his reign; a
cedarwood chest, supposedly the one used to hide the
infant Kypselos, was eventually kept on display in the
Temple of HERA at OLYMPIA.
Kypselos and his son and successor, PERIANDER,
increased Corinth’s power through TRADE and manufac-
turing. Export markets were developed in Etruscan ITALY
and other western locales, and Corinthian vase painting
blossomed into the perfection of style that modern schol-
ars call Early Corinthian.
See also ETRUSCANS; POTTERY; PROPHECY AND DIVINA-
TION.
Further reading: A. Andrewes, The Greek Tyrants
(London: Hutchinson, 1956); S. I. Oost, “Cypselus the
Bacchiad,” Classical Philology 67 (1972): 10–30.
186
Kym¯e

L
187
Labyrinth
In MYTH, the Labyrinth was the mazelike
palace designed by the Athenian craftsman DAEDALUS at
KNOSSOS, in CRETE, to house the monstrous Minotaur.
The Athenian hero THESEUS, making his way through the
Labyrinth’s corridors with the help of the Cretan princess
Ariadne, slew the Minotaur. The classical Greeks
described any kind of architectural maze as a labyrinth
(laburinthos)—much as we use the word today.
Like other myths, this one contains a kernel of fact:
The name Labyrinth was probably applied to the Minoan
palace at Cnossus, sometime in the second millennium
B.C.E. Laburinthos was not originally a Greek word, as
shown by its distinctive nth sound (which distinguishes
such 
other 
pre-Greek 
names 
as 
CORINTH
and
HYACINTHOS). It was probably a Minoan word, meaning
“house of the double ax”—the two-headed ax (labrys)
being a Minoan royal symbol.
See also GREEK
LANGUAGE; MINOAN
CIVILIZATION;
MINOS.
Further reading:
W. H. Matthews, Mazes and
Labyrinths: Their History and Development (New York:
Dover, 1970); J. Kraft, “The Cretan Labyrinth and the
Walls of Troy. An Analysis of Labyrinth Designs,” Opus-
cula Romana 15 (1985): 79–86; Rodney Castleden, The
Knossos Labyrinth: A New View of the ‘Palace of Minos’ at
Knossos (London: Routledge, 1990); Penelope R. Doob,
The Idea of the Labyrinth from Classical Antiquity through
the Middle Ages (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press,
1990); Hermann Kern, Through the Labyrinth: Designs and
Meanings over 5000 Years, translated by Abigail Clay
(New York: Prestel, 2000); Jeff Saward, Labyrinths and
Mazes: the Definitive Guide to Ancient and Modern Tradi-
tions (Stroud, U.K.: Gaia, 2003).
Laconia
This word refers to the local territory of
SPARTA, in the southeastern PELOPONNESE and apparently
was a shortened form of the region’s alternate name,
Lacedaemon.
Of the Peloponnese’s three southern peninsulas,
Laconia included the eastern (Cape Malea) and middle
one (Cape Taenarum). The two capes and much of the
interior consist of limestone mountains; two ranges—Mt.
Parnon in the east and Mt. Taygetus in the west—run
north to south. Between these mountain ranges lay the
fertile Eurotas River valley, which widens southward to
the Laconian Gulf. In the north, Laconia shared a moun-
tainous (and often-disputed) border with ARCADIA and
the territory of ARGOS. To the west, beyond the Taygetus
range, lay the region of MESSENIA.
In the second millennium B.C.E., Laconia was the site
of a thriving Mycenaean-Greek kingdom; the semimythi-
cal king MENELAUS would have ruled there. Overrun by
DORIAN GREEKS circa 1100–1000 B.C.E., Laconia eventu-
ally produced a number of Dorian settlements, including
Sparta, in the upper Eurotas valley. By about 700 B.C.E.
Sparta had conquered the Eurotas down to the sea. The
town of Gytheum, on the western Laconian Gulf, became
Sparta’s port. The Eurotas farmland became the home of
the Spartan elite, the “true” Spartans (Spartiatai). Other
parts of Laconia were inhabited by Spartan citizens of
lesser social rank—the PERIOIKOI (“dwellers about”).
Together these two groups comprised the Spartan free
population, the Lacedaemonians (Lakedaimonioi).
The name Laconia has provided the modern English
word laconic, referring originally to the Spartan brevity of
speech.
See also HELOTS.

Further reading: Jan M. Sanders, ed., Philolakon:
Lakonian Studies in Honour of Hector Catling (London:
British School at Athens, 1992); W. G. Forrest, A History
of Sparta, 2d ed. (London: Bristol Classical Paperbacks,
1995); William G. Cavanagh, The Laconia Survey: Conti-
nuity and Change in a Greek Rural Landscape (London:
British School at Athens, 1996); William G. Cavanagh
and Susan E. C. Walker, eds., Sparta in Laconia: Proceed-
ings of the 19th British Museum Classical Colloquium Held
with the British School at Athens and King’s and University
Colleges, London 6–8 December 1995 (London: British
School at Athens, 1998).
Lampsacus
See HELLESPONT.
Laocoön
A Trojan priest of APOLLO, in the MYTH of the
TROJAN WAR, Laocoön was the brother of Anchises and
uncle of the hero AENEAS. After the Greeks had appar-
ently abandoned the siege of TROY, leaving behind the
wooden Trojan Horse, Laocoön objected vehemently to
the Trojans’ plan to bring the horse within the city’s walls.
(In fact, the horse was full of Greek soldiers.) To stifle
Laocoön’s objections, and thus fulfill the ordained doom
of Troy, the goddess ATHENA sent two huge serpents from
the sea. These enwrapped Laocoön and his two small
sons and crushed them to death.
Further reading: Margarete Bieber, Laocoon: The
Influence of the Group since Its Discovery, 2d ed. (Detroit:
Wayne State University Press, 1967); S. Howard, “Lao-
coon Rerestored,” American Journal of Archaeology 93
(1989): 417–422; B. Fehr, “The Laocoon Group, or the
Political Exploitation of a Sacrilege,” in Religion and
Power in the Ancient Greek World. Proceedings of the Upp-
sala Symposium 1993, edited by Pontus Hellström and
Brita Alroth (Stockholm: Alqvist & Wiksell International,
1996), 189–204.
lapiths
See CENTAURS.
laws and law courts
By the 700s B.C.E.—and proba-
bly long before—Greek states had developed official and
public procedures for administering justice. No informa-
tion is available on laws or law courts during the Myce-
naean era (around 1600–1200 B.C.E.), but HOMER’s epic
poem the Iliad (written down around 750 B.C.E.) men-
tions a public trial as one of the scenes embossed on the
shield of ACHILLES (book 18). In the scene, elders seated
in a city’s AGORA arbitrate a dispute between two men
over payment of blood money for a murder done by one
of the two. A crowd stands around, and heralds call for
order.
The judges at such court cases would have been the
individuals who ran the city government—that is, the
aristocratic COUNCIL or a committee thereof. The ancient
Greeks never distinguished between the judiciary and the
legislative or executive branches, as modern American
society does; there was no class of professional judges.
Rather, in early Greek history (around 900–500 B.C.E.),
the judges might be the same men who decreed the laws,
commanded the army, oversaw the state RELIGION, and
owned most of the land. Such law courts obviously were
biased in favor of aristocratic plaintiffs and defendants,
and this unfairness contributed to the popular anger that
produced the Greek TYRANTS (600s B.C.E.) and, later, the
Athenian DEMOCRACY (500s B.C.E.).
Systems of law differed from one city-state to
another. Before the invention of the Greek ALPHABET, the
law would have been handed down by oral tradition,
with officials and their underlings memorizing whole
legal codes. But in the 600s B.C.E., with the spread of
WRITING in the Greek world, laws came to be written
down for permanence and easy reference. (By contrast,
written law codes had existed in the Near East since at
least 1800 B.C.E.)
The writing-down of Greek legal codes came in
response to the tense political climate of the 600s B.C.E., as
middle-class citizens demanded fair, permanent, and pub-
licly accessible laws. Naturally this was also an occasion
for legal reforms and revisions. The earliest written Greek
law code was supposedly composed by a certain Zaleucus
at LOCRI, in Greek southern ITALY, around 662 B.C.E. At
ATHENS, new laws were drafted and written down under
DRACO (ca. 625 B.C.E.) and SOLON (ca. 594 B.C.E.). Solon’s
laws, carved into wooden blocks, were displayed for cen-
turies afterward in the Athenian agora. Today the law code
of the city of GORTYN partly survives in a lengthy inscrip-
tion, carved in stone in about 450 B.C.E.
Law codes covered civil cases such as disputes over
inheritance and land boundaries, as well as criminal cases
such as homicide and forgery. A comparison with Ameri-
can laws shows some surprising differences. For instance,
in Athens in the 400s–300s B.C.E., raping a nonslave
woman was merely a finable offense, but a man who
seduced such a woman could be punished much more
severely. (The legal theory here was that rape was a spon-
taneous crime while seduction was not only premeditated
but corruptive to the woman’s morals and to the Athe-
nian household.) The most serious crime at Athens was
homicide; conviction brought the death penalty for an
intentional killing or exile for an unintentional one (aside
from an excusable accident or self-defense). Penalties for
other crimes included loss of citizenship or confiscation
of property.
Most information on the day-to-day workings of
Greek law courts comes from the democratic Athens of
the 400s–300s B.C.E. Sources include inscriptions, court-
room speeches, and factual references in the writings of
PLATO, ARISTOTLE, and other thinkers. Cases were heard
by large groups of jurors, often numbering 501 but other-
wise ranging between about 201 and 2,501. Odd num-
bers were employed to avoid a tie jury vote—unlike
188
Lampsacus

modern American juries, ancient Greek juries did not
need to reach a unanimous verdict.
The jurors were ordinary Athenian citizens, chosen
by lottery. But their responsibilities far surpassed those of
modern American jurors. Although an Athenian court-
room had an officiating magistrate to maintain procedure,
there was no learned judge to interpret the law, enforce
the rules of evidence, or pass sentence. These decisions
were made by the jury itself, on the basis of the speeches
and examination of witnesses by prosecutor and defen-
dant (or, in a civil case, by the two disputants).
Similarly, there was no state-employed district attor-
ney, whose job was to prosecute in court. State prosecu-
tions were usually brought by volunteers; any adult male
citizen could do so. A private individual might decide to
prosecute out of civic duty or for public attention toward
a political career. In case of conviction, the prosecutor
might be entitled to a portion of the defendant’s paid fine
or confiscated property. Frivolous prosecution was dis-
couraged by a law requiring the prosecutor to pay a fine
himself if his case won less than one-fifth of the jury vote.
Nevertheless, the courts undoubtedly became the scene of
personal and political vendettas, and it is no coincidence
that the Athenians were known to be a litigious people.
See also AESCHINES; ANDOKIDES; ANTIPHON; AREOPA-
GOS; 
ARISTOCRACY;
ARISTOPHANES;
CATANA;
KLEON;
DEMOSTHENES (1); HOMOSEXUALITY; ISAEUS; ISOKRATES;
LYKOURGOS (1); LYKOURGOS (2); LYSIAS; MARRIAGE; PERIK-
LES;
PITTAKOS; 
PROSTITUTES;
PROTAGORAS; 
RHETORIC;
SLAVES; SOCRATES; WOMEN; ZEUS.
Further reading: N. Robertson, “The Laws of Athens,
410–399 B.C. The Evidence for Review and Publication,”
Journal of Hellenic Studies 110 (1990): 43–75; Robin
Osborne, “Law and Laws. How Do We Join Up the Dots?”
in The Development of the Polis in Archaic Greece, edited
by Lynette Mitchell and P. J. Rhodes (London: Routledge,
1997), 74–82; J. Whitley, “Cretan Laws and Cretan Liter-
acy,” American Journal of Archaeology
101 (1997):
685–661; C. Carey, “The Shape of Athenian Laws,” Clas-
sical Quarterly 48 (1998): 93–109.
Leda
In MYTH, this beautiful woman was the wife of the
Spartan king Tyndareus. The god ZEUS became infatuated
with her and raped her, approaching her in the shape of a
swan. Leda bore two sets of twins, all of whom had
important destinies: HELEN OF TROY and KLYTEMNESTRA,
and CASTOR AND POLYDEUCES. According to a familiar
pattern of Greek storytelling, it was sometimes claimed
that only one member of each pair of twins was Zeus’s
child, the other being Tyndareus’s. Helen and Polydeuces
were Zeus’s children, and hence eligible for immortality.
In some versions, the two pairs of twins were hatched
from two giant bird eggs.
Further reading: M. Maaskunt-Kleibrink, “Leda on
Ancient Gems,” in Classicism to Neo-Classicism. Essays
Dedicated to Gertrud Seidman, edited by Martin Henig and
Dimitris Plantzos (Oxford: Archaeopress, 1999), 19–27.
Lefkandi
This modern village and archaeological site is
situated on the Lelantine plain, on the west coast of the
island of EUBOEA. In the 1960s C.E. British excavations
there found traces of an ancient settlement whose earliest
level predated the Greeks’ arrival (around 2100 B.C.E.). As
a Greek town, the site apparently prospered during the
Mycenaean era and later, down to about 825 B.C.E., before
being abandoned around 700 B.C.E.
Lefkandi has shed rare light on Greek life during the
DARK AGE (around 1100–900 B.C.E.). The pride of
Lefkandi’s archaeological yieldings is the so-called Hero’s
Tomb, excavated in the 1980s C.E. by the British School
of Archaeology at Athens. This surprisingly rich grave of
a warrior is located under the floor of a long and narrow,
apsidal building dated to the first half of the 10th century
Lefkandi
189
Zeus came to Leda in the form of a swan. Many statues show
this popular myth. Here Leda pulls the swan into her lap and
hides behind her cloak. (The J. Paul Getty Museum, Gift of 
J. Paul Getty)

B.C.E. The warrior was cremated, and he was buried
alongside a woman, who was inhumed. The burial also
contained rich grave goods, including ornaments of GOLD
imported from the East. An adjacent burial shaft with the
skeletons of four horses further attests the wealth and
social importance of the Lefkandi warrior. The tomb’s evi-
dence of affluence and TRADE has forced historians to
revise their otherwise grim picture of Dark Age Greece.
Lefkandi’s apparent abrupt decline after 825 B.C.E.
seems related to the emergence of the nearby ancient city
of ERETRIA. ARCHAEOLOGY suggests that Eretria arose
abruptly, in prosperity, around 825 B.C.E., and modern
historians have guessed that Lefkandi was the original
city of the Eretrians. Lefkandi sits halfway along the
Lelantine plain between Eretria (southeast) and CHALCIS
(northwest). Probably under pressure from nearby Chal-
cis, Lefkandi was abandoned and a new settlement, Ere-
tria, was founded farther away from Chalcis.
See also LELANTINE WAR.
Further reading: L. H. Sackett and M. R. Popham,
“Lefkandi. A Euboean Town of the Bronze Age and the
Early Iron Age (2100–700 B.C.),” Archaeology 25 (1972):
8–19; M. R. Popham, E. Touloupa, and L. H. Sackett, “The
Hero of Lefkandi,” Antiquity 56 (1982): 169–174; C. M.
Antonaccio, “Lefkandi and Homer,” in Homer’s World. Fic-
tion, Tradition, Reality, edited by Øivind Anderson and
Matthew Dickie (Bergen, Norway: P. Aström, 1995), 5–27;
J. A. K. E. de Waele, “The Layout of the Lefkandi Heroon,”
Annual of the British School at Athens 93 (1998): 379–384.
Lelantine War
The earliest Greek conflict for which
any reliable historical record exists, this war was fought
around 720–680 B.C.E. between the neighboring cities of
CHALCIS and ERETRIA, on the west coast of the large island
of EUBOEA, in central Greece. Chalcis and Eretria were the
most powerful Greek cities of the day; they had previously
cooperated in overseas TRADE and COLONIZATION ventures.
But now they fought over possession of the fertile plain of
Lelanton, which stretched between them.
According to the Athenian historian THUCYDIDES (1)
(ca. 410 B.C.E.), the Lelantine War marked the first time
that the Greek world divided itself into alliances on one
side or the other. It seems to have been a primitive world
war, in which the most powerful Greeks states squared
off with each other according to traditional local enmi-
ties: MILETUS (Eretria’s ally) versus its old rival and neigh-
bor SAMOS (Chalcis’s ally); CHIOS (Eretria’s side) versus
its mainland neighbor Erythrae (Chalcis’s side); and
SPARTA (Chalcis’s) against its bitter enemy, the neighbor-
ing region of MESSENIA (Eretria’s).
The fighting between Chalcis and Eretria on the
Lelantine plain may have been an old-fashioned, gentle-
men’s affair. One later writer reports seeing an old
inscription recording the belligerents’ agreement not to
use “long-distance missiles”—that is, arrows, javelins,
and slingstones. Another inscription mentions CHARIOTS,
a very old-fashioned military device. These battles were
probably fought by dueling aristocrats rather than by the
massed concentrations of HOPLITE citizen-soldiers who
would come to define warfare in the mid-600s B.C.E.
The war ended around 680 B.C.E., apparently with
Chalcis as the marginal winner. In any case, both cities
soon were overtaken as commercial and military powers
by Corinth, Sparta, and ATHENS. But the war’s alliances
had lasting effects. With the help of Corinth and Samos,
Sparta later conquered Messenia. And seafaring Corinth,
shut out of the BLACK SEA by its “Lelantine” enemy Mile-
tus, instead enlarged its grain supplies and foreign mar-
kets in SICILY and ITALY.
See also WARFARE, LAND.
Further reading:
Donald William Bradeen, The
Lelantine War and Pheidon of Argos (Lancaster, Pa.: Trans-
actions of the American Philological Association, 1947).
Leonidas
See THERMOPYLAE.
Leontini
See CATANA; SICILY.
lesbianism
See HOMOSEXUALITY; SAPPHO.
Lesbos
The largest island (630 square miles) of the
eastern AEGEAN SEA, Lesbos is situated near the north-
western coast of ASIA MINOR. According to Greek MYTH,
the island was named for the grandson of Aeolos, founder
of the AEOLIAN GREEKS. The original inhabitants of Les-
bos may have been descendants of the civilization of
TROY. Pottery found through ARCHAEOLOGY there shows
that occupation was continuous from at least the Late
Neolithic period to the Geometric period.
In around the 900s B.C.E., Lesbos was conquered by
the Aeolians, who had migrated east from the Greek
mainland regions of THESSALY and BOEOTIA. In the fol-
lowing centuries, Lesbos was the departure point for fur-
ther Aeolian expeditions that colonized the northwest
Asia Minor coast. During the eighth century B.C.E., the
foremost city of Lesbos, MYTILENE, controlled most of the
cities across the water on the coast of Asia Minor, up to
the HELLESPONT. By the 600s B.C.E., Lesbos had become
the homeland of a thriving Aeolian culture.
The island prospered by seaborne TRADE, both with
mainland Greece and with the eastern Mediterranean
kingdoms of LYDIA and EGYPT. Lesbos’s tradition of
poetry making found its culmination in the verses of SAP-
PHO (ca. 600 B.C.E.). Lesbos’s heyday also saw the politi-
cal reforms of the Mytilenian statesman PITTACUS (ca. 600
B.C.E.) and the short-lived appearance of Aeolic-style
temple architecture at Mytilene and Nape (early 500s
B.C.E.). But the golden age had ended by the time the Per-
sians captured the island in 527 B.C.E.
190
Lelantine War

Under CYRUS (1), Lesbos was subject to the Persian
Empire and joined the futile IONIAN REVOLT in 499 B.C.E.
The island was finally set free from Persian domination in
479 B.C.E., after the battle at Mykale. Lesbos then became
an ally of the Athenians, although most of the island
revolted again in 428 B.C.E.; this rebellion was severely
put down the following year. The Spartan general
LYSANDER took command of Lesbos in 405 B.C.E., but it
again reverted to Athenian control in 392 B.C.E. For the
rest of the Greek era, the island constantly switched
between being an independent state and being variously
under Athenian, Spartan, Persian, and Macedonian con-
trol, finally coming under Roman domination in 88 B.C.E.
See also PERSIAN WARS.
Further reading: Joseph Braddock, Sappho’s Island: A
Paean for Lesbos (London: Constable, 1970); Raymond
Kenneth Levang, Studies in the History of Lesbos (Min-
neapolis: Levang, 1972); Peter Green, Lesbos and the
Cities of Asia Minor (Austin: University of Texas Press,
1984); Nigel Spencer, A Gazetteer of Archaeological Sites
in Lesbos (Oxford: Tempus Reparatum, 1995); Lesbos:
From Sappho to Elytis (Mytilene; Topio, 1995); Liza Evert
(photographs), Aeolian Lesbos (Athens: Constellation
Books, 1995).
Leto
See APOLLO; ARTEMIS.
Leukippos (Leucippus) (ca. 480–420 B.C.E.) Greek
philosopher, credited with inventing the “atomic” theory of
natural philosophy
Probably a native of MILETUS, in ASIA MINOR, Leukippos
believed that matter was composed of tiny particles,
which he called atomoi, an adjective meaning “indivisi-
ble.” According to him, all creation, destruction, and
change are accomplished by the perpetual reorganization
of these atoms into new combinations. The atomic theory
forms the basis of much of modern physical science.
The basic facts of Leukippos’s life and works are
unknown. Leukippos was probably older than his pupil
DEMOKRITOS, who was born in 460 B.C.E. Even Leukip-
pos’s birthplace is debated; some believe he was from
Abdera or Elea, in Greek southern ITALY. He developed
the atomic theory together with Demokritos, to some
degree; it is not entirely possible to determine the indi-
vidual views and contributions of these two philosophers.
No written works survive under Leukippos’s name, but
two preserved treatises usually attributed Demokritos—
The Great World-system and On the Mind—were probably
written by his teacher. From the latter work is a quota-
tion that seems to define Leukippos’s basic philosophies:
“Nothing happens in vain, but everything from reason
and of necessity.”
Further reading: Maurice Crosland, ed., The Science
of Matter: A Historical Survey (Philadelphia: Gordon and
Breach Science Publishers, 1992); Andrew Pyle, Atomism
and Its Critics: Problem Areas Associated with the Develop-
ment of the Atomic Theory of Matter from Democritus to
Newton (Bristol, U.K.: Thoemmes Press, 1995); C. C. W.
Taylor, trans., The Atomists, Leucippus and Democritus:
Fragments: A Text and Translation with a Commentary
(Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1999).
Leuktra (Leuctra)
An ancient village in northern
BOEOTIA, Leuktra was the site of one of the most eventful
battles in Greek history. There, in the summer of 371
B.C.E., the legend of Spartan invincibility was destroyed
when an army of Spartans and allies under King Kleom-
brotos met defeat by a force of Thebans and allies com-
manded by the Theban leader EPAMINONDAS. In the
battle’s aftermath, Epaminondas simply removed SPARTA as
a first-class power, mainly by liberating the Spartan-ruled
HELOTS of MESSENIA (362 B.C.E.). Sparta, previously master
of Greece, never recovered its former power, and the man-
tle of Greek leadership passed (briefly) to THEBES.
The Battle of Leuktra is described in detail by
XENOPHON in his Hellenica (ca. 360 B.C.E.). At the heart
of the Theban victory was Epaminondas’s decision to
place the Theban Sacred Band on his battle lines’ left
wing, deepening it to 50 rows, against the Spartans’ more
usual 12-man depth. Epaminondas’s intent was to destroy
the Spartans along their strongest front—their right wing,
where the elite “Spartiates” (the Spartan upper class)
were arrayed and where the king commanded personally.
Traditionally, Greek armies had won their battles on their
right wings. The better troops customarily were stationed
there, and, due to the battle rows’ natural drift rightward,
the advancing right wing tended to overlap (advanta-
geously) the enemy left—for both armies. Victory, prior
to Leuktra, lay in winning on the right while withstand-
ing the enemy’s advantage on its right; traditionally, the
left wing performed more poorly. Epaminondas’s tactic
was to make his left wing the better-performing, by deep-
ening it.
The success was devastating. The Spartan right was
pushed back and crushed by the heavy Theban left, and
the Spartan left wing scattered in retreat. Nearly 1,000
from the Spartan-led army were killed, including King
Kleombrotos and 400 other Spartiates. The Theban side
lost 47 men.
Epaminondas’s innovation—striking at the enemy’s
strongest point—changed the nature of Greek warfare.
Within a few decades, the technique had been elaborated
by the Macedonian king PHILIP II.
See also CHAIRONEIA; WARFARE, LAND.
Further reading: E. David, “Revolutionary Agitation
in Sparta after Leuctra,” Athenaeum 58 (1980): 299–308;
C. J. Tuplin, “The Leuctra Campaign. Some Outstanding
Problems,” Klio
69 (1987): 72–107; V. Hansen,
“Epameinondas, the Battle of Leuktra (371 B.C.), and the
Revolution in Greek Battle Tactics,” Classical Antiquity 7
Leuktra
191

(1988): 190–207; J. DeVoto, “Pelopidas and Kleombrotos
at Leuktra,” Ancient History Bulletin 3 (1989): 115–117.
Linear B
This modern name refers to a pre-alphabetic
form of WRITING used by the Mycenaean Greeks, around
1400–1200 B.C.E. This was a syllabary script; it basically
employed about 90 symbols, each representing a vowel-
consonant combination, with pictograms sometimes
added to help identify certain words. Linear B was
revealed to modern eyes in 1900 C.E. by archaeologist Sir
Arthur Evans in his excavations at Mycenaean-era KNOS-
SOS, on the island of CRETE. The writing, incised into clay
tablets, had been incidentally preserved when the tablets
were fired during the violent burning of the palace,
around 1400 B.C.E. Evans named the then-undeciphered
script Linear B to distinguish it from an earlier, Minoan
script found at Knossos, called Linear A.
Soon similar tablets were found at PYLOS, THEBES,
and MYCENAE, at archaeological levels corresponding to
about 1200 B.C.E. In each case the inscriptions had been
preserved by unintended firing of the clay. To date, over
5,000 tablets have been discovered.
Linear B was finally deciphered in 1952 by British
architect Michael Ventris. Ventris’s breakthrough showed
that the writing’s language was an early form of Greek—
that is, when the symbols are correctly sounded out, they
yield words that are Greek. This discovery confirmed the
assumption (not previously proven) that the Mycenaeans
had spoken Greek. The deciphered tablets were revealed
to be palace records—inventories, lists of employees and
administrative notes—that have shed valuable light on
the organization and material culture of late Mycenaean
society.
Evidently the Mycenaeans acquired Linear B writing
by adapting Minoan Crete’s Linear A script to the Greek
language. Linear A—which records a vanished, non-Greek
language—remains largely undeciphered to this day.
See also ALPHABET; MINOAN CIVILIZATION; MYCENAEAN
CIVILIZATION.
Further reading: D. Gary Miller, Ancient Scripts and
Phonological Knowledge
(Amsterdam: J. Benjamins,
1994); Leonard R. Palmer, The Greek Language (Norman:
University of Oklahoma Press, 1996); Andrew Robinson,
The Man Who Deciphered Linear B: The Story of Michael
Ventris (New York: Thames and Hudson, 2002).
literacy
See WRITING.
literature
See
EPIC
POETRY; LYRIC
POETRY; THEATER;
WRITING.
Locri
A city on the east coast of the “toe” of ITALY,
Locri was founded around 700 B.C.E. by Dorian-Greek
colonists from LOCRIS, in central Greece. The city’s offi-
cial name was Lokroi Epizephurioi, “West Wind Locri-
ans.” After ejecting the native Sicels from the area, the
Greek settlers established a well-run OLIGARCHY, called
the Hundred Houses. Locri boasted the Greek world’s
earliest written law code, attributed to the statesman
Zaleucus (ca. 622 B.C.E.).
A sprawling community defended by a wall more
than four miles long, Locri feuded with neighboring Ital-
ian peoples and with CROTON and RHEGIUM, two nearby
Greek cities inhabited by non-Dorians. In around 500
B.C.E. the Locrians—supposedly aided by the divine twins
CASTOR AND POLYDEUCES—won a famous victory over the
Crotonians at the Battle of the Sagras River.
Locri’s allies included the powerful Dorian-Greek city
of SYRACUSE, in eastern SICILY. In around 387 B.C.E. Locri
helped the Syracusan tyrant DIONYSIUS (1) to destroy
Rhegium. But Locri was later weakened by the wars that
accompanied the expansion of ROME through the Italian
peninsula, and the city surrendered to Hannibal of
Carthage in 216 B.C.E., but was conquered by the Romans
in 205 B.C.E. It gradually diminished in importance dur-
ing the Roman era.
Archaeological ruins on the site of Locri include the
city wall, built in the fourth or third century B.C.E., urban
complexes of roads and houses, a theater, and a Doric
temple, possibly dedicated to Olympian ZEUS. Also
nearby is another, unidentified temple with a decorative
SCULPTURE group on the roof consisting of a Nereid
between the two DIOSKOUROI. In addition, a large ceme-
tery has been excavated to the northeast of the city,
including graves mostly of the 700s and 600s B.C.E., but
some of later periods as well.
See also DORIAN GREEKS; LAWS AND LAW COURTS.
Further reading: A. De Franciscis, “Ancient Locri,”
Archaeology 11 (1958): 206–212; C. Sourvinou-Inwood,
“The 
Boston 
Relief 
and 
the 
Religion 
of 
Locri
Epizephyrii,” Journal of Hellenic Studies 94 (1974):
126–137; E. Badian, “Athens, the Locrians, and Nau-
pactus,” Classical Quarterly 40 (1990): 364–369; Torben
Melander, “The Import of Attic Pottery to Locri
Epizephyrii. A Case of Reinterpretation,” in Pots for the
Living, Pots for the Dead, edited by Annette Rathje, Mar-
gatta Nielsen, and Bodil Bundgaard Rasmussen (Copen-
hagen: Museum Tusculanum Press, 2002), 59–82; James
Redfield, The Locrian Maidens: Love and Death in Greek
Italy (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2003).
Locris
This bipartite region in the mountains of central
Greece is divided by the states of PHOCIS and Doris. West
Locris—or Ozolian Locris, named for a local tribe—bor-
dered the northern Corinthian Gulf from NAUPACTUS
eastward to Crisa, the harbor of DELPHI. The heart of
West Locris was the fertile coastal valley of Amphissa.
East Locris—or Opuntian Locris, named for its center at
Opus—lay along the Euboean Straits on the mainland’s
east coast, from THERMOPYLAE southward to a border
with BOEOTIA.
192
Linear B

East Locris, governed as a 1,000-man OLIGARCHY, was
the more advanced of the two regions. It sent colonists to
found LOCRI, in southern ITALY, around 700 B.C.E., and
was minting coins in the 300s B.C.E. The Locrians were
DORIAN GREEKS, but their dialect (called Northwest Greek
by modern scholars) was one shared by many of the peo-
ples dwelling around the western Corinthian Gulf.
See also GREEK LANGUAGE.
Further reading: John M. Fossey, The Ancient Topog-
raphy of Opountian Locris (Amsterdam: Gieben, 1990).
Long Walls, the
These walls were built between 461
and 456 B.C.E. at the urging of the Athenian statesman
PERIKLES, to connect ATHENS with its port city of PIRAEUS,
four miles away. The completed Long Walls consisted of
two parallel walls, about 200 yards apart. The result was
to make Athens and Piraeus into a single, linked fortress,
suppliable by sea and easily in contact with its navy. By
building the Long Walls, Periklean Athens became the
Greek naval power par excellence.
The Long Walls, however, affected civilian concerns
in Athens as well. The city was henceforth connected
with the “party of the Piraeus”—the pro-democratic,
lower-income citizens who supplied the bulk of the
navy’s crews. These people began exercising more power
in the Athenian ASSEMBLY, resulting in the left-leaning
Periklean legislation of these years, such as the introduc-
tion of jury pay (457 B.C.E.). This political association
was so odious to certain Athenian right-wingers that in
457 B.C.E. a band of Athenian extremists hatched a trea-
sonous plot to deliver the Long Walls to the Spartans.
The scheme was discovered and averted.
After the outbreak of the PELOPONNESIAN WAR (431
B.C.E.), the Long Walls permitted Perikles to employ his
tortoiselike land strategy of abandoning the countryside
to Spartan invasion and collecting the rural Athenian
populace within the city’s fortifications. The area between
the Long Walls became crowded with refugees, resulting
in the disastrous plague of 430–427 B.C.E.
After Athens’s defeat in the war, the Long Walls were
pulled down by Spartan order, to the MUSIC of flutes (404
B.C.E.). The Athenian leader KONON rebuilt the walls in
393 B.C.E., but after 322 B.C.E., under Macedonian over-
lordship, they gradually fell into disuse. Hardly any trace
of them remains today.
See also DEMOCRACY; OLIGARCHY; WARFARE, NAVAL;
WARFARE, SIEGE.
Further reading: David H. Conwell, “The Athenian
Long Walls: Chronology, Topography, and Remains”
(Ph.D. diss. University of Pennsylvania Press, 1992).
Lotus Eaters
See ODYSSEUS.
love
See
APHRODITE;
EROS; 
HOMOSEXUALITY; 
LYRIC
POETRY; MARRIAGE.
Lyceum
This grove and GYMNASIUM outside ATHENS
was sacred to the god APOLLO under his title Lukeios,
“wolf god.” The area, described by several ancient writ-
ers, was located to the east of the city wall and included
several buildings: an exercise room, a dressing room,
roads or running tracks, walkways, cult sanctuaries dedi-
cated to Apollo, HERMES, and the MUSES, seating areas,
and colonnaded stoas. It was at the Lukeion or Lyceum
that ARISTOTLE opened his philosophical school, in 335
B.C.E. The Lyceum operated as a rival to the ACADEMY,
which was the Athenian philosophical school founded by
PLATO. Unlike the Academy, whose teachings were based
on the study of MATHEMATICS, Aristotle’s Lyceum focused
on nature and the physical world.
In around 286 B.C.E., after the death of Aristotle’s
successor, THEOPHRASTUS, the Aristotelian school relo-
cated to new buildings at Athens, donated by Theophras-
tus in his will. According to one version, the new site
included a colonnaded walk (Greek: peripatos), which
gave the institution its famous name, the Peripatetic
School. Theophrastus’s successor, Straton of Lampsacus,
was the last great thinker to preside over the school (ca.
286–269 B.C.E.).
The Peripatetics suffered a decline in influence in the
later 200s B.C.E. Whereas Aristotle and Theophrastus had
overseen inquiries into every known branch of SCIENCE
and PHILOSOPHY, later scholars focused mainly on literary
criticism and biography writing; the movement acquired
a reputation for pedantry. The decline may have resulted
partly from the gradual disappearance of many of Aristo-
tle’s original writings, and when these were rediscovered
and published in the first century B.C.E., the school did
enjoy a partial revival. But by then the Peripatetics were
being permanently overshadowed by other Greek philo-
sophical movements, primarily STOICISM and EPICURE-
ANISM, which were flourishing among the Romans. The
word lyceum survives in the modern French word for
school: “lycée.”
Further reading: J. P. Lynch, Aristotle’s School. A
Study of a Greek Educational Institution (Berkeley: Univer-
sity of California Press, 1972).
Lycia
See ASIA MINOR.
Lydia
This wealthy and advanced non-Greek kingdom
of western ASIA MINOR was centered at the city of Sardis,
on the Hermus River. It bordered on the regions of Caria,
to the south, and Phrygia, to the east. As a military and
trading power—with riverborne 
GOLD
and 
SILVER
deposits, and access to eastern caravan routes—Lydia
dominated Asia Minor in the 600s–500s B.C.E., before
falling to the Persian conqueror CYRUS (1), in 546 B.C.E.
Lydia’s significance for Greek history lies in its relations,
both hostile and friendly, with the Greeks of IONIA, on the
coast of Asia Minor.
Lydia
193

Lydia was the first non-Greek nation to take an active
part in Greek affairs. King Gyges (ca. 670 B.C.E.) sent gifts
to the god APOLLO’S shrine at DELPHI, in mainland Greece.
King CROESUS, another patron of Delphi, also made a
treaty of friendship with SPARTA (ca. 550 B.C.E.). Yet in that
same era the Lydian kings repeatedly attacked the Ionian
cities, particularly MILETUS, coveting them as outlets to
the sea. Finally submitting to Croesus, these Greek cities
became privileged subject states under Lydian rule.
Lydia was probably the first nation on earth to mint
coins (ca. 635 B.C.E.). This invention was quickly copied
by certain Greek cities.
Like certain other Asian peoples, the Lydians had a
formidable CAVALRY; they also pioneered early techniques
of siege warfare. But after Croesus succumbed to the Per-
sian assault, Lydia became a western province of the Per-
sian Empire.
Although not independent thereafter, Lydia retained
a cultural identity. After the conquests and death of
ALEXANDER THE GREAT (334–323 B.C.E.), Lydia became a
province of the Hellenistic SELEUCID EMPIRE. In the 100s
B.C.E. Lydia passed briefly into the kingdom of PERGA-
MON, before being absorbed into the empire of ROME.
Several sites in Lydia have been investigated by archaeol-
ogists, but the most important of these is Sardis, which
has been systematically excavated since 1958 by the
Archaeological Exploration of Sardis, headquartered at
Harvard University. The excavation team, consisting of
American and Turkish scholars and students, continues
to work there, uncovering and restoring monuments
from the Lydian period, as well as from later eras.
See also COINAGE; PERSIA; WARFARE, SIEGE.
Further reading: E. N. Lane, “Two Notes on Lydian
Topography,” Anatolian Studies 25 (1975): 105–110;
Andrew Ramage, Lydian Houses and Architectural Terra-
cottas (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1978); G. M. A. Hanfmann, “On Lydian Sardis,” in From
Athens to Gordion. The Papers of a Memorial Symposium
for Rodney S. Young Held at the University Museum the
Third of May 1975, edited by Keith DeVries (Philadelphia:
University Museum, University of Pennsylvania, 1980),
99–107; C. H. Greenwalt Jr. and L. J. Majewski, “Lydian
Textiles,” in From Athens to Gordion. The Papers of a
Memorial Symposium for Rodney S. Young Held at the Uni-
versity Museum the Third of May 1975, edited by Keith
DeVries (Philadelphia: University Museum, University of
Pennsylvania, 1980), 133–140; Nicholas Cahill, “Lydian
Houses, Domestic Assemblages, and Household Size,” in
Across the Anatolian Plateau: Readings in the Archaeology
of Ancient Turkey, edited by David C. Hopkins (Boston:
American School of Oriental Research, 2002), 173–186.
Lykourgos (1)
This semilegendary, early Spartan law-
giver was said to have founded the government and social
organization of classical SPARTA. The Spartans revered the
memory of Lykourgos, yet today little is known of his life
or even when he lived.
By the most plausible modern theory, Lykourgos arose
as a political savior in about 665 B.C.E., after Sparta had
been disastrously defeated in a war with ARGOS. In the
decades following this defeat, Sparta completely reorga-
nized itself as a militaristic state, devoted to the HOPLITE
style of warfare and governed as a moderate OLIGARCHY
built around the hoplite class of citizens. The name given
to this new form of government was eunomia: “good law”
or “good discipline.” It is reasonable to see this swift,
comprehensive change as the work of individual political
genius.
In later centuries the Spartans preserved the text of a
brief “commandment” (rh¯etra), supposedly written by
Lykourgos as the basis for his reforms.
Further reading: J. T. Hooker, “The Life and Times of
Lykourgos the Lawgiver,” Klio 70 (1988): 340–345;
Richard J. A. Talbert, trans., Plutarch on Sparta (New
York: Penguin Books, 1988).
Lykourgos (2) (ca. 390–324 B.C.E.) Athenian orator and
statesman of the mid-300s B.C.E.
Known for his fierce public prosecutions of various ene-
mies, Lykourgos was an able administrator, who received a
special commission to oversee the city’s finances. He was
active in opposition to the Macedonian king PHILIP II,
before Philip’s conquest of Greece (338 B.C.E.). One speech
by Lykourgos survives, Against Leokrates (331 B.C.E.).
See also LAWS AND LAW COURTS.
Further reading: David G. Romano, “The Pana-
thenaic Stadium and Theater of Lykourgos. A Re-Exami-
nation of the Facilities on the Pnyx Hill,” American
Journal of Archaeology 89 (1985): 441–454.
lyric poetry
Like Greek EPIC POETRY, lyric had its ori-
gins in MUSIC. Lurika mel¯e (lyric verse) meant a solo song
in which the singer accompanied him- or herself on the
stringed instrument known as the lyre. These brief songs
were distinct from epic verse, which told traditional tales
of the deeds of heroes, using an on-flowing rhythm (the
hexameter). Lyric used other meters, to convey more per-
sonal or immediate messages. Of the earliest lyric poets
whose verses have survived, SAPPHO (ca. 600 B.C.E.) is the
art’s greatest practitioner.
Lyric poetry was developed by the AEOLIAN GREEKS
and the DORIAN GREEKS. Aeolian-style lyric consisted of
short rhythmical lines, accompanied by stringed instru-
ments. They were personal songs, full of passionate emo-
tions such as love and hatred, joy and sorrow. The Dorians
developed a more complex genre of choral lyric, designed
for performance in religious festivals. Their songs were
therefore not as personal, since they were meant to be sung
in public. They are accompanied by strings and flutes, and
they had longer lines and a rhythm that was better suited
194
Lykourgos

for dancing. The Dorians also developed a greater variety
of types of songs, enlarging the category of lyric.
One of these forms of song was the elegy, which had
its own distinctive meter and was sung to the music of a
flute (elegos); obviously, for this type of song, the singer
used an accompanist. One natural setting for the elegy
was the aristocratic drinking party known as the SYMPO-
SIUM, where female SLAVES would provide flute music as
well as other pleasures. The Ephesan poet KALLINUS (ca.
640 B.C.E.) produced what are probably our earliest sur-
viving elegiac verses, urging his countrymen to defend
themselves against the marauding Kimmerians. The Spar-
tan TYRTAEUS (ca. 630 B.C.E.) wrote elegies in a similar
vein. The elegies of ARCHILOCHUS (ca. 640 B.C.E.) are more
angry and personal, and those of ANACREON (ca. 520
B.C.E.) reflect a life that was fun-loving and decadent. One
subcategory of elegy was the epigram, which was typically
a brief poem, composed for inscription in stone; the epi-
taph, or gravestone inscription, was one type of epigram.
Another specialized lyric meter was the iambos, used
by Archilochus, HIPPONAX (ca. 540 B.C.E.), and others for
conveying satire and derision. Eventually iambic meter
was adopted by Athenian playwrights as sounding natu-
ral for individual speaking parts in stage comedy and
tragedy.
The term lyric also encompassed the category of
choral poetry. These verses, in various meters, were writ-
ten for public performance by a chorus—of men, boys, or
girls—usually at a religious festival. Typically accompa-
nied by lyre music, the chorus (usually 30 members)
would dance and present interpretive movements.
The many categories of choral lyric include the
paian, (religious hymn of praise), the maiden song
(parthenaion), the dirge (thr¯enos), and the victory ode
(epinikion). The greatest Greek choral poet, PINDAR (ca.
470 B.C.E.), is best remembered for his victory odes,
which celebrated various patrons’ triumphs at such pan-
hellenic festivals as the OLYMPIC GAMES. Another form of
choral was the dithyramb, which was a song narrating a
mythological story. At ATHENS, dithyrambs were per-
formed at festivals of the god DIONYSUS and included the
wearing of masks and the impersonation of characters in
the story. By the mid-500s B.C.E., this practice had given
birth to a crude form of stage tragedy.
See also
ALCMAN;
BACCHYLIDES;
KALLIMACHUS;
SIMONIDES; STESICHORUS; THEATER.
Further reading: Richard Lewis, Muse of the Round
Sky: Lyric Poetry of Ancient Greece (New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1969); Anthony Podlecki, The Early Greek Poets
and Their Times
(Vancouver: University of British
Columbia Press, 1984); W. J. Henderson, “Criteria in the
Ancient Greek Lyric Contests,” Mnemosyne 42 (1989):
24–40; Paul Allen Miller, Lyric Texts and Lyric Conscious-
ness: The Birth of a Genre from Archaic Greece to Augustan
Rome (London: Routledge, 1994).
Lysander (ca. 445–395 B.C.E.) Leading Spartan com-
mander of the later PELOPONNESIAN WAR and aftermath
First appointed as an admiral in 408 B.C.E., Lysander pur-
sued a strategy to capture the HELLESPONT waterway from
the Athenians, and it was in the Hellespont that he won
the sea battle of AEGOSPOTAMI (405 B.C.E.), which virtu-
ally won the war for SPARTA. After besieging ATHENS,
Lysander received the Athenian surrender, occupied the
city, and installed the puppet government of the THIRTY
TYRANTS (404 B.C.E.). Similarly, he set up oligarchic gov-
ernments in former Athenian ally cities.
However, the Spartan king Pausanias reversed
Lysander’s policies, abandoning the Thirty and permitting
the restoration of DEMOCRACY at Athens and elsewhere
(403 B.C.E.). Lysander became shut out of power by Pau-
sanias and his colleague AGESILAUS. As a field commander
at the outbreak of the CORINTHIAN WAR (395 B.C.E.),
Lysander invaded BOEOTIA but was killed in battle against
the Thebans.
Further reading: C. D. Hamilton, “Lysander, Agesi-
laus, Spartan Imperialism, and the Greeks of Asia Minor,”
Ancient World 23 (1992): 35–50.
Lysias (ca. 459–380 B.C.E.) Athenian orator
Of Lysias’s reportedly 200 speeches, 32 survive today.
These provide an important source for our knowledge of
the Athenian law courts.
Like other orators, Lysias wrote speeches for clients
but did not personally plead in court. (He was forbidden
to do so, since he was a resident alien, or metic.) His
father, Kephalos, a Syracusan by birth, had a lucrative
shield manufactory in PIRAEUS. (It is this Kephalos who,
with Lysias’s brother Polemarchus, is featured in the
opening episode of PLATO’S fictional dialogue The Repub-
lic.) Evidently the family knew SOCRATES and moved in
intellectual circles.
Under the THIRTY TYRANTS (404 B.C.E.), Polemarchus
was put to death and the family’s wealth confiscated.
Lysias escaped to MEGARA (1), returning under the
restored DEMOCRACY of 403 B.C.E. His major speeches,
such as his Against Eratosthenes—in which Lysias prose-
cuted a surviving member of the Thirty—were delivered
in the period after this return.
See also LAWS AND LAW COURTS; METICS; RHETORIC.
Further reading: Christopher Carey, ed., Trials from
Classical Athens (London: Routledge, 1997); Stephen
Usher, Greek Oratory: Tradition and Originality (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1999); Alan Boegehold,
“At Home. Lysias 1, 23,” in Polis and Politics: Studies in
Ancient Greek History, edited by P. Flensted-Jensen, T. H.
Nielsen, and L. Rubinstein (Copenhagen: Museum Tus-
culanum Press, 2000); S. C. Todd, trans., Lysias (Austin:
University of Texas Press, 2000); A. Wolpert, “Lysias 1
and the Politics of the Oikos,” Classical Journal 96
(2000–2001): 415–424.
Lysias
195

Lysimachus (ca. 360–281 B.C.E.) Macedonian general
and one of the DIADOCHOI (successors) who carved up the
empire of ALEXANDER THE GREAT.
During Alexander’s lifetime, Lysimachus was one of his
close friends and bodyguards. After Alexander’s conquest
of the Persian Empire and his sudden death (323 B.C.E.),
Lysimachus claimed a domain encompassing THRACE and
northwest ASIA MINOR. He took the title of King of
Thrace in 306 B.C.E. and built a royal capital, Lysi-
macheia, on the west coast of the CHERSONESE.
Lysimachus’s primary enemy was ANTIGONUS (1),
who sought to reconquer Alexander’s entire empire from
a base in Asia Minor. Lysimachus joined forces with
SELEUCUS (1), and together they defeated Antigonus at
the Battle of Ipsus in Asia Minor (301 B.C.E.), dividing his
territory between themselves. In 287 B.C.E., Lysimachus
and another ally, PYRRHUS, expelled Antigonus’s son,
DEMETRIUS POLIORKETES, from MACEDON and THESSALY.
Pyrrhus took control of the lands at first, but the follow-
ing year Lysimachus drove him out and established him-
self as the king of Macedon.
In 281 B.C.E., Lysimachus was defeated and killed by
his former ally Seleucus at the Battle of Corupedium, in
Asia Minor. Lysimachus’s patchwork kingdom did not
survive him, but instead was divided between the Seleu-
cids and the Antigonids of Macedon.
Further reading: S. M. Burstein, “Lysimachus and
the Cities. The Early Years,” Ancient World 14 (1986):
19–24; Helen S. Lund, Lysimachus: A Study in Early Hel-
lenistic Kingship (London: Routledge, 1992).
Lysippos
See SCULPTURE.
196
Lysimachus

M
197
Macedon
This outlying Greek kingdom north of
THESSALY is situated inland from the Thermaic Gulf, on
the northwest Aegean coast. In modern reference, the
name Macedon usually refers to the political entity, as
opposed to the general territory called Macedonia.
Macedon’s heartland was the wide Thermaic plain, west
of the modern Greek city of Thessaloniki, where the
rivers Haliacmon and Axius flowed close together to the
sea. The widely separated upper valleys of these rivers
supplied two more regions of political and economic
importance. Elsewhere the country was mountainous
and forested. Its name came from an ancient Greek word
meaning highlanders.
Macedon was inhabited by various peoples of
Dorian-Greek, Illyrian, and Thracian descent, who spoke
a Greek dialect and worshipped Greek gods. Prior to the
mid-400s B.C.E. Macedon was a mere backwater, belea-
guered by hostile Illyrians to the west and Thracians to
the east, and significant mainly as an exporter of TIMBER
and SILVER to the main Greek world.
Unification and modernization came gradually, at the
hands of kings of Dorian descent. Alexander I “the Phil-
hellene” (reigned ca. 485–440 B.C.E.) began a hellenizing
cultural program and minted Macedon’s first coins, of
native silver. The ruthless Archelaus I (413–399 B.C.E.)
built forts and roads, improved military organization,
chose PELLA as his capital city, and glorified his court by
hosting the Athenian tragedians EURIPIDES and AGATHON
(both of whom died in Macedon).
Macedon emerged as a major power in the next cen-
tury. The brilliant Macedonian king PHILIP II (359–336
B.C.E.) created the best army in the Greek world and
annexed territory in THRACE, ILLYRIS, and Greek CHAL-
CIDIC¯E, then subjugated Greece itself (338 B.C.E.). His son
and successor, ALEXANDER THE GREAT (336–323 B.C.E.),
conquered the Persian Empire and made Macedon,
briefly, the largest kingdom on earth.
In the turmoil after Alexander’s death, Macedon was
seized by a series of rulers until the admirable king
Antigonus II anchored a new, stable dynasty there (ca. 272
B.C.E.). This century saw Macedon as one of the three great
Hellenistic powers, alongside Ptolemaic EGYPT and the
SELEUCID EMPIRE. Macedonian kings controlled Greece,
with garrisons at CORINTH, at the Athenian port of PIRAEUS,
and elsewhere. In 222 B.C.E.
the Macedonian king
Antigonus III captured the once-indomitable city of SPARTA.
To counter Macedonian domination, there arose two
new Greek federal states, the Achaean and Aetolian
leagues (mid-200s B.C.E.). The Macedonian king PHILIP V
(221–179 B.C.E.) punished the Aetolians but came to grief
against a new European power—the Italian city of ROME.
Philip’s two wars against Roman-Aetolian armies in
Greece—the 
First 
and 
Second 
Macedonian 
wars
(214–205 and 200–197 B.C.E.)—ended with Macedon’s
defeat and the Roman liberation of Greece (196 B.C.E.).
Macedon’s last king was Philip’s son Perseus
(179–167 B.C.E.). After defeating Perseus in the Third
Macedonian War (171–167 B.C.E.), the Romans impris-
oned him and dismantled his kingdom. In 146 B.C.E. the
region was annexed as a Roman province, called Macedo-
nia. A lot of current archaeological work is being done in
the region of Macedon, particularly at sites like Pella,
Dion, Edessa, and especially Vergina, where the royal
Macedonian tombs have been discovered.
See also ACHAEA; AETOLIA; DORIAN GREEKS; HEL-
LENISTIC AGE; KASSANDER; PHALANX; PYRRHUS.

Further reading: N. G. L. Hammond, “The King and
the Land in the Macedonian Kingdom,” Classical Quarterly
38 (1988): 382–391; N. G. L. Hammond, The Macedonian
State: Origins, Institutions, and History (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1989); Peter Green, Alexander of Mace-
don, 356–323 B.C.: A Historical Biography (Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press, 1991); Eugene N. Borza, In the
Shadow of Olympus: The Emergence of Macedon, 2d ed.
(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1992); Alfred
S. Bradford, ed., Philip II of Macedon: A Life from the Ancient
Sources (Westport, Conn.: Praeger, 1992); N. G. L. Ham-
mond, Philip of Macedon (London: Duckworth, 1994).
maenads (Greek: mainadai, “mad-women”)
In MYTH,
the maenads were the frenzied female devotees of the god
DIONYSUS. Usually imagined as Thracian WOMEN, the
maenads symbolized the obliteration of personal identity
and the liberation from conventional life that came with
Dionysus’s ecstatic worship. Clothed in fawn- or panther-
skins, crowned with garlands of ivy, the maenads would
rove across mountains and woods, to worship the god
with dancing and song. In their abandon, they would
capture wild animals and tear them limb from limb, even
eating the beasts’ raw flesh. Also known as the Bacchae,
the maenads were female counterparts of the male SATYRS,
but, unlike the satyrs, they were never comical figures.
The maenads’ rites are unforgettably portrayed in the
Athenian tragedian EURIPIDES’ masterpiece, The Bacchae
(405 B.C.E.).
Although certain women’s religious groups of central
Greece did practice a midwinter ritual of “mountain
dancing” (Greek: oreibasia) in Dionysus’s honor, the mae-
nads as presented in art and literature were not real.
Rather, they were mythical projections of the self-aban-
donment found in Dionysus’ conventional cult. Perhaps
the idea of the maenads originated in savage, real-life
Dionysian festivals in the non-Greek land of THRACE.
Further reading: Renate Schlesier, “Mixtures of
Masks: Maenads as Tragic Models,” in Masks of Dionysus,
edited by Thomas H. Carpenter and Christopher A.
Faraone (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1993),
89–114; Guy Hedreen, “Silens, Nymphs, and Maenads,”
Journal of Hellenic Studies 114 (1994): 47–69; L. B. Joyce,
“Maenads and Bacchantes. Images of Female Ecstasy”
(Ph.D. diss., UCLA, 1997); Jenifer Neils, “Others Within
the Other: An Intimate Look at Hetairai and Maenads,” in
Not the Classical Ideal: Athens and the Construction of the
Other in Greek Art, edited by Beth Cohen (Leiden,
Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 2000), 203–226; Ross Shepard
Kraemer, Women’s Religions in the Greco-Roman World: A
Sourcebook (New York: Oxford University Press, 2004).
magic
Magic and magicians were quite commonplace
in ancient society, and the practice of magic was closely
related to Greek religion and science. Spells, enchant-
ments, and curses of various types have been found in
inscriptions, and on stone and other materials. In MYTH,
the most celebrated magicians were female: CIRCE in
Homer’s Odyssey and MEDEA in the story of JASON (1) and
the Argonauts. The goddess Hekate is often associated
with magical rites and herbs, and she is the divinity
invoked by Medea in the play of that name by EURIPIDES
(431 B.C.E.).
Probably the most common types of spells in the
ancient world were love spells and curses. Love magic is
mentioned in numerous literary sources from the time of
Homer through the Roman era. In the Iliad, HERA uses
APHRODITE’s magic belt to seduce her straying husband,
ZEUS. ARISTOTLE and other scientific writers provide
information about the many plants, minerals, and ani-
mals believed to have magical and aphrodisiacal powers.
In addition, many magical gemstones have survived that
appear to be love amulets; they bear short Greek inscrip-
tions and amorous scenes typically involving Aphrodite
and EROS.
198
maenads
A satyr and maenad dance on this Greek-Etruscan antefix,
475 B.C.E. The maenad holds krotala, or castanets. An antefix
was a decorated upright roof tile set along the edges of the
roof of a building. (The J. Paul Getty Museum)

Curse tablets are another important source of infor-
mation about ancient Greek magic. The most effective
means of cursing an individual was thought to involve
writing the name of the person along with magical for-
mulas and/or symbols on a small strip of lead. The
inscribed lead tablet was then buried in or near a tomb or
thrown into a well, spring, or river. Sometimes the tablet
was pierced with a nail, presumably to increase the
potency of the curse.
Further reading: David Godwin, Light in Extension:
Greek Magic from Homer to Modern Times (St. Paul,
Minn.: Llewellyn, 1992); Hugh Parry, Thelxis: Magic and
Imagination in Greek Myth and Poetry (Lanham, Md.: Uni-
versity Press of America, 1992); Hans Dieter Betz, The
Greek Magical Papyri in Translation, including the Demotic
Spells, 2d ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1996); Christopher Faraone and Dirk Obkink, eds.,
Magika Hiera: Ancient Greek Magic and Religion (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1997); Valerie Flint et al.,
Witchcraft and Magic in Europe: Ancient Greece and Rome
(London: Athlone Press, 1999); Matthew Dickie, Magic
and Magicians in the Greco-Roman World (London: Rout-
ledge, 2001); S. R. Asirvatham, C. O. Pache, and J.
Watrous, eds., Between Magic and Religion: Interdisci-
plinary Studies in Ancient Mediterranean Religion and Soci-
ety (Lanham, Md.: Rowman and Littlefield, 2001); Daniel
Ogden, Magic, Witchcraft, and Ghosts in the Greek and
Roman Worlds: A Sourcebook (New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 2002).
Magna Graecia
See ITALY.
Mantineia
An important city of ARCADIA located in the
central Arcadian plain, Mantineia emerged around 500
B.C.E. from an amalgamation of villages. The name Man-
tineia, suggesting holiness, may refer to a religious dedi-
cation at the city’s founding. Mantineia was the
implacable rival of its 10-mile-distant neighbor, TEGEA.
The two cities fought over their boundary and the rout-
ing of the destructive water courses through the plain.
Also, Mantineia tended to be the enemy of the mighty
Spartans, who coveted Arcadia.
Mantineia became a moderate DEMOCRACY around
470 B.C.E.—probably due to Athenian involvement—and
in 420 B.C.E., during the PELOPONNESIAN WAR, Mantineia
joined an anti-Spartan alliance of ATHENS, ARGOS, and
ELIS. This led to a Spartan invasion and a Mantineian
defeat at the first Battle of Mantineia (418 B.C.E.). In 385
B.C.E. the Spartan king AGESILAUS captured the city and
pulled down its walls; but after the Spartans’ defeat at
LEUKTRA (371 B.C.E.), the Mantineians built the majestic
fortifications whose remnants still stand today. In 362
B.C.E. Mantineian troops fought on the Spartan side and
shared in the Spartan defeat at the second Battle of Man-
tineia, where the Theban commander EPAMINONDAS was
killed in his hour of victory. This battle marked the final
Theban invasion of the Peloponnese.
The city was captured and destroyed by the Macedo-
nian king Antigonus III in 223 B.C.E., during his cam-
paign that captured SPARTA.
Mantineia was later
reestablished under the name Antigoneia.
Mantineia began to be excavated in the early 20th
century by the French Archaeological School at Athens.
These investigations uncovered the ancient theater, the
council house, and the AGORA. The Greek Archaeological
Service undertook new excavations at the site in
1985–1995 and revealed the locations of several cult
sanctuaries.
Further reading: S. Hodkinson and H. Hodkinson,
“Mantineia and the Mantinike: Settlement and Society in
a Greek Polis,” Annual of the British School at Athens 76
(1981): 239–296.
Marathon
This town in the Athenian territory of
ATTICA is situated three miles from the sea and about 26
miles northeast of ATHENS, along a main road. The
coastal plain at Marathon saw one of history’s most
famous battles, when an Athenian army defeated a
seaborne invasion force sent by the Persian king DARIUS
(1) (summer of 490 B.C.E.). The Persians, masters of
western Asia, were thought to be invincible. The victory
at Marathon saved Athens from subjugation and came to
be viewed as a nearly mythical event—the gods were said
to have smiled on the city and its fledgling DEMOCRACY.
Among many later commemorations of the battle was a
famous wall PAINTING in Athens’s AGORA.
The name Marathon may have referred to wild fennel
(Greek: marathon) in the area. More than 50 years before
the battle, Marathon town played a role in the rise to
power of the Athenian tyrant PEISISTRATUS. Like other
towns of eastern Attica, Marathon held traditional alle-
giance to Peisistratus’s family, and it was at Marathon’s
hospitable coast that Peisistratus landed an army by sea,
to capture Athens (546 B.C.E.). His son HIPPIAS (1) rode
with the army that day. Hippias later succeeded his father
as tyrant of Athens, but was ousted in 510 B.C.E. Making
his way to PERSIA, he became one of King Darius’s advis-
ers. Then, in 490 B.C.E., Hippias returned with a Persian
invasion fleet, which he guided to the shore near
Marathon.
Darius had sent the Persian force to punish two
mainland Greek cities, ERETRIA and Athens, for their role
in the recent IONIAN REVOLT against Persia. Hippias, then
nearly 80 years old, was intended as the Persians’ puppet
ruler in Athens. Apparently he had been in secret contact
with partisans inside Athens who had promised to hand
the city over to the invaders.
The ancient Greek historian HERODOTUS, who is the
main extant information source for the Marathon cam-
paign, says that the Persian fleet numbered 600 ships. A
Marathon
199

more accurate figure may have been 200. The fleet car-
ried a land army of perhaps 20,000: armored spearmen,
archers, and the formidable Persian CAVALRY, well suited
to fighting on the Marathon plain.
After destroying Eretria, the Persian troops disem-
barked at Marathon to attack Athens. Against them came
marching a HOPLITE army of about 9,000 Athenians, plus
perhaps 600 from Athens’ faithful ally PLATAEA. The Spar-
tans too had promised to send aid, but their troops were
delayed at home by certain religious obligations—a typi-
cal case of excessive Spartan piety. By the time they
arrived, the fight was over.
The opposing armies faced each other for several
days, retiring to their respective camps at night. The
Greeks, who had no horsemen or archers, were unwilling
to attack: They were outnumbered, probably two to one,
and they feared the Persian cavalry. The Greeks’ advan-
tage was their BRONZE armor (heavier and more extensive
than the Persians’) and their organized hoplite tactics;
man for man, they were to prove the better foot soldiers.
The Athenian command, at this point in history, con-
sisted of 10 generals overseen by a polemarchos, or “war
leader.” Five of the generals wanted to march back to
defend the walls of Athens; but the other five led by the
brilliant MILTIADES, convinced the polemarch, Kalli-
machus, to attack. Apparently the timing involved a
chance to catch the Persians without their cavalry; the
Persian horsemen may have been reembarking to sail
elsewhere, when the Athenian army charged.
Advancing quickly across the mile that separated the
armies, the Greeks crashed into the Persian infantry ranks
and sent both wings fleeing. In the center, the Persian
spearmen stood firm but were destroyed when the two
Greek wings—Athenians on the right and Plataeans on
the left—wheeled inward in an unusual pincer movement.
The retreating Persians were slaughtered as they ran
for their ships waiting inshore. The Greeks pursued them
into the sea, right up to the ships. There Kallimachus was
killed. All but seven Persian ships got away, leaving
behind 6,400 dead soldiers. The Athenians had lost 192.
Later the Athenian and Plataean dead were buried on the
battlefield, under a mound still visible today.
A runner was sent to Athens to report the victory.
(Twenty-five centuries later this run would be commemo-
rated in the marathon footrace, first organized for the
1900 C.E. Paris Olympics.) Meanwhile, on distant Mt.
Pentelicus, behind the battlefield, a shield was seen flash-
ing in the morning sun—probably a heliographic signal
to the Persian fleet. Presumably Hippias’s Athenian parti-
sans were reporting themselves ready to launch their
coup d’état. But no coup was ever attempted: The traitors
were frightened off by news of the Athenian victory.
The Persian fleet sailed south and west around Cape
Sunium, intending to land closer to Athens. But when
they found the Athenian army waiting there, having
marched from the battlefield, the Persians set sail for
Asia. For the Persian command, the battle had demon-
strated that future military action against mainland
Greece would require a large army of occupation; 10
years later they would return with one.
The victory was a source of Greek religious awe. Leg-
end claimed that the mythical Athenian hero THESEUS
had been seen fighting alongside the Greeks and that an
Athenian long-distance messenger had met the god PAN
while running through the Arcadian wilds en route to
SPARTA. For centuries afterward the battlefield was said to
be haunted at night by the noise of combat.
Marathon inspired the confident outlook of a young
generation of Athenians, who would defeat the Persians
again (480–479 B.C.E.) and go on to forge an Athenian
Empire. When the Athenian playwright AESCHYLUS died
in 456 B.C.E., after a life full of honors, he recorded only
one achievement in his epitaph: that he had fought at
Marathon.
See also OSTRACISM; PERSIAN WARS.
Further reading: Konstantinos P. Kontorlis, The Bat-
tle of Marathon: and The Recent Archaeological Discoveries
Made There, 2d ed. (Athens: K. Kontorlis, 1973); Alan
Lloyd, Marathon: The Story of Civilizations on Collision
Course (New York: New American Library, 1975); J. A. S.
Evans, “Herodotus and the Battle of Marathon,” Historia
42 (1993): 279–307; Basil Petrakos, Marathon, translated
by Alexandra Doumas (Athens: Archaeological Society at
Athens, 1996); N. A. Doenges, “The Campaign and Battle
of Marathon,” Historia 47 (1981): 1–17.
marble
See ARCHITECTURE; SCULPTURE.
Marmara, Sea of
This modern name refers to the
roughly diamond-shape saltwater body, 140 miles long
and 40 miles wide at most, that connects the BOSPORUS
and HELLESPONT seaways, along the northwestern coast of
ASIA MINOR. The Greeks called this sea the Propontis—
the “foresea” (i.e., in front of the BLACK SEA). The Propon-
tis supplied a link in the crucial Greek TRADE route that
brought metals and grain westward from the Black Sea.
Although not originally part of the Greek world, the
Propontis had begun attracting Greek COLONIZATION by
the early 600 B.C.E. Greek exploration is reflected (dis-
tortedly) in certain episodes in the legend of JASON (1)
and the Argonauts.
The major Greek cities on the shores of the Propontis
were CYZICUS and BYZANTIUM. The sea’s abundant fish
runs were commemorated in Cyzicus’s COINAGE, which
used a tuna as the city’s emblem.
Further reading: H. Buitenhuis, “Note on Archeozo-
ological Research around the Sea of Marmara,” Anatolica
20 (1994): 141–144.
marriage
The ancient Greeks were monogamous; only
the Macedonian royal house and certain other marginal
200
marble

traditions allowed for multiple wives. Women married
young; brides were frequently around 14 years of age.
Grooms were generally chosen by a young girl’s parents
and tended to be as much as 20 years older than the
bride. Marriages were frequently motivated by political
and economic considerations.
Very little is known about actual marriage traditions
in the BRONZE AGE or at the time of HOMER. The evidence
of the Homeric epics shows that gifts were always
exchanged between the groom and the bride’s parents or
guardians; these attested to the new alliance being forged
between the two families. Homeric heroes sometimes
obtained a wife by winning her in a competition or by
abducting her in time of warfare. When Troy fell, the
women of the city were taken by the Greeks as wives and
concubines.
Most of our information about Greek marriage tradi-
tions comes from Athens in the 400s–300s B.C.E. There,
marriage arrangements generally included a dowry paid
to the groom by the family of the bride. The union was
considered complete upon the groom’s ritualized accep-
tance of the dowry or his promise to do so.
The Greek goddess of marriage was HERA, but the
wedding ceremony did not involve any priests or
priestesses. The ritual, for wealthier families, consisted of
a wedding feast typically held at the house of the bride’s
father. Another important element of the ceremony was
the bride’s offering her childhood toys and clothing to the
gods, symbolizing that she was undertaking the transi-
tion to adulthood and would no longer need these items.
After the meal, the veiled bride left her father’s home and
accompanied her husband in a procession to his house—
her new home. The revelers followed, and when the bride
and groom entered the wedding chamber the well-wish-
ers stood outside the closed door and sang the epithala-
mion (outside-the-bedroom song).
The primary purpose of marriage in ancient Greece
was to produce children, and WOMEN were generally
judged by their success or failure to do so. In the Athenian
marriage ceremony, the bride’s guardian would announce,
“I give this woman for the begetting of legitimate off-
spring.” The question of legitimacy was extremely impor-
tant and had consequences for Athenian citizenship. The
statesman PERIKLES sponsored a series of laws in 451
B.C.E. that decreed that an Athenian citizen could legally
marry only another citizen, and citizenship for children
was limited to the legal offspring of such marriages.
The exclusive emphasis on procreation rather than
love, in a society that otherwise tended to devalue
women, made most Greek marriages unromantic. It was
considered entirely appropriate for husbands to find sex-
ual adventure outside marriage—with SLAVES or PROSTI-
TUTES, or in the homosexual pursuits of the GYMNASIUM
and other male gathering places. The husband’s busi-
nesslike view of marriage is conveyed in the words of a
male Athenian courtroom speaker of the mid-300s B.C.E.:
“Prostitutes we have for our pleasure, concubines for our
daily refreshment, but wives to give us legitimate chil-
dren and be faithful guardians of our homes” (Against
Neaera, 122; ascribed to DEMOSTHENES [1]).
In Athens, a husband’s extramarital liaisons were not
punishable as adultery unless they happened to involve
another man’s wife. Legally, adultery was defined as sex
between a married woman and a man other than her hus-
band—the offense was that it defied the husband’s
authority and created the possibility of illegitimate chil-
dren. In cases of adultery, both the erring wife and her
male lover could be severely punished. (Due to a lack of
evidence, it is not known what the classical Athenians’
attitude might have been toward wives taking female
lovers, but it too was probably very disapproving. In any
event, a wife’s secluded, housebound life offered few
chances to find lovers of any type.)
Greek divorce was simple. A husband could just dis-
miss his wife from the house, or a wife could decide to
walk away. To petition for the return of her dowry, how-
ever, a woman had to present herself in a court of law,
which was always biased in favor of her husband. For
example, when Hipparette, the estranged wife of the
Athenian statesman ALCIBIADES (ca. 420 B.C.E.), arrived at
court for this purpose, Alcibiades appeared, lifted her up,
and carried her home unchallenged.
See also ADONIS; ASPASIA; HETEROSEXUALITY; HOMO-
SEXUALITY; LAWS AND LAW COURTS.
Further reading: C. Zaccagnini, “On Late Bronze Age
Marriage,” in Studi in onore di Edda Bresciani, edited by S.
F. Bondi (Pisa: Giardini, 1985), 593–605; P. Walcot,
“Romantic Love and True Love. Greek Attitudes to Mar-
riage,” Ancient Society 18 (1987): 5–33; Aphrodite Ava-
gianou, Sacred Marriage in the Rituals of Greek Religion
(New York: P. Lang, 1991); C. B. Patterson, “Marriage and
the Married Woman in Athenian Law,” in Women’s History
and Ancient History, edited by Sarah B. Pomeroy (Chapel
Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1991), 48–72;
John H. Oakley and Rebecca H. Sinos, The Wedding in
Ancient Athens (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press,
1993); Cheryl Anne Cox, Household Interests: Property,
Marriage Strategies, and Family Dynamics in Ancient
Athens
(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press,
1998); V. Sabetai, “Marriage Boiotian Style,” Hesperia 67
(1998): 323–334; Fiona Macdonald, Women in Ancient
Greece (New York: Peter Bedrick Books, 1999).
Massalia
This Greek seaport in southern France is
located just east of the mouth of the Rhône River; in
modern times it is the major French city of Marseille.
Massalia was established in about 600 B.C.E. by long-
range Greek seafarers from PHOCAEA, in ASIA MINOR; the
founding was associated with a sea battle in which the
Phocaeans defeated rival Carthaginians in the area.
The Ligurian tribes of the region apparently wel-
comed the Greeks. Massalia prospered through TRADE
Massalia
201

with the Ligurians as well as with the CELTS of interior
Gaul and the Celtic kingdom of Tartessus in southern
Spain. The Massaliote Greeks soon established their own
Mediterranean colonies, including Nicaea (modern Nice)
and Emporion (meaning “seaport”—modern Ampurias,
in southern Spain). These contacts supplied the raw met-
als—SILVER, IRON, tin, and lead—that the Massaliotes
craved for manufacturing or lucrative export to Greece.
In exchange the Greeks offered luxury goods, such as
worked BRONZE. Greek goods made their way into the
continent: Modern ARCHAEOLOGY has discovered Greek
bronzes of the 500s B.C.E. (cauldrons, a helmet, vasehan-
dles) in southern Spain, southern France, and at a site
100 miles southeast of Paris.
Another important Greek export was WINE, the key
that unlocked the wealth of native peoples. Like the
French fur traders of the 1600s C.E. who took brandy into
the Canadian wilderness to sell to Indians for pelts, so
did the ancient Greeks take Greek wine into interior
Gaul, introducing it among the Celtic tribes. A later
Greek writer (ca. 20 B.C.E.) described how cheaply the
Celts sold their SLAVES for wine, “trading a servant for a
drink.” In time, the peoples of southern France learned
how to cultivate their own grapes. The creation of the
French wine industry is not the least cultural legacy of
the ancient Greeks.
This infusion of Greek influences up the Rhône in the
500s B.C.E played a vital role in shaping the Celtic “La
Tène” culture that was to emerge in Gaul in the next cen-
tury. From the Greeks, the Gauls learned improved meth-
ods of FARMING, fortification, and local administration.
They copied the Greek ALPHABET, which Julius Caesar
would find still in use throughout Gaul in 59 B.C.E. Aspects
of the Gauls’ religious beliefs may have been shaped by
images of the Greek gods. One ancient writer observed that
it seemed as if Gaul had become part of Greece.
Around 310–306 B.C.E. a Massaliote seafarer named
Pytheas sailed through the Straits of Gibraltar and around
the British Isles, perhaps reaching as far as Norway, in
search of the sources of traded tin and other goods. Later
ancient writers plausibly describe his exploration.
Massalia was known for the stability of its aristo-
cratic government. Remote from the agitations of main-
land Greece, the city thrived without social conflict,
while keeping contact with the Greek homeland through
such means as a Massaliote treasury house at DELPHI. For
centuries, Massalia’s only principal enemy was CARTHAGE,
and Massalia finally allied itself with the Italian city of
ROME
against Carthage in the Second Punic War
(218–201 B.C.E.). In 125 B.C.E. hostility from local tribes
compelled Massalia to appeal to Rome, resulting in the
Roman occupation of the region. The Romans called this
territory “the province,” Provincia—modern Provence.
Excavations began at Massalia after World War II,
when the Greek theater was located. A sanctuary of the
goddess Kybele and parts of the Roman harbor have also
been investigated. Other remains discovered include
houses from the Archaic through the Roman eras, a Hel-
lenistic marble quarry, a cemetery, and some early Chris-
tian churches.
See also ARISTOCRACY; SHIPS AND SEAFARING.
Further reading: A. N. Oikonomides, “Greek Inscrip-
tions from the Ancient City of Massalia,” Ancient World 11
(1985): 53–60; B. B. Shefton, “Massalia and Colonization
in the North-western Mediterranean,” in The Archaeology
of Greek Colonisation. Essays Dedicated to Sir John Board-
man, edited by Gocha Tsetskhladze and Franco De Angelis
(Oxford: Oxbow Books, 1994), 61–86; A. Trevor Hodge,
Ancient Greek France (Philadelphia: University of Pennsyl-
vania Press, 1999).
mathematics
The study of mathematics represents the
most permanent achievement of ancient Greek thought.
Many aspects of modern mathematics, particularly the
rules and nomenclature of geometry, derive from the
Greeks.
The Greek term mathematik¯e simply means “learn-
ing.” From the 500s B.C.E. the Greeks saw mathematics as
an ideal study and exercise of pure intellect, relevant to
PHILOSOPHY. The mystic philosopher PYTHAGORAS (ca.
530 B.C.E.) sought the secrets of the universe in numbers,
while PLATO (427–347 B.C.E.) undoubtedly found inspira-
tion for his theory of Forms in the analogy of perfect
mathematical concepts. The Greeks were not the only
ancient mathematicians—the Babylonians (especially)
and Egyptians were also masters in the field—but the
Greeks’ abiding contribution was their practice of devis-
ing rigorous proofs for their theorems.
Like modern peoples, the Greeks counted by 10s, but
their numerical symbols were awkward. (Arabic numer-
als had not been invented yet.) By the 400s B.C.E. Greek
numbers were represented mainly by modified letters
of the Greek ALPHABET in accumulative combinations.
For example, 6,000 was written as 
; 6,852 was
. While arithmetic calculations could
be difficult, plane and solid geometry came more natu-
rally to the Greeks, partly from the age-old inspiration of
FARMING patterns and boundary demarcation—the Greek
word geometria means “land survey.” The study of geom-
etry was at the heart of early Greek ASTRONOMY, as bril-
liant mathematicians such as Eudoxus of KNIDOS (ca.
350 B.C.E.) and Apollonius of Perg¯e (ca. 200 B.C.E.)
devised geometric models to explain the heavenly bod-
ies’ movements.
As for the accumulation of mathematical knowledge,
a brief sketch must suffice here. By about 500 B.C.E.
Pythagoras had discovered the geometric theorem that
still bears his name, which states that the squared value
of the hypotenuse of a right triangle is equal to the sums
of the squares of the two adjacent sides. The very concept
of square numbers was a Pythagorean discovery; the cate-
202
mathematics

gory was used for numbers that could be shown as dots
forming a square, such as:
These and other principles probably had been uncov-
ered by the Babylonians centuries before, but the Greeks
most likely made independent discoveries rather than
somehow copying Babylonian technique.
Most likely, the earliest Greek mathematical textbook
was the now-lost Elements of Geometry by Hippocrates of
CHIOS, in about 430 B.C.E. (He is not be confused with his
contemporary, the physician HIPPOCRATES (1) of Kos.)
Mathematics were emphasized at Plato’s Athenian school
of higher learning, the ACADEMY (founded in about 385
B.C.E.). The most important mathematician of the day was
Plato’s pupil Eudoxus, who lived around 390–340 B.C.E.
None of his writing survives, but he apparently developed
the general laws of geometric proportion that now com-
prise Euclid’s book 5. Eudoxus is probably the one who
discovered that a cone will always cover one-third of the
area covered by a cylinder with the same base and height.
By 300 B.C.E. the Greek-Egyptian city of ALEXANDRIA
(1), with its royally endowed Library and Museum, had
emerged as a new Greek center of learning. Among the
city’s mathematicians was Euclid (Eukleid¯es), who wrote a
textbook titled Elements (Stoicheia), which survives today.
Divided into 13 “books,” the Elements sets forth the total
mathematical knowledge of the day. Euclid was not an
original thinker, but he did provide a systematic statement
of definitions and problems, featuring clear and methodi-
cal proofs. His terminology and methods became canoni-
cal, and not just for the ancient world. The Elements’ first
six books, on topics in plane geometry, were used in
barely revised form as a textbook for European and North
American schools up to the early 20th century.
The next century saw the acme of Greek mathemat-
ics in the work of two geniuses, ARCHIMEDES of SYRACUSE
(ca. 287–212 B.C.E.) and Apollonius of Perg¯e (active ca.
200 B.C.E.). Although best remembered today as an
inventor and physicist, Archimedes did groundbreaking
mathematical work; his extant writings include part of
On the Sphere and the Cylinder, On Conoids and Spheroids,
and the Sand Reckoner (in which he invented a system for
denoting very large numbers). Of all his life’s achieve-
ments, he is said to have been most proud of a certain
geometric proof, namely, that a cylinder circumscribing a
sphere will always have an area in ratio 3-2 to the sphere.
Apollonius was born at a Greek city of southern ASIA
MINOR and studied mathematics at Alexandria with the
followers of Euclid. Later he sought the patronage of King
Attalus I of PERGAMON. Apollonius’ major treatise, Conics,
has survived in most part and provides a milestone in post-
Euclidean solid geometry. From Apollonius, for example,
come the modern names by which the three types of conic
sections are known: ellipse, parabola, and hyperbola.
The most famous practical application of mathemat-
ics in the ancient world was that of Eratosthenes of
CYRENE (1), who was head of the Alexandrian Library ca.
245–194 B.C.E. and who used simple geometric principles
to calculate the Earth’s polar circumference. Eratosthenes
discovered that an upright stick would cast no shadow at
noon on the summer solstice at Syene (modern Aswan, in
southern EGYPT), while at the same moment a stick at
Alexandria would cast a small shadow at a 7.2-degree
angle. Believing Alexandria to be due north of Syene at a
distance of 5,000 stades, Eratosthenes multiplied 5,000
by 50, in ratio to the calculation 50 × 7.2 = 360. To the
resultant figure of 250,000 stades he added 2,000 more,
to offset possible error. Assuming Eratosthenes’ stade
measure to equal 200 yards, then his figure for the Earth’s
north-south circumference equals about 28,636 miles;
assuming a stade measure of 175 yards (as seems more
likely, from the Alexandria-Syene figure), then Eratos-
thenes’ figure equals about 25,057 miles. This is remark-
ably close to the modern measurement of 24,805 miles.
See also SCIENCE.
Further reading: G. E. R. Lloyd, “Science and Mathe-
matics,” in The Legacy of Greece: A New Appraisal, edited
by M. I. Finley (New York: Oxford University Press,
1981), 256–300; Oswald A. W. Dilke, Mathematics and
Measurement (London: British Museum Publications,
1987); D. J. O’Meara, Pythagoras Revived. Mathematics
and Philosophy in Late Antiquity (New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1990); R. Netz, “Classical Mathematics in
the Classical Mediterranean,” Mediterranean Historical
Review 12 (1997): 1–24.
Mausolus
See HALICARNASSUS.
Medea
In MYTH, the daughter of King Aeëtes of Colchis
and the niece of the witch CIRCE. Medea herself was a sor-
ceress; her name, Medeia, means “cunning.” In the story
of JASON (1) and the Argonauts, as told by the epic poet
APOLLONIUS (ca. 245 B.C.E.), the young Medea fell in love
with the handsome hero when he arrived at Colchis in
search of the Golden Fleece. Against her father’s interest,
she helped Jason with magic ointments and instructions,
and escaped with him and the fleece aboard the ship Argo.
Later, on arriving at the city of Ioclus, in THESSALY,
Medea helped Jason avenge himself on his enemy; King
Pelias. First, she boiled a cauldron of water and magic herbs
for Jason’s old father, Aeson. After submerging himself in
the boiling water, Aeson emerged as a young man. Medea
then suggested that Pelias’s daughters do the same for him.
But this time she supplied useless herbs, and when the king
entered his daughters’ bath he was boiled to death.
Ousted from Ioclus by Pelias’s son, Jason and Medea
settled at CORINTH, where they had a son and daughter.
.   .   .
.   .
.   .   . 
.   . (4)    or .   .   . (9)
Medea
203

What followed is the subject of EURIPIDES’ tragedy Medea
(431 B.C.E.). Learning that Jason planned to desert her and
marry Glauce—daughter of the Corinthian king—Medea
went insane with anger. She sent Glauce a robe and tiara
smeared in poison; this resulted in the death of both the
bride and her father. Next, to avenge herself fully on Jason,
Medea stabbed both of their young children to death, then
flew off in a magic chariot, taking refuge with the Athenian
king Aegeus (father of THESEUS). Euripides’ Medea pro-
vides an almost modern study of pathological jealousy and
hatred, emanating from a woman wronged. The play is
often considered to be almost feminist in its portrayal of
the strong-willed, clever protagonist and her articulation of
the injustices done to women in the ancient Greek world
and other patriarchal societies (lines 215ff). She had
betrayed her father and her country to be with Jason, and
thereby made herself dependent on him. She fulfilled the
primary purpose of a Greek wife in bearing him legitimate
offspring. The tragic chorus is therefore sympathetic to her
and her grievances. Her extreme reaction and her choice to
slaughter her own children, however, is not only unfemi-
nine, it is very un-Greek, and at this point she loses the
support of the chorus, the playwright, and the audience.
Further reading: C. Sourvinou-Inwood, “Myths in
Images. Theseus and Medea as a Case Study,” in
Approaches to Greek Myth, edited by Lowell Edmunds
(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1990),
395–445; James Clauss and Sarah Iles Johnston, eds.,
Medea: Essays on Medea in Myth, Literature, Philosophy, and
Art (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1997).
Medes
See PERSIA.
medicine
Modern 
knowledge 
of 
ancient 
Greek
medicine comes largely from the surviving works of med-
ical writers of antiquity, from references in the works of
nonmedical writers, and from artwork depicting medical
scenes. The greatest Greek medical writer was Galen of
PERGAMON, who lived in the 100s C.E. In the centuries
before Galen, existing medical knowledge was organized
and written down by HIPPOCRATES (1) of Kos and his fol-
lowers (late 400s B.C.E. and after) and by various physi-
cians based at ALEXANDRIA (1).
To a surprising degree, the Greeks distinguished
medicine from 
RELIGION
or superstition. Although
APOLLO, ASKLEPIOS, and other gods were believed to have
healing powers—and although crude healing magic
existed—such beliefs did not prevent the development of
scientific methods. Since the Greeks lacked such modern
marvels as antibiotics and anesthesia, surgery was a dras-
tic and dangerous recourse. Ancient texts describe a
number of surgical tools used by Greek physicians, and
examples of them have been discovered in many archaeo-
logical excavations. These tools include scalpels, hooks
(for lifting blood vessels or tissue and retracting the edges
of a wound), forceps, bone drills, bone forceps, catheters,
and vaginal speculums. One type of surgery that the
Greeks performed was trepanning, a dangerous technique
involving a hole being drilled into the skull to relieve
pressure on the brain. This process is mentioned in writ-
ings of the 400s B.C.E., and a skeleton that survived such
an operation was recently excavated on the island of
CHIOS, dated to ca. 250 B.C.E. There was also no knowl-
edge of microorganisms as the cause of disease. But a
knowledge of dietetics, healing herbs, primitive orthope-
dics, and techniques of bandaging provided the begin-
nings of Greek medicine in the centuries prior to 400
B.C.E. Physicians employed numerous herbs in their treat-
ments, many of which are still considered to be effective
by alternative medicine practitioners today. An extensive
treatise on herbal medicine was written by ARISTOTLE’s
pupil THEOPHRASTUS in the 300s B.C.E.
There was no medical licensing in ancient Greece.
Physicians were considered to be on par with skilled
craftsmen such as poets or architects. The historian
HERODOTUS mentions a famous Greek doctor, Democedes
of CROTON, who in the late 500s B.C.E. became the court
physician to the tyrant POLYCRATES of SAMOS and then to
the Persian king DARIUS (1). But it is Hippocrates (ca.
460–377 B.C.E.) who provides the first milestone.
On his native island of Kos, Hippocrates in about 430
B.C.E. established a school to create standards of medical
and ethical procedure: The modern “Hippocratic Oath” is
one legacy of this school. The Hippocratics emphasized
careful observation and diagnosis. Among the writings
known as the Hippocratic Collection (produced by Hip-
pocrates’ followers in the late 400s and early 300s B.C.E.),
the two books entitled Epidemics—presenting 42 case histo-
ries of severely ill patients—are unequaled in clarity by any
extant European medical writing prior to the 16th century
C.E. Modern readers of the Epidemics are able to identify
cases of diphtheria and typhoid fever from the symptoms
described. It is a testament to the medical ignorance of the
day, and to the honesty of the writer, that about 60 percent
of the Epidemics’ cases end with the patient’s death.
Another Hippocratic writing is a treatise whose title
is traditionally translated as On the Nature of Man. Writ-
ten around 400 B.C.E., this work presents the famous (but
incorrect) theory of the Four Humors, destined to domi-
nate medical thought for the next 2,000 years. According
to the theory, the human body consists of four elemen-
tary fluids—blood, phlegm (pituita), yellow bile (chol¯e),
and black bile (melancholia)—whose correct proportion
maintains health and whose imbalance causes illness.
One crude procedure of the day was to apply heated
metal cups to a patient’s skin, in an attempt to draw off
any excessive humors; gravestones and other surviving
artwork sometimes show the physician with two metal
cups, as a badge of profession. The practice of bleeding a
patient, to purge “excessive” blood, was another mis-
guided procedure inspired by the Four Humors belief.
204
Medes

The 300s B.C.E. saw a growing interest in anatomy,
due partly to the biological studies of ARISTOTLE and his
school, the LYCEUM. Anatomical knowledge was greatly
advanced by two Alexandrian physicians of the middle
and late 200s B.C.E.—Herophilus of Chalcedon and Eris-
tratus of Keos, whose respective writings survive only in
fragments but whose work is described by the Roman
writer Celsus (first century C.E.). Working separately,
Herophilus and Eristratus were among the first to per-
form dissection on the human body—and, according to
rumor, they also practiced human vivisection in the name
of medical knowledge, using condemned criminals
handed over by royal permission. These doctors and their
colleagues added greatly to the knowledge of human cir-
culation and respiration, and several of the anatomical
terms coined by them survive in use today.
In the Roman era, many of the herbs and tools used
by Greek physicians continued to be utilized, but
medicine generally became increasingly scientific and
respected. With the establishment of a professional
Roman army in 90 B.C.E., the need for practical medical
treatments became greater. The emperor Augustus
formed a professional military medical corps, with higher
status and significant benefits. By the early first century
C.E., a formal medical school had been established,
including specialized training in fields such as internal
medicine, urology, and ophthalmology.
See also SCIENCE.
Further reading: E. D. Phillips, Aspects of Greek
Medicine, 2d ed. (Philadelphia: Charles Press, 1987); P.
Potter, Short Handbook of Hippocratic Medicine (Quebec:
Editions du Sphinx, 1988); J. Longrigg, Greek Rational
Medicine. Philosophy and Medicine from Alcmaeon to the
Alexandrians
(London: Routledge, 1993); Darrel W.
Amundsen, Medicine, Society, and Faith in the Ancient and
Medieval Worlds (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1996); J. Longrigg, Greek Medicine from the Heroic
to the Hellenistic Age: A Sourcebook (London: Duckworth,
1998).
Medusa
In MYTH, this winged female monster had hair
of snakes and a face that caused any humans who looked
at it to turn to stone. Medusa (“cunning”) was mortal but
had two immortal sisters, Sthenno (“strong”) and Euryal¯e
(“wide jumping”). Known collectively as the Gorgons
(“grim ones”), they lived together in the far West. With
the aid of the goddess ATHENA, the Greek hero PERSEUS
severed Medusa’s head and put it in a bag. The head—
with its abiding ability to petrify an onlooker—aided
Perseus in his subsequent adventures. The head was later
given to Athena, who set it in the center of her cloak
known as the aegis.
Clearly, in early Greek or pre-Greek RELIGION,
Medusa and her sisters had an apotropaic function; that
is, they were worshipped or represented as protective
demons who could scare away evil from the community.
The protective head of Medusa was said to be buried
under the AGORA at Perseus’s city, ARGOS. By the 600s
B.C.E., Medusa (or an unspecified Gorgon) had became a
favorite subject in PAINTING and SCULPTURE, particularly
at CORINTH and at Corinthian colonies such as CORCYRA.
Portrayed as a winged running demon grimacing at the
viewer, the monster would be shown in vivid colors.
Probably the best-known surviving example is the Gor-
gon pediment sculpture from the temple of ARTEMIS at
Corcyra (ca. 600–580 B.C.E.).
Further reading: Stephen R. Wilk, Medusa: Solving
the Mystery of the Gorgon (New York: Oxford University
Press, 2000).
Megara (1)
This city of south-central Greece is located
in the widening, northeastern isthmus region known as
the Megarid. Lying in a fertile valley near the Saronic
Gulf and the island of SALAMIS (1), Megara is surrounded
on three sides by mountains, which separate the city from
Megara
205
The head of Medusa decorates the back of this bronze hand
mirror. Medusa’s gaze, with its ability to turn the observer to
stone, was used in Greek art to ward off evil. Maybe the
artist was also making a point about beauty and ugliness.
(The J. Paul Getty Museum)

the regions of ATHENS (to the north east), CORINTH (to the
southwest), and THEBES (to the north). In particular,
the southwestern mountain range, the Geranea, formed a
natural barrier between central Greece and the PELOPON-
NESE, and was of strategic importance in Greek history.
After a promising start, the city slipped into a largely
unhappy pattern of resistance to its powerful neighbors.
Megara was founded by DORIAN GREEKS who had invaded
the Peloponnese (ca. 1100 B.C.E.). Unlike older Greek
cities founded by pre-Greek inhabitants, Megara has a
name that actually means something in Greek: “the great
hall.” In the age of TRADE and COLONIZATION (ca. 800–550
B.C.E.), Megara was a foremost power, exporting its prized
woolens and establishing the colonies Megara Hyblaea, on
the east coast of SICILY (ca. 750 B.C.E.), and Heraklea Pon-
tika, on the south shore of the BLACK SEA (ca. 560 B.C.E.).
In the LELANTINE WAR (ca. 720–680 B.C.E.), Megara sided
with ERETRIA, the enemy of Megara’s neighbor and rival,
Corinth.
Like other commercial cities of this era, Megara came
under the sway of TYRANTS. A certain Theagenes (ca. 630
B.C.E.) seized power after leading the common people in
slaughtering the nobles’ cattle. Theagenes was the father-
in-law of the Athenian aristocrat KYLON and seems to
have played a role in Kylon’s failed coup at Athens (ca.
625 B.C.E.). Later the tyrant fell.
Engulfed by class war between nobles and common-
ers, the city declined, losing border land to Corinth and
the coveted island of Salamis to Athens (mid-500s B.C.E.).
The poems of the Megarian aristocrat THEOGNIS (ca. 540
B.C.E.) are filled with hatred toward the common people,
signifying the discord that drained Megarian power in
these years.
As part of the Spartan alliance, the Megarians fought
on sea and land against the Persian king XERXES’ invasion
of Greece (480–79 B.C.E.). Later, after seeking help
against Corinth in a border dispute, Megara allied itself
with Athens (460 B.C.E.). The Athenians occupied the
region and helped set up a DEMOCRACY at Megara. They
also built “long walls,” extending the mile’s distance
between Megara and its port of Nisaea, on the Saronic
Gulf. The walls turned Megara and Nisaea into a linked
fortress, suppliable directly by sea and impregnable by
land.
Ironically, Megara’s defenses came into use against
Athens. In the 430s B.C.E. the Megarians withdrew from
the Athenian alliance, encroached on Athenian territory,
and murdered an Athenian herald. The Athenian states-
man PERIKLES responded with the notorious Megarian
Decree, which attempted to starve the Megarians into
submission by placing embargoes on their food imports
and their export trade. This hostile act alarmed the Spar-
tans and other Greeks, and played a role in causing the
PELOPONNESIAN WAR (431–404 B.C.E.).
As a Spartan ally near Athenian territory in the war,
Megara was a constant target for the Athenians, who
invaded the Megarid with a huge force in 431 B.C.E. and
kept invading—without capturing the city—every year
until 421 B.C.E. In 424 B.C.E. a faction within Megara
attempted to betray the city to the Athenian general DEMOS-
THENES (2); he seized Nisaea and the Long Walls, but
Megara itself was saved by the Spartan general BRASIDAS.
A brief phase of prosperity came in the 300s B.C.E.,
when the city was host to a school of SCULPTURE and to
the Megarian School of PHILOSOPHY (founded by Euklei-
des, a disciple of the Athenian SOCRATES). Thereafter,
although still inhabited, Megara fades from history.
Further reading: Ronald Legon, Megara: The Political
History of a Greek City-state to 336 B.C. (Ithaca, N.Y.:
Cornell University Press, 1981); Hans R. Goette, Athens,
Attica, and the Megarid: An Archaeological Guide, 2d ed.
(London: Routledge, 2001).
Megara (2)
See HERAKLES.
Meleager
See CALYDONIAN BOAR HUNT.
Melian Dialogue
See MELOS; THUCYDIDES (1).
Melos
This small island of the western AEGEAN SEA is
part of the island group known as the CYCLADES. ARCHAE-
OLOGY reveals that in the pre-Greek “Cycladic” culture of
the third millennium B.C.E. Melos was the exclusive
source of obsidian—a volcanic glass that when quarried
and honed, supplied axblades, plowshares, and the like,
in the days before general use of metals. By the 1600s
B.C.E. Melos was an ally or subject of Minoan CRETE and
by 1400 B.C.E. was part of the Aegean empire of the
Mycenaean Greeks.
Around 1000 B.C.E. Melos was occupied by DORIAN
GREEKS from LACONIA. With its capital city, also called
Melos, in the north of the island, Melos existed as a
Dorian state amid the predominantly Ionian-Greek
Cyclades. By about 475 B.C.E. the Cyclades were the heart
of the Athenian-dominated DELIAN LEAGUE, of which
Melos was not a member.
Melos remained neutral at the outbreak of the PELO-
PONNESIAN WAR between ATHENS and SPARTA (431 B.C.E.).
The Athenians attacked Melos in 426 B.C.E., and in 416
B.C.E. they again landed there, demanding that Melos join
the Delian League. The Melians refused, preferring to
look for help from their kinsmen the Spartans. This
“Melian Dialogue” provides one of the set pieces of
THUCYDIDES’ (1) history of the Peloponnesian War (book
5). Although the dialogue often has been interpreted as
an argument between Might and Right, it seems clear that
Thucydides’ heart is with the Athenians, who deliver
their argument in terms of expedience and common
sense. In any case, Melos city was besieged and captured
by the Athenians, who enslaved and deported the
islanders and planted an Athenian garrison colony there.
206
Megara

The celebrated statue called the Venus de Milo, now
in the Louvre, is a marble APHRODITE discovered at Melos
in 1820 C.E. (“Milo” being the Italian form of Melos.)
Dated to the 100s B.C.E., it is probably a copy of a lost
original of the 300s B.C.E.
See also BRONZE AGE; MINOAN CIVILIZATION; MYCE-
NAEAN CIVILIZATION.
Further reading:
Colin Renfrew and Malcolm
Wagstaff, eds., An Island Polity: The Archaeology of
Exploitation in Melos (New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1982); Greg Curtis, Disarmed: The Story of the
Venus de Milo (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2003).
Memnon
In Greek MYTH, Memnon was an Ethiopian
king, son of the dawn goddess Eos and the mortal man
Tithonus. Memnon, whose name means “resolute,” led a
contingent of his countrymen to TROY, to help defend the
city against the Greeks in the TROJAN WAR. In battle
Memnon slew NESTOR’s son Antilochus, but was himself
killed by the Greek champion, ACHILLES. The dawn god-
dess carried away her son’s corpse, and the great god
ZEUS revived him as an immortal in heaven. The story of
Memnon was told in a now-lost epic poem, the Aithiopis.
Memnon was a favorite subject of Greek vase paint-
ing in the 500s and 400s B.C.E. Like other mythological
figures from Ethiopia, he was sometimes shown with dis-
tinctly negroid facial features. During the HELLENISTIC
AGE (300–150 B.C.E.), the Greeks in EGYPT associated
Memnon with certain preexisting monuments of the
ancient pharaohs, including the so-called Colossi of
Memnon—two huge sandstone statues of Pharaoh
Amenophis III, seen at Luxor today.
See also BLACK PEOPLES.
Further reading: W. D. E. Coulson and M. E. Clark,
“Memnon and Sarpedon,” Museum Helveticum 35 (1978):
65–73; D. V. Bothmer, “Euphronios and Memnon? Obser-
vations on a Red-Figured Fragment,” Metropolitan
Museum Journal 22 (1987): 5–11; R. D. Griffith, “The Ori-
gin of Memnon,” Classical Antiquity 17 (1998): 212–234.
Menander (Greek: Menandros) (ca. 342–219 B.C.E.)
Athenian comic playwright
Menander is the last great Athenian literary artist whose
writings have survived from antiquity. He wrote over 100
plays, yet only one complete work exists today: The Mis-
anthrope (Greek: Duskolos). Portions of other plays are
known from quotations by later ancient authors and by
modern archaeological discoveries of papyrus remnants
in EGYPT, where Menander was apparently a favorite
author of the Greco-Roman educated classes during the
Roman Empire.
Little is known of his life. He grew up in an ATHENS
that was well past its imperial prime and was dominated
(like all of Greece) by the powerful kingdom of MACE-
DON. Menander apparently moved in the highest circles
of Athenian society and politics. He studied under the
Aristotelian philosopher THEOPHRASTUS and was a friend
of Demetrius of Phalerum, an Athenian who served as
governor 
for 
the 
Macedonian 
king 
KASSANDER.
Demetrius’s overthrow in 307 B.C.E. is said to have put
Menander in temporary danger.
In 321 B.C.E., at about age 20, Menander won his first
drama-victory, when his comedy Anger (not extant today)
took first prize at an Athenian festival. His surviving mas-
terpiece, The Misanthrope, won first prize in 316 B.C.E., at
the midwinter festival called the Lenaea. Among his plays
that survive in part today are The Woman from Samos, The
Hated Lover, and The Girl with the Short Haircut.
Menander died after having won first prize eight
times—a respectable but not dazzling record. However, his
reputation grew soon after his death, and he came to be
considered one of the classic Athenian authors. His plays
served as models for the work of the Roman comic play-
wrights Plautus (ca. 200 B.C.E.) and Terence (ca. 150 B.C.E.)
For modern readers, The Misanthrope was discovered
on an ancient papyrus only in 1958 C.E. (The French
comic playwright Molière may have known the title but
did not have the play as a model for his own Misanthrope,
performed in 1666 C.E.) Set in the Athenian countryside,
Menander’s fanciful tale involves an old farmer, Knemon,
who loathes humanity and lives, secluded, with his
daughter. A rich young man, falling in love with the
daughter, poses as a rustic laborer in order to win her
hand in MARRIAGE. He succeeds after pulling Knemon out
of a well where the old man has fallen.
Ancient and modern scholars have seen Menander’s
work as the high point of the “New Comedy” (ca.
321–264 B.C.E.), which marks the last phase of evolution
for Athenian stage comedy. “Old Comedy,” as developed
by ARISTOPHANES and others in the 400s B.C.E., was the
product of the powerful Athenian city-state; Menander
and the New Comedy are products of the more cos-
mopolitan and uncertain HELLENISTIC AGE, where most
citizens lived cut off from major political events. Whereas
Old Comedy presented fantasy, political satire, and
obscene farce, New Comedy offered realistic settings and
domestic plots, often “boy meets girl.” In keeping with
other conventions of New Comedy, Menander’s plays
show a great reduction in the onstage role of the comic
chorus, which is used only for song-and-dance inter-
ludes. Menander’s witty comedies of manners are still
highly relevant today and are well appreciated by modern
audiences.
See THEATER.
Further reading: A. W. Gomme and F. H. Sandbach,
Menander, A Commentary (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1973); Dana F. Sutton, Ancient Comedy: the War of
the Generations (New York: Maxwell Macmillan Interna-
tional, 1993); Netta Zagagi, The Comedy of Menander:
Convention, Variation, and Originality (Bloomington: Indi-
ana University Press, 1995); J. Michael Walton and Peter
Menander
207

D. Arnott, Menander and the Making of Comedy (West-
port, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1996); Susan Lape, Repro-
ducing Athens: Menander’s Comedy, Democratic Culture,
and the Hellenistic City (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 2004).
Menelaus
In MYTH, this king of Lacedaemon was the
younger brother of King AGAMEMNON of MYCENAE.
Menelaus was married to the Spartan princess Helen,
later known as HELEN OF TROY. At the prompting of the
love goddess APHRODITE, Helen abandoned Menelaus to
elope with the Trojan prince PARIS. It was to punish this
outrage that Agamemnon organized the Greek expedition
against TROY, in the TROJAN WAR.
In the Iliad (book 3) Menelaus agrees to settle the
entire war by single combat with Paris. Menelaus over-
whelms his rival, but is deprived, by Aphrodite, of the
chance to kill him. In the Odyssey Menelaus is shown
briefly, back home with Helen and reconciled with her.
Further reading: Christopher Logue, The Husbands:
An Account of Books 3 and 4 of Homer’s Iliad (New York:
Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1995).
Messana
See ZANCL¯E.
Messenia
The southwest region of the PELOPONNESE,
Messenia’s eastern frontier is separated from the Spartan
region of LACONIA by the lofty Mt. Taygetus range. On
the west and south, Messenia is bounded by the sea, and
in the north, it borders ELIS and ARCADIA. Largely moun-
tainous, Messenia includes the westernmost of the Pelo-
ponnese’s three southern peninsulas, Cape Akritas.
The heart of the region is the Messenian plain, one of
the most fertile areas of mainland Greece; it opens south-
ward around the river Pamisus to the Messenian Gulf. On
the west coast, a second, narrower plain was home to a
thriving kingdom in Mycenaean times, around 1400–1200
B.C.E. Later Greeks remembered this kingdom by the
name PYLOS and associated it with the mythical king
NESTOR. This domain vanished prior to or during the
invasion of the DORIAN GREEKS, around 1100–1000 B.C.E.,
and consequently, Messenia became a Dorian region.
Messenia had a tragic history, being the most com-
plete victim of Spartan domination. In the 700s B.C.E. the
Spartans, crossing the Taygetus range, began their long
campaign of conquest. The First and Second Messenian
wars (ca. 730–710 B.C.E. and ca. 650–620 B.C.E.) were bit-
ter conflicts; the Messenian leaders Aristodemus and
Aristomenes were later remembered for their failed,
heroic defense. By 620 B.C.E. the Messenian plain was in
Spartan hands, and those Messenians who had not fled
were virtually enslaved as Spartan-owned HELOTS.
Under the helot system, the Messenians were serfs,
owned in common by the Spartan state. They were not
deported to Sparta, but were left on the Messenian land
(which they no longer owned), to farm it and produce
food for their overlords. Half of all their produce went to
Sparta.
The Messenians were allowed to maintain their local
cults, customs, and family structures, but they were bru-
talized and terrorized. The Spartan poet TYRTAEUS writes
of a Messenian’s hopeless drudgery and his dutiful
mourning when his Spartan master dies. Discipline was
maintained by Spartan garrisons and by the Krypteia—
the Spartan “secret society” whose job was to identify and
do away with subversive helots. The Spartan’s ferocity
toward the Messenians—who were, after all, their fellow
Dorian Greeks—comprised the single most warped
aspect of the Spartan mentality.
The Third Messenian War was a rebellion sparked by
news of a devastating earthquake at Sparta (464 B.C.E.).
The revolt died with the surrender of the Messenian hill-
top fortress of Ithom¯e (“the step”), in about 460 B.C.E. At
least some of the Messenian defenders were permitted to
depart under safe-conduct, and the Athenians later relo-
cated them to NAUPACTUS, a city on the northwest shore
of the Corinthian Gulf.
During the PELOPONNESIAN WAR (431–404 B.C.E.)
Messenian helots served their Spartan masters loyally
while, on the other side, refugee Messenians fought as
valuable Athenian allies. After the Athenian victory at the
site called Pylos, on Navarino Bay (425 B.C.E.), the Athe-
nians built a fortified naval base there. But the hoped-for
Messenian revolt against Sparta never materialized.
Messenia was finally liberated in 369 B.C.E. by the
Theban statesman and general EPAMINONDAS, after his
destruction of a Spartan army in 371 B.C.E. Under
Epaminondas’s guidance, the Messenians founded a city,
Messene (modern Messini), to be the capital of the new,
free territory. Messene and Messenia thrived for a century
but suffered in the 200s and 100s B.C.E. from the inter-
vention of MACEDON and the Achaean League, before
passing into the hands of ROME after 146 B.C.E.
See also ACHAEA; DEMOSTHENES (2); ZANCL¯E.
Further reading: Nikos Kaltsas, Ancient Messene (Con-
gleton, U.K.: Old Vicarage, 1994); Piotr Dyczek, Pylos in
the Bronze Age: Problems of Culture and Social Life in Messe-
nia (Warsaw: Wydawnictwa Uniwersytetu Warszawskiego,
1994); Petros G. Themelis, Ancient Messene: Site and Monu-
ments, translated by A. Makres (Amaroussio, Greece: D &
G Kalofolias, 1998); N. Luraghi and S. E. Alcock, eds.,
Helots and Their Masters in Laconia and Messenia: Histories,
Ideologies, Structures (Washington, D.C.: Center for Hel-
lenic Studies, Trustees for Harvard Universities, 2003).
meter
See EPIC POETRY; LYRIC POETRY.
metics
These resident aliens had legal status in Greek
cities. A metic (Greek: metoikos, “dweller among”) was
usually a Greek who had immigrated to a Greek city
208
Menelaus

other than his birthplace. Metics abounded in the wealth-
ier and more populous Greek cities, but their existence is
best attested at ATHENS.
The rules for acquiring metic status and the legal
restrictions applying to metics somewhat resembled
those surrounding resident aliens in the United States
today. The applicant had to be sponsored by a citizen,
had to register in an Athenian DEME (city ward), and had
to pay a special annual tax. Metics owed the state certain
public duties and military service, usually as crewmen in
the Athenian navy. They could not set foot inside (much
less vote at) the Athenian political ASSEMBLY, usually
could not own land, and could not marry an Athenian
citizen. In exchange, metics enjoyed the courts’ protec-
tion, the right to engage in business, and a recognized
position in the community. At Athens, much of the
import-export and manufacturing was in the hands of
metics, some of whom became very rich. One example is
the Syracusan-born Kephalos, father of the orator LYSIAS.
The most famous person who was a metic at Athens was
ARISTOTLE.
See also POLIS.
Further reading: David Whitehead, The Ideology of
the Athenian Metic (Cambridge: Cambridge Philological
Society, 1977).
Midas
The last king of the wealthy, non-Greek nation
of Phrygia, in ASIA MINOR, Midas reigned through the late
700s B.C.E. He was said to be the first non-Greek to send
gifts to the god APOLLO’s shrine at DELPHI, that is, the first
foreign ruler to open diplomatic relations with mainland
Greece. He also was said to have married the daughter of
the king of the east Greek city of CYM¯E, in Asia Minor.
Midas died when his kingdom was overrun by the
nomadic Kimmerians, in about 696 B.C.E.
On account of his fabulous wealth, Midas—like the
later king CROESUS of LYDIA—became a figure in Greek
legend. Best known is the tale of the Midas Touch.
Offered any wish by the god DIONYSUS, Midas asked that
whatever he touched might turn to GOLD. But, finding
that this ruined the food that he touched, he prayed to
lose the gift. In another version, it was his daughter
whom he accidentally turned to gold.
Further reading: L. E. Roller, “Midas and the Gor-
dian Knot,” Classical Antiquity 3 (1985): 256–271; M. C.
Miller, “Midas as the Great King in Attic Fifth-century
Vase-painting,” Antike Kunst 31 (1988): 79–89; A. J. N.
W. Prag and D. Thimme, “Reconstructing King Midas. A
First Report,” Anatolian Studies 39 (1989): 159–165; O.
W. Muscarella, “King Midas of Phyrgia and the Greeks,”
in Anatolia and the Ancient Near East. Studies in Honour of
Tahsin Özgüç, edited by Kutlu Emre (Ankara, Turkey:
Press of the Turkish Historical Foundation, 1989)
333–344; E. Simpson, “‘Midas’ Bed’ and a Royal Phrygian
Funeral,” Journal of Field Archaeology 17 (1990): 69–87.
Miletus
This Greek city, located on the central west
coast of ASIA MINOR, was preeminent in TRADE, COLO-
NIZATION, and cultural achievements in the 600s–500s
B.C.E. Situated at the mouth of the river Maeander, Mile-
tus enjoyed communication seaward and inland. The city,
originally located on the coast, today lies approximately
five miles from the sea. Archaeological evidence shows
that this advantageous site was occupied in the second
millennium B.C.E. first by Minoans, then by Mycenaean
Greeks, and last by non-Greek Carians. Around 1000
B.C.E., IONIAN GREEKS arrived and founded the historical
Miletus, which became the southernmost city of the
Greek region known as IONIA.
The patron god of Miletus was APOLLO. In addition
to the temple dedicated to him within the boundaries of
the city itself, the Milesians also worshipped at the
important local oracular cult located at Didyma, approxi-
mately 12 miles away.
The people of Miletus were expert seafarers and led
the way in the expansion of the Greek world in the 600s
B.C.E. They exported prized woolen textiles and metal-
work, and they founded a remarkable string of colonies
along the trade route to the BLACK SEA, as far as the dis-
tant Crimea.
By the late 600s B.C.E., Miletus was ruled by TYRANTS.
In the mid-500s B.C.E., Miletus and the rest of Ionia were
conquered by King CROESUS of LYDIA, only to be con-
quered shortly thereafter by the Persian king CYRUS (1).
From about 546 to 499 B.C.E., Miletus enjoyed privileged
status under the Persians, who maintained control
through a series of Greek puppet rulers.
In the 500s B.C.E., the wealthy city witnessed the
twin birth of PHILOSOPHY and SCIENCE, as the Milesian
School of natural philosophers—THALES, ANAXIMANDER,
and ANAXIMENES—took the first, revolutionary steps
toward explaining the universe in nonreligious terms.
Another innovative Milesian thinking of the day was the
geographer HECATAEUS.
The city’s heyday, however, was ending. After leading
the doomed IONIAN REVOLT against Persian domination,
Miletus was captured, sacked, and depopulated by the
vengeful Persians (probably in 493 B.C.E.). The survivors
were settled inside PERSIA. Miletus recovered, but slowly
and not as a major power; EPHESOS soon surpassed it as
the most important of the Ionian cities. After Ionia was
liberated by the Greeks in 479 B.C.E., Miletus joined the
Athenian-dominated DELIAN LEAGUE. Then governed as a
DEMOCRACY, the city remained an Athenian ally for much
of the PELOPONNESIAN WAR. In 412 B.C.E., however, Mile-
tus revolted from Athens and became a naval base for the
Spartan side. In 386 B.C.E., the Spartans returned Miletus
and the rest of Ionia to Persian rule, according to the
terms of the KING’S PEACE.
In 334 B.C.E., Ionia was again freed of Persian rule,
this time by the Macedonian king ALEXANDER THE GREAT,
who stormed Miletus to capture it from a Persian garrison.
Miletus
209

In the HELLENISTIC AGE (ca. 300–150 B.C.E.), Miletus
enjoyed self-rule, prosperity, and an admirable building
program sponsored by such Hellenistic rulers as the Seleu-
cids and the Attalids of PERGAMON. Unfortunately, the
gradual silting up of the harbor brought economic decline.
Miletus was not highly regarded by the Romans, and
it was eclipsed by its neighbors Ephesos and Smyrna,
especially in the first century C.E. In the second century
C.E., the city experienced a brief renaissance, as donors
such as the empress Faustina sponsored major new build-
ing projects in the city center.
Excavations at Miletus were begun by German
archaeologists in the late 19th century C.E. and have con-
tinued with few interruptions to the present. An archaeo-
logical museum at the site contains many of the artifacts
discovered there.
See also CYZICUS; MINOAN CIVILIZATION; MYCENAEAN
CIVILIZATION; PANTICAPAEUM; PHRYNICHUS; SINOPE.
Further reading:
Krzystof Nawotka, Boule and
Demos in Miletus and Its Pontic Colonies from Classical
Age until Third Century A.D. (Wroc ⁄law, Poland, Poland:
Wydawnicto, Zaklad Narodowy im. Ossolinskich, 1999).
Miltiades (ca. 550–489 B.C.E.) Athenian general and
politician
Miltiades masterminded the Athenian victory over the
invading Persians at the Battle of MARATHON (490 B.C.E.)
and afterward enjoyed a brief preeminence at ATHENS
before succumbing to political enemies. He was the first
of a series of dynamic Athenian leaders in the 400s B.C.E.
Born into the rich and aristocratic Philaïd family, he
began his career under the Athenian tyrant HIPPIAS (1).
In around 522 B.C.E. Miltiades left Athens for the Thra-
cian CHERSONESE—the 50-mile-long peninsula that forms
the European side of the HELLESPONT—to rule the region,
inherited from his maternal uncle, the elder Miltiades.
There the young Miltiades reigned as tyrannos (dicta-
tor) over native Thracians and Athenian colonists, but
served as a vassal of the Persian king DARIUS (1). Milti-
ades married a Thracian king’s daughter, who bore his
son KIMON. Like other eastern Greek rulers, Miltiades
took part in Darius’s expedition across the Danube into
Scythia (ca. 513 B.C.E.). However, after participating in
the doomed IONIAN REVOLT against Darius, Miltiades fled
back to Athens (493 B.C.E.).
Athens, by then a full-fledged DEMOCRACY, was
entirely different from the place that Miltiades had left 30
years before. In the turbulent political climate, Miltiades
had enemies who resented his prior dictatorship in the
Chersonese and his association with Hippias. But before
long Miltiades moved to the political fore, being elected
as one of Athens’ generals for the year 490 B.C.E.
That summer, when a seaborne Persian army landed
at Marathon with the aim of capturing Athens, it was Mil-
tiades who convinced the Athenian commander-in-chief
to attack, rather than just defend the city walls. The Bat-
tle of Marathon—a complete victory by an outnumbered
force over a supposedly invincible foe—was one of the
crucial moments in Greek history. The unique battle
plan, involving an enveloping tactic by the army’s wings,
probably came from Miltiades.
His glory lasted barely a year. Ambitious, he led a 70-
ship Athenian fleet to seize Paros, a wealthy Greek island
that had submitted to Darius. But the attack failed, and
the 60-year-old Miltiades, with a badly injured knee,
returned to face public anger at Athens. The left-wing
leader XANTHIPPUS accused Miltiades of deceiving the
Athenian people. The hero of Marathon was tried and
convicted in the ASSEMBLY and fined a ruinous 50 TAL-
ENTS. Soon Miltiades died from his gangrenous injury,
and the fine was paid by the young Kimon (himself des-
tined to become the foremost Athenian soldier and states-
man of his day).
Among the ancient artifacts now displayed at the
OLYMPIA museum is a Greek HOPLITE helmet discovered
by archaeologists in 1961 C.E. and inscribed with the
words in Greek, “Miltiades dedicated this to Zeus.” Pre-
sumably it is Miltiades’ own helmet, worn at the Battle of
Marathon and afterward given as an offering to the king
of the gods and the lord of victory.
See also PERSIAN WARS; ZEUS.
Further reading: Debra Hamel, Athenian Generals:
Military Authority in the Classical Period (Leiden, Nether-
lands: E. J. Brill, 1998).
Mimnermus (latter 600s B.C.E.) Early Greek lyric poet
of Colophon, in western ASIA MINOR
Mimnermus’s work survives only in fragments. He was a
writer of the elegy—a form meant to be sung to flute
accompaniment—and many of his verses were love
poems addressed to a flute girl named Nanno. Mimner-
mus was a forerunner of the later love elegists of ALEXAN-
DRIA (1) and imperial ROME. His best-known fragment
deals with a topic destined to become a favorite of Greek
and Latin poets: the transience of youth and the implaca-
ble approach of old age and death.
See also LYRIC POETRY.
Further reading: Archibald Allen, The Fragments of
Mimnermus: Text and Commentary (Stuttgart, Germany: F.
Steiner, 1993); S. R. Slings, Symposium, Speech, and Ideol-
ogy: Two Hermeneutical Issues in Early Greek Lyric, with
Special Reference to Mimnermus (Amsterdam: Koninklijke
Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenscappen, 2000).
Minoan civilization
Based on the Aegean island of
ancient CRETE, this accomplished palatial society flour-
ished from roughly 2200 to 1400 B.C.E. The name
“Minoan civilization” refers to a mythological Cretan
ruler, King MINOS, and was invented in 1900 C.E. by the
British archaeologist Sir Arthur Evans. Evans was the first
210
Miltiades

to discover the remains of this wealthy, sophisticated cul-
ture in his excavations at the site of KNOSSOS.
The Minoans were not Greeks, and their language,
RELIGION, and social structures were not Greek. Most of
what is known or can be guessed about the Minoans
comes from modern ARCHAEOLOGY on Crete. (The little
island of THERA also has yielded an important Minoan
site.) Evidence suggests that the Minoans emerged from a
fusion between existing Cretan inhabitants and invaders
from ASIA MINOR during the era 2900–2200 B.C.E. These
people became master seafarers and built a society
inspired partly by contact with the Egyptian Old King-
dom (ca. 2650–2250 B.C.E.). By about 1900 B.C.E. the
Minoans were acquiring an AEGEAN SEA empire and were
constructing palaces on Crete—at KNOSSOS, Phaistos,
Mallia, and Khania—that were bigger and more elaborate
than any buildings outside the Near East. So confident
were the Minoans in their naval power that they declined
to encircle their palaces with defensive walls.
Wealth came from Cretan FARMING and fishing, from
taxes paid by subject peoples in the CYCLADES and other
Aegean locales, and from long-distance TRADE. Minoan
objects discovered by archaeologists outside Crete indi-
cate two-way commerce with EGYPT, Asia Minor, and the
Levant as well as with western ITALY (a region that offered
raw tin and copper, the components of BRONZE). But
much Minoan trade, especially after 1600 B.C.E., was with
the northwestern Aegean mainland now called Greece,
where Greek-speaking tribes had been settling since
about 2100 B.C.E.
The Minoans’ importance for Greek history is that
they supplied the model for the Greeks’ MYCENAEAN CIVI-
LIZATION, which arose on the mainland around 1600 B.C.E.
The Mycenaean fortress palaces at MYCENAE, TIRYNS, and
elsewhere were warlike imitations of Minoan palaces on
Crete. Mycenaean skills in metalworking, POTTERY-mak-
ing, and other handicrafts were improved by copying Cre-
tan models. The Mycenaean form of WRITING—a syllabary
script that modern scholars call LINEAR B, invented soon
before 1400 B.C.E.—was copied from the Minoan system
(a yet-undeciphered script called Linear A). Eventually
the Mycenaeans were ready to challenge Minoan
supremacy in the Aegean.
Daily scenes of the Minoans’ life are preserved on
some of their beautiful art objects, which include cut
gems, worked GOLD, terra-cotta figurines, vase paintings,
and frescoes. Sensuous and modern-seeming in design,
Minoan pictorial art favors sea animals and other subjects
from nature. Religious scenes often show a goddess (or
priestess) with a subordinate male figure or with wild
beasts, such as lions, in tame postures. Evidence of this
kind leads many scholars to conclude that Minoan reli-
gion was centered on a mother goddess or a group of
goddesses overseeing nature and bounty. Aspects of
Minoan worship apparently infiltrated Greek religion in
the cult of certain goddesses, such as ARTEMIS and HERA.
The Minoans ascribed religious or magical power to
dancing and to the remarkable athletic performance now
known as bull leaping. Minoan reverence for the bull is
probably reflected in Greek MYTHS of later days, such as
the interrelated tales of Minos and of THESEUS and the
Minotaur, or the tale of HERAKLES and the Cretan bull.
Minoan high society probably revolved around a
priest-king or priest-queen whose capital city was Knossos
and whose royal emblem was the labrys, a double-headed
ax. Scenes in art suggest a confident, vivacious life at court.
Upper-class WOMEN—portrayed as wearing flounced skirts
and open-breasted tunics—apparently played prominent
roles in court life (as opposed to the secluded existence of
women in Greece in later centuries).
The material level enjoyed by the Minoan ruling
class was probably unsurpassed anywhere before the late
19th century C.E. The Knossos palace, reaching three sto-
ries in parts, boasted clay-piped plumbing and a clever
system of air wells to bring light and ventilation to inte-
rior rooms. COINAGE had not yet been invented, but
Minoan wealth was measured in luxury items and in farm
surplus such as sheep, pigs, and olive oil (great quantities
of which were stored at Knossos).
The Minoan golden age on Crete, around 1900–1450
B.C.E., was a time of peace but was troubled by natural dis-
asters. Archaeology at Cnossus shows that the palace was
destroyed twice by earthquake, in about 1730 and 1570
B.C.E. Around 1480 B.C.E. Cretan coastal regions suffered
damage and depopulation, from some natural disaster.
The Knossos palace, on high ground, survived, but
new archaeological signs of distress in the mid-1400s
B.C.E. include proliferation of war equipment and the first
appearance on Crete of the horse (presumably imported
as a tool of war). Overseas, Minoan pottery from this
time is absent from certain sites—a sign of disrupted
trade routes. Presumably a foreign enemy or number of
enemies, taking advantage of Cretan natural disaster, had
begun to cut into the Minoan Empire. These enemies
surely included groups of Mycenaean Greeks.
In about 1400 B.C.E. or soon after, all the Cretan
palaces were destroyed by fire, presumably in war. The
most obvious explanation for this simultaneous destruc-
tion is a Mycenaean invasion of Crete. Intriguingly,
archaeological evidence suggests that, prior to this inva-
sion, Mycenaean Greeks had already taken over the
Knossos palace and that it was they who were destroyed
in the palace’s ruin. There may have been rival Myce-
naean armies, battling each other for control of Crete.
Although the Mycenaean victors seem to have aban-
doned Crete soon after 1400 B.C.E., the Minoan culture
was finished.
See also ATLANTIS; BRONZE AGE; DAEDALUS; LABYRINTH;
SHIPS AND SEAFARING.
Further reading: Susan Sherratt, Arthur Evans, Knos-
sos, and the Priest-king (Oxford: Ashmolean Museum,
2000).
Minoan civilization
211

Minos
According to Greek MYTH, Minos was a Cretan
king who ruled the AEGEAN SEA with fleets of warships in
olden times. A son of the god ZEUS and the Phoenician
princess EUROPA, Minos was born in CRETE with his two
brothers, Rhadamanthys and Sarpedon. As a young man
at the royal city of KNOSSOS, Minos married Pasiphaë,
daughter of the sun god, HELIOS. During a dispute over
who should become the next king of Crete, Minos prayed
to the god POSEIDON to send a bull from the sea as a sign
of divine favor. The bull emerged, thus assuring Minos of
the kingship; but the pure-white animal was so beautiful
that Minos neglected to sacrifice it to Poseidon, as he had
promised to do.
In retaliation, the god inspired Pasiphaë with an
unnatural lust for the animal, and she acquired—from
the immigrant Athenian craftsman DAEDALUS—a wooden
device that disguised her as a cow. In this costume she
approached the bull and was mounted by it. She con-
ceived its child, which proved to be a grotesque creature,
half human, half bull—the Minotaur (Greek: Minotauros,
“the bull of Minos”).
To hide the Minotaur, Minos angrily ordered the med-
dling Daedalus to build the palace known as the
LABYRINTH. Then Minos imprisoned Daedalus and his son,
Icarus, inside a tower. But Daedalus escaped from Crete
on mechanical wings. (Icarus fell to his death en route.)
By ship, Minos pursued Daedalus to SICILY, where he
was treacherously murdered in his bath by King Cocalus’s
daughters, who did not want to relinquish the miraculous
inventor Daedalus. Zeus then installed Minos as one of
the judges of the dead in the Underworld.
The Minos legend probably represents the Greeks’
distorted memory of the great days of Cretan wealth and
naval power, around 1950–1450 B.C.E. For this reason, in
1900 c.e. the pioneering British archaeologist Sir Arthur
Evans coined the adjective “Minoan” to describe that
real-life civilization on Crete. The name Minos is not
Greek in origin and may possibly have been a hereditary
royal title of the Minoan rulers.
See also AFTERLIFE; MINOAN CIVILIZATION.
Further reading: P. B. S. Andrews, “The Myth of
Europa and Minos,” Greece and Rome 16 (1969): 60–66;
Alexandre Farnoux, Knossos. Searching for the Legendary
Palace of King Minos, translated by David J. Baker (New
York: H. N. Abrams, 1996).
Minotaur
See LABYRINTH; MINOS; THESEUS.
Minyans (Greek: Minuai)
In MYTH, the Minyans were
a powerful Greek clan that had controlled parts of BOEO-
TIA and THESSALY in the old days. This legend probably
commemorates an actual northern Greek dynasty of the
Mycenaean era, around 1200 B.C.E. Relatedly, in the Thes-
salian-based legend of JASON (1) and the Argonauts, the
Argonauts traditionally are referred to as Minyans.
The modern term Minyan Ware was coined by archae-
ologist Heinrich Schliemann in 1880 C.E. to describe a
kind of POTTERY he had discovered at the Boeotian city of
ORCHOMENOS. The pottery, now dated to around 1900
B.C.E., usually is considered to have been made by early
Greeks—that is, by early descendants of the Greek-speak-
ing invaders who occupied mainland Greece after about
2100 B.C.E.
See also MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION.
Further reading: F. J. Tritsch, “Minyans and Luvians,”
in Acta of the 2nd International Colloquium on Aegean Pre-
history. The First Arrival of Indo-European Elements in
Greece. Athens, April 5–11, 1971, edited by Elly Arditis
(Athens: Ministry of Culture and Science, 1972), 43–45; J.
H. Crouwel, “Pot-marks on Grey Minyan Ware,” Kadmos
12 (1973): 101–108; J. B. Rutter, “Stone Vases and Minyan
Ware. A Facet of Minoan Influence on Middle Helladic
Laconia,” American Journal of Archaeology 83 (1979):
464–469; J. B. Rutter, “Fine Gray-burnished Pottery of the
Early Helladic III Period. The Ancestry of Gray Minyan,”
Hesperia 52 (1983): 327–355.
Mitylene
See MYTILENE.
Muses
These Greek goddesses oversaw poetry, MUSIC,
dance, and the arts in general. The word Muse (Greek:
Mousa) is related to mousik¯e, “music.” In MYTH, they were
the daughters of ZEUS and Mnemosyne—that is, the god
of universal order and the goddess Memory—and this is
surely a metaphor for the reliance on verse rhythm and
the singer’s memory in the traditional technique of oral
composition, prior to the spread of literacy.
The Muses, together or individually, were imagined
as inspiring human song and poetry. HOMER’s Odyssey
(written around 750 B.C.E.) opens with an appeal to an
unspecified Muse to help the poet sing about his sub-
ject. In his epic poem Theogony (ca. 700 B.C.E.), HESIOD
describes how the Muses approached him on Mt. Heli-
con, in BOEOTIA, and breathed the gift of song into him.
Hesiod named nine goddesses, but it was only a later
elaboration that assigned to each Muse a separate func-
tion. The nine were Kalliope, Klio, Euterpe, Terpsi-
chore, Erato, Melpomene, Thalia, Polyhymnia, and
Urania.
See also APOLLO; EPIC POETRY; WRITING.
Further reading: B. S. Ridgway, “Musings on the
Muses,” in Beiträge zur Ikonographie und Hermeneutik.
Festschrift für Nikolaus Himmelmann, edited by Hans-
Ulrich Cain, Hanns Gabelmann, Dieter Salzmann (Mainz
am Rhein, Germany: Phillip von Zabern, 1989),
265–272; R. Cohon, “Hesiod and the Order and Naming
of the Muses in Hellenistic Art,” Boreas
14–15
(1991–1992): 67–83; Angeles Arrien, The Nine Muses: A
Mythological Path to Creativity (New York: Tarcher/Put-
nam, 2000).
212
Minos

music
Greek music—mousik¯e, “the art of the MUSES”—
was closely connected to dancing and to the recitation of
Greek poetry. Greek poetic meter was a form of rhythm,
and verses were sung or chanted to the accompaniment
of various instruments. Ancient music is understood
today primarily through descriptions in ancient literary
sources; very few pieces of actual music are preserved.
Musical rhythm generally consisted of a single melodic
line; there was no complex harmony as in modern musi-
cal works.
The ancient Greeks considered the Homeric age to
represent a musical “golden age.” The primary instru-
ment used to accompany the EPIC POETRY sung by bards
(such as HOMER, if he did exist) was the phorminx, a type
of stringed instrument played by plucking, also known as
a lyre. The earliest known actual musician was the lyric
poet TERPANDER of LESBOS, who lived in the 600s B.C.E.
In the age of LYRIC POETRY, new musical instruments
became popular for accompanying the verses: the kithara,
another type of lyre, and the aulos, a wind instrument
often described as a flute but really more like our clarinet
or oboe. The lyre’s sound was considered dignified and
soothing, while flute music was more exciting. The lyre
was associated with the god APOLLO, lord of order and
harmony. The ennobling and civilizing power of music
was emphasized in legends of the great lyre musicians,
such as ORPHEUS, who could charm wild beasts with his
song, or Amphion, whose music brought stones trooping
of their own accord to build the perimeter wall of THEBES.
By contrast, the aulos was associated with the riotous god
DIONYSUS.
By the mid-600s B.C.E., the lyre had begun to be used
to accompany more and more types of verse, including
elegy (originally intended for flute music). Early surviv-
ing verses of elegy—such as those by the poets KALLINUS
(mid-600s B.C.E.) and TYRTAEUS (ca. 630 B.C.E.)—convey
military-patriotic themes intended to rouse and encour-
age an audience. Other forms of flute poetry included the
dithyramb, which was a choral song sacred to Dionysus.
Descended from the dithyramb (by the late 500s B.C.E.)
music
213
A depiction of three muses who together or individually were imagined to inspire human song and poetry. Note the musical
instruments and parchment scroll. (Alison Frantz Photographic Collection, American School of Classical Studies at Athens)

was the choral ode of Athenian stage tragedy, developed
by PINDAR, also accompanied by flutes. In the 400s B.C.E.,
a new class of professional musicians arose, the best
known of whom were Phrynis of MILETUS (ca. 450
B.C.E.), his pupil Timotheus of Miletus, and the Athenian
playwright EURIPIDES. Ancient Greek music flourished
through the Classical period and into the HELLENISTIC
AGE, but dwindled as an art from under the Romans.
Musical instruments had important functions in
many different aspects of ancient Greek life. Instruction
in lyre playing formed an important part in the EDUCA-
TION of upper- and middle-class boys at ATHENS. The
flute, on the other hand, was generally considered an
instrument of professional musicians, including SLAVES
and PROSTITUTES. Flutes supplied lively dance music, as
well as background music for SPORT competitions and for
the drinking party known as the SYMPOSIUM. From the
mid-seventh century B.C.E. on, flute players always
accompanied the Spartan army as it marched into battle,
to keep the soldiers in step and to rouse their courage.
Stately flute music was also used in the background at
sacrifices and other religious ceremonies.
Greek MYTH ascribed the invention of the lyre to the
god HERMES. In fact, the Greeks probably adopted the
instrument in the second millennium B.C.E. from the Cre-
tan MINOAN CIVILIZATION. The simplest form of the lyre
had a sound box of tortoiseshell (or a wooden facsimile),
with strings of animal gut stretched down from a crossbar
between two extended horns. Most lyres had seven
strings, though archaeological evidence suggests that
some had as many as 12. Unlike the modern harp, the
lyre had strings of a uniform length, but a skilled musi-
cian could vary the sound by stopping a string partway
with the bare fingers of his left hand; sound was made by
using an ivory plectrum in his right hand to pluck the
strings.
The ancient flute could be made of wood, ivory, or
bone, with a double reed in the mouthpiece. Representa-
tions of musicians in Greek art often show a player blow-
ing a pair of flutes simultaneously, sometimes strapped
around his or her head.
The question of Greek musical notation is obscure.
Surviving artwork never shows musicians reading musi-
cal notes, but it is believed that some form of written
musical notation did exist by the late 400s B.C.E.
A major advance in ancient musical theory was
developed by the Greek philosopher PYTHAGORAS (ca.
530 B.C.E.), who sought in music the secrets of the uni-
verse. He developed ratios that explained the tones made
by dividing a stretched string, making music a branch of
MATHEMATICS as well as an art. PLATO (427–347 B.C.E.)
also studied music reverently, believing that it repre-
sented a powerful force for either good or ill, with the
ability to mold human character permanently.
The best-known musical theorist of ancient Greece
was Aristoxenus (active ca. 330 B.C.E.), who was born at
TARAS and studied under ARISTOTLE at the LYCEUM in
Athens. Two of his works survive in part: Principles and
Elements of Harmonics and Elements of Rhythm.
See also PYTHIAN GAMES.
Further reading: Solon Michaelides, The Music of
Ancient Greece: An Encyclopaedia (London: Faber, 1978);
Martin L. West, Ancient Greek Music (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1994); Thomas Mathiesen, Apollo’s Lyre:
Greek Music and Music Theory in Antiquity and the Middle
Ages (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1999);
Egbert Pöhlmann and Martin L. West, eds., Documents of
Ancient Greek Music: The Extant Melodies and Fragments
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2001).
Mycal¯e
This mountain peninsula on the central west
coast of ASIA MINOR is situated opposite the island of
214
Mycal¯e
A bigger, more elaborate form of lyre, called the kithara, was
used for public performance. It was played with both hands,
plucked with bare fingers, and strummed with an ivory 
plectrum. (Alison Frantz Photographic Collection, American
School of Classical Studies at Athens)

SAMOS, in the Greek-inhabited region known as IONIA.
On Mycal¯e’s north side was a sanctuary area called the
Panionium, where delegates from the 12 Ionian cities met
and where an annual Ionian festival was held. The site
was sacred to POSEIDON.
In late summer of 479 B.C.E., at the end of the PER-
SIAN WARS, Cape Mycal¯e was the scene of a small but sig-
nificant land battle, resulting in the liberation of Ionia
after about 75 years of Persian domination. This battle
supposedly occurred on the same day as the decisive Bat-
tle of PLATAEA, in mainland Greece.
At the Battle of Mycal¯e, a Greek force of about 4,400
HOPLITES landed from ships and destroyed a Persian army
twice as large. More significantly, the Greeks then were
able to burn the Persians’ beached warships—numbering
perhaps 100—which had comprised the last remnant of
the Persian navy. (The rest had been destroyed at the
Greek sea victory at SALAMIS the year before.) Without a
navy, PERSIA became temporarily helpless to defend its
other east Greek possessions, such as the HELLESPONT
district or the island of CYPRUS, and these regions fell to
the Greek counteroffensive in the following months.
The Greek commander in chief at Mycal¯e was the
Spartan king Leotychides, at the head of a Spartan contin-
gent. But—according to the version told by the historian
HERODOTUS—the brunt of the fighting was borne by the
Athenian contingent, under command of the soldier-
politician XANTHIPPUS.
In the battle’s aftermath, Xanthippus and other Athe-
nian commanders enrolled the nearby Aegean island
states in a common alliance against Persia. This union
led quickly to the creation of the DELIAN LEAGUE, the
power base for the Athenian Empire during the next 75
years.
Further reading: I. McDougall, “The Persian Ships at
Mycale,” in Owls to Athens. Essays on Classical Subjects
Presented to Sir Kenneth Dover, edited by E. M. Craik
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1990), 143–149.
Mycenae
This Greek city in the northeast PELOPONNESE
had great significance in early Greek history. Situated in
the hills at the northeastern edge of the Argive plain,
Mycenae was the capital of a rich and accomplished early
Greek culture (around 1600–1200 B.C.E.). The name
MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION was coined by the pioneering
German archaeologist Heinrich Schliemann on the basis
of his excavations at Mycenae in the 19th century C.E. The
ARCHAEOLOGY of the site has provided the single most
important source of information about the Mycenaean
Greeks, who left behind no written history.
The origins of the name “Mycenae” are mysterious
and appear to predate the Greek occupation of the site,
since the Greek name Muk¯enai has no apparent meaning
in the GREEK LANGUAGE. Some modern scholars believe
that it comes from the word for indentation, referring to
Mycenae’s location in a recess of the Argive plain. Ancient
authors such as PAUSANIAS (2) (ca. 150 C.E.) believed that
the name came from the Greek word muk¯es, “mush-
rooms.” In other instances, it is said to refer to an epony-
mous heroine named Mycene, the daughter of the hero
Inachus.
Mycenae was one of the first places occupied by the
invading Greek tribesmen of about 2100 B.C.E., but it pre-
dates their arrival. Archaeology shows that the site—
commanding the fertile plain to the south and the land
route northward to the isthmus—was first inhabited
around 3000 B.C.E. by Neolithic settlers. The Greek
takeover of the region may be indicated in the destruc-
tion of a pre-Greek palace (often called the House of the
Tiles) at Lerna, at the opposite edge of the Argive plain,
around 2100 B.C.E. Greek presence is almost certainly
indicated in changes in style of POTTERY found at Myce-
nae, datable to about 1900 B.C.E.
Greek Mycenae’s preeminence by the midmillennium
is clearly shown by the 31 lavish royal tombs now called
Grave Circle A and Grave Circle B and dated to about
1550 B.C.E. and 1650 B.C.E., respectively. Circle A, located
atop Mycenae’s ACROPOLIS, was discovered by Schlie-
mann; the tombs’ treasure of GOLD and SILVER gave the
first archaeological proof of the existence of an early-
Greek high civilization.
Mycenae
215
This beaten-gold mask from Mycenaean times ca. 1550 B.C.E.
was placed over the face of a male corpse. It is probably a
portrait of the man made during his lifetime. (Alison Frantz
Photographic Collection, American School of Classical 
Studies at Athens)

Mycenae’s heyday came in 1400–1200 B.C.E., when
the huge limestone walls and hilltop citadel were built. In
about 1260 B.C.E. the city received its most distinctive
surviving feature: the Lion Gate, surmounted by rampant
carved-limestone lions (now headless).
To this era belongs the supreme Mycenae later
recalled in the MYTHS of the classical Greeks—the city
“rich in gold” (as the poet HOMER called it), with a high
king who was overlord of many lesser Greek rulers. The
legendary AGAMEMNON, king of Mycenae, raises an army
against TROY, by summoning his various vassal kings.
This is probably an accurate reflection of Mycenae’s feu-
dal dominance in the Mycenaean age.
Archaeology also tells the tale of the city’s decline in
the 1200s B.C.E. A series of burnings culminated around
1200 B.C.E. in major destruction, which probably indi-
cates internal strife or several defeats at the hands of
other Mycenaean-Greek cities. There followed perhaps
three generations of depopulation, culminating in Myce-
nae’s final ruin, possibly at the hands of the invading
DORIAN GREEKS (around 1120 B.C.E.).
Later Mycenae existed as a Dorian town whose
inhabitants probably lived amid the ruins of vanished
grandeur. Men of Mycenae fought as allies of SPARTA
against the Persians at THERMOPYLAE (480 B.C.E.) and
PLATAEA (479 B.C.E.). This Mycenae was destroyed by its
powerful neighbor ARGOS
around 468 
B.C.E.,
but
reemerged in the 200s B.C.E.
The ruins of Mycenae were first investigated by the
British Lord Elgin in 1802, who concentrated on the
monumental tomb outside the city, the so-called Treasury
of ATREUS. The city itself was discovered and first exca-
vated by Schliemann in 1874–1876. Greek archaeologists
followed and carried out campaigns from 1876 to 1877
and 1884 to 1902. In the 20th century, the British School
of Archaeology at Athens obtained rights to the site and
excavated much of the area in 1920–1923, 1939, and
1950–1957. From the 1950s to the present, British and
the Greek archaeologists have collaborated in excavating
and restoring the Mycenaean remains, and a new
museum is planned for the site.
See also ATREUS; TROJAN WAR.
Further reading: George Mylonas, Mycenae, Rich in
Gold (Athens: Ekdotike Athenon, 1983); E. B. French,
Mycenae: Agamemnon’s Capital. The Site and Its Setting
(Charleston, S.C.: Tempus, 2002).
Mycenaean civilization
This term is used by modern
scholars to describe the earliest flowering of mainland
Greek culture, around 1600–1200 B.C.E. The Mycenaeans
were Greeks whose warlike society rose and fell long
before the era of classical Greece. The classical Greeks of
around 400 B.C.E. half remembered their Mycenaean fore-
bears as a race of heroes, celebrated in MYTH and EPIC
POETRY.
In world prehistory, the Mycenaeans comprised the
last of several great civilizations to emerge in the eastern
Mediterranean during the BRONZE AGE. The Mycenaeans’
urban building, military organization, and TRADE seem to
have been partly copied from a few preexisting, non-
Greek, Bronze Age cultures—namely, the Middle and New
Kingdoms of EGYPT, the Hittite kingdom of ASIA MINOR,
and especially, the MINOAN CIVILIZATION of CRETE.
The adjective “Mycenaean” was coined in 1876 C.E.
by the pioneering German archaeologist Heinrich Schlie-
mann, on the basis of his spectacular discoveries at the
site of MYCENAE, in the northeastern PELOPONNESE, in
southern Greece. The Mycenaeans lived before the era of
history-writing, and thus most details of their story—
such as their rulers’ names or the reasons why their entire
society collapsed in fiery ruin around 1200 B.C.E.—
remain unknown. Modern knowledge relies mostly on
artifacts uncovered by ARCHAEOLOGY at a few sites, such
as Mycenae, TIRYNS, and PYLOS (in the Peloponnese) and
THEBES, ORCHOMENOS, and ATHENS (in central Greece).
The artifacts include POTTERY, stone carvings, jewelry, and
armor—most of it found in the tombs of rulers—as well
as the remnants of Mycenaean stone palaces and
defenses. Particularly, the sites of Mycenae and Tiryns
still show huge fortifications built by Mycenaean inhabi-
tants in the 1300s and 1200s B.C.E.
In addition, a few sites have yielded primitive Myce-
naean written records, inscribed on clay tablets that seem
to date from about 1400 B.C.E. or 1200 B.C.E., depending
on the site. Written in a script that modern scholars call
LINEAR B, the records have been deciphered mainly as
lists of inventory—produce, livestock, military equip-
ment—and accounts of goods-distribution, religious
rites, and similar daily events. The tablets provide pre-
cious information on the social structure, economy, and
RELIGION of the Mycenaeans, as well as on the early-stage
GREEK LANGUAGE that they spoke.
Aside from archaeology, some insight into the Myce-
naeans has been gained from a cautious reading of
HOMER’s epic poems, the Iliad and the Odyssey. Although
written circa 750 B.C.E., more than 400 years after the
Mycenaeans’ disappearance, these poems derive from oral
tradition that stretches back to the Mycenaeans. It is
believed that the poems faithfully record certain aspects
of Mycenaean upper-class life—such as the warrior code
and the network of local kings—amid distortions and
overlays.
The first Greek-speaking tribes arrived in mainland
Greece around 2100 B.C.E., from the Danube region. But
500 years went by before the emergence of the culture
that we call Mycenaean: The remarkable social and tech-
nological changes of these intervening centuries can only
be guessed at. No doubt the Greeks were deeply influ-
enced by the non-Greek people they had conquered, and
from them the Greeks probably learned skills such as
stone masonry, ship-building, navigation, the cultivation
216
Mycenaean civilization

of the olive and certain other crops, and the worship of
certain female deities (with associated, new spiritual con-
cepts). Similarly, the Greeks were inspired by the palace
society of Minoan Crete.
The Mycenaean era began around 1600 B.C.E., as
archaeology reveals. Several sites in Greece came under
control of powerful rulers who were buried in elaborate
tombs, unlike the simple graves of prior centuries. And
within a few generations the tomb designs altered again,
suggesting further dynastic changes and evolving organi-
zation. The six treasure-filled tombs at Mycenae known
as Grave Circle A—built in the era 1550–1500 B.C.E. and
discovered intact by Schliemann—provide clear proof of
the rulers’ wealth and overseas contacts. For example, the
tombs contain items of GOLD that were shaped by Greek
smiths, but the raw metal probably came from Asia Minor
or Egypt. The warlike nature of these leaders is suggested
by the many weapons left as offerings in the tombs.
In Greece’s terrain, where mountain ranges separate
the flatlands, the Mycenaeans apparently emerged as four
or so major kingdoms, each based at a large farming
plain. Two of these domains were in the Peloponnese: the
plain of ARGOS (with its capital at Mycenae) and the plain
of MESSENIA (capital at Pylos). One was in central Greece:
the plain of BOEOTIA (with the cities Thebes and
Orchomenos vying for supremacy). And one was in the
north, on the great plain of THESSALY (capital at Iolkos).
Lesser kingdoms probably existed as well. But the great-
est domain was Mycenae, as indicated by its signs of
superior wealth and by the testimony of Greek myth. In
Homer’s Iliad, the Mycenaean king AGAMEMNON is the
supreme commander, to whom all other kings, such as
ODYSSEUS and NESTOR, owe obedience.
One event of the Mycenaean era that modern schol-
ars are sure of is that by around 1450 B.C.E. Mycenaeans
had taken over the Cretan palace at KNOSSOS—probably
as the result of a Mycenaean naval invasion of Crete.
Mysteriously, the Mycenaeans seem to have abandoned
Crete soon thereafter, around 1400 B.C.E. But the years of
occupation there taught Mycenaean rulers certain organi-
zational skills—such as improved architectural tech-
niques and the use of Cretan WRITING (adapted at this
time, as the Linear B script)—that ushered in 200 years
of the Mycenaean heyday in mainland Greece, around
1400–1200 B.C.E.
It was now that the Mycenaeans built their own
palaces, adapted from the Minoan palaces on Crete.
Mycenae and Tiryns were turned into elaborate, high-
walled castles; other palaces, such as at Pylos, arose with-
out huge defenses. The social and economic structure of
these centers is partly revealed by the Linear B tablets.
The palace was the seat of the king (wanax in Mycenaean
Greek); beyond the capital city, a network of outlying vil-
lages paid taxes, obeyed the king’s laws, and relied on
him for defense against other rulers. That palace was also
a center of industry, where metalworkers, weavers, per-
fumers, and many other crafts people turned out finished
goods, to enrich the king or to be distributed by him.
Raw materials came from local taxes (sheep’s wool, for
example) and from overseas trade.
Mycenaean civilization
217
A lion hunt inlaid on a Mycenaean dagger, deposited as an offering in a royal tomb ca. 1575 B.C.E. Two hunters carry distinctive
hourglass-shaped oxhide shields. (Alison Frantz Photographic Collection, American School of Classical Studies at Athens)

The premier metal for war and industry was BRONZE
(the use of IRON being introduced to the Greek world only
later). The search for bronze’s two components—copper
and tin—led Mycenaean sea traders far and wide. Large
remains of Mycenaean pottery in CYPRUS show that parts
of that copper-rich island were colonized by Mycenaeans.
On the western Asia Minor coast, the site of MILETUS
probably became a Mycenaean trading colony, mainly for
the acquisition of raw metals. Toward the other end of the
Mediterranean, extant pottery suggests a Mycenaean pres-
ence in western ITALY, where tin could be found.
The Mycenaean rulers commanded armies of heavy
infantry. The soldiers’ standardized equipment, including
bronze breastplates and helmets, is recorded on Linear B
tablets. Various evidence paints a picture of Mycenaean
kings or princes leading Viking-like raids overseas, of
which the biggest were the (presumed) invasions of Crete
and Cyprus. On certain Linear B tablets, SLAVES are men-
tioned by names that suggest they came from Asia Minor;
probably they were captured in Mycenaean raids there.
The Greek myth of JASON (1) and the Argonauts may dis-
tortedly commemorate such as overseas expedition. But
the Mycenaean kingdoms fought also against each other:
the legend of the SEVEN AGAINST THEBES seems clearly
based on actual warfare between Mycenae and Thebes.
By about 1250 B.C.E. the Mycenaean world had come
under pressure, due partly to upheavals in the Near East.
The decline of the Hittite kingdom in Asia Minor proba-
bly brought a gradual closing of the Mycenaeans’ eastern
trade routes. Deprived of raw metals for industry and
conquest, Mycenaean society began to whither. The
Greek legend of the TROJAN WAR may recall the Myce-
naeans’ attempt to keep trade routes open by removing
the interfering, non-Greek, Hellespontine city TROY,
around 1220 B.C.E.
Finally, it seems, the Mycenaean kingdoms turned
against each other and destroyed each other, in a desper-
ate bid for survival. Archaeology clearly reveals the fiery
ruin of Thebes, Mycenae, and other centers in the 50
years leading down to 1200 B.C.E. At Pylos, the final days
are dramatically indicated in emergency troop move-
ments and religious sacrifices recorded on Linear B
tablets.
Modern historians used to believe that this wholesale
destruction was the work of outsiders—specifically,
DORIAN GREEKS invading from the northwest. But more
recent scholarship concludes that the Dorian invasion, in
about 1100 B.C.E., was merely opportunistic; the Myce-
naeans had already exhausted themselves through inter-
nal war.
In the villages outside of the wrecked palaces, Myce-
naean society survived on an impoverished scale during
the 1100s B.C.E. Social change in these rural areas can be
glimpsed in the development of a certain Greek word:
The official title quasireu, which during the Mycenaean
heyday had indicated a local sheriff (a relatively low posi-
tion), gradually changed to basileus and took on a new
meaning, “king.” These men became the new local rulers
within the disintegrated Mycenaean kingdoms.
See also ACHAEA; ACHAEANS; ARCADIA; ATREUS; CHAR-
IOTS; DARK AGE; FUNERAL CUSTOMS; PERSEUS (1); SHIPS
AND SEAFARING; WARFARE, LAND.
Further reading: Konstantinos Kontorlis, Mycenaean
Civilization: Mycenae, Tiryns, Asine, Midea, Pylos, 2d ed.
(Athens: K. Kontorli, 1985); K. A. Wardle and Diana War-
dle, Cities of Legend: The Mycenaean World (London: Bris-
tol Classical Press, 1997); Michael L. Galaty and William
A. Parkinson, eds., Rethinking Mycenaean Palaces: New
Interpretations of an Old Idea (Los Angeles: University of
California Press, 1999); Bryan Feuer, Mycenaean Civiliza-
tion: An Annotated Bibliography through 2002, rev. ed. (Jef-
ferson, N.C.: McFarland, 2004).
mystery cults
See AFTERLIFE; DIONYSUS; ELEUSINIAN
MYSTERIES; ORPHISM; SAMOTHRACE.
myth
The Greek word mythos simply refers to any nar-
rative, factual or not. In modern use, the term has come to
mean a popular story elaborated over several generations.
Myths are sometimes based on a kernel of historical fact
and are often significant for understanding the mass men-
tality of an ancient people. Since they often involve gods
or other supernatural beings, mythology is sometimes
considered a facet of ancient religion, but Greek myths
frequently address nonreligious topics as well.
The myths of ancient Greece, like those of other cul-
tures, originated in a variety of ways and for a variety of
purposes. Some have a moral, such as the need to be hos-
pitable to strangers or the need for humility. Other myths
are “etiological,” attempting to explain local geographic
features, religious rites, or other phenomena not fully
understood by other means. Related to this type of story
is the propagandistic “charter myth,” which seeks to
sanctify a local custom or social institution—examples
include the myth connecting the DORIAN GREEKS with the
prestigious sons of HERAKLES, or the myth claiming that
the city of CYRENE (1) was founded by the god APOLLO
for his mistress, named CYRENE (2). In addition, three
major themes dominate the myths and legends from
ancient Greece; the creation of the world, activities of the
gods, and activities of heroes.
Many Greek myths appear to be based on distorted
memories of the Aegean BRONZE AGE, including the
MINOAN CIVILIZATION (ca. 2200–1400 B.C.E.) and the
MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION (ca. 1600–1200 B.C.E.). Later
generations of Greeks regarded the Mycenaean age, in
particular, as an Age of Heroes. Since the Minoans and
Mycenaeans do not appear to have kept written histo-
ries, certain real-life events were commemorated by
heroic songs handed down through the years and elabo-
rated in a tradition of oral EPIC POETRY. There are many
218
mystery cults

examples of such semihistorical myths, including THE-
SEUS and the Minotaur, the SEVEN AGAINST THEBES, and
the TROJAN WAR.
A remarkable number of Greek myths have survived
antiquity. Their quantity and diversity are due in part to
the fact that literacy took hold very quickly in Greek
society after the invention of the Greek ALPHABET, proba-
bly occurring within the span of a single generation
around 775–750 B.C.E. Many legends previously main-
tained by oral traditions were written down around that
time. The earliest and most important of these writings
are HOMER’s Iliad and Odyssey. Many other ancient
authors include mythological content in their works,
such as the Boeotian epic poet HESIOD, the Theban choral
poet PINDAR,
the Athenian tragedians AESCHYLUS,
SOPHOKLES, and EURIPIDES, the Alexandrian poets KALLI-
MACHUS and APOLLONIUS, and the Roman poet Ovid. In
the Christian era, myths survived as symbolic allegories,
often being retold to conform to contemporary religious
beliefs. From antiquity to the present, Greek mythology
has had a constant and unmistakable influence on the
development of the arts in Western civilization, including
painting, sculpture, literature, and music.
See also
CALYDONIAN
BOAR
HUNT;
JASON
(1);
ODYSSEUS; OEDIPUS; ORESTES; PERSEUS; ZEUS.
Further reading: John Pinsent, Greek Mythology
(New York: Harper & Row, 1983); Jan Bremmer, Interpre-
tation of Greek Mythology (London: Routledge, 1988);
Lowell Edmunds, ed., Approaches to Greek Mythology
(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1990);
Richard Stoneman, Greek Mythology: An Encyclopedia of
Myth and Legend (Hammersmith, London: Aquarium
Press, 1991); Fritz Graf, Greek Mythology: An Introduc-
tion, translated by Thomas Marier (Baltimore: Johns Hop-
kins University Press, 1993); Iain Thompson, Ancient
Greek Mythology (Edison, N.J.: Chartwell Books, 1996).
Mytilene
The principal city of the eastern Greek island
of LESBOS, in ancient times and still today (under the
name Mitilini). Located on the island’s southeastern
shore, 12 miles from the northern west coast of ASIA
MINOR, Mytilene was a prosperous Greek seaport, con-
necting East and West.
Archaeological study of the ancient site has been
hampered by the modern city, but we know that this
advantageous locale was occupied before the arrival of
the first Greeks. We also know that the name Mytilene—
sometimes rendered as Mitylene—is not Greek, for the
ending -ene is similar to the endings of other pre-Greek
place-names. Mycenaean-Greek POTTERY
from about
1200 B.C.E. has been discovered on Lesbos; very possibly
the seafaring Mycenaeans captured Mytilene at this time.
Later, around 1000 B.C.E., the city became a refuge for
eastward-migrating AEOLIAN GREEKS. During 1000–900
B.C.E., Mytilene was an important departure point for
further Aeolian colonizing, along the northwest Asia
Minor coast.
By 625 B.C.E. Mytilene was a leading city of the east-
ern Greek world. Lesbos’s traditions of LYRIC POETRY
reached their zenith with the Mytileneans SAPPHO (ca.
600 B.C.E.) and ALCAEUS (ca. 590 B.C.E.). In this era the
city was governed as an ARISTOCRACY. The chief clan was
the Penthilidae, who had the oppressive habit of arbitrar-
ily beating people with clubs in the street. Class tensions
were enflamed by an overseas military failure—Mytilene’s
loss of the Hellespontine colony of Sigeum to Athenian
settlers (ca. 600 B.C.E.).
TYRANTS arose in Mytilene to lead the common peo-
ple against the nobles. But civil war was averted by the
statesman PITTACUS, who served as an elected 10-year
dictator (ca. 590–580 B.C.E.) and was later enshrined as
one of the SEVEN SAGES of Greece. The turmoil of this era
is conveyed in the poems of Pittacus’s enemy Alcaeus.
In about 522 B.C.E. Mytilene and the rest of the
island fell to the advancing Persians under King DARIUS
(1). The Mytileneans joined the doomed IONIAN REVOLT
against Persian rule and distinguished themselves by
their cowardice at the sea battle of Lade (494 B.C.E.). Lib-
erated by the Greek counteroffensive at the end of the
PERSIAN WARS (479 B.C.E.), Mytilene became a leading
member of the Athenian-controlled DELIAN LEAGUE. For
the next 50 years, Mytilene was one of the few league
states to pay its annual obligation in the form of warships
and crews rather than in SILVER.
During the PELOPONNESIAN WAR (431–404 B.C.E.),
Mytilene twice revolted unsuccessfully against Athenian
rule. The first revolt (428–427 B.C.E.) ended with Athe-
nian troops occupying the island. Afterward, there
occurred a famous debate in the ASSEMBLY at ATHENS,
where a decision to destroy Mytilene and execute the
adult male population was rescinded by a revote. This
Mytilenean Debate forms a set piece in book 3 of the war
history written by THUCYDIDES (1). After the second
revolt was crushed (412 B.C.E.), the Mytileneans lost
their fleet, their city walls, and much of their farmland to
the vengeful Athenians. With the defeat of Athens in 404
B.C.E., a reduced Mytilene came under Spartan control.
After a generation of Spartan oppression, Mytilene
joined the SECOND ATHENIAN LEAGUE, in about 377 B.C.E.
In 333 B.C.E. the city fell briefly to the Persian navy but
was liberated by the conquering Macedonian king
ALEXANDER
THE GREAT. After Alexander’s death (323
B.C.E.), Mytilene and Lesbos passed to various Hellenistic
rulers. Acquired by the kings of nearby PERGAMON in 188
B.C.E., Mytilene was part of the domain bequeathed to the
Romans by the Pergamene king Attalus III in 133 B.C.E.
The city soon became part of the Roman province of Asia.
See also GREEK LANGUAGE.
Further reading: P. Krentz, “Xenophon and Diodorus
on the Battle at Mytilene, 406 B.C.,” Ancient History Bul-
letin 2 (1988): 128–130; C. Williams and H. Williams,
Mytilene
219

“Excavations at Mytilene (Lesbos), 1987,” Echos du monde
classique 7 (1988): 135–149; ———, “Excavations at
Mytilene (Lesbos), 1988,” Echos du monde classique 8
(1989): 167–181; ———, “Excavations at Mytilene (Les-
bos), 1989),” Echos du monde classique 9 (1990): 181–193;
———, “Excavations at Mytilene (Lesbos), 1990,” Echos
du monde classique 10 (1991): 175–191; H. J. Mason,
“Mytilene and Methymna: Quarrels, Borders, and topogra-
phy,” Echos du monde classique 12 (1993): 225–250; C.
Williams and H. Williams, “Excavations at Mytilene (Les-
bos), 1994,” Echos du monde classique 14 (1995): 95–100.
220
Mytilene

N
221
names
Unlike modern Americans, ancient Greek males
and females typically carried only one personal name—
for example, Socrates. In formal address, a man or boy
might be specified by a patronymic (his father’s name):
“Themistokles, son of Neokles.” However, at some Greek
cities, specifically ATHENS, the use of the patronymic was
discouraged due to social-leveling legislation aimed at
removing distinctions and stigmas of lineage. Hence
“Themistokles of the DEME of Phrearrus” was the pre-
ferred form. The masculine or feminine ending of a name
clearly distinguished the person’s gender—Diotima and
Elpinice are female; Perikles and Diodorus, male.
Greek names, like those in German and certain other
Indo-European tongues, usually contained common
words in compound form. The Greek female name
Cleopatra means “glory of her father.” One of the ele-
ments might typically be a deity’s name, as in Herodotus,
“given by HERA.” Two male names popular after the 500s
B.C.E. were Demetrius and Dionysius, which were adjecti-
val forms of the names of well-loved agrarian gods,
DEMETER and DIONYSUS.
Because the keeping of horses was a sign of wealth,
many aristocratic names included the proud element
hippo—: Philip (Philippos), “horse-lover,” Hippocrates,
“horse power,” Xanthippe, “yellow horse.” For some rea-
son, an aristocratic boy usually was not named after his
father, but often after a grandfather—for example, KLEIS-
THENES (1) and (2), and THUCYDIDES (1) and (2). Collec-
tively, members of a noble clan might be known by a
family name—such as the ALCMAEONIDS (descendants of
Alcmaeon).
Not only bluebloods had identifying names. Children
of left-wing families might receive names with such polit-
ically charged elements as Demo—(“the people”) or
Iso—(“equality”)—for instance, Demosthenes, “the peo-
ple’s strength,” or Isodice, “equal justice.”
Acquired nicknames came into use, mainly for roy-
alty, starting in the late 300s B.C.E. The Macedonian sol-
dier-prince Demetrius was honored with the surname
Poliorket¯es, “the city-besieger”; his father, ANTIGONUS
(1), was Monophthalmos, “the one-eyed.” And the con-
quering Macedonian king Alexander was surnamed
Megas “the Great.”
See 
also
ALEXANDER
THE
GREAT;
DEMETRIUS
POLIORCETES.
Further reading: M. Golden, “Names and Naming at
Athens. Three Studies,” Echoes du monde classique 5
(1986): 245–269; P. M. Fraser and E. Matthews, A Lexicon
of Greek Personal Names, 1. The Aegean Islands, Cyprus,
Cyrenaica (New York: Oxford University Press, 1987); E.
Carney, “Eponymous Women. Royal Women and City
Names,” Ancient History Bulletin 2 (1988): 134–142; A. B.
Tataki, Ancient Beroea Prosopography and Society (Athens:
National Hellenic Research Foundation, 1988); C.
Habicht, “Notes on Attic Prosopography. Coincidence in
Father-Son Pairs of Names,” Hesperia
59 (1990):
459–462; Carolyn Higbie, Heroes’ Names, Homeric Identi-
ties (New York: Garland, 1995); M. J. Osborne, The For-
eign Residents of Athens: An Annex to the Lexicon of Greek
Personal Names: Attica (Leuven, Belgium: Peeters, 1996);
Simon Hornblower and Elaine Matthews, eds., Greek Per-
sonal Names: Their Value as Evidence (New York: Oxford
University Press, 2000).
Narcissus
In MYTH, this handsome Boeotian youth,
son of the river god Kephisus and the nymph Liriop¯e,

fell in love with his own reflection in a pond. In one ver-
sion, he pined away and died of hopeless longing, in
another, he stabbed himself with a dagger in frustration.
From his body or blood there arose the white flower that
the ancient Greeks called the narkissos (possibly a type of
iris or lily, but not the same as our modern narcissus
flower). This tale has produced the English words narcis-
sism and narcissistic.
Narcissus’s connection with a local flower, along with
the pre-Greek issos ending of his name, suggest that he
was originally a god or demigod of the pre-Greek peo-
ples, absorbed into Greek mythology during the second
millennium B.C.E.
See also GREEK
LANGUAGE; HYACINTHUS; NYMPHS;
RELIGION.
Further reading: E. Pellizer, “Reflections, Echoes,
and Amorous Reciprocity. On Reading the Narcissus
Story,” in Interpretations of Greek Mythology, edited by Jan
Bremmer (London: Croom Helm, 1987), 107–120; M.
Nelson, “Narcissus. Myth and Magic,” Classical Journal
95 (1999–2000): 363–389.
Naukratis
This ancient port city of EGYPT is situated
about 50 miles inland, on the westernmost branch of the
Nile River. In the later 600s B.C.E. the pharaohs assigned
Naukratis as the one emporium for all Greek TRADE in
Egypt. The city then became the site of Greek temples
and offices where various Greek states were represented.
As listed by the historian HERODOTUS, these states
included the great seagoing powers of the day: AEGINA,
SAMOS,
CHIOS,
MILETUS,
PHOCAEA,
MYTILENE,
and
RHODES. The name Naukratis seems to be Greek, mean-
ing “ship power”—that is, shipping place.
Archaeological excavations at Naukratis, combined
with written references, give some idea of the commerce
between Greece and Egypt in the 600s–500s B.C.E. Much
of this trade apparently consisted of Greek SILVER ore and
SLAVES (both acquired in the northern Aegean) exchanged
for Egyptian grain, which was shipped by Greek mer-
chants at a large profit to the hungry cities of the Greek
world. Egyptian luxury goods, such as carved ivory, were
also exported.
Like other port cities throughout history, Naukratis
offered its share of men’s entertainment. Herodotus
describes Naukratis as “a place for lovely courtesans”
(hetairai). Certain verses by the Greek poet SAPPHO (ca.
600 B.C.E.) lament the predicament of Sappho’s brother,
ensnared at Nauktratis by a fascinating hetaira on whom
he has squandered his fortune.
Naukratis’s fortunes declined after 525 B.C.E., when
the Persian occupation of Egypt disrupted the Greek
trade. After ALEXANDER THE GREAT’s conquest of Egypt
(332 B.C.E.), Naukratis was completely eclipsed by the
founding of nearby ALEXANDRIA (1).
See also PROSTITUTES.
Further reading: M. S. Venit, Greek Painted Pottery
from Naukratis in Egyptian Museums (Winona Lake, Ill.:
Eisenbrauns, 1988); B. Muhs, “The Great Temenos of
Naukratis,” Journal of the American Research Centers in
Egypt 31 (1994): 99–113; William Coulson, Ancient
Naukratis (Oxford: Oxbow Books, 1996); H. Bowden,
“The Greek Settlement and Sanctuaries at Naukratis.
Herodotus and Archaeology,” in More Studies in the Ancient
Greek Polis, edited by Mogens Herman Hansen and Kurt
Raaflaub (Stuttgart, Germany: Franz Steiner Verlag,
1996), 17–37; Albert Leonard Jr., Ancient Naukratis: Exca-
vations at a Greek Emporium in Egypt (Atlanta: Scholars
Press, 1998); Astrid Möller, Naukratis: Trade in Archaic
Greece (New York: Oxford University Press, 2000); K.
Smoláriková, “The Great Temenos at Naukratis Once
Again,” Archív orientálni 68 (2000): 571–578.
Naupactos
This seaport of West LOCRIS is situated at
the mouth of the Corinthian Gulf. Naupactos’ position
controlling the gulf’s narrow outlet made the town a natu-
ral naval base—its name in Greek means “shipbuilding.”
In the mid-400s B.C.E. Naupactos was captured by ATHENS
and repopulated with fugitives from MESSENIA who had
unsuccessfully revolted from Spartan rule (464–460
B.C.E.). During the PELOPONNESIAN WAR (431–404 B.C.E.),
Naupactos was the main Athenian naval base in western
Greece; it was off Naupactos that the Athenian admiral
Phormion won his two brilliant sea victories over Pelo-
ponnesian fleets in 429 B.C.E.
After Athens’s defeat in the war, Naupactos passed to
the state of ACHAEA. In 338 B.C.E. the Macedonian king
PHILIP II gave Naupactos to his ally, the state of AETOLIA.
Naupactos had lost its importance by the 100s B.C.E.,
when the Aetolian League was defeated by ROME.
Further reading: E. Badien, “Athens, the Locrians,
and Naupactus,” Classical Quarterly 40 (1990): 364–369.
Nausicaa
This princess of the virtuous Phaeacians is
featured prominently in HOMER’s Odyssey. In one of the
poem’s most charming episodes (book 6), she leads her
waiting women to wash clothes at a stream and there
encounters the shipwrecked hero ODYSSEUS. Approaching
naked and shielded only by a leafy branch, Odysseus
unintentionally scares away the servants, but not Nausi-
caa. Inspired by the goddess ATHENA, she supplies food
and clothing to the hero, then shows him the way to her
father’s palace, where he is suitably received.
Further reading: F. Brommer, “Theseus and Nausi-
caa,” Journal of the Walters Art Gallery 38 (1980):
364–369; J. Boardman, “No, No, Nausicaa,” Journal of the
Walters Art Gallery 39 (1981): 38.
navies
See WARFARE, NAVAL.
navigation
See SHIPS AND SEAFARING.
222
Naukratis

Naxos (1)
See CYCLADES.
Naxos (2)
The first Greek colony in SICILY, Naxos was
also one of the earliest Greek colonies anywhere. Situated
on a promontory on the island’s east coast, at the foot of
Mt. Etna, Naxos was a natural landfall for westbound
ships rounding the “toe” of ITALY from the northeast.
Naxos was founded in about 734 B.C.E. by Greeks from
CHALCIS under a leader named Thucles. Supposedly, the
expedition included Greeks from the Aegean island of
Naxos, who gave the new city its name.
Naxos itself seems to have been intended only as a
Greek foothold in Sicily: Six years after its founding,
Thucles and his followers drove the native Sicels from the
fertile plain of Catania and founded the cities of CATANA
and Leontini. These cities and others, such as nearby
SYRACUSE, soon exceeded Naxos in importance.
By the early 400s B.C.E. Naxos was ruled by Syracu-
san TYRANTS. As an Ionian-Greek city in a realm domi-
nated by DORIAN GREEKS, Naxos became a target of
ruthless social engineering when the Syracusan tyrant
HIERON (1) depopulated it and moved the people to
Leontini (476 B.C.E.).
Reconstituted, Naxos made an alliance with ATHENS
against Syracuse in 415 B.C.E., during the PELOPONNESIAN
WAR, and served as an Athenian base for the disastrous
expedition against Syracuse. In 403 B.C.E. Naxos was cap-
tured and razed by the Syracusan tyrant DIONYSIUS (1).
See also COLONIZATION.
Further reading: Maria Costanza Lentini, ed., The
Two Naxos Cities: A Fine Link between the Aegean Sea and
Sicily: 14–30 June 2001, University of Athens . . . 6–31 July
2001, Archaeological Museum of the Island of Naxos: exhibi-
tion of objects from the Museums of Sicilian and Cycladic
Naxos: fruit of a collaboration between the Soprintendenza
BB.CC.AA. di Messina and the University of Athens and the
21st Ephorate of the Cyclades (Palermo, Italy: Regione
Sicilia, Assessorato dei Beni Culturali e Ambientali e Pub-
blica Istruzione, 2001).
Nemean Games
One of the four great sports-and-reli-
gious festivals of ancient Greece, the Nemean Games
were celebrated along with the OLYMPIC, PYTHIAN, and
ISTHMIAN GAMES. Sacred to the god ZEUS, this festival was
held every other year at the valley and sanctuary called
Nemea in the northeastern PELOPONNESE, in the region of
ARGOS but close to the town of Cleonae. There, according
to myth, the hero HERAKLES instituted the games after
slaying the Nemean Lion—the first of his 12 Labors. In
fact, the Nemean festival first became important in 573
B.C.E., when Argos took over its administration from
Cleonae and enlarged it on the model of the Olympic
Games. Around 415 B.C.E., the games were removed from
Nemea to Argos, until they were returned to the sanctu-
ary in the 330s B.C.E. At this time, there was a large
amount of building activity at Nemea, including the Tem-
ple of Zeus, the stadium, and a bath complex. The games
were moved again to Argos (permanently, this time) in
271 B.C.E., although Aratos of SIKYON made an unsuccess-
ful attempt to reinstate the games at Nemea in 235 B.C.E.
At the beginning of each competition, the participat-
ing athletes would gather and swear an oath to the god
Zeus. The prize for victors was a garland of wild celery
(as at the Isthmian Games).
The ruins of a Doric-style temple of Zeus, built
around 340–320 B.C.E., have been excavated in Nemea.
The temple was destroyed by earthquakes in late antiq-
uity. Near the temple, archaeologists have discovered the
remains of the ancient stadium, where the athletes com-
peted in the Nemean Games. It was built around 330
B.C.E., perhaps on the site of some earlier structure. The
stadium was in use until around 271 B.C.E., when the
games ceased to be held at Nemea. During the Roman
and Early Christian eras, the stadium was used for farm-
ing and herding animals.
Nemea was visited by European travelers in the 18th
century C.E., but the first archaeological excavations took
place in 1884, under the French School of Archaeology.
An American team under the auspices of the University
of Cincinnati and the American School of Classical Stud-
ies began work at Nemea in the 1920s and 1930s. A new
expedition took place in the 1960s, under Charles K.
Williams II, again sponsored by the American School of
Classical Studies. From 1973 to the present, Nemea has
been the subject of investigation by Stephen G. Miller,
professor of classics at the University of California at
Berkeley. Recent work at the site includes the construc-
tion of a new museum, the reconstruction of the temple
of Zeus, and the revival of the Nemean Games as a mod-
ern annual athletic event.
Further reading: Stephen G. Miller, “Tunnel Vision.
The Nemean Games,” Archaeology 33 (1980): 54–56;
Stephen G. Miller, “The Theorodokoi of the Nemean
Games,” Hesperia 57 (1988): 147–163; Paula Perlman,
“The Calendrical Position of the Nemean Games,”
Athenaeum 67 (1989): 57–90; Olga Tzachou-Alexandri,
ed., Mind and Body: Athletic Contests in Ancient Greece
(Athens: Ministry of Culture, National Hellenic Commit-
tee I.C.O.M., 1989); Stephen G. Miller, Nemea: A Guide to
the Site and Museum (Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1990); Stephen G. Miller, “The Stadium at Nemea
and the Nemean Games,” in Proceedings of an Interna-
tional Symposium on the Olympic Games, 5–9 September
1988, edited by William Coulson and Helmut Kyrieleis
(Athens: Deutsches Archaeologisches Institut Athen,
1992), 81–86; Darice E. Birge, Excavations at Nemea
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992–2001).
Neoptolemos
A Greek mythical hero of the island of
Scyros, Neoptolemos was the son of the Thessalian hero
Neoptolemos
223

ACHILLES and the princess Deidameia. Neoptolemos
(“new warrior”) was begotten while Achilles was hiding
among the WOMEN of Scyros in an attempt to avoid serv-
ing in the TROJAN WAR.
HOMER’s epic poem the Odyssey mentions that Neop-
tolemos himself went to TROY after his father’s death. He
was summoned by the Greeks, who had learned in a
prophecy that Neoptolemos’s presence was a fated pre-
condition of the city’s fall. Although Neoptolemos would
have been only about 10 years old at that time, this detail
was overlooked in the legend, and he was said to have
fought fiercely at Troy, winning the nickname Pyrrhus
(“fiery” or “red”).
Neoptolemos was one of the select Greek comman-
does who hid inside the Trojan Horse. During the capture
of the city, he slew the Trojan king PRIAM—despite the fact
that Priam had taken sanctuary at the altar of the great
god ZEUS. This brutal act brought the hatred of the Tro-
jans’ patron god APOLLO against Neoptolemos.
According to one version, Neoptolemos was killed
after the war in a dispute at Apollo’s shrine at DELPHI.
Another version says he sailed to EPIRUS, in northwestern
Greece, where he fathered the ruling clan, the Molos-
sians. In historical times the Molossians used the hero’s
nickname, Pyrrhus, as a given name. The most famous
such person was the Epirote king PYRRHUS (reigned
297–272 B.C.E.).
See also ANDROMACHE.
Further reading: E. Suárez de la Torre, “Neoptolemos
at Delphi,” Kernos 10 (1997): 153–176.
Nereids
See NEREUS.
Nereus
In MYTH, Nereus was a minor sea god, a kind of
old man of the sea. He and his wife, Doris (the daughter
of OCEANUS), had 50 daughters, known as the Nereids
(Greek: Nereidai “daughters of Nereus”). These sea-
dwelling young goddesses, often imagined as fish-tailed,
have been favorite subjects of art and poetry since ancient
times. The best known of the Nereids were Amphitrit¯e,
who married the Olympian sea god POSEIDON, and
Thetis, who married the mortal PELEUS and gave birth to
the hero ACHILLES.
The name Amphitrit¯e is not Greek, and surely
derives from the language of the prehistoric people who
occupied the land of Greece before the first Greek-speak-
ing tribes arrived, around 2100 B.C.E. The Nereids are
probably survivals of the pre-Greek people’s RELIGION.
See also ARTEMIS; NYMPHS.
Further reading: R. Glynn, “Herakles, Nereus, and
Triton. A Study of Iconography in Sixth Century Athens,”
American Journal of Archaeology 85 (1981): 121–132.
Nestor
In MYTH, Nestor was the king of PYLOS, in the
southwestern PELOPONNESE, and the most elderly of the
Greek commanders in the TROJAN WAR. Nestor—the son
and successor of King Neleus—was probably imagined as
being over the age of 50 when the war began and over the
age of 60 at its conclusion. HOMER’s Iliad and Odyssey
give a charming portrait of an admirable but garrulous
old man, often ineffectual in combat and councils of war.
In both poems he delivers meandering but lively speeches
recalling his youthful achievements.
The Iliad presents Nestor’s fond relationship with his
soldier-son Antilochus but omits the tale of Antilochus’s
death. We know from other ancient sources that
Antilochus was killed while defending his father from the
Ethiopian champion MEMNON. In the Odyssey, Nestor is
shown safely back in Pylos, where he welcomes the prince
TELEMACHOS in the latter’s search for his father, ODYSSEUS.
Further reading: O. Murray, “Nestor’s Cup and the
Origins of the Greek Symposium,” Annali di archeologia e
storia antica 1 (1994): 47–54; Keith Dickson, Nestor:
Poetic Memory in Greek Epic (New York: Garland, 1995).
Nik¯e
The goddess of Victory, Nik¯e oversaw winning in
war or SPORT. Like many other minor deities, Nik¯e was
more a symbol than an important character in Greek
MYTH. The name Nik¯e was sometimes reduced to an epi-
thet of the goddess ATHENA—Athena Nik¯e, the patron of
victory through strategy.
From the 500s B.C.E. onward, Nik¯e was picturesquely
shown in art as having two feathery wings. She became a
favorite subject after the Greek triumph in the PERSIAN
WARS, and was often associated with the god ZEUS—most
famously in the colossal statue of Zeus sculpted by PHEI-
DIAS for the temple at OLYMPIA. In this monument (com-
pleted in about 430 B.C.E., now lost, but represented on
coins), Nik¯e appeared standing on the god’s upturned
palm.
The best-known surviving Nik¯e in art is the marble
statue called the Winged Victory of Samothrace, sculpted
around 190 B.C.E. and now in the Louvre. In the Greco-
Roman world, Nik¯e often was shown on coins and
medallions, sometimes elevated, garlanding a victorious
general’s head.
See also PARTHENON; SAMOTHRACE.
Further reading: B. S. Ridgway, “The Nike of Archer-
mos and Her Attire,” in Chios. A Conference at the Homer-
ion in Chios, 1984, edited by J. Boardman and C. E.
Vaphopoulou-Richardson (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1986), 259–274; Ira S. Mark, The Sanctuary of
Athena Nike in Athens. Architectural Stages and Chronol-
ogy. Hesperia Supplement 26 (Princeton, N.J.: American
School of Classical Studies in Athens, 1993); M. H. Jami-
son, “The Ritual of the Athena Nike Parapet,” in Ritual,
Finance, Politics. Athenian Democratic Accounts Presented
to David Lewis, edited by Robin Osborne and Simon
Hornblower (New York: Oxford University Press, 1994),
307–324; Erika Simon, “An Interpretation of the Nike
224
Nereids

Temple Parapet,” in The Interpretation of Architectural
Sculpture in Greece and Rome, edited by Diana Buitron-
Oliver (Washington, D.C.: National Gallery of Art, 1997),
126–143; J. de Waele, “The Temples of Athena Nike on
the Acropolis of Athens. Ancient Measurements and
Design,” Pharos 5 (1997): 27–48.
Nikias (ca. 470–413 B.C.E.) Athenian general and politi-
cian of the PELOPONNESIAN WAR
Rich and devoutly religious, Nikias served his city loyally.
But his hesitancy and befuddlement in the Athenian cam-
paign against SYRACUSE (415–413 B.C.E.) produced an
epic disaster that destroyed an Athenian force of perhaps
50,000 men, including Nikias himself.
Nikias (“victorious”) was the son of Niceratus, of a
distinguished Athenian family whose income came from
the leasing of large numbers of SLAVES to work the Athe-
nian SILVER mines at Laurion. Upon the death of PERIKLES
(429 B.C.E.), the soldierly Nikias became the heir to
Perikles’ defensive strategy in the Peloponnesian War.
As a politician, Nikias headed the conservative peace
party, composed of the upper class and the smallholding
farmers. Nikias’s opponent and personal enemy was the
pro-war radical democrat KLEON. After Kleon’s death,
Nikias arranged the short-lived peace with SPARTA that
bears his name—the Peace of Nikias (421 B.C.E.).
In 415 B.C.E. Nikias was appointed alongside the gen-
erals ALCIBIADES and Lamachus to command a 134-ship
armada to besiege and capture Syracuse, in SICILY. Unfor-
tunately, the 55-year-old Nikias disapproved of the ambi-
tious venture and, after Alcibiades was recalled, Nikias
proved to be a dangerously indecisive leader. The death
of Lamachus, combined with Nikias’s kidney ailment,
contributed to the deteriorating situation, despite Nikias’s
field victory at the River Anapus (late 415 B.C.E.). By
summer of 413 B.C.E. the Athenians—although reinforced
by fresh troops—were surrounded by the enemy on land
and sea, after Nikias had hesitated too long to abandon
the siege and sail away. Leading a hopeless attempt to
escape overland, Nikias was captured by the Syracusans
amid the slaughter of his men at the River Assinarus. He
was later executed by the Syracusans.
See also DELOS; DEMOSTHENES [2].
Further reading: R. Seager, “After the Peace of
Nicias. Diplomacy and Policy 421–416 B.C.,” Classical
Quarterly 26 (1976): 249–269; Donald Kagan, The Peace
of Nicias and the Sicilian Expedition, 2d ed. (Ithaca, N.Y.:
Cornell University Press, 1991); J. C. Trevett, “Nikias
and Syracuse,” Zeitschrift für Papyrologie und Epigraphik
106 (1995): 246–248; J. E. Atkinson, “Nicias and the
Fear of Failure Syndrome,” Ancient History Bulletin 9
(1995): 55–63; Lisa Kallet, Money and the Corrosion of
Power in Thucydides: The Sicilian Expedition and Its After-
math (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001).
Niob¯e
In MYTH, Niob¯e was the wife of the Theban hero
Amphion. As the mother of six youths and six maidens,
Niob¯e boasted arrogantly that she was superior to the
demigoddess Leto, who had borne only two children—
the deities APOLLO and ARTEMIS. Angered at this affront
to their mother, Apollo and Artemis hunted down, with
bow and arrow, all 12 of Niob¯e’s children. Niob¯e wept
ceaselessly until, on the 10th day of her lamenting, the
god ZEUS turned her to stone. The stone was said to be
located in ASIA MINOR, on the slopes of Mt. Sipylos, in
Phrygia. It is described by the Roman traveler PAUSANIAS
(2), as well as other ancient authors.
As a symbol of maternal grief, Niob¯e became a popu-
lar subject in ancient Greek literature and art. This tale is
Niob ¯e
225
Nike, the winged goddess of victory, forms the base of this
incense burner, probably used to offer thanks. A bird sits
atop the incense bowl. Nike’s pose and costume are 
identical with large-scale marble statues carved about 
480 B.C.E. (The J. Paul Getty Museum)

first told in HOMER’s Iliad, as background to the grief of
the parents of the slain Trojan hero HECTOR. Niob¯e was
also featured in tragedies by AESCHYLUS and SOPHOKLES,
and her transformation is one of the main stories in the
Roman poet Ovid’s Metamorphoses. Scenes of Niob¯e try-
ing to shield her children from the arrows of Apollo and
Artemis also appear on Greek vases. The most famous
artistic representation of Niob¯e and her children was a
marble SCULPTURE group taken from Greece to Rome in
the early imperial era; it survives only in a Roman copy,
and the original may have been by one of the famous
Greek sculptors PRAXITELES or Skopas. As a symbol of
maternal grief, Niob¯e became a popular subject in Greco-
Roman art and poetry.
See also HUBRIS.
Further reading: R. M. Cook, Niobe and Her Children
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1964); H. M.
Fracchia, “The Mourning Niobe Motif on South Italian
Art,” Echos du monde classique 6 (1987): 199–205.
numbers
See MATHEMATICS.
nymphs
The nymphai were mythical female spirits of
the wilderness, representing the beauty and fertility of
nature. They were daughters of ZEUS or of other gods, but
they themselves were not usually immortal. Rather, they
were like leprechauns, living for centuries in the wild and
avoiding contact with humans.
Usually imagined as young and amorous, nymphs
were associated with the god DIONYSUS and his coterie of
lusty male SATYRS. (This association is behind the pseu-
dopsychiatric term nymphomaniac, meaning a woman
with obsessive sexual desire.) Individual nymphs of MYTH
include CALYPSO, lover of the hero ODYSSEUS, and CYRENE
(2), lover of the god APOLLO. In the ancient GREEK LAN-
GUAGE, nymph¯e could also mean a young marriageable
woman.
Eventually these pretty wilderness creatures became
the subject of poets’ elaborations, especially in the Hel-
lenistic and Roman eras, after 300 B.C.E. There we find
specialized categories of nymphs, such as the Naiads
(stream nymphs) and the Dryads or Hamadryads (tree
nymphs).
Like the NEREIDS and other demigoddesses, the
nymphs may date back to the RELIGION of the pre-Greek
people who inhabited the land of Greece before 2100 B.C.E.
Further reading: Guy Hedreen, “Silens, Nymphs,
and Maenads,” Journal of Hellenic Studies 114 (1994):
47–69; Judith Barringer, Divine Escorts: Nereids in Archaic
and Classical Greek Art (Ann Arbor: University of Michi-
gan Press, 1995); Jennifer Larson, Greek Nymphs: Myth,
Cult, Lore (New York: Oxford University Press, 2001).
226
numbers

O
227
Oceanids
See OCEANUS.
Oceanus
In MYTH, Okeanos was a river that encircles
the world and serves as the underground source for all
earthly rivers. The poet HESIOD described the river god
Oceanus as one of the primeval offspring of Ouranos
(“Sky”) and GAEA (Mother Earth). Oceanus and his wife,
Tethys, produced the 3,000 Oceanids, the “daughters of
Oceanus.” These Oceanids were NYMPHS inhabiting bod-
ies of water and other wilderness sites. In HOMER’s Iliad
and Odyssey, Oceanus was associated with the far West;
there he flowed past shores inhabited by such fabulous
creatures as MEDUSA, Geryon, and the Hesperides.
The notion of an encircling world stream is common
to many mythologies. The Greeks may have borrowed it
from the Near East, since the word Okeanos does not
seem to be Greek. But the Greeks soon added their own
layer, when their concept of Okeanos became colored by
rumors of the Atlantic sea, lying west of the Mediter-
ranean. The Greeks chose the word of Okeanos to iden-
tify the Atlantic, once they began to venture beyond the
straits of Gibraltar in the wake of the pioneering Phoeni-
cians (600s B.C.E.). The English word ocean of course
derives from Okeanos.
See also ATLANTIS; ATLAS; HERAKLES; PHOENICIA.
Odysseus
In MYTH, this wily king of ITHACA (a small
island on the northwest coast of Greece) was a captain of
the Greeks in the TROJAN WAR. Odysseus’s 10-year-long
journey home from TROY, and his strategy to rid his king-
dom of troubles brewed by his absence, constitute the
story of the 12,000-line epic poem the Odyssey. Written
down around 750 B.C.E. and ascribed in ancient times to
the poet HOMER, the Odyssey—with its associated poem,
the Iliad—stands at the beginning of Western literature,
as one of the greatest works of Western literature.
The name Odysseus means “angry.” The Romans, in
retelling the myth, latinized the name to Ulixes, from
which we get the form Ulysses. In some versions, Ulysses
or Odysseus was said to be secretly the son of the cunning
hero SISYPHUS, begotten on Antikleia, wife of the Ithacan
king Laertes. In any case, Odysseus was raised as Laertes’
son and succeeded him as king after Laertes abdicated in
old age. Soon, however, Odysseus was summoned, along
with other Greek vassal kings, to bring troops and ships to
the expedition against Troy organized by King AGAMEM-
NON of MYCENAE. Odysseus left behind a dedicated and
highly intelligent wife, PENELOPE, and their infant son,
TELEMACHOS. The Trojan War itself was to last for 10 years.
In the Iliad, which describes events of the war’s 10th
year, Odysseus appears as one of the foremost Greek
commanders, valiant in combat and wise in counsel. He
often is associated with the Greek hero DIOMEDES.
Together they make a night raid against the Trojan allies
(book 10) and later, amid fierce fighting, they stop a
Greek retreat (book 11). Being the swiftest-running
Greek aside from ACHILLES, Odysseus wins the footrace at
the Funeral Games of PATROKLOS (book 23). He also
wrestles the hero AJAX (1) to a draw, using skill to offset
his opponent’s greater strength. Later Greek writers, such
as SOPHOKLES (400s B.C.E.), enlarged on the rivalry
between these two heroes, contrasting the cleverness or
deviousness of Odysseus with the simplicity or honesty
of Ajax.

Odysseus’s character was one of courage, wisdom,
levelheadedness, and perseverance. He was an eloquent
speaker and often served as ambassador or negotiator. His
cleverness was sometimes sneaky and scheming, qualities
that made him a successful spy as well. Although he is an
accomplished soldier, he prefers to use persuasion rather
than force. On his long voyage home to Ithaca from Troy,
he resisted dozens of alluring temptations and remained
steadfast in returning to his wife and family. Odysseus
generally appears in Greek art as a bearded man, wearing
the short, rounded cap of a sailor or traveler.
The chronological sequence of Odysseus’s homeward
progress—not presented in this simple order in the
Odyssey—is as follows: Leaving the ruins of Troy, he and
his 12 ships raid the coast of THRACE but are beaten off
by the warlike Cicones (book 9). Thereafter the voyage
enters the realm of fable and is no longer geographically
recognizable. (However, certain of its supernatural land-
marks seem to be associated with the shores of southern
ITALY and eastern SICILY, which real-life Greek mariners
were exploring in the 800s and 700s B.C.E.
The voyagers’ next landfall is among the friendly
Lotus-eaters, who are perpetually narcotized by their
magical lotos-fruit food. Fleeing from this seductive dan-
ger, the squadron puts ashore in the territory of the one-
eyed monsters known as Cyclopes (book 9). Odysseus is
captured by one of them, named POLYPHEMOS, but
escapes after blinding the creature. Polyphemos prays to
his father, the god POSEIDON, for revenge.
Next Odysseus and his ships reach the island of the
hospitable wind king, Aeolis (book 10). Aeolis gives
Odysseus a tied-up bag containing all the winds except
the favorable one needed for Odysseus’s voyage home.
But out at sea, while Odysseus sleeps, his men greedily
open the mysterious bag: The released winds blow the
ships back to the isle of Aeolis, who refuses to help again.
Later, Odysseus loses all ships and crews except his own
to the cannabalistic Laestrygonians.
The hero’s ship arrives at the island of the beautiful
witch CIRCE (book 10). After saving his men from Circe’s
evil magic, Odysseus becomes her lover. She tells him
that in order to reach home he must journey down to the
Underworld and consult the ghost of the seer TEIRESIAS.
In the Underworld (book 11) Odysseus observes the
ghosts of several prominent people, including his own
mother and such former comrades as Achilles and Ajax.
After lingering with Circe for a year, Odysseus reem-
barks, having received Circe’s directions for reaching
home. His ship bypasses the SIRENS, survives the channel
of SCYLLA and the whirlpool Charybdis, and reaches the
island where the cattle of the sun god, HELIOS, graze.
There, despite his warnings, his men slaughter the cattle
for food. Consequently, the ship is destroyed at sea by the
thunderbolt of the great god ZEUS. Everyone aboard per-
ishes except Odysseus, who drifts to the isle of the
amorous CALYPSO (book 12).
Seven years later, at Zeus’s command, Calypso allows
Odysseus to depart in a boat of his own construction
(book 5). But he is shipwrecked again, this time by Posei-
don, in vengeance for Polyphemos’s distress. With the
help of the goddess ATHENA, Odysseus reaches the land
of the virtuous Phaeacians and encounters the princess
NAUSICAA, who directs him to the palace of her father,
King Alcinous (book 6). There the hero, welcomed roy-
ally (books 7–8), tells the tale of his wanderings since
Troy (books 9–12).
By then nearly 10 years have passed since Troy’s
destruction and Odysseus’s departure for home and
nearly 20 years have gone by since he first left Ithaca.
Unknown to Odysseus, Ithaca has meanwhile fallen prey
to more than 100 visiting lords and petty kings who
crowd the palace, competing to marry the presumably
widowed Penelope; she remains elusive, in the hope that
Odysseus might yet return. The prince Telemachos, now
a young man, has gone abroad in search of his father,
hoping to free his home from the loathsome suitors.
The Odyssey’s entire second half (books 13–24)
describes Odysseus’s return to Ithaca, his espionage there
in disguise as a beggar, and how—with the help of
Athena, Telemachos, and two trusted retainers—he
destroys the suitors, reclaims his wife and throne, and
restores harmony to the island.
The story of Odysseus’s death, not told in the
Odyssey, was described in a later epic poem, now lost,
called the Telegonia. Tiresias in the Underworld had pre-
dicted that Odysseus’s death would come from the sea,
but Odysseus reigned for many happy years on Ithaca.
Meanwhile his three illegitimate sons by Circe grew to
manhood. The youngest, Telegonus (“distant born”), set
out to meet his father and somehow encountered
Odysseus en route, not knowing who he was. A fight
ensued, and Telegonus slew Odysseus. (This episode
bears comparison with the similar tale of OEDIPUS.) The
weapon that Telegonus used was a sharp fishbone,
thereby fulfilling the terms of Tiresias’s prophecy.
Odysseus is the best-known example of the “trick-
ster” type of Greek mythical figure. Other tricksters from
Greek myth include the god HERMES, the demigod
PROMETHEUS, and Odysseus’s putative father, Sisyphos.
See also AFTERLIFE; EPIC POETRY; PROPHECY AND DIV-
INATION.
Further reading: D. Williams, “Ajax, Odysseus, and
the Arms of Achilles,” Antike Kunst 23 (1980): 137–145;
P. Walcot, “Odysseus and the Contest of the Bow. The
Comparative Evidence,” in Studi Micenei ed Egeo-anatolici
25 (Rome: Edizioni dell’Ateneo & Bizzari, 1984),
357–369; P. J. Connor, “The Cup and the Sword.
Odysseus Intimidates Circe on a Column-krater in Syd-
ney,” 
Archäologischer 
Anzeiger
(1988): 
41–53; 
S.
Symeónoglou, “The Wanderings of Odysseus,” in The
Hellenic Diaspora from Antiquity to Modern Times, 1. From
Antiquity to 1453. Proceedings of the First International
228
Odysseus

Congress, Montreal, 17–22.IV.1988, edited by John Fossey
(Amsterdam: J. C. Gieben, 1991), 37–43; T. J. McNiven,
“Odysseus on the Niobid Krater,” Journal of Hellenic Stud-
ies 109 (1989): 191–198; W. Donlan, “Political Reciproc-
ity in Dark Age Greece. Odysseus and his Hetairoi,” in
Reciprocity in Ancient Greece, edited by C. Gill, N.
Postlethwaite, and R. Seaford (New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1998), 51–71.
Odyssey
See HOMER; ODYSSEUS.
Oedipus
In MYTH, Oedipus was a Theban king who
could not escape his FATE. He married a woman who, unbe-
known to him, was his own mother, Jocasta (Iocast¯e). The
story is mentioned in HOMER’s Odyssey, but the classic
telling of the Oedipus tale is the Athenian playwright
SOPHOKLES’ extant tragedy Oedipus the King (presented ca.
429–420 B.C.E.).
Oedipus was the son of Laius, king of THEBES, and
Jocasta, his wife. Warned by prophecy that his son would
kill him, Laius abandoned the infant on Mt. Kithaeron,
after first running a spike through the baby’s feet—from
which the child later got his name, Oidipous, “swollen
foot.” As in all such folktales, the infant did not die but
was rescued, in this case by a Corinthian shepherd, ser-
vant of the Corinthian king. This king and his wife, being
childless, were happy to adopt the boy and pass him off
as their own.
Nevertheless, the young Oedipus was taunted by oth-
ers for being adopted, and eventually he went to DELPHI
to ask the god APOLLO who his real parents might be. The
oracle withheld this information but told Oedipus that he
would kill his father and marry his mother. Disgusted,
Oedipus decided never to return to CORINTH. Journeying
by chance toward Thebes, he fell into a dispute at a cross-
roads with a stranger. Not knowing that this was Laius,
his own father, Oedipus killed him. Then he reached
Thebes, which was at that time being terrorized by a
supernatural female monster, the Sphinx.
When the Sphinx encountered people, she would ask
them a riddle, and eat them when they failed to guess the
answer. The riddle asked: “What goes on four legs at
morning, two at noon, and three at evening?” Oedipus
deduced the correct answer: a human being. (The “legs”
represent, respectively, the baby’s hands and knees, the
adult’s upright legs, and the elderly person’s legs and
cane.) At this point the Sphinx either killed herself or
was killed by Oedipus. Acclaimed by the Thebans, Oedi-
pus now married the newly widowed queen, Jocasta,
whom he did not know to be his mother. In most ver-
sions they had four children: the girls ANTIGONE and
Ismen¯e and the boys Eteokles and Polynices. These chil-
dren were also doomed to unhappy ends.
In Sophokles’ play, these events are revealed through
Oedipus’s own careful investigations (prompted by a
plague and famine in Thebes that can be resolved only by
discovering the murderer of Laius). Jocasta hanged her-
self in grief, and Oedipus blinded himself and abdicated
his throne, going into exile with Antigone. In Sophokles’
play Oedipus at Colonus (performed 401 B.C.E.), the aged
hero is shown as having wandered to Colonus, an outly-
ing Athenian village (and Sophokles’ own home). There
Oedipus disappeared from earth, having been taken up by
the gods.
The subject of Oedipus and the Sphinx was a popular
one of vase painting in the 400s B.C.E.
See also PROPHECY AND DIVINATION; SEVEN AGAINST
THEBES.
Further reading: Edmunds, Lowell, Oedipus: The
Ancient Legend and Its Later Analogues (Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1985); J. Bremmer, “Oedipus
and the Greek Oedipus Complex,” in Interpretations of
Greek Mythology, edited by J. Bremmer (London: Croom
Helm, 1987), 41–59.
oligarchy
Meaning “government by the few” (oligoi),
an oligarchy in ancient Greece referred to a city-state in
which only a small minority of the citizens (usually the
wealthiest) could be admitted to political power. The rest
of the citizens had certain rights and protections, but they
lacked any important say in the governing of the state.
ARISTOTLE and other ancient political thinkers dis-
cussed oligarchy and the distinctions between it and an
ARISTOCRACY (where the government was controlled by a
few chosen because of their familial lineage). In oli-
garchies, the exclusive ruling circle consisted of rich men,
not only men of noble birth. Of course, there was some
overlap between these two groups, and oligarchy usually
represented a development from aristocracy, due to
urbanization and commercialization in the 700s–400s
B.C.E. The inroads made by wealth against privileges of
birth are well documented in the indignant verses of aris-
tocratic poets such as THEOGNIS (ca. 550 B.C.E.).
Oligarchy and DEMOCRACY were the two main oppos-
ing government forms of Classical Greece (400s–300s
B.C.E.). The champion of oligarchies everywhere was
SPARTA, and its enemy was ATHENS, the beacon of democ-
racy (whose citizens, nevertheless, included an angry
pro-oligarchic minority). The PELOPONNESIAN
WAR
(431–404 B.C.E.) was in part a conflict between these two
forms of government. Sparta’s ruling group was called the
“council of elders” (gerousia), made up of the two kings
plus 28 other wealthy men. Five annually elected officials
called ephors also exercised considerable power, particu-
larly concerning judgment and punishment.
Other prominent oligarchies of the 400s B.C.E.
included CORINTH, THEBES, and LOCRI (in Greek ITALY).
See also HOPLITE; POLIS.
Further reading: J. M. Moore, trans., Aristotle and
Xenophon on Democracy and Oligarchy (Los Angeles:
oligarchy
229

University of California Press, 1975); W. G. Forrest,
“Democracy and Oligarchy in Sparta and Athens,” Echos
du monde classique 2 (1983): 285–296.
olives
See FARMING.
Olympia
Sanctuary and sports complex, sacred to the
great god ZEUS, in the region known as ELIS, in the west-
ern PELOPONNESE. This was the site of the most impor-
tant panhellenic festival of ancient Greece, the OLYMPIC
GAMES. The name Olympia refers to Olympian Zeus—
that is, Zeus, king of the gods on Mt. OLYMPUS. (However,
Mt. Olympus itself stands in THESSALY, in northeastern
Greece, hundreds of miles from Olympia.)
The elaborate complex, which has been partly
restored by archaeologists since 1829, lay in a pleasant
valley, near the confluence of the rivers Alphaeus and
Kladeus. ARCHAEOLOGY has revealed traces of pre-Greek
settlement and it may be that Olympia—like DELPHI and
certain other Greek sanctuaries—was a holy place for the
inhabitants of the land long before the first Greek
invaders arrived circa 2100 B.C.E. The site was inhabited
by Greeks of the Mycenaean era (around 1600–1200
B.C.E.), but Olympia truly emerged after 776 B.C.E., the
traditional date for the first Olympic Games.
In its heyday, Olympia contained hostels, restaurants,
a meeting hall, and many other amenities, but it was
never a city in the political sense, for it had neither citi-
zens nor a government. The heart of Olympia was the
sacred precinct, or Altis—a walled enclosure whose name
apparently comes from alsos, “grove.” From early times
the Altis contained a temple of the goddess HERA and a
shrine to the hero PELOPS (mythical founder of the
Games). In 457 B.C.E. the magnificent Doric-style temple
of Zeus was completed inside the Altis. This building was
wrecked by an earthquake at the end of antiquity, but the
foundations and platform are visible today, as are the
temple’s huge, collapsed column drums (made of a lime-
stone visibly comprised of fossilized shellfish). The tem-
ple’s pedimental sculptures, partly preserved and now
displayed in the Olympia Museum, showed two mythical
scenes: the battle between Lapiths and CENTAURS at King
Pirithoos’s wedding, and the chariot race of Pelops and
Oinomaus. The temple housed a colossal cult statue of
Zeus, fashioned by the Athenian sculptor PHEIDIAS (ca.
430 B.C.E.) and reckoned as one of the SEVEN WONDERS
OF THE WORLD for its size and solemn majesty.
The statue, about 40 feet high, showed the god
seated, enthroned. One ancient viewer objected that
Zeus’s head was so close to the roofbeams that he could
not have stood up without taking off the roof, but in the
temple’s darkened interior this disproportion was proba-
bly not obvious. The god’s flesh was made of ivory; his
cloak, sandals, and accoutrements were GOLD. A human-
size figure of the goddess NIK¯E, in ivory and gold, stood
atop his right-hand palm, and his left hand held a scepter
of various precious metals, tipped with a golden eagle. His
cloak was inlaid with images of animals and lilies, and on
his head was a golden wreath of facsimile olive leaves.
This statue had the power to awe those who stood
before it. The Roman orator Quintilian (ca. 70 C.E.)
stated that it added something to human religion. The
great work survived through the Roman era until the
400s C.E. when, having been removed to the eastern
Roman capital at Constantinople, it was accidentally
destroyed in a fire. Our scanty knowledge of the statue’s
appearance comes from its image on ancient Elean coins
and its description by the travel writer PAUSANIAS (2) (ca.
150 C.E.).
Modern archaeological excavations at the site of
Phidias’s workshop at Olympia have uncovered traces of
ivory and gold, and terra-cotta molds (apparently for the
casting of Zeus’s golden cloak). Also, rather spectacularly,
a red-figure ceramic jug has been found, inscribed with
Phidias’s name—his “office coffee mug.”
Other ancient splendors of Olympia included many
statues of prior victors and a row of 12 treasury houses,
built between about 600 and 480 B.C.E. by various rich
states of the Greek world, to hold offerings to the god. Of
these, the Treasury of the Sikyonians has been recon-
structed by modern archaeologists. Along the valley were
the structures for the sporting events: a huge GYMNASIUM;
a hippodrome for horse and chariot races; and a stadium
(now fully restored) for footraces, where 40,000 specta-
tors could be seated on grass embankments that had no
need of benches.
Olympia was first excavated by French archaeologists
in 1829, and their finds began to be transported to the
Louvre. The Greek government intervened and stopped
the excavation. In about 1875, German archaeologists
resumed investigation of the site, and work by the Ger-
man Institute of Archaeology in Athens continues at
Olympia to the present day.
See also ARCHITECTURE; MILTIADES; SCULPTURE.
Further reading: Theodora Karaghiorga, Ancient
Olympia
(Athens: Apollo Editions, 1971); Nikolaos
Yalouris, Olympia: Altis and Museum, 2d ed., translated by
Paul J. Dine (Athens: Art Editions Meletzis and
Papadakis, 1973); G. Schneider, “Bronze Casting at
Olympia in Classical Times,” Masca Journal 6 (1898):
17–24; Manolis Andronikos, Olympia, 2d ed., translated
by Brian de Jongh (Athens: Ekdotike Athenon, 1990);
Catherine Morgan, Athletes and Oracles: The Transforma-
tion of Olympia and Delphi in the Eighth Century B.C.
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 1990).
Olympic Games
These were the oldest and most
important of the ancient Greek sports-and-religious festi-
vals. Open to all male, free-born Greeks, the Olympic
Games were held every four years in honor of the god
230
olives

ZEUS, at OLYMPIA, in the western PELOPONNESE. Tradi-
tionally the games were said to have been established by
the hero HERAKLES, or alternatively by the hero PELOPS,
but in practical terms the Greeks recognized 776 B.C.E. as
the inaugural date, the date at which a record of victors
was first begun.
The games were administered by the people of ELIS
(the general region of Olympia). However, after King
PHEIDON of ARGOS marched his troops into Olympia and
took over the games in (probably) 668 B.C.E., he handed
Olympia over to be run by the people of the nearby town
of Pisa. The Pisans held Olympia for about 90 years, until
the Eleans, with Spartan support, won it back (in about
580 B.C.E.).
In the earliest years, the contests took place all on
one day and consisted of only two events: WRESTLING and
the footrace (one lap of the stadium). Later, perhaps after
King Pheidon’s intervention, the games were enlarged to
include races for saddle horses and for horse- and mule-
drawn CHARIOTS. BY 471 B.C.E. the games spanned five
days—involving competitions, religious sacrifices, and
feasting—and included most of the famous sports events
of classical Greece: BOXING; PANKRATION; the PENTATHLON;
boys’ categories in footrace, wrestling, and boxing; and,
the final event of the sequence, the footrace for men in
armor. A separate festival, in honor of the goddess HERA,
was organized and run by WOMEN and included footraces
and dances for girls in three age groups. For every con-
test, the prize for victory was nothing more than a gar-
land of olive leaves.
The games were of immense political and social
importance. To Olympia every four years crowded the
most influential people (almost exclusively men) of the
Greek world, as spectators and competitors. Statesmen
such as the Syracusan tyrant HIERON (1) (ca. 468 B.C.E.)
and the Athenian ALCIBIADES (ca. 416 B.C.E.) spent for-
tunes developing chariot teams to enroll at the games.
Famous writers such as HERODOTUS and EMPEDOKLES
gave readings at Olympia, probably at privately organized
side events. Drinking parties of the rich and powerful
took place. The spirit of the Olympic Games—religious
fervor and aristocratic pride—can be found in the victory
odes of the Theban poet PINDAR (ca. 470 B.C.E.).
The four-year cycle between Olympic festivals was
known as an Olympiad and was used as a chronological
device in the ancient world. For instance, “the 67th
Olympiad” signified the period that we would call 512-
508 B.C.E., which began 264 years (66 by 4 years) after
the first Olympiad (776 B.C.E.). Sometimes the ancients
remembered a specific year by noting that that was the
year when so-and-so won the footrace at Olympia.
The most striking aspect of the games was the
Olympic Truce, which was announced by heralds in all
major cities of mainland Greece months before the start
of each Olympic festival. Whatever wars might be in
progress elsewhere, the region of Elis and the site of
Olympia were sacrosanct for the truce. During the PELO-
PONNESIAN WAR, for example, visitors from enemy cities
coexisted peaceably at Olympia during the games. In
420 B.C.E. the Spartans, having attacked Elean territory
after the truce was declared, were barred from compet-
ing that year. To enforce the ban, several thousand
troops from Elis, ARGOS, and MANTINEIA (all enemies of
Sparta) guarded Olympia during the competition. A
more notorious truce-breaking occurred in 364 B.C.E.,
when the Pisans and Arcadians invaded Olympia and
fought a battle against the Eleans that raged within the
sanctuary itself.
The games remained prestigious—although less cen-
tral—in the Roman era (after about 150 B.C.E.), and sur-
vived nearly to the end of antiquity. In 393 C.E. they were
abolished by an edict of the Byzantine emperor Theodo-
sius I that prohibited all pagan festivals.
The first modern Olympics were organized in Athens
in 1896 by a Frenchman named Baron Pierre de Cou-
bertin. Fourteen nations sent teams to participate, but the
majority of the athletes were from Greece. The events
included track and field events, fencing, weightlifting,
rifle and pistol shooting, tennis, cycling, swimming, gym-
nastics, and wrestling. One race was added that was not
part of the ancient festival: the 40-kilometer race that
began at the site of MARATHON and finished in the
Olympic Stadium. The marathon supposedly commemo-
rates the run of a soldier named Pheidippides, said to
have run to Athens with news of the Greeks’ victory
against the Persians at Marathon in 490 B.C.E.
See also SPORT.
Olympic Games
231
A bronze jockey, ca. 668 B.C.E., minus his horse but still 
holding part of the reins. Races for saddle horses were a later
addition to the Olympic Games. (Alison Frantz Photographic
Collection, American School of Classical Studies at Athens)

Further reading: G. Nagy, “Pindar’s Olympian 1 and
the Aetiology of the Olympic Games,” Transactions of the
American Philological Association 116 (1986): 71–88;
Richard Woff, The Ancient Greek Olympics (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1999); Ulrich Sinn, Olympia:
Cult, Sport, and Ancient Festival, translated by Thomas
Thornton (Princeton, N.J.: M. Wiener, 2000); Terence
Measham, Elisabeth Spathari, and Paul Donnelly, 1000
Years of the Olympic Games: Treasures of Ancient Greece.
Exhibition (Sydney: Powerhouse, 2000); Hugh M. Lee,
The Program and Schedule of the Ancient Olympic Games
(Hildesheim, Germany: Weidmann, 2001); W. Lindsay
Adams and Larry R. Gerlach, The Olympic Games: Ancient
and Modern (Boston: Pearson Custom Publishing, 2002);
Judith Swaddling, The Ancient Olympic Games (London:
British Museum, 2004); Stephen G. Miller, Ancient Greek
Athletics (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press,
2004).
Olympias
See also ALEXANDER THE GREAT.
Olympus, Mt.
The tallest mountain in mainland
Greece, Mt. Olympus was, in MYTH, the celestial home of
ZEUS and most of the other important gods. The massif,
whose height reaches 9,570 feet, rises in the region of
THESSALY, in northeastern Greece.
The religious awe that Mt. Olympus inspired proba-
bly had to do with the mystery of its summit, often
cloaked in stormclouds appropriate to the weather god
Zeus. The massif also served as a barrier to any invasion
force moving southward from MACEDON, and it may have
represented an important milestone for the first immi-
grating Greeks of around 2100 B.C.E.
Throughout Greek literature, Mt. Olympus is identi-
fied as the royal court of Zeus—the “Olympian”—and of
his foremost subordinate gods. These 12 Olympian gods,
aside from Zeus, were: HERA,
POSEIDON,
APOLLO,
ARTEMIS, ATHENA, APHRODITE, ARES, DEMETER, DIONYSUS,
HERMES, and HESTIA. They comprised the important
deities for most spheres of life, with the exception of the
Underworld.
See also AFTERLIFE; HADES; RELIGION.
Further reading:
Ilias Venezis, Mount Olympos
(Athens, 1957).
Olynthos
This major Greek city is situated in the
northwestern Aegean region known as CHALCIDIC¯E.
Located on the coastal plain of the Chalcidic mainland, at
the head the Gulf of Torone, Olynthos was originally a
settlement of the non-Greek, native Bottiaeans. It was
occupied by local Chalcidic Greeks after the non-Greek
settlement was destroyed by the army of the Persian king
XERXES, in 479 B.C.E.
With its southern neighbor POTIDAEA, Olynthos
became one of the two premier cities of Chalcidic¯e. After
Potidaea revolted from the Athenian-controlled DELIAN
LEAGUE (432 B.C.E.), Olynthos served as a regional
fortress against the retaliatory Athenian invasion. Soon
thereafter, Olynthos became the capital of the newly
formed local federation known as the Chalcidic League.
In 349 B.C.E. war broke out between the Chalcidic
League and the aggressive Macedonian king PHILIP II.
Philip besieged Olynthos. Despite the efforts at ATHENS of
the statesman DEMOSTHENES (1) to organize military aid
for Olynthos (in his three extant speeches called the
Olynthiacs), Philip captured the city with the help of
traitors within (348 B.C.E.). He razed Olynthos to the
ground and sold the inhabitants as SLAVES. Reports of the
pitiful condition of these captives provided Demosthenes
with material for more of his speeches, the famous Philip-
pics. Demosthenes’ Third Philippic (341 B.C.E.) contains
the comment that a visitor to the Olynthos site would
never know that a city had stood there.
Olynthos was excavated by American archaeologists
in 1928–1934 C.E. and published extensively in a 14-vol-
ume series, Excavations at Olynthus, by David M. Robin-
son. More recent work has been done at the site by
Nicholas Cahill, who has created a database (available
online at http://www.stoa.org/olynthus/) containing all
the artifacts found in the houses during Robinson’s exca-
vations, room-by-room. The site, free from any later
buildings, has provided one of the clearest pictures of the
floor plans of ordinary ancient Greek houses. The city
was laid out on a grid pattern, an admirable example of
the Greek town planning that developed in the mid-400s
B.C.E. Over a hundred houses are visible in plan, most
dating from the late 400s and early 300s B.C.E.
See also ARCHAEOLOGY; HIPPODAMOS.
Further reading: Lisa C. Nevett, House and Society in
the Ancient Greek World (New York: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1999); Nicholas Cahill, Household and City
Organization at Olynthus (New Haven, Conn.: Yale Uni-
versity Press, 2002).
orators
See RHETORIC.
Orchomenos
Three ancient Greek cities were known
by this name, the most important being “Minyan”
Orchomenos in BOEOTIA, in central Greece. The other
two cities called Orchomenos were located in ARCADIA
and THESSALY. The name seems to be Greek, meaning
“place of the strong battle rank.”
The site of Boeotian Orchomenos was first excavated
by archaeologist Heinrich Schliemann in 1880 C.E. Build-
ings uncovered from the Mycenaean era (1600–1200
B.C.E.) include a palace and an elaborate tomb. Such rem-
nants—along with certain hints in extant Greek myth—
indicate that Orchomenos was one of the wealthiest
Mycenaean-Greek cities, surpassing its neighbor and
enemy, THEBES.
232
Olympias

This Mycenaean Orchomenos was the seat of a rich
and powerful clan named the MINYANS (Minuai), who may
originally have come from the Thessalian Orchomenos.
The Boeotian city thrived from its location—controlling
the land route through central Greece—and from its fertile
farmland, claimed by the engineered draining of nearby
Lake Kopaïs.
But by the main centuries of ancient Greek history,
Orchomenos had declined greatly, due to Thebes’s domi-
nance and the refilling of Lake Kopaïs. Orchomenos
fought as a Theban ally against ATHENS in the PELOPON-
NESIAN WAR (431–404 B.C.E.) but sided with SPARTA
against Thebes during the CORINTHIAN WAR (395–386
B.C.E.). After Thebes had replaced Sparta as the foremost
Greek power (371 B.C.E.), revenge was swift. Orchomenos
was destroyed by the Theban-led Boeotian League in 364
B.C.E. It was rebuilt, then again destroyed in 349 B.C.E.
See also
ARCHAEOLOGY; MYCENAEAN
CIVILIZATION;
POTTERY.
Further reading: Penelope Mountjoy, Orchomenos V:
Mycenaean Pottery from Orchomenos, Eutresis, and Other
Boeotian Sites (Munich: Verlag der Bayerischen Akademie
der Wissenschaften, 1983): F. E. Winter, “Arcadian Notes
1. Identification of the Agora Buildings at Orchomenos
and Mantinea,” Echos du monde classique 6 (1987):
235–246; F. E. Winter, “Arcadian Notes 2. The Walls of
Mantinea, Orchomenos, and Kleitor,” Echos du monde
classique 8 (1989): 189–200; Katie Demakopoulou, ed.,
Troy, Mycenae, Tiryns, Orchomenos: Heinrich Schliemann,
the 100th Anniversary of his Death: Athens, National
Archaeological Museum, 15th June–2nd September 1990,
Berlin, Altes Museum, 4th October 1990–15th January 1991
(Athens: Ministry of Culture of Greece, 1990).
Orestes
In MYTH,
Orestes was the son of King
AGAMEMNON and KLYTEMNESTRA, of the city of MYCENAE
(alternatively, of the city of ARGOS). In the best-known
version of the tale, told by the Athenian playwright
AESCHYLUS in his Oresteian Trilogy (presented in 458
B.C.E.), Orestes murders his mother and her lover,
Aegisthus, in vengeance for their murder of his father.
But having broken the bonds of nature by committing
matricide, Orestes is driven mad by the demonic FURIES,
the agents of divine punishment. Orestes flees to
DELPHI—and then, in Aeschylus’s version, to ATHENS—
and is eventually cleansed of his sin. The Greeks were
intrigued by the horror and legalism of Orestes’
dilemma—compelled by filial duty to avenge his father
(even against his mother), but doomed to be punished
for doing so. A similar myth developed around the Argive
hero ALCMAEON (1).
The earliest surviving version of the story is a men-
tion in HOMER’s epic poem the Odyssey (written down
around 750 B.C.E.). There Orestes has killed Aegisthus,
who (in this version) is the principal culprit in Agamem-
non’s murder. It is not stated specifically whether Orestes
also killed Klytemnestra, but it is implied. Homer says
nothing of the Furies.
The Furies may have been introduced into the story
by STESICHORUS (ca. 580 B.C.E.), the sophisticated Sicil-
ian-Greek poet whose work had a strong influence on
Aeschylus and other later writers. Stesichorus wrote a
narrative poem called the Oresteia, which survives only
in fragments. In this version the Furies pursued Orestes
and APOLLO gave him a special bow, designed to ward
them off.
The Orestes story also is told in surviving plays by
SOPHOKLES and EURIPIDES. A side-by-side comparison of
the three great Athenian tragedians’ versions sheds light on
their differing values and messages. Aeschylus is con-
cerned (primarily) with settling Orestes’ controversial posi-
tion in the world order and (secondarily) with glorifying
the playwright’s beloved Athens. Orestes is introduced in
the second play of Aeschylus’s trilogy, the Libation Bearers
(Cho¯ephoroi), as having been ordered by Apollo to take
vengeance on Klytemnestra and Aegisthus. Assisted by his
friend Pylades and sister ELECTRA, Orestes can hardly bring
himself to kill his mother but, having done so, he is imme-
diately assailed by the Furies. The trilogy’s third play, the
Eumenides (kindly ones), features Orestes’ legal acquittal at
the hands of the Athenian homicide court, the AREOPAGOS,
with the help of Apollo and ATHENA.
The version presented in Sophokles’ Electra (ca.
418–410 B.C.E.) is closer to the simple Homeric story.
Orestes shows only a little natural reluctance to do the
deed, and afterward there are no Furies. Euripides in his
Orestes (408 B.C.E.) and Electra (probably 417 B.C.E.)
seeks to bring out the myth’s most disturbing implica-
tions. His Orestes emerges, not as a heroic figure, but as
an enthusiastic killer who has sexual feelings for his own
sister. After the crime, the Furies (not shown onstage) are
made to be simply phantoms of Orestes’ troubled mind.
In Euripides’ Iphigenia in Tauris (ca. 413 B.C.E.), Orestes
must expiate his guilt by journeying to the Crimean
peninsula, at the edge of the known world.
Orestes’ slaying of Aegisthus was a popular subject of
vase painting and SCULPTURE in the 500s and 400s B.C.E.
Ancient Greek artists also frequently depicted Orestes in
the Sanctuary of Apollo at Delphi, where he sought sanc-
tuary from the angry Furies. The location is represented
either with the omphalos (the naval of the world) or the
sacred Delphic tripod. Orestes himself is a handsome
youth, often shown in heroic nudity wearing a chlamys
(cloak) and holding a sword.
Further reading: William Whallon, Problem and
Spectacle: Studies in the Oresteia (Heidelberg, Germany:
Winter, 1980); D. J. Conacher, Aeschylus’ Oresteia: A Lit-
erary Commentary (Toronto: University of Toronto Press,
1989); James Diggle, The Textual Tradition of Euripides’
Orestes (New York: Oxford University Press, 1991); Ann
Batchelder, The Seal of Orestes: Self-reference and Authority
Orestes
233

in Sophokles’ Electra (Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Little-
field, 1995); Deborah Boedeker, “Hero Cult and Politics
in Herodotus: The Bones of Orestes,” in Cultural Poetics
in Archaic Greece: Cult, Performance, Politics, edited by
Carol Dougherty and Leslie Kurke (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1998), 164–177.
Orion
In MYTH, this hunter of enormous size was partic-
ularly skilled with the bow and arrow. He is variously
described as the son of the Earth goddess GAEA or as the
son of the god POSEIDON and Euryal¯e the Gorgon. Orion
was killed by the goddess ARTEMIS. His offense may have
been his arrogant challenge of Artemis to a discus-throwing
contest or his attempted rape of one of her attendants. Or
his great hunting prowess may have proved to be an affront
to the jealous goddess of the hunt. In any case, his huge
corpse was set in the sky as the constellation Orion.
Further reading: Michael Speidel, Mithras-Orion:
Greek Hero and Roman Army God (Leiden, Netherlands:
E. J. Brill, 1980); Joseph Fontenrose, Orion: The Myth of
the Hunter and the Huntress (Berkeley: University of Cali-
fornia Press, 1981).
Orpheus
In Greek MYTH, Orpheus was a Thracian lyre-
player and singer of supernatural ability. Although
THRACE was a savage, non-Greek land, Orpheus was a
civilizing influence; his song could charm not only
humans and beasts, but trees and stones as well. He
served as one of the Argonauts who sailed with the Thes-
salian hero JASON (1) to win the Golden Fleece. But the
best-known story about Orpheus tells how when his wife,
Eurydic¯e, died from snakebite, he ventured down into
the Underworld to seek the god HADES’ permission to
bring her up from the dead. Permission was granted, on
condition that Orpheus not look back as Eurydic¯e fol-
lowed, until they should reach the upper world. But as
they approached the upper world Orpheus, not hearing
her footsteps behind him, did look back, and with a cry
Eurydic¯e disappeared forever.
Despondent, Orpheus neglected all other WOMEN,
thereby infuriating the Thracian women—or, more
specifically in some versions, those female followers of
the god DIONYSUS known as MAENADS. These women tore
Orpheus limb from limb in the course of a Dionysian
frenzy and pitched his head into the Thracian River
Hebrus. The head floated, singing, out to sea, to the
Aegean island of LESBOS.
The background to these legends is uncertain.
Orpheus may have been an actual poet and musician, per-
haps of royal blood, in Thrace around 700 B.C.E. He was
said to be the founder of the mystic religious cult known
as ORPHISM, which arose in the Greek world in the 600s
B.C.E. and revered certain religious poems supposedly
written by him. He also was said to have introduced male
HOMOSEXUALITY among the Thracians, in consequence of
his later aversion to women. Alternatively, he was said to
have lived celibate after Eurydic¯e’s death.
For the classical Greeks, Orpheus symbolized the civi-
lizing or soothing power of MUSIC. One well-known Athe-
nian vase painting of around 500 B.C.E. shows him playing
his lyre and singing to a group of charmed (but fierce-look-
ing) Thracian warriors. The Athenian playwright AESCHY-
LUS wrote a tragic trilogy (now lost) about Orpheus.
See also LYRIC POETRY.
Further reading: D. A. Amyx, “The Orpheus Legend in
Art,” Archaeological News 5 (1976): 25–41; F. Graf,
“Orpheus, a Poet among Men,” in Interpretations of Greek
Mythology, edited by J. Bremmer (London: Croom Helm,
1987), 80–106; Joan M. Erikson, Legacies: Prometheus,
Orpheus, Socrates (New York: Norton, 1993); Ilona J. Jes-
nick, The Image of Orpheus in Roman Mosaic: An Exploration
of the Figure of Orpheus in Graeco-Roman Art and Culture
with Special Reference to Its Expression in the Medium of
Mosaic in Late Antiquity (Oxford: Archaeopress, 1997).
Orphism
This religious cult probably arose in the 600s
B.C.E., with followers eventually at ATHENS and the Greek
cities of SICILY and southern ITALY. Orphism’s beliefs were
set down in religious poems supposedly composed by the
Thracian musician ORPHEUS. These poems, now lost, are
known from mentions by later writers.
Orphism emphasized a belief in the transmigration of
souls. This concept, later adapted by the Greek philoso-
phers PYTHAGORAS (ca. 530 B.C.E.) and EMPEDOKLES (ca.
450 B.C.E.), claimed that a dead person’s soul generally
goes on to inhabit another life form, whether human, ani-
mal, or vegetable. Like the ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES and
other mystery cults, Orphism promised its followers a
happy existence in the AFTERLIFE.
The Orphic MYTH centered on a holy infant named
Zagreus, who was seen as an alter ego of the god DIONY-
SUS. In this peculiar tale, perhaps derived from Thracian
legend, the great god ZEUS seduced or raped his own
daughter, the goddess PERSEPHONE. She bore the baby
Zagreus, whom Zeus intended to make supreme among
the gods. However, the jealous TITANS, after luring the
child to their midst, tore him limb from limb and ate
him. Zeus angrily blasted the Titans with a thunderbolt,
incinerating them. From their ashes emerged the first
humans. Zagreus’s living heart, saved from the butchery,
was now swallowed by Zeus, who passed it on supernatu-
rally in begetting his next divine son, Dionysus.
In Orphic belief, Zagreus’s ghoulish murder was a
kind of Original Sin, in which all humans shared. Conse-
quently, atonement had to be made to Zagreus’s bereaved
mother, Persephone, who, as queen of the Underworld,
judges people after death. Apparently Orphism viewed
the cycle of transmigration as a kind of purgatory: Only
by living successive lives (on earth and also in the Under-
world) could a person’s soul be cleansed of its Original
234
Orion

Sin. Reincarnation might mean reward or punishment,
depending on Persephone’s judgment of one’s conduct in
a prior life. The soul might descend to inhabit beasts or
paupers, or ascend to statesmen and heroes. The Orphic
devotee hoped eventually for release from this round of
reincarnations. “I have escaped from the wheel of pain,”
one Orphic verse announces, referring to the achieve-
ment of bliss in the other world. The golden leaves dis-
covered by archaeologists in Greek tombs of southern
Italy from around 400 B.C.E., containing precise instruc-
tions for the soul’s procedure on reaching the Under-
world, are thought to be Orphic documents.
Related to this spiritual preparation, Orphism also
involved strict behavioral taboos. Orphics were notorious
for abstaining from hunting and meat-eating, and even
from wearing wool. They also were known for sexual
abstinence—or at least for discouraging heterosexual
intercourse—in order to thwart pregnancy; pregnancy
was lamentable because it imprisoned another soul in a
human body. The Orphics said that the body (soma) was
the tomb (s¯ema) of the soul. The higher life was the puri-
fied soul’s existence in Persephone’s realm.
Orphism’s otherworldliness and contempt for bodily
existence recommended it to the Athenian philosopher
PLATO (ca. 370 B.C.E.). But its strict code of behavior
struck many Greeks as crankish and kept Orphism on the
mystic fringe.
Further reading: W. K. C. Guthrie, Orpheus and
Greek Religion: A Study of the Orphic Movement (London:
Methuen, 1952); M. Christopoulos, “The Spell of
Orpheus. Orpheus and the Orphic Religion Movement,”
Métis 6 (1991): 205–222; Ralph Abraham, Chaos, Gaia,
Eros: A Chaos Pioneer Uncovers the Three Great Streams of
History (San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco, 1994); Barry
Sandywell, The Beginnings of European Theorizing: Reflex-
ivity in the Archaic Age (London: Routledge, 1996).
ostracism
This political practice was unique to Athe-
nian DEMOCRACY in the 400s B.C.E., whereby the people
could vote to banish any citizen for 10 years. Created in
reaction to the tyrannies of PEISISTRATUS and HIPPIAS (1),
ostracism was intended for use against wealthy politi-
cians who, while not guilty of wrongdoing, might still be
suspected of hoping to seize supreme power.
Once a year, at an appointed time in winter, the citi-
zens in ASSEMBLY voted on whether an ostracism should
be held that spring—no candidates were named. If the
majority voted yes, then the ostracism vote itself took
place a few months later. There each citizen had the
chance to write down the name of one person for exile.
Because clay potsherds were the ancient world’s equiva-
lent of scrap paper, each voter used a sherd (Greek:
ostrakon, plural: ostraka), on which to scratch the
intended victim’s name. The potsherds gave this unique
practice its name, ostrakismos. The vote was secret, with
officials making sure no one handed in more than one
ballot. If a quorum of 6,000 votes was reached, then the
man with the most votes had to remove himself from the
city within 10 days.
Ostracism in ancient Greece was not a criminal pun-
ishment. The ostracized individual was not considered a
felon or a traitor; he retained his Athenian citizenship
and property while absent and was allowed to return after
a period of 10 years. During the state emergency of the
PERSIAN WARS, two Athenians under ostracism, ARISTIDES
and XANTHIPPUS, were allowed to return immediately
(480 B.C.E.).
According to ARISTOTLE’s treatise the Constitution of
Athens, the ostracism law was created by the reformer
KLEISTHENES (1) in about 508 B.C.E., soon after the expul-
sion of Hippias. Clearly, the law was aimed against Hip-
pias’s friends who might dream of reinstating a dictator.
But what puzzles modern scholars is that the people did
not vote their first ostracism until 487 B.C.E. (The victim
was Hippias’s kinsman Hipparchus.) This 20-year delay
has led some historians to suggest that the ostracism law
really was created soon after the Battle of MARATHON (490
B.C.E.), but was later falsely ascribed to Kleisthenes.
After Hipparchus, four more men were soon ostra-
cized amid the political turmoil of the 480s B.C.E., and it
is thought that about eight others fell victim during the
rest of the 400s B.C.E. These included the left-wing states-
man-soldier THEMISTOKLES (ca. 471 B.C.E.) and the con-
servative statesman-soldier KIMON (462 B.C.E.). This
clearly shows that ostracism had quickly become a tool
by which the two political parties could attack each
other. Many other Athenians were named as ostracism
candidates but did not receive majority votes—as indi-
cated by the 64 names compiled from the several thou-
sand ostraka
discovered in modern archaeological
excavations of the Athenaian AGORA and other sites.
The last successful ostracism was of the demogogue
Hyperbolus (417 B.C.E.), after which the law fell out of use.
See also THUCYDIDES (2).
Further reading: Rudi Thomsen, The Origin of
Ostracism. A Synthesis (Copenhagen: Gyldendal, 1972);
A. E. Samuel, Death and Taxes: Ostraka in the Royal
Ontario Museum (Toronto: A. M. Hakkert for the Ameri-
can Society of Papyrologists, 1971–1976); Kathleen
McNamee, Abbreviations in Greek Literary Papyri and
Ostraca (Chico, Calif.: Scholars Press, 1981); V. J. Rosir-
ach, “Some Fifth and Fourth Century Views on the Pur-
pose of Ostracism,” Tyche 2 (1987): 161–170; J. L. Marr
and N. Worswick, “The Institution of Ostracism at
Athens,” Ostraka 3 (1994): 285–290; D. C. Mirhady, “The
Ritual Background to Athenian Ostracism,” Ancient His-
tory Bulletin 11 (1997): 13–19; John F. Oates, Checklist of
Editions of Greek, Latin, Demotic, and Coptic Papyri,
Ostraca, and Tablets (Oakville, Conn.: American Society
of Papyrologists, 2001).
ostracism
235

P
236
paean
See LYRIC POETRY.
Paestum
See POSEIDONIA.
painting
For the painting of scenes and portraits, the
Greeks used various surface materials, including POTTERY,
wooden panels, stone walls, leather, and textiles. Of
these, only pottery has preserved Greek painting in any
quantity, due to the ceramic’s durability and the paint
being baked into the clay during firing. Secondarily, there
exist some examples of tomb paintings—from walls of
graves or the insides of coffins—that were preserved
underground. But most other Greek paintings have van-
ished over time, as their surfaces crumbled to dust.
The paintings on pottery can reveal only a certain
amount about general Greek painting, because pottery
was a miniaturist discipline, with colors limited to those
that would survive firing. Modern scholars must therefore
rely partly on indirect evidence, such as ancient writers’
descriptions of specific paintings and techniques and cer-
tain surviving mosaics and wall paintings of the Roman
era, believed to be copies of earlier Greek paintings.
Aegean painting traditions predate the Greeks. By the
third millennium B.C.E. the Minoan peoples were making
pigments by processing and grinding down various vege-
tation, and were painting lively murals at their palaces in
CRETE. Among several existing examples is the famous
Toreador Fresco (ca. 1500 B.C.E.). Minoan whorl designs,
sea-life subjects, and human figures helped inspire Myce-
naean-Greek paintings on walls and pottery, from the
1500s B.C.E. onward.
Examples of Greek painting in the centuries after the
Mycenaeans’ fall are represented now mainly by works on
pottery: the whorls and other designs of the Protogeo-
metric style (ca. 1050–900 B.C.E.), the stick-figure human
and animal silhouettes of the Geometric style (ca.
900–700 B.C.E.), and the colors, detail, and primitive
depth perception of the ripe Corinthian style (ca.
625–550 B.C.E.).
CORINTH was a center for painting in the 600s B.C.E.,
and one rare surviving example of nonvase painting of
this era is a wooden plaque of ca. 500 B.C.E., found at a
site near Corinth. The painting shows a sacrificial proces-
sion, in a style reminiscent of the Corinthian vase paint-
ing that had peaked a century before. With its vivid red,
blue, and flesh tones, the work suggests the color range
available to the ancient Greek painter—well beyond the
restricted colors of the vase painter. The painting’s back-
ground is white, which would remain the chosen back-
ground color for decades to come.
ATHENS arose to replace Corinth as the artistic cen-
ter of Greece in the mid-500s B.C.E. By about 460 B.C.E.
the splendors of the Athenian AGORA included a Painted
Colonnade (Stoa Poikil¯e) where large wall paintings on
mythological and patriotic subjects were displayed. This
era produced the first Old Master of Greek painting—the
artist Polygnotos, born at THASOS but active at Athens in
the 470s–450s B.C.E. He is best remembered for two
mythological wall paintings, neither of which survives: a
scene of the fall of TROY, in the Painted Colonnade, and
a scene of the Underworld, painted at the Meeting House
at DELPHI. Polygnotos apparently used no foreshortening
but did innovatively convey depth by showing his
human figures standing at different levels—a device that
subsequently appears in Athenian vase painting. He also
pioneered the technique called encaustic, which used
heated wax for applying colors. Micon of Athens is

another painter remembered for public wall paintings in
these years.
The use of perspective is said to have developed at
Athens in the mid-400s B.C.E. partly through the produc-
tion of painted backdrops for Athenian stage perfor-
mances. The second half of the 400s B.C.E.—the
Athenian cultural heyday—saw greater use of shading to
indicate depth: The great name of the day was Apol-
lodoros of Athens, surnamed skiagraphos,
“shade
painter.” His younger contemporary and imitator
Zeuxis—from Greek ITALY but active at Athens circa
430–400 B.C.E.—was known for his illusionary realism.
Supposedly Zeuxis’s outdoor paintings of grapes
attracted hungry birds. Apollodoros, Zeuxis, and the
painter-sculptor Parrhasius (active at Athens in these
years) were all known for their mythological subjects.
But scenes from everyday life—a woman spinning,
young WOMEN playing at dice—are indicated by later
Roman copies of lost originals.
With Athens’s decline after the PELOPONNESIAN WAR
(431–404 B.C.E.), the Peloponnesian city of SIKYON
emerged briefly as a painting center. But it was the Mace-
donian king ALEXANDER THE GREAT (reigned 336–323
B.C.E.) who inspired a revival of Greek painting, at his
wealthy court. The best-known surviving painting of this
school comes from the Macedonian city of Aegai (mod-
ern Vergina, in northern Greece), from a wall of the royal
tombs excavated in 1977 C.E. The scene shows HADES,
the god of death, abducting the maiden goddess PERSE-
PHONE. Factual subjects are indicated by the admirable
Roman mosaic from the “House of the Faun” at Pompeii
(first century C.E.), showing the Persian king Darius III
fleeing from Alexander at the Battle of the Issus; this is
believed to be a copy of a Greek painting of the late 300s
B.C.E., presumably commissioned by Alexander or one of
his followers. The crowded battle scene shows intricate
use of detail and foreshortening.
The HELLENISTIC AGE (300–150 B.C.E.) saw changes
that anticipate the surviving examples of Roman painting
(first centuries B.C.E. and C.E., mainly). These include
development of landscape and other backgrounds to the
extent of dwarfing the foreground figures and a new
value placed on trompe l’oeil affects, such as mural-
painted false windows or corridors, opening to realistic
background scenes. Subjects became more whimsical
while expert techniques were forgotten, and by about 50
C.E. the Roman writer Pliny the Elder could describe
painting as a dying art.
See also ARCHITECTURE.
Further reading: V. J. Bruno, Form and Color in Greek
Painting (London: Norton, 1977); Martin Robertson,
Greek Painting (New York: Rizzoli, 1979); D. von Both-
mer, Greek Vase Painting, 2d ed. (New York: Metropolitan
Museum of Art, 1987); G. P. Schaus, “The Beginning of
Greek Polychrome Painting,” Journal of Hellenic Studies
108 (1988): 107–117; Stelios Lydakis, Ancient Greek
Painting and Its Echoes in Later Art (Los Angeles: J. Paul
Getty Museum, 2004).
Palladion
See ATHENA.
Pallas
See ATHENA.
Pan
This minor but picturesque Greek deity was the
god of flocks, shepherds, and mountain pastures. His
worship was centered in the rural area of ARCADIA, from
which it spread eventually throughout Greece. Various
myths describe Pan as the son of HERMES and a nymph,
Dryops, or as the son of Hermes and PENELOPE. The
Homeric Hymn to Pan says that his name comes from the
Greek word for “all” and signifies that he delighted all the
Olympian gods. He was, however, often associated with
DIONYSUS and the NYMPHS.
Pan is represented in art as a small male figure with
the horns, legs, hooves, and tail of a goat; he has a thick
beard, a snub nose, and pointed ears. Famous images of
Pan include the Barberini Faun at Munich, the Dancing
Faun at Naples, and the Pan of PRAXITELES at Rome.
He loved music and dancing, and frequently appears
playing a reed pipe or flute, which he was said to have
invented; it is called a syrinx or, in colloquial English, a
panpipe. Pan was said to have been particularly fond of the
poet PINDAR and his LYRIC POETRY, and Pindar reciprocated
by erecting a shrine to Pan in front of his house. At
ATHENS, Pan had a sanctuary on the ACROPOLIS and annual
festivities involving torch races. The Athenians adopted his
worship after an incident associated with the Battle of
MARATHON (490 B.C.E.), in which the god supposedly
appeared to an Athenian dispatch runner in Arcadia.
Pan had a tendency to appear suddenly to passersby,
and he was generally feared by travelers. As a result, any
sudden fright without an obvious cause came to be
attributed to Pan, leading to the English word “panic.”
Further reading: P. J. Riis, “A Colossal Athenian
Pan,” Acta Archaeologica 45 (1974): 124–133; Dorothy
Zayatz Baker, Mythic Masks in Self-Reflexive Poetry: A
Study of Pan and Orpheus (Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press, 1986); Philippe Borgeaud, The Cult
of Pan in Ancient Greece, translated by Kathleen Atlass
and James Redfield (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1988); F. Bader, “Pan,” Revue de philology, de litéra-
ture, et d’histoire anciennes 63 (1989): 7–46; Luba Freed-
man, The Classical Pastoral in the Visual Arts (New York:
P. Lang, 1989); P. Flourentzos, “The Iconography of the
God Pan in Cypriot Sculpture,” Report of the Department
of Antiquities, Cyprus (1989): 121–126; John Boardman,
The Great God Pan: The Survival of an Image (New York:
Thames and Hudson, 1998).
Panathenaia
This Athenian festival was celebrated
annually in midsummer, and especially elaborately
Panathenaia
237

every fourth year. Although its roots were in prehistory,
the Panathenaia (“all-Athens”) was instituted by the
Athenian tyrant PEISISTRATUS in the mid-500s B.C.E., to
serve as a nationalist-religious holiday. Considered to
be the birthday of the city’s patron goddess, ATHENA,
the festival included sacrifices, sports competitions,
and a procession of citizens (illustrated on the famous
PARTHENON frieze). At the fourth-yearly celebration—
called the Great Panathenaia—the procession would
carry a new peplos, or lady’s gown, up to the Athenian
ACROPOLIS. There the peplos would be presented to the
ancient olivewood statue of Athena Polias (“of the
city”) that was housed, after about 410 B.C.E., in the
Erechtheion.
Further reading:
Jiri Frel, Panathenaic Prize
Amphoras (Athens: Esperos, 1973); J. D. Mikalson,
“Erechtheus and the Panathenaia,” American Journal of
Philology 97 (1976): 141–153; R. Develin, “From Pana-
thenaia to Panathenaia,” Zeitschrift für Papyrologie und
Epigraphik 57 (1984): 133–138; Jenifer Neils, ed., God-
dess and Polis: The Panathenaic Festival in Ancient
Athens (Hanover, N.H.: Hood Museum of Art, Dart-
mouth College, 1992); Jenifer Neils, ed., Worshipping
Athena: Panathenaia and Parthenon (Madison: Univer-
sity of Wisconsin Press, 1996); Gregory Nagy, Plato’s
Rhapsody and Homer’s Music: The Poetics of the Pana-
thenaic Festival in Classical Athens (Washington, D.C.:
Center for Hellenic Studies, Trustees for Harvard Uni-
versity, 2002).
Pandora
See PROMETHEUS.
pankration
This one-on-one combative 
SPORT
in
antiquity combined BOXING and WRESTLING. The rules
allowed for punching, kicking, strangleholds, and twist-
ing of arms and fingers; only biting and gouging were
forbidden. Opponents fought naked, sometimes with
light boxing thongs to protect their hands. Victory
occurred when a contestant either signaled surrender or
was unable to continue. The bout was overseen by a ref-
eree, but pankration (“total strength” or “complete vic-
tory”) was a brutal sport: Contestants sometimes died
from injuries.
Pankration was an important event at the OLYMPIC
GAMES and other major athletic festivals. Successful
pankratiasts were celebrities throughout the Greek world.
Ancient vase paintings and stone carvings show pankra-
tion scenes, and further details are given by ancient writ-
ers and athletes’ tombstone inscriptions.
Pankration was a relative latecomer to Greek sport. It
is not mentioned in HOMER’s poems or in any writing
before the 400s B.C.E.
Further reading: Michael Poliakoff, Combat Sports in
the Ancient World: Competition, Violence, and Culture
(New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1987); Olga
Tzachou-Alexandri, ed., Mind and Body: Athletic Contests
in Ancient Greece (Athens: Ministry of Culture, National
Hellenic Committee I.C.O.M., 1989).
238
Pandora
Amphorae filled with oil pressed from olives from the sacred
trees of Athena were given as prizes in the Panathenaic
Games. One side of the amphora showed Athena and
included the inscription “from the games at Athens”; the other
side showed the event won. (The J. Paul Getty Museum)

Panticapaeum (Pantikapaion, 
“ditch 
town”)
This
important Greek colony on the northern BLACK SEA coast
was founded around 625 B.C.E. by settlers from MILETUS.
Panticapaeum guarded the Straits of Kerch in the eastern
Crimean Peninsula, in what is now southern Ukraine.
With access to the interior steppes along the river Don,
the city thrived from the export of Ukrainian grain to the
distant cities of the central Greek world. In the era
around 438–404 B.C.E., under the powerful Thracian-
Greek dynasty of the Spartocids, Panticapaeum became
the premier supplier of grain to imperial ATHENS. Threat-
ened in later centuries by local Scythian and Sarmatian
peoples, Panticapaeum passed into the hands of King
Mithridates VI of Pontus, who made it his capital (110
B.C.E.). After Mithridates’ defeat by the Romans, the city
came under control of ROME (63 B.C.E.).
Further reading: Gocha R. Tsetskhladze, ed., The
Greek Colonisation of the Black Sea Area: Historical Inter-
pretation of Archaeology (Stuttgart, Germany: F. Steiner,
1998); John Boardman, The Greeks Overseas: Their Early
Colonies and Trade, 4th ed. (London: Thames and Hud-
son, 1999): N. Z. Kunina, “Decorated Glass Medallions
from the Necropolis of Panticapaeum,” in Northern Pontic
Antiquities in the State Hermitage Museum, edited by J.
Boardman, S. Solovyov, and G. R. Tsetskhladze (Leiden,
Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 2001), 199–203; E. N. Khodza,
“A Terracotta Bust from Panticapaeum,” in Northern Pon-
tic Antiquities in the State Hermitage Museum, edited by J.
Boardman, S. Solovyov, and G. R. Tsetskhladze (Leiden,
Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 2001), 205–229; Gocha R. Tset-
skhladze and A. M. Snodgrass, Greek Settlements in the
Eastern Mediterranean and the Black Sea
(Oxford:
Archaeopress, 2002); D. V. Grammenos and E. K.
Petropoulos, eds., Ancient Greek Colonies in the Black Sea
(Thessaloníki: Archaeological Institute of Northern
Greece, 2003).
papyrus
See WRITING.
Paris
In MYTH, this handsome Trojan prince was the
son of King PRIAM and Queen HECUBA. The name Paris
(which has nothing to do with the capital city of France)
means “wallet” in Greek. It may have been a nickname,
since Paris had another name, Alexander (Greek: Alexan-
dros, “defender”).
With the help of the goddess APHRODITE, Paris
seduced Helen, wife of King MENELAUS of Lacedaemon,
and stole her away to TROY. This provoked the TROJAN
WAR, in which the Greeks besieged Troy for 10 years to
get Helen back. At the war’s end, Paris was dead, Troy
destroyed, and Helen was contentedly reunited with
Menelaus.
In HOMER’s Iliad, which presents events of the war’s
10th year, Paris is portrayed as affable but irresponsible,
in contrast to his elder brother, the champion HECTOR. In
the Iliad (book 3) Paris challenges Menelaus to single
combat but is nearly killed, and is saved only by
Aphrodite’s intervention. The goddess carries him back to
his bedchamber within the walls of Troy and summons
Helen to join him there.
The other tales of Paris’s life were told in various
post-Homeric works, including two epic poems now lost,
the Cypria (“Tales of Cyprus”) and Little Iliad. The narra-
tive is as follows: Hecuba, while pregnant with Paris,
dreamed that she gave birth to a flaming torch (a refer-
ence to the fated destruction of Troy). On the advice of
soothsayers, the infant Paris was handed over to be
killed, but—as in all similar Greek legends, such as that
of OEDIPUS—the entrusted servant merely abandoned the
baby in the wild. Rescued by shepherds, Paris grew to
manhood and reclaimed his royal title after an incident of
recognition at Troy.
The Judgment of Paris, the hero’s most famous
adventure, was recounted in the Cypria and was a
favorite subject in Greek vase painting and other art from
the 600s B.C.E. onward. After the goddess Eris (“strife”)
had set off a female rivalry in heaven (by offering a
golden apple inscribed “For the fairest”), the goddesses
HERA, ATHENA, and Aphrodite invited Paris to judge a
beauty contest among them. They presented themselves
naked to the young man. He chose the love goddess
Aphrodite, whose bribe had been to promise him the
world’s most beautiful woman. Paris thus won Helen and
the favor of Aphrodite. But henceforth he and all the Tro-
jans suffered the hatred of Hera and Athena.
In the war’s 10th year, sometime after the Greek
champion ACHILLES had slain Hector, it was Paris, with
the god APOLLO’s help, who killed Achilles. Paris shot an
arrow that struck Achilles in his only vulnerable spot, his
right heel, and the wound proved fatal. Later Paris was
slain by the Greek hero PHILOKTETES. Helen was briefly
married to Paris’s brother or half-brother Deiphobus,
before rejoining with Menelaus after the war.
See also EPIC POETRY; HELEN OF TROY.
Further reading: P. Connor, “Erotes at Work. Paris
and Helen on a Red-figured Hydria in Hildesheim (PM
1252),” Mediterranean Archaeology 2 (1989): 51–64.
Parmenides (ca. 515–440 B.C.E.) The most important
Greek philosopher before SOCRATES
Parmenides was a native of the Greek city of Elea, in
southwest ITALY. A member of a wealthy, influential fam-
ily, he was said to have served Elea as a statesman and
lawgiver. One of his teachers was supposedly the immi-
grant philosopher XENOPHANES. Parmenides was known
for having lived an exemplary life, and later Greeks
talked of an ideal “Parmenidean life.” He founded a
school of philosophy at Elea, known as the Eleatic
School. He visited ATHENS at least once, when he was
about 65 years old, and then became acquainted with
Parmenides
239

Socrates. This occasion is the setting for the Athenian
philosopher PLATO’s fictional dialogue Parmenides.
Parmenides’ significance to PHILOSOPHY lies in his
breakthrough theory that the material world as we
observe it is not real. Prior to Parmenides, the foremost
philosophers sought out essential reality by searching for
the fundamental ingredient of the material world (hence
the use of the name material philosophers to describe such
thinkers). THALES (ca. 570 B.C.E.) decided that the basic
element is water; ANAXIMENES (ca. 546 B.C.E.) called it
aer, or mist. For Parmenides, however, the real world is
not what we see and feel around us; he believed that it
can be understood only by mental contemplation. Reality
is an ideal world, a timeless unity, free of change, varia-
tion, generation, or destruction. Parmenides’ notion of an
ideal world, inherited in part from the Pythagoreans,
would later contribute significantly to Plato’s Theory of
Forms (mid-300s B.C.E.).
Parmenides was best known for his didactic poem,
On Nature, composed in hexameter verse and using the
oracular language of religious revelation. The poem was
divided into two parts, “The Way of Truth,” and “The
Way of Seeing.” Of these, the former seems to have been
the more important part, and fortunately about 150 lines
of it survive today. “The Way of Truth” describes how an
unnamed goddess instructs the poet that only the state-
ment “It is”—or “It exists”—can be valid. Nothing, the
goddess says, does not exist.
Further reading: Scott Austin, Parmenides: Being,
Bounds, and Logic (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University
Press, 1986); Karl R. Popper, The World of Parmenides:
Essays on the Presocratic Enlightenment (London: Rout-
ledge, 1998); Victor Caston and Daniel W. Graham, eds.,
Presocratic Philosophy: Essays in Honour of Alexander
Mourelatos (Aldershot, U.K.: Ashgate, 2002); Martin J.
Henn, Parmenides of Elea: A Verse Translation with Inter-
pretive Essays and Commentary to the Text (Westport,
Conn.: Praeger, 2003).
Parnassus, Mt.
See DELPHI.
Parthenon
This temple is dedicated to the goddess
ATHENA the Virgin (Parthenos), built atop the highest part
of the Athenian ACROPOLIS in 447–432 B.C.E. Still partly
standing today, the Parthenon is considered the most glo-
rious building of the ancient world—the epitome of the
Doric order of ARCHITECTURE and the embodiment of the
classical Greek values of harmony and proportion. The
Parthenon crowned a rich and powerful ATHENS that was
the cultural capital of Greece. The temple was a focus of
international tourism in ancient times, as it still is today;
its survival for nearly 2,500 years is due to its superior
design and workmanship. In fact, the Parthenon would
be in far better shape today had it not been blown half
apart in 1687 C.E. amid fighting between Turks and Vene-
tians, when a Venetian cannonball ignited a Turkish pow-
der magazine inside the building.
The Parthenon was constructed in the statesman
PERIKLES’ building program, overseen by the sculptor
PHEIDIAS and meant to celebrate the conclusion of hostili-
ties with PERSIA. Designed by the architects Iktinus and
Kallikrates, the temple was intended as the building pro-
gram’s masterpiece. The Parthenon stood close to the site
of a prior temple of Athena, which had been burned
down by the occupying Persians of 480 B.C.E.
Intriguingly, the Parthenon never housed the ancient,
olivewood statue of Athena Polias (which was eventually
placed in the nearby Erechtheion 1000). The Parthenon
was devoted to a grander, more modern vision of goddess
and city. The Parthenon’s cult statue was a 35-foot-high,
GOLD-and-ivory figure of Athena, sculpted by Phidias.
Although this statue is lost, marble copies and descrip-
tions by ancient writers give some idea of its appearance.
The goddess wore a warrior’s helmet, sleeveless robe,
and biblike aegis. On the palm of her right hand stood
a human-size statue of the goddess NIK¯E (Victory).
Athena’s left hand grasped the top rim of an upright
shield, which stood grounded by her left leg; a giant
snake coiled within the shield, and a long spear stood
upright in the crook of her left arm. The flesh of Athena
and Nik¯e was sculpted in ivory; the rest was gold.
The temple, measuring 228 feet by 101 feet at the top
of its entrance stairs, is built almost entirely of marble
quarried at Mt. Pentelicus, near Athens. It has 17
columns at each side and eight columns across the front
and back, rather than the more usual six.
Like other elaborate ancient Greek temples, the
Parthenon had its upper structures adorned by painted,
marble SCULPTURE. There were carved figures at the two
pediments (the triangular gables at front and back), at the
metopes (plaques along the sides), and along the frieze
(the continuous paneling that ran around the outside top
of the inner block, or cella). The pedimental sculptures
were carved entirely in the round. The east pediment
showed the mythical birth of Athena from the head of
ZEUS; the west showed the contest between Athena and
POSEIDON for mastery of Athens.
The metopes’ figures were carved nearly in the
round. They showed various mythical combats, each
symbolizing the triumph of civilization over barbarism or
West over East—a victory that, to the classical Greek
mind, had been actually reenacted in the recent PERSIAN
WARS. The combats in sculpture were on the east, gods
versus GIANTS; on the south, Lapiths versus CENTAURS; on
the west, Greeks versus AMAZONS; and on the north, the
TROJAN WAR.
The frieze carvings were in bas-relief. They were
unique in Greek temple sculpture for showing not a
mythical scene but a scene from real-life Athens—namely,
the procession at the festival of the PANATHENAIA. This
240
Parnassus, Mt.

daring glorification of contemporary Athens must have
struck some ancient observers as crass or sacrilegious.
Through decay and vandalism over the centuries,
many of the sculptures fell or were torn from their high
places. In 1800–1812 C.E., the British ambassador to
Greece—Thomas 
Bruce, 
Lord 
Elgin—bought 
and
removed many of the sculptures; these “Elgin Marbles”
are displayed in the British Museum. At the Parthenon
today, modern casts of the Panathenaic frieze replace
those carted off by Lord Elgin.
See also CAVALRY.
Further reading: Rhys Carpenter, The Architects of
the Parthenon (Harmondsworth, U.K.: Penguin, 1970);
Frank Brommer, The Sculptures of the Parthenon: Metopes,
Frieze, Pediments, Cult-statue, translated by Mary Whittall
(London: Thames and Hudson, 1979); John Boardman,
The Parthenon and Its Sculpture (Austin: University of
Texas Press, 1985); L. Kallet-Marx, “Did Tribute Fund the
Parthenon?” Classical Antiquity 8 (1989): 252–266; D.
Harris, The Treasures of the Parthenon and Erechtheion
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1995); E. B. Harrison, “The
Web of History. A Conservative Reading of the Parthenon
Frieze,” 
in 
Worshipping 
Athena: 
Panathenaia 
and
Parthenon, edited by Jenifer Neils (Madison: University of
Wisconsin Press, 1996): 198–214; J. J. Pollitt, “The
Meaning of the Parthenon Frieze,” in The Interpretation of
Architectural Sculpture in Greece and Rome, edited by
Diana Buitron-Oliver (Washington, D.C.: National
Gallery of Art, 1997), 50–65; Olga Palagia, The Pediments
of the Parthenon, 2d ed. (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J. Brill,
1998); J. Boardman, “The Parthenon Frieze. A Closer
Look,” Revue archéologique (1999): 305–330; S. A. Pope,
“Financing and Design. The Development of the
Parthenon 
Program 
and 
the 
Parthenon 
Building
Accounts,” in Miscellanea Mediterranea, edited by R. Ross
Holloway (Providence: Center for Old World Archaeol-
ogy and Art, Brown University, 2000), 61–69; M. R.
Lagerlöf, The Sculptures of the Parthenon: Aesthetics and
Interpretation (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press,
2000); Manolis Korres, Stones of the Parthenon (Los Ange-
les: J. Paul Getty Museum, 2000); Jenifer Neils, The
Parthenon Frieze (New York: Cambridge University Press,
2001); Mary Beard, The Parthenon (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 2003).
Patroklos
In HOMER’s epic poem the Iliad, Patroklos is
the close friend of the Greek hero ACHILLES in the TRO-
JAN WAR. Patroklos is the older of the two. In the Iliad
(book 22) he charges into battle wearing Achilles’ armor
(with Achilles’ permission) to rally the retreating Greeks.
Slain by the Trojan champion HECTOR, Patroklos is
avenged ferociously by Achilles, who kills numerous
Patroklos
241
The northwestern view of the Parthenon today. Many of the decaying sculptures of the upper structure were removed in 1800–1812
by the British ambassador to Greece, Thomas Bruce, Lord Elgin. The Elgin Marbles remain in London’s British Museum. (Alison Frantz
Photographic Collection, American School of Classical Studies at Athens)

Trojans, including Hector. Book 23 describes Patroklos’s
funeral games.
The Greeks of the 500s B.C.E. and later, judging
Patroklos and Achilles by the social standards of those
days, assumed that the two men were sexual partners, in
the familiar aristocratic pattern of an older man educat-
ing and protecting a younger. But the Iliad never states
this to be, and modern scholars believe that such socially
sanctioned male couplings were not part of the poet
Homer’s world (around 750 B.C.E.) nor part of the Myce-
naean world (around 1200 B.C.E.) that inspired the Iliad.
The modern consensus is that Homer imagined Patroklos
strictly as Achilles’ comrade and confidant.
See also HOMOSEXUALITY.
Further reading: Dale Sinos, Achilles, Patroklos and the
Meaning of Philos (Innsbruck, Austria: Institut für Sprach-
wissenschaft der Universität Innsbruck, 1980); Steven
Lowenstam, The Death of Patroklos: A Study in Typology
(Königstein, Germany: Hain, 1981); A. Petropoulou, “The
Interment of Patroklos (Iliad 23, 252–57),” American Jour-
nal of Philology 109 (1988): 482–495; David Konstan,
Friendship in the Classical World (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1997).
Pausanias (1)
See PERSIAN WARS; PLATAEA, BATTLE OF.
Pausanias (2) (mid-100s C.E.) Greek travel writer, said
to have been a physician from ASIA MINOR
Pausanias’ surviving prose work, A Description of Greece,
is a valuable source of information on the physical monu-
ments and local histories of all the important mainland
Greek cities and sanctuaries, including ATHENS, SPARTA,
DELPHI, and OLYMPIA.
Further reading: W. H. S. Jones, trans., Description of
Greece/Pausanias (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1979); C. Habicht, “Pausanias and the Evidence of
Inscriptions,” Classical Antiquity 3 (1984): 40–56; H.
Whittaker, “Pausanias and His Use of Inscriptions,” Sym-
bolae Osloenses 66 (1991): 171–186; K. W. Arafat, “Pausa-
nias’ Attitude to Antiquities,” Annual of the British School
at Athens 87 (1992): 387–409; J. Elsner, “From the Pyra-
mids to Pausanias and Piglet,” in Art and Text in Ancient
Greek Culture, edited by Simon Goldhill and Robin
Osborne (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1994),
224–254; L. Rubinstein, “Pausanias as a Source for the
Classical Greek Polis,” in Studies in the Ancient Greek
Polis, edited by Mogen Herman Hansen and Kurt
Raaflaub (Stuttgart, Germany: F. Steiner, 1995), 211–219;
K. W. Arafat, Pausanias’ Greece: Ancient Artists and Roman
Rulers (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1996);
Christian Habicht, Pausanias’ Guide to Ancient Greece
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998); Susan E.
Alcock, John F. Cherry, and Jas Elsner, eds., Pausanias:
Travel and Memory in Roman Greece (New York: Oxford
University Press, 2001).
Pegasus
See BELLEROPHON.
Peleus
This mythical hero was the father of ACHILLES.
Peleus’s father was Aeacus, king of AEGINA and a son of
the god ZEUS. As an adult, Peleus had various misadven-
tures—including murdering his half brother and acciden-
tally killing a man during the CALYDONIAN
BOAR
HUNT—before arriving in THESSALY. There he married the
sea goddess Thetis, a daughter of NEREUS. The match was
arranged by Zeus, who (knowing that Thetis’s son was
preordained to be greater than his father) was anxious
that she marry a mortal, rather than a god. But in order to
win the resentful Thetis’s hand in MARRIAGE, Peleus had
to defeat her in a WRESTLING bout, during which she took
on various harmful shapes: fire, water, a lion, a serpent,
and an ink-squirting cuttlefish.
Later, when Thetis abandoned him and the baby
Achilles, Peleus took the boy to be raised by the centaur
Chiron in the glens of Thessaly’s Mt. Pelion. Eventually
Peleus and Thetis were reconciled, and Peleus was made
immortal in repayment for his hardships.
See also CENTAURS.
Further reading: E. G. Pemberton, “The Name Vase
of the Peleus Painter,” Journal of the Walters Art Gallery 36
(1977): 63–72; K. Danali-Giole, “Dionysus and Peleus.
Problems of Interpretation in Athenian Black-Figured
Vases,” Archaeognosia 6 (1989–1990): 109–118.
Peirithoos
See CENTAURS; THESEUS.
Peisistratus (ca. 600–527 B.C.E.) Dictator or tyrannos
who ruled ATHENS from 546 to 527 B.C.E.
Like other Greek TYRANTS of that era, Peisistratus seized
supreme power in his city with the common people’s sup-
port, at the expense of the aristocrats. His benevolent
reign removed the nobles’ grip on Athenian government
and marked a step in the city’s difficult progress from
ARISTOCRACY to DEMOCRACY in the 500s B.C.E.
Peisistratus (“adviser of the army”) was himself born
into an Athenian aristocratic family. Before taking power,
the dynamic and affable Peisistratus came to the political
fore when he led an army against Athens’s enemy, the city
of MEGARA (1). He then set out to make himself dictator,
by exploiting the volatile atmosphere of Athenian class
tensions.
Despite the prior democratic reforms of the states-
man SOLON (594 B.C.E.), Athenian politics and adjudica-
tion at this time were still dominated by the nobility. This
dominance was resented by the middle class, which sup-
plied the backbone of the army. When Peisistratus
entered politics, the countryside held two opposing fac-
tions, divided along lines of region and class: the right-
wing party of the plain, led by a certain Lykourgos; and
the more democratic party of the coast, led by Megakles
of the Alcmaeonid clan.
242
Pausanias

Peisistratus created a third, more left-wing party, by
organizing a peasant following and styling himself as the
champion of the common people. He then convinced the
Athenian ASSEMBLY to vote him an escort of bodyguards.
Legend claims that the aged Solon, who was Peisistra-
tus’s kinsman, warned the Athenians against the man’s
intentions, but Peisistratus, using his bodyguards, was
able to seize the ACROPOLIS and become tyrant (in about
561 B.C.E.).
Soon pushed into exile by the combined effort of the
two other factions, he was reinstated with the help of his
former rival Megakles. But when this alliance broke
down, Peisistratus fled once more (around 556 B.C.E.). In
around 546 B.C.E. he was back, leading a Greek merce-
nary army hired with a fortune he had made in SILVER-
mining ventures in THRACE. Sailing from ERETRIA, the
invaders landed near the town of MARATHON, where Pei-
sistratus’s family had its regional following. There Peisis-
tratus was joined by other Athenians who wanted an end
to aristocratic strife. On the road to Athens, Peisistratus
defeated a government army at the Battle of Pallene, and
the city was his again.
Peisistratus ruled shrewdly and moderately for 19
more years. He took aristocratic hostages but indulged in
no vendettas or confiscations. He maintained Solon’s laws
and certain trappings of democratic government (although
he also made sure that his own supporters held the top
posts). He taxed reasonably—his tax on farm revenue, for
instance, was 5 percent—and in return, he provided lavish
building programs and public relief.
Like other dictators, Peisistratus aimed to make his
city great. He assured Athens of a food supply by devel-
oping military outposts along the HELLESPONT, at Sigeum
and in the Thracian CHERSONESE. These guarded the
shipping lane for precious grain from the BLACK SEA. He
elaborated Athens’ national festivals, such as the PANA-
THENAIA, and encouraged industry and commerce. Under
him, Athenian black-figure POTTERY reached its artistic
peak and dominated the Mediterranean market. In SCULP-
TURE, ARCHITECTURE, and primitive THEATER, Peisistratus’s
Athens moved toward its amazing achievements in the
next century. He fostered an Athenian patriotic culture
that was partly intended to compete with cities such as
CORINTH and partly intended to erase the old, local, aris-
tocratic factionalism at home. His reign brought Athens
forward in its progress from being a second-tier power in
the 600s B.C.E. to being the capital of the Greek world in
the 400s B.C.E.
Peisistratus died peacefully and was succeeded by his
eldest son, HIPPIAS (1), whose reign was more troubled.
See also ALCMAEONIDS.
Further reading: A. Podlecki, “Solon or Peisistratus?
A Case of Mistaken Identity,” Ancient World 16 (1987):
3–10; R. R. Holloway, “Peisistratus’ House,” Numismatica
e antichità classiche 28 (1999): 83–96; Heleen Sancisi-
Weerdenburg, ed., Peisistratos and the Tyranny: A Reap-
praisal of the Evidence (Amsterdam: J. C. Gieben, 2000);
Sarah Pomeroy, A Brief History of Ancient Greece: Politics,
Society, and Culture (New York: Oxford University Press,
2004).
Pelias
See JASON (1).
Pella
The capital city of the kingdom of MACEDON,
from about 410 B.C.E. until the Roman conquest of 167
B.C.E., Pella is located in the Thermaic coastal plain,
about 25 miles northwest of the modern Greek seaport of
Thessaloníki. The city was in existence by the mid-400s
B.C.E. and was chosen by the Macedonian king Archelaus
I as his capital. In this, Pella replaced the old royal capital
at nearby Aegai (modern Vergina). Archelaus, who
reigned 413–399 B.C.E., made Pella a showplace of Greek
building and culture.
At Pella ruled such mighty Macedonian kings as
PHILIP II, ALEXANDER THE GREAT, and PHILIP V, in the 300s
and 200s B.C.E. But under Roman rule Pella was totally
overshadowed by the development of Thessaloníki.
The first archaeological excavations took place at Pella
between 1957 and 1964 C.E. These campaigns uncovered
the remains of elaborate houses with beautiful mosaic
floors (dated ca. 300 B.C.E.). The subjects of these floors
include a Lion Hunt, a Stag Hunt, the Abduction of Helen,
an Amazonomachy, and a scene of the god DIONYSUS riding
on a leopard’s back. Restoration work during these years
included some of the walls and colonnade of the house
with the Dionysus mosaic. In 1976, archaeologists
returned to Pella, and these excavations continue today.
Several additional buildings have been discovered, includ-
ing the Macedonian palace, located on the northernmost
hill of the city and covering an area of six hectares. The
AGORA, in the center of the city, consists of a large open
square surrounded by colonnades and commercial/admin-
istrative rooms. Other houses, sanctuaries, and cemeteries
have also been excavated, and part of the house with the
Abduction of Helen mosaic has been restored. Artifacts are
exhibited in the archaeological museum at the site.
Further reading: Photios Petsas, Pella: Alexander the
Great’s Capital (Thessaloníki: Institute for Balkan Studies,
1978); Maria Siganidou and Maria Lilimpaki-Akamati,
Pella: Capital of Macedonians, translated by David Hardy
(Athens: Ministry of Culture, Archaeological Receipts
Fund, 1996); Bonnie Kutbay, Palaces and Large Residences
of the Hellenistic Age (Lewiston, N.Y.: Edwin Mellen
Press, 1998); M. Lilimpaki-Akamati, “Recent Discoveries
in Pella,” in Excavating Classical Culture: Recent Archaeo-
logical Discoveries in Greece, edited by Maria Stam-
atopoulou and Marina Yeroulanou (Oxford: Beazley
Archive and Archaeopress, 2002), 83–90.
Peloponnese (Peloponn¯esos) (“Island of PELOPS”)
This wide, jagged, mountainous peninsula of southern
Peloponnese
243

Greece measures 132 miles north to south and 134 east
to west (maximum) and is connected with central Greece
by the seven-mile-wide Isthmus of CORINTH. Other major
sites in the Peloponnese include MYCENAE, SIKYON, EPI-
DAURUS, OLYMPIA, SPARTA, PYLOS, Messene, Mistra, and
Stymphalos. In classical times the Peloponnese was the
heartland of Dorian-Greek culture—the “other” Greece,
in conflict with democratic, Ionian-Greek ATHENS.
Despite a coastline hundreds of miles long, the Pelo-
ponnese has few natural harbors; only Corinth and the
Argos region became great from seaborne TRADE. Coastal
geography includes four mountainous peninsulas jutting
southward into the AEGEAN SEA; from west to east, these
four capes were named Acritas, Taenarum, Malea, and
(far to the northeast) Scyllaeum. Between these peninsu-
las, the sea forms three wide gulfs, whose shoreline typi-
cally features a fertile alluvial plain. Important events of
Greek history centered on these three coastal flats named,
from west to east, the plains of MESSENIA, LACONIA, and
ARGOS.
It was on the plain of Argos that Greek civilization
began, around 1600 B.C.E. There stood the chief group of
Mycenaean-Greek cities: Mycenae, Argos, and TIRYNS.
After the MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION’s downfall, the Pelo-
ponnese was largely overrun by DORIAN GREEKS, around
1100–1000 B.C.E. But one Mycenaean contingent fled
inland to the mountains of the central Peloponnese, to
reemerge in historical times as the hard-bitten “high-
landers” of ARCADIA. Of the Dorian settlements, one in
particular grew to power—Sparta (“the sown land”),
located in interior Laconia. By 600 B.C.E. the Spartans had
conquered Messenia as well as Laconia, thus controlling
the entire southern Peloponnese.
Two other principal Peloponnesian regions were ELIS,
in the west, and ACHAEA, in the northwest. The inhabi-
tants of these two regions were not Dorians but had
affinities in race and language with the Greeks of AETOLIA
and other areas north of the Corinthian Gulf.
See also FARMING; GREECE, GEOGRAPHY OF; GREEK
LANGUAGE.
Further reading: K. Adshead, Politics of the Archaic
Peloponnese. The Transition from Archaic to Classical Poli-
tics (Aldershot, U.K.: Avebury, 1986); G. D. R. Sanders
and I. K. Whitbread, “Central Places and Major Roads in
the Peloponnese,” Annual of the British School at Athens
85 (1990): 333–361; Kenneth A. Sheedy, ed., Archaeology
in the Peloponnese: New Excavations and Research (Oxford:
Oxbow Books, 1994); Peter Levi, A Bottle in the Shade: A
Journey in the Western Peloponnese (London: Sinclair-
Stevenson, 1996); W. Josing, Greece: The Mainland—Pelo-
ponnese; An Up-to-date Travel Guide with 163 Color Photos
and 23 Maps, 2d ed. (Munich: Nelles, 2000); A. D. Riza-
kis and S. Zoumbaki, Roman Peloponnese (Paris: Diffusion
de Boccard, 2001); Robin Hägg, ed., Peloponnesian Sanc-
tuaries and Cults: Proceedings of the Ninth International
Symposium at the Swedish Institute at Athens, 11–13 June
1994 (Stockholm: Svenska Institutet i Athen, 2002).
Peloponnesian War
This was the world war of
ancient Greece, in which SPARTA and its allies defeated
ATHENS and its allies after 27 years of intermittent fight-
ing, 431–404 B.C.E. The defeat ended Athens’s 75-year
reign as the richest and most powerful Greek city and left
Sparta in control of an exhausted Greece.
The Greeks called this conflict “the war between the
Peloponnesians and the Athenians.” One side consisted
of Sparta and its core allies throughout the PELOPONNESE,
grouped into a Spartan-led alliance known as the Pelo-
ponnesian League. The Athenian side included most of
the islands and cities of the AEGEAN SEA and western ASIA
MINOR—perhaps 200 states in all—organized into the
Athenian-controlled DELIAN LEAGUE. Most of the Delian
League states were peopled by IONIAN GREEKS, while the
Spartan side consisted largely of DORIAN GREEKS. With
some important exceptions, the war was fought along
these ethnic lines, Ionians versus Dorians.
The fighting ranged across the Greek world, from
eastern SICILY to BYZANTIUM, but the war often was mired
in stalemate because Sparta remained invincible on land
and Athens supreme at sea. Against the mainly defensive
Athenian strategy, the cautious Spartans frequently
proved ineffectual.
Low military technology contributed to the standoff.
Greek armies of the 400s B.C.E. had not yet developed the
tactics and machinery for storming fortified cities. Siege
warfare was a slow and expensive game of encircling the
enemy city and waiting for its defenders to succumb to
starvation, fear, or betrayal. A fortified city suppliable by
sea, such as Athens, was impossible to capture unless the
besieger also could block the harbor.
Sparta finally gained the upper hand in the war after
two critical changes occurred. First, the Athenian disaster
at SYRACUSE (413 B.C.E.) inspired a widespread revolt of
Athens’s unhappy Delian League allies. Second, the non-
Greek empire of PERSIA formed an alliance with Sparta
(412 B.C.E.) and brought Persian funds to finance Spartan
war fleets. Gradually Sparta was able to challenge Athe-
nian naval supremacy, and the Spartan naval victory at
AEGOSPOTAMI
(405 B.C.E.) made Athens’s surrender
inevitable (404 B.C.E.). The victorious Spartans—over the
objections of some of their allies—spared the defeated
city from destruction.
Modern knowledge of the war comes partly from
archaeological evidence (such as inscribed Athenian leg-
islative decrees) but mostly from the works of ancient
writers—principally the Athenian historian THUCYDIDES
(1), who served briefly as a general in the war and pro-
duced a highly reliable history of it. Thucydides’ account,
unfinished, breaks off in describing the events of 411
B.C.E. The war’s final years, 411–404 B.C.E., are recorded
244
Peloponnesian War

in the first part of the Hellenica, by the Athenian
XENOPHON. Xenophon, like Thucydides, witnessed some
of the events he describes. A third contemporary source
was the Athenian comic playwright ARISTOPHANES, who
addressed war politics in such plays as Acharnians (per-
formed in 425 B.C.E.) and Peace (421 B.C.E.). Later
sources include the biographer PLUTARCH (ca. 100 C.E.).
In one famous passage, Thucydides states that the
ultimate cause of the war was Spartan fear of the growth
of Athenian power. More than Athens’s navy and army,
however, Sparta feared Athens’s magnetic cultural appeal
and the appeal of Athenian DEMOCRACY. Thus, the Pelo-
ponnesian War was partly a conflict between two political
ideologies—radical democracy, embodied by Athens and
most of its allies, and the old-fashioned government of
OLIGARCHY, championed by Sparta. Sparta’s control of the
Peloponnese depended on the oligarchic ruling class in
the ally cities. The politically excluded underclass in
Peloponnesian War
245

these cities posed a tremendous potential threat, liable to
be exploited by the agents of democratic Athens.
Similarly, in almost every democratic city allied with
Athens, a few rich right-wingers secretly wished for oli-
garchy. Athens itself contained such people; they seized
power briefly in 411 B.C.E. The defections and attempted
defections of cities on each side in the war came partly
from this internal struggle between rich and poor, one
side naturally pro-Spartan, the other naturally pro-Athe-
nian. The most devastating civil strife occurred at the
northwestern Greek city of CORCYRA, which at the war’s
start was an important Athenian ally but which then
(427 B.C.E.) succumbed to riots between democrats and
oligarchs.
An immediate cause of the Peloponnesian War was
Athens’s cavalier attitude toward the Thirty Years’ Peace
of 446 B.C.E., which had ended prior hostilities between
Athens and Sparta. Although this religiously sanctioned
treaty had guaranteed that Athens would not interfere
with other mainland Greek cities, the treaty was flouted
by the Athenian statesman PERIKLES, who apparently saw
a future war as inevitable. The most provocative Athenian
violations were domination of AEGINA and designs
against MEGARA (1). The notorious Megarian Decree,
passed at Athens in about 433 B.C.E., effectively prohib-
ited the Megarians from conducting TRADE throughout
the Athenian empire.
Next, Athens slipped into an undeclared war against
CORINTH, an important Spartan ally. First, the Corinthian
navy defeated a joint Corcyrean-Athenian fleet at Sybota,
near Corcyra island (433 B.C.E.), then Corinthian and
Athenian land troops fought outside POTIDAEA (432
B.C.E.). Incited by the Corinthians, the Peloponnesian
League voted for war against Athens (432 B.C.E.). The
Athenian ASSEMBLY, on Perikles’ urging rejected Spartan
ultimatums (fall and winter of 432–431 B.C.E.). Both
sides prepared for war.
The Spartan bloc was joined by THEBES and other
cities of BOEOTIA (a central Greek region northwest of
Attica traditionally hostile to Athens). This caused the
peninsular Athenian home region of ATTICA to face ene-
mies along its entire land frontier.
Athens was ready, however, with its navy of 200 war-
ships, its impregnable fortifications (including the LONG
WALLS, linking the city to its harbor at PIRAEUS), and its
huge financial reserve, supplied by the tribute-paying
Delian League allies. Foremost among the Delian states
were the eastern Aegean islands of LESBOS and CHIOS,
which contributed warships and crews to Athens’s navy.
Outside of the league, Athens had several nontribute-pay-
ing allies, including Corcyra, the Boeotian city of PLATAEA
(a traditional enemy of Thebes), and the northwestern
regions of ACARNANIA and Amphilochia.
The Athenian war strategy was innovative and odd.
Faced with a numerically superior enemy land army that
boasted the best soldiers in Greece (the Spartans, The-
bans, Eleans, and Arcadians), Perikles planned to avoid
land battles. Instead, Athens would rely on static defense
by land and amphibious attacks by sea. If the Spartans
attacked Athens, as expected, the Athenians would wait
out the assault, relying on the city’s fortifications and sea
imports of food and supplies. Meanwhile, Athenian war
fleets could sail from Piraeus even if a Spartan army was
outside the walls. Carrying land troops aboard, Athenian
fleets could attack enemy coastal sites. These attacks
might be intended as either harassments or as wholesale
attempts to capture enemy cities.
The drastic aspect of Perikles’ strategy was that it
would abandon the Athenian countryside to the Spartans.
The Athenian rural population would be housed in
camps within the Long Walls and the walls of the city
and Piraeus—at least for the summer campaigns if not for
the whole war. The farmers’ livestock would be evacuated
to the Athenian-controlled island of EUBOEA.
Perikles apparently believed that his one-sided strat-
egy would not be needed for long. He seems to have
expected that Sparta’s allies would be demoralized and
that the war would end in about three years. In fact,
however, events were destined to take a far different
turn.
The war’s first military action was a failed Theban
night attack against Plataea (spring of 431 B.C.E.). Then,
in midsummer, the Spartan king ARCHIDAMUS led a Pelo-
ponnesian army of 24,000 HOPLITE infantry into Athenian
territory. Events followed much as Pericles had forseen.
Archidamus devastated crops and farm buildings in the
evacuated countryside but was powerless against Athens’s
walls. After perhaps a month the Peloponnesians with-
drew. This pattern of ineffectual Spartan invasion would
recur in several following summers. The war’s first 10
years (431–421 B.C.E.) are sometimes known as the
Archidamian War, after the Spartan king who led these
initial attacks.
After Archidamus had marched away that first year,
Perikles himself led 13,000 hoplites and 100 warships
against nearby Megara. But, like so many assaults against
fortified cities in the Peloponnesian War, this one
failed—as did Perikles’ similar attack on EPIDAURUS the
following year.
In the summer of 430 B.C.E., Athens suffered its first
catastrophe of the war. When the Spartan army invaded
for the second time, and the Athenian rural population
again gathered within the walls, a deadly plague broke out
at Athens (the disease’s identity is unknown to us). The
cramped, unsanitary conditions of the Athenian refugees
provided a breeding ground for the contagion, which
raged for the next year and a half and recurred briefly two
years after that (427 B.C.E.). Eventually one-fourth of the
population, perhaps 50,000 people, had died.
The plague removed Athens’s initial advantage in the
war, creating problems in manpower and leadership.
Perikles himself died of the sickness in 429 B.C.E., at
246
Peloponnesian War

about age 65. Most significantly, the plague encouraged
the Spartans by seeming to show the will of the gods.
In 429 B.C.E. the Spartans began besieging the defiant
little city of Plataea. Two years later, the starving inhabi-
tants surrendered (after half the garrison had escaped in a
nighttime breakout through the Spartan siege lines). To
please their Theban allies, the Spartans executed the male
prisoners—200 Plataeans and 25 Athenians—and sold
the WOMEN as SLAVES. Later, the empty town was leveled.
Many Greeks felt that Plataea’s destruction was an impi-
ous act, because during the PERSIAN WARS Plataea had
been the site of a famous oath sworn by the Spartans and
other Greeks, promising forever to honor the city.
The Athenians, now deprived of Perikles, sought
more aggressively to drive Sparta’s allies out of the war.
Based at the West Locrian seaport of NAUPACTUS in north-
western Greece, the Athenian admiral Phormion won two
spectacular naval victories against larger, Corinthian-led
fleets (429 B.C.E.). In 426 B.C.E. the Athenian general
DEMOSTHENES (2) brought an army of light-armed Acar-
nanians and Amphilochians to victory against their tradi-
tional enemy, the Corinthian colony of AMBRACIA.
Demosthenes failed to capture Ambracia, but his experi-
ences in the hilly, wooded terrain taught him the possible
advantage of javelin men and slingers over heavier-armed
hoplites. The subsequent Athenian development of light-
armed projectile troops was one of the few tactical
advances of the Peloponnesian War.
Meanwhile the important Delian League city of MYTI-
LENE, capital of Lesbos, revolted against Athens (428
B.C.E.) but fell to a besieging Athenian force (427 B.C.E.).
Back in Athens, the citizens’ assembly debated how to
punish the captured Mytileneans. Rescinding a vote led by
the Athenian politician KLEON for massacre of the entire
adult male population and enslavement of the women and
children, the assembly voted a lesser penalty—execution
of the 1,000 Mytileneans judged responsible for the rebel-
lion. Certain speeches of this Mytilenean Debate provide a
famous scene in Thucydides’ history (book 3). Later, amid
the war’s increasing brutality, the Athenians would begin
treating rebellion more cruelly.
Kleon, now emerging as Perikles’ political heir, was a
leader who could have won the war for Athens. Although
not a military man by training, he embodied an aggres-
sive, can-do spirit that was at odds with the Perikles-
derived passivity of much of the Athenian officer class. In
partnership with Demosthenes, Kleon would soon give
Athens the upper hand in the war.
This critical campaign began when Demosthenes
established an Athenian naval base at PYLOS, in the south-
western Peloponnese, only about 50 miles west of Sparta
(425 B.C.E.). The ensuing fighting between Athenians and
Spartans at Pylos, which took place in the city’s harbor
and on the nearby island of Sphacteria (“wasp place”),
ended in an Athenian victory and was one of the most
consequential events of the war. Kleon, who was present
at Pylos as an elected Athenian general, encouraged
Demosthenes to attack the 420 elite Spartan soldiers
trapped on Sphacteria, of whom 292 surrendered and
survived.
Taken as prisoners to Athens, the 292 Spartans served
as diplomatic pawns until 421 B.C.E., when they were
returned home. That their government welcomed them
back rather than punishing them for their surrender—as a
prior generation of Spartan leaders might have done—is a
sign of how valuable their bloodstock was thought to be,
amid Sparta’s long-term problem of falling birthrate.
Sparta then faced its low point in the war. Its suppos-
edly invincible army had been humiliated, while the Athe-
nian fort at Pylos became a rallying point for rebellious
Messenians. At Athens, the Pylos victory made Kleon
politically supreme, ushering in a period of Athenian mili-
tary boldness in pursuit of total victory (425–421 B.C.E.).
Spartan peace overtures were rebuffed. An imperialistic
tone is evident in the surviving Athenian inscription
called the Thoudippos Decree, which effectively doubled
the tribute owed to Athens by its Delian League subject
allies (autumn of 425 B.C.E.). But Kleon’s aggressive policy
brought some Athenian setbacks. Particularly, a foolhardly
Athenian invasion of Boeotia was defeated at the land bat-
tle of Delium, fought near a temple of Delian Apollo
alongside the Straits of Euboea (autumn of 424 B.C.E.).
More bad news followed for Athens. The brilliant
Spartan general BRASIDAS, having marched a small Pelo-
ponnesian army to the north Aegean coast, convinced sev-
eral Delian League subject towns to defect to the Spartan
side. Then, in a night attack, he captured the strategic
Athenian colony of AMPHIPOLIS (December of 424 B.C.E.).
The city’s loss caused an outrage at Athens; without pos-
sessing a single ship, Brasidas had dealt a blow to Athens’
northeastern shipping route and had opened the threat of
a wider north Aegean revolt. The Athenian general inside
Amphipolis apparently had been killed or captured, while
the other Athenian general in the vicinity had arrived with
a naval squadron too late to save the city. This general was
Thucydides, the same man whose written history of the
war is our major source. Blamed by his countrymen for
the loss, Thucydides was banished from Athens.
A new Spartan king, Pleistoanax, viewed these suc-
cesses mainly as bargaining chips to end the war, but a
year’s truce for peace talks passed inconsequentially
(spring 423—422 B.C.E.). In the north, meanwhile, Brasi-
das ignored the truce and continued to bring local towns
into revolt against Athens.
Promising to recapture Amphipolis and eliminate
Brasidas, Kleon sailed from Athens in the summer of 422
B.C.E. with 30 warships and a small army. But for all his
pugnacity, Kleon was not an experienced tactician; while
scouting the terrain around Amphipolis, he and his force
were surprised by a sortie from the city, led by Brasidas.
In the fight, the Athenians retreated with 600 dead,
including Kleon—but Brasidas too had been killed. The
Peloponnesian War
247

Battle of Amphipolis removed at once the two most war-
like leaders of the day.
In March of 421 B.C.E., the two sides agreed to a
peace that was intended to last 50 years. (In fact, it lasted
barely three.) Modern scholars call this treaty the Peace
of NIKIAS, named for the cautious soldier-politician who
was then the leading Athenian. The peace’s terms
amounted to a triumph for Athens, which was left free to
maintain its empire and to recapture rebellious subject
cities. It was all that Perikles could have hoped for. The
peace was followed quickly by an alliance between
Athens and Sparta, designed to give them dual hegemony
over the rest of Greece.
The losers in this process were the Spartan ally
states, which had endured hardship only to see their
interests ignored. Certain states then began looking for a
new leader in the Peloponnese. This they found in the
previously neutral, east Peloponnesian city of ARGOS.
By 420 B.C.E. an anti-Spartan axis had arisen, consist-
ing of Argos, MANTINEA,
ELIS,
and—surprisingly—
Athens, which flouted the Peace of Nikias. The driving
force behind this Athenian policy was ALCIBIADES, a
volatile, left-wing aristocrat, perhaps 30 years old, who
had emerged as Nikias’s political opponent. Alcibiades
embodied the reckless mood of an Athenian citizenry
that—far from being exhausted by 11 years of war—was
overconfident from the advantageous peace.
Provoked by the four-city alliance, the Spartans
marched. At the Battle of Mantinea, in the central Pelopon-
nese, a Spartan-led army of 3,600 hoplites crushed a
roughly equal force of Argive, Mantinean, Elean, and Athe-
nian troops (418 B.C.E.). The alliance dissolved, bringing
Elis and Mantinea back into the Spartan fold. Hostilities
between Athens and Sparta did not recommence outright,
but the angry Spartans awaited their chance.
In 416 B.C.E., the Athenians—tightening their control
over their Aegean sea routes—landed a force on the
Cycladic island of MELOS. The Melians were Dorian
Greeks, descended from Spartan colonists. They had
shown prior hostility to Athens and were now com-
manded to submit to Athenian rule, but Melian leaders
refused the Athenian demands. Political-philosophical
arguments purporting to be the positions of both sides are
presented in the famous Melian Dialogue in Thucydides’
history (book 5). Besieged, the Melians were starved into
surrender. The Athenians killed all adult male prisoners
and sold the women and children into slavery. The island
was later repopulated with Athenian colonists.
The year 415 B.C.E. brought the most fateful event of
the war—the Athenian expedition against the city of Syra-
cuse, in southeastern Sicily. A wealthy, seafaring, Dorian-
Greek democracy, Syracuse was an ally of Sparta and the
enemy of the Ionian Greeks of Sicily and southern Italy.
At Alcibiades’ urging, the Athenian assembly voted to
send out a major force. The intended capture of Syracuse
would give Athens control of the wheatfields that sup-
plied grain to Corinth and other Spartan-allied cities.
Although Alcibiades was the natural choice to lead the
expedition, the Athenians mistrusted him because of his
flamboyant and licentious private life. So they split the
command among three generals—Alcibiades, Nikias
(who had opposed the whole idea of the venture), and
the able Lamachus.
Just before the departure, an act of religious terrorism
occurred. Under cover of darkness, a group (probably pro-
peace, right-wing conspirators) smashed the carved faces
and genitals of the stone effigies of the god HERMES, called
herms (hermai), that stood in front of houses throughout
Athens. This sacrilegious event is known as the Mutilation
of the Herms. Undoubtedly intended to create a bad omen
against the expedition, the act succeeded well, because the
Athenian people irrationally turned their suspicion on the
commander Alcibiades.
The armada consisted of 134 warships, 130 supply
ships, 5,100 hoplites, and 1,300 archers, javelin men, and
slingers (mostly allies and mercenaries), plus about
20,000 crewmen. It sailed in late spring, but Alcibiades
was soon summoned back to Athens to face impiety
charges. He instead fled to Sparta, where he gave strategic
advice against his fellow Athenians. Among other things,
he advised that a Spartan officer be sent to Syracuse to
organize the city’s defense.
The Athenian attack on Syracuse stalled under the
indecisive, ailing, 55-year-old Nikias, who took nearly a
year to settle down to a siege (the spring of 414 B.C.E.).
Outside the city wall, Athenian troops began constructing
a siege wall to cut off the city’s landward side; on the sea-
ward side, Athenian naval patrols kept the Syracusan
navy (about 80 warships) bottled inside the harbor.
When Lamachus was killed in a skirmish at the siege
works, Nikias took sole command. Meanwhile, the pes-
simistic Syracusans were urged to resistance by their
statesman-general Hermocrates.
The tide turned when a Spartan general, Gylippos,
led a small army of Peloponnesians and Sicilian Greeks
into Syracuse on the landward side, around the incom-
plete Athenian siege wall. Gylippos blocked completion
of the Athenians’ wall and captured their naval base at
the mouth of the bay known as the Greek Harbor. This
loss forced the Athenians henceforth to beach their ships
on an exposed shore at the head of the bay, where they
could be bottled in by the Syracusan navy. As troops and
supplies trickled into Syracuse by land and sea, the
besiegers became the besieged.
In the spring of 413 B.C.E., in response to Nikias’s
appeal for help, a second Athenian armada sailed for
Syracuse: 73 warships carrying 5,000 Athenian and allied
hoplites and 3,000 light-armed troops. The force brought
two generals, Eurymedon and (Athens’s finest battlefield
commander of the war) Demosthenes.
By then—with Nikias’s warships having been defeated
in a sea battle in the Great Harbor—the Athenian position
248
Peloponnesian War

at Syracuse was so vulnerable that the reinforcements
were simply entering a death trap. Demosthenes and
Eurymedon urged an evacuation by sea, but Nikias (still
the senior general) hesitated, believing he could yet take
the city. An unlucky eclipse of the moon (August 27, 413
B.C.E.) led the superstitious Nikias to delay further.
Another sea battle in the Great Harbor brought a second
Athenian defeat and the death of Eurymedon. When
Nikias finally gave the order to evacuate by sea (Septem-
ber of 413 B.C.E.), the Syracusan navy blocked the Atheni-
ans from leaving the harbor mouth. Driven back to shore,
the Athenians abandoned their dead and wounded and
marched inland, hoping to escape to the neutral territory
of the native Sicels. The bedraggled refugees numbered
perhaps 40,000, largely crewmen from the ships.
“No prior Greek army had ever endured such a
reversal. They had come to enslave others, but were now
fleeing in fear of slavery themselves.” So writes Thucy-
dides, whose solemn account of the Athenians’ final
destruction (book 7) is the most moving section in his
history. On the seventh day, the Athenian rear column,
under Demosthenes, was surrounded and captured. The
Athenian main column, under Nikias, was surrounded
the next day in a riverbed and massacred with arrows and
javelins. Of the approximately 7,000 captured, most died
in captivity or were sold as slaves. Nikias and Demos-
thenes were captured and put to death.
It was the worst disaster in Athenian history: Losses
included perhaps 50,000 men, 173 warships, and
immense expense. Yet such were Athens’s financial and
spiritual resources that the city fought on for nearly
another nine years (413–404 B.C.E.). In mainland Greece,
the war had recommenced. In the spring of 413 B.C.E.,
the Spartans had invaded Athenian territory for the first
time since 425 B.C.E. However, they did not withdraw
entirely at the summer’s end, but fortified the site called
Decelea, about 13 miles north of Athens, to be a perma-
nent base in Athenian territory.
Under personal command of the Spartan king Agis II,
Decelea served Sparta much as Pylos had served
Athens—as a front-line fort for raids and for rallying of
the enemy’s disaffected underclass. Thucydides says that
20,000 skilled Athenian slaves escaped to Decelea during
the remaining war years.
The Spartan presence at Decelea threw Athens finally
onto the defensive; overland communication outside the
walls became a hardship. The Athenian CAVALRY was now
obliged to make daily patrols against Spartan war parties
in the Athenian countryside. Local resources, such as
food and SILVER ore, became less available, and the Athe-
nians grew increasingly reliant on purchased supplies
imported by ship.
The Peloponnesian War’s final nine years are some-
times known as the Ionian War, because the major cam-
paigns shifted to the eastern Aegean and the shorelines
of Asia Minor (particularly to the Greek region of west-
ern Asia Minor called IONIA). There lay the most impor-
tant Athenian allies and the sea routes bringing resources
westward to Athens; the most essential of these imports
was grain, brought by merchant ships from the ports of
the BLACK SEA. The vulnerable links in the sea route
were the narrow waterways of the HELLESPONT and
BOSPORUS, which Athenian forces controlled out of the
naval base at SESTOS. It was against these regions that the
Spartans directed their operations, aiming first to dis-
lodge the unhappy and heavily taxed Athenian allies,
and then to block Athens’s supply route and bring the
city to starvation.
Sparta’s new role as a naval power was made possible
because Athens had lost nearly three-fourths of its navy
at Syracuse, and because Sparta now found a source of
funds for its own shipbuilding and crews’ wages, in an
alliance with the Persian king Darius II (412 B.C.E.). In
exchange, Darius received the right to reclaim the Greek
cities of Asia Minor after the war.
The year after the Sicilian disaster saw the Greek world
turn against Athens. Warships from the Peloponnese and
Dorian Sicily began to invade the eastern Aegean. The
Delian League unraveled amid revolts. The first rebel was
Chios, with its considerable navy, followed by MILETUS,
EPHESOS, PHOCAEA, CYM¯E, RHODES, Mytilene, and others.
Of Athens’s greatest east Aegean possessions, only the
island state of SAMOS remained loyal. The Athenians
responded with new war fleets, built with emergency funds.
Samos became Athens’s eastern naval base, as amphibious
operations began against the rebels. Miletus and Dorian-
Greek KNIDOS became Sparta’s eastern naval bases.
By the winter of 412–411 B.C.E., the scene was set for
Alcibiades’ return. After earning the mistrust of his Spar-
tan masters, Alcibiades had fled to Persian protection in
western Asia Minor, and from there conducted secret
intrigues with the Athenians at Samos to get himself
recalled to Athens’s service. His chance came when the
oligarchic FOUR HUNDRED seized power at Athens, and
the Athenian sailors and soldiers at Samos formed a
democratic government-in-exile (June of 411 B.C.E.).
Alcibiades was brought to Samos and elected as a general.
At Athens, the government of the Four Hundred,
using untrained emergency crews, suffered a naval defeat
against Peloponnesian ships in the Straits of Euboea
(summer of 411 B.C.E.). With all of Euboea now in revolt
against Athens, the disgraced Four Hundred soon fell
from power.
The next four years marked the final Athenian high
point of the war, under Alcibiades’ leadership. The Spar-
tans suffered a disastrous naval defeat at Alcibiades’
hands at CYZICUS (410 B.C.E.) and soon offered peace on
generous terms. The overconfident Athenians, however,
rejected the offer as insufficient. In 408 B.C.E. Alcibiades
captured the strategically vital, rebellious Delian city of
Byzantium, and the next year he was recalled to Athens
to receive extraordinary powers of command.
Peloponnesian War
249

But when Alcibiades returned to the east Aegean in
the autumn of 407 B.C.E., he faced a ruthless new oppo-
nent—the Spartan LYSANDER, commanding a fleet at Eph-
esos. After Lysander defeated a lieutenant of Alcibiades in
a sea battle (spring of 406 B.C.E.), Alcibiades was blamed
at Athens and was not reelected as general. Knowing that
his life was in danger from his ungrateful fellow citizens,
the greatest naval commander of the day retired to an
estate beside the Hellespont.
Athens—foolishly trying to re-create its lost empire—
was running out of resources. To man the newest fleet off
the blocks, the Athenians resorted to enlisting slaves and
resident aliens as oarsmen (a duty usually taken by lower-
income Athenian citizens). In August of 406 B.C.E. these
motley crewmen won the huge sea battle of Arginusae
(“the white islands”) off Mytilene. But the triumph was
soured when the crews of the Athenian disabled vessels—
about 5,000 men—perished in a storm immediately after-
ward. At Athens, hysteria reigned over the failure to
rescue the crews; six of the responsible naval comman-
ders, including Perikles’ son, were executed. Worse, on
the urging of the demagogue Kleophon, the assembly
again rejected Spartan peace proposals.
Now a weak and inexperienced Athenian naval com-
mand led an irreplaceable force of about 200 ships. In
the summer of 405 B.C.E., the wily Lysander sailed from
Ephesus with 150 ships and slipped into the Hellespont,
where he captured Lampsacus. When an 180-ship Athe-
nian fleet arrived in pursuit, Lysander ambushed and
destroyed it at the sea battle of Aegospotami (“the goat’s
rivers”). The Athenian navy had ceased to exist.
Spartan forces converged on the fortress of Athens,
which endured six months of siege, without food
imports. At last, the starving inhabitants voted to accept
Sparta’s terms—peace in exchange for the destruction of
certain city fortifications, the surrender of overseas hold-
ings and of most of the remaining warships, the recall of
political exiles, and a military alliance with Sparta. The
city capitulated in April of 404 B.C.E. Lysander’s forces
occupied Athens and Piraeus. The Long Walls were torn
down to the MUSIC of flutes. It was the end of Athens as
the dominant power in Greece.
See also
CORINTHIAN
WAR;
EURIPIDES;
KONON;
SOCRATES; SOPHOKLES; THERAMENES; THIRTY TYRANTS,
THE; WARFARE, LAND; WARFARE, NAVAL; WARFARE, SIEGE.
Further reading: John Wilson, Athens and Corcyra:
Strategy and Tactics in the Peloponnesian War (Bristol,
U.K.: Bristol Classical Press, 1987); Donald Kagen, The
Fall of the Athenian Empire (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell Univer-
sity Press, 1987); I. G. Spence, “Perikles and the Defense
of Attika During the Peloponnesian War,” Journal of Hel-
lenic Studies 110 (1990): 91–109; Barry S. Strauss,
Fathers and Sons in Athens: Ideology and Society in the Era
of the Peloponnesian War (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 1993); Charles D. Hamilton and Peter
Krentz, eds., Polis and Polemos: Essays on Politics, War,
and History in Ancient Greece, in Honor of Donald Kagen
(Claremont, Calif.: Regina Books, 1997); John F.
Lazenby, The Peloponnesian War: A Military Study (Lon-
don: Routledge, 2004).
Pelops
In Greek MYTH, Pelops was a prince of a non-
Greek kingdom in ASIA MINOR—either LYDIA or Paphlag-
onia. His father was TANTALUS, who was a son of the god
ZEUS and who offended the gods in an infamous episode.
Pelops eventually emigrated to southern Greece, where
he supposedly founded the OLYMPIC GAMES and fathered
the line of kings at MYCENAE. He is commemorated in the
name of the southern Greek peninsular region, the PELO-
PONNESE (Greek: Peloponn¯esos, “island of Pelops”). The
name Pelops (dark face) may refer to his Asian origin.
The best-known version of the Pelops story is told in
the poet PINDAR’s First Olympian ode, written in 476
B.C.E. As a youth in Asia Minor, Pelops became the
favorite of POSEIDON (god of horses as well of the sea),
who taught Pelops to be a great horseman and charioteer.
Arriving in Greece, Pelops went to Pisa (the future site of
OLYMPIA). There he asked for the hand in MARRIAGE of
Hippodameia, the daughter of King Oinomaus.
Oinomaus secretly intended that his daughter never
marry, either because he harbored an incestuous desire
for her or because he knew a prophecy that his son-in-
law would kill him. His terms of courtship were that any-
one might carry Hippodameia off by chariot, but
Oinomaus would follow and, upon overtaking, could
spear the suitor. Twelve or 13 men had already died in
this manner; their heads were nailed above the gates of
Oinomaus’s palace.
But Pelops cleverly bribed Oinomaus’s groom, Myr-
tilus, to remove the linchpins from his master’s chariot
axle and replace them with wax. In the contest, Oino-
maus’s chariot collapsed and the evil king was dragged to
death behind his horses. Pelops then married Hippo-
dameia and became king of Pisa. Later he deceitfully
killed Myrtilus, either to avoid acknowledging his help or
to avoid sharing Hippodameia’s favors with him, as
promised. But the dying Myrtilus cursed Pelops and his
family, and the curse proved effective. Pelops’s son
ATREUS and grandson AGAMEMNON ruled households
riven by bloodshed.
The myth of Pelops and Oinomaus was in part etio-
logical—that is, it explained the origin of a custom,
namely the Olympic chariot race. In historical times
Pelops was worshipped as a hero at Olympia, where his
purported tomb was located. At Olympia’s Temple of
Zeus, the sculptures on the east pediment showed Pelops
and Oinomaus preparing for the fateful chariot race, with
Zeus standing between them and looking toward his
grandson Pelops.
See also CHARIOTS.
250
Pelops

Further reading: W. J. Slater, “Pelops at Olympia,”
Greek, Roman, and Byzantine Studies 30 (1989): 485–501;
G. Howie, “Pindar’s Account of Pelops’ Contest with
Oenomaus. With a Translation of Olympian 1,”
Nikephoros 4 (1991): 55–120; Helmut Kyrieleis, “Zeus and
Pelops in the East Pediment of the Temple of Zeus at
Olympia,” in The Interpretation of Architectural Sculpture in
Greece and Rome, edited by Diana Buitron-Oliver (Wash-
ington, D.C.: National Gallery of Art, 1997), 13–28.
Penelope
In MYTH, Penelope was the Spartan-born wife
of the Ithacan king ODYSSEUS; their son was TELEMACHOS.
She faithfully awaited her husband’s return during his 20-
year absence—10 years fighting the TROJAN WAR and
another 10 years for his homeward voyage.
In HOMER’s epic poem the Odyssey, Penelope appears
as a gracious and clever lady. Since about the seventh year
of Odysseus’s disappearance during his voyage from
TROY, she has been pressured to assume him dead and to
marry one of the 108 suitors—local nobles and nearby
kings—who have flocked to the palace at ITHACA. She
puts them off by claiming she cannot remarry until she
finishes weaving a shroud for Odysseus’s elderly (but still
living) father, Laertes. Every night she secretly unravels
what she has woven that day, so that the work never pro-
gresses. At length the deceit is discovered, and she is
compelled to make known the day on which she will
choose a new husband. Finally she announces that she
will marry whoever can bend and string Odysseus’s
mighty bow, then shoot an arrow through the empty
sockets of 12 axheads sunk in a line. In fact, it is
Odysseus himself who performs this feat, having returned
to Ithaca disguised as a beggar. Then he slaughters the
suitors and reclaims his throne (Odyssey books 21–22).
Afterward, Penelope and Odysseus lived happily for
years. After his death—according to one post-Homeric ver-
sion—Penelope married Telegonus, who was Odysseus’s
son by CIRCE.
Further reading: Marylin A. Katz, Penelope’s Renown:
Meaning and Indeterminacy in the Odyssey (Princeton,
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1991); Nancy Felson,
Regarding Penelope: From Character to Poetics (Princeton,
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1994); D. Buitron-Oliver
and B. Cohen, “Between Skylla and Penelope. Female
Characters of the ‘Odyssey’ in Archaic and Classical
Greek Art,” in The Distaff Side. Representing the Female in
Homer’s Odyssey, edited by Beth Cohen (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1995), 29–58; W. E. Helleman,
“Penelope as Lady Philosophy,” Phoenix 49 (1995):
283–302; Barbara Clayton, A Penelopean Poetics: Reweav-
ing the Feminine in Homer’s Odyssey (Lanham, Md.: Lex-
ington Books, 2004).
pentathlon
The “fivefold contest,” the pentathlon was
one of the most prestigious events at such Greek athletic
festivals as the OLYMPIC GAMES, beginning in 708 B.C.E.
Originally, contestants competed in the footrace, the long
jump, the discus throw, and the javelin throw. The two
men scoring the highest in these events were then
selected for the final contest, a WRESTLING match. The
winner of this was declared to be the pentathlete. BOXING
was added to the agenda in 688 B.C.E., and the PANKRA-
TION was added in 648 B.C.E. The pentathlon continued
to be called by that name, even though it came to include
more than five events.
The modern pentathlon was invented by Baron
Pierre de Coubertin, the founder of the modern Olympic
Games. It first took place in 1912 C.E. at the Games in
Stockholm, Sweden. The events chosen for the pen-
tathlon were intended to appeal to the military and
included equestrian show jumping, shooting, fencing,
swimming, and cross-country running.
Further reading: S. G. Miller, “The Pentathlon for
Boys at Nemea,” California Studies in Classical Antiquity 8
(1975): 199–201; M. K. Langdon, “Scoring the Ancient
Pentathlon. Final Solution?” Zeitschrift für Papyrologie
und Epigraphik 78 (1989): 117–118; G. Waddell, “The
Greek Pentathlon,” in Greek Vases in the J. Paul Getty
Museum, 5 (Malibu, Calif.: J. Paul Getty Museum, 1991),
99–106; D. F. Jackson, “Philostratos and the Pentathlon,”
Journal of Hellenic Studies 111 (1991): 178–181; V.
Matthews, “The Greek Pentathlon Again,” Zeitschrift für
Papyrologie und Epigraphik 100 (1994): 129–138; H. M.
Lee, “Yet Another Scoring System for the Ancient Pen-
tathlon,” Nikephoros 8 (1995): 41–55.
Penthesilea
See AMAZONS.
Pentheus
See DIONYSUS.
Pergamon
One of the wealthiest and most important
Greek cities of the later HELLENISTIC AGE (ca. 250–133
B.C.E.), Pergamon is located on the north-central west
coast of ASIA MINOR, about 15 miles inland in the hills
along the River Caïcus. The city thrived from local SILVER
mines and exports of grain, textiles, and parchment
(Greek: pergam¯en¯e).
In the classical period, Pergamon was one of many
Greek cities of the region called AEOLIS. Soon after 300
B.C.E. Pergamon became a subject city of the sprawling
SELEUCID EMPIRE. By 262 B.C.E., however, the Pergamenes
were led by Philetairos and his adopted son Eumenes and
revolted from Seleucid rule. The royal dynasty of the
Attalids—“the sons of Attalus” (Philetairos’s father)—
brought the city to its zenith. Pergamon dominated Asia
Minor and became a center of Greek culture, with a royal
library that was second in size only to the one at Egyptian
ALEXANDRIA (1).
Eumenes’ successor was King Attalus I (reigned
269–197 B.C.E.). He defeated the invading CELTS, resisted
Pergamon
251

the ambitions of the Macedonian king PHILIP V, and
wisely sided with the Romans against Philip in the Sec-
ond Macedonian War (200–197 B.C.E.). Attalus’s friend-
ship with ROME helped assure Pergamon’s survival amid
Roman conquest of the eastern Mediterranean. When
Attalus III died in 133 B.C.E., he bequeathed his kingdom
to the Romans.
The grandeur of ancient Pergamon is suggested in
the Great Altar of ZEUS, erected by King Eumenes II
(reigned 197–159 B.C.E.) and now housed in the Perga-
mon Museum in Berlin. Carved with marble bas-reliefs
showing the gods’ mythical combat with the GIANTS, the
altar is one of the most admired surviving Hellenistic art-
works.
The site of Pergamon, terraced cleverly into high
hills, was mostly excavated by German archaeologists in
1875–1886. Current work at the site primarily involves
conserving and restoring the fantastic ruins for the many
visitors. The city is one of the most dramatic ancient
Greek sites in Turkey, with grand vistas from the ACROPO-
LIS and from the steep auditorium of the ancient THEATER.
See also WRITING.
Further reading: Esther V. Hansen, The Attalids of
Pergamon, 2d ed. (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press,
1971); Max Kunze, The Pergamon Altar: Its Rediscover, His-
tory, and Reconstruction (Berlin: Staatliche Museem zu
Berlin, Antikensammlung, 1991); U. Westermark, “Bronze
Coins of Pergamon,” Numismatica e antichità classiche 20
(1991): 147–159; Ann Kuttner, “Republican Rome Looks
at Pergamon,” Harvard Studies in Classical Antiquity 97
(1995): 157–178; R. Dreyfus and E. Schraudolph, Perga-
mon: The Telephos Frieze from the Great Altar (San Fran-
cisco: Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco, 1996); N. T.
de Grummond and B. S. Ridgway, eds., From Pergamon to
Sperlonga: Sculpture and Context (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 2000).
Periander (ca. 650–585 B.C.E.) Dictator of CORINTH from
about 625 to 585 B.C.E.
The son and successor of KYPSELOS, Periander reigned
energetically over a city that was the most prosperous in
Greece. Combining total power with wise statesmanship,
he was the most famous example of the breed of Greek
rulers known as TYRANTS. Later generations counted him
among the SEVEN SAGES of Greece.
Periander extended his power through the Greek
world by war and diplomacy. He brought Corinth’s rebel-
lious colony CORCYRA to heel and captured the Pelopon-
nesian city of EPIDAURUS. Looking to western ASIA
MINOR, he forged ties with the Greek city of MILETUS and
the non-Greek kingdom of LYDIA. Asked to arbitrate in a
war between ATHENS and MYTILENE, he in effect judged
in favor of Athens. This act inaugurated a period of
Corinthian-Athenian friendship. (The two cities had a
mutual trading rival, AEGINA.)
In TRADE, Periander brought Corinth to new heights.
Responding to the great demand for Corinthian goods
among the ETRUSCANS
of western ITALY,
Periander
enlarged the westward shipping route, establishing Adri-
atic colonies such as APOLLONIA and EPIDAMNOS to serve
as anchorages and local depots. In the distant northeast-
ern region called CHALCIDIC¯E, Periander founded the
colony of POTIDAEA. Apparently he also pursued trade
with EGYPT, as suggested by the Egyptian royal name
Psammetichus that he gave to his son.
Exploiting Corinth’s geography, Periander con-
structed a ships’ dragway (Greek: diolkos) across the
seven-mile-wide isthmus that separates the Saronic Gulf
from the Corinthian Gulf. A stretch of this stone roadbed,
with grooves for trolley wheels, remains visible today.
The diolkos provided Greek merchant ships with an east-
west overland shortcut across central Greece—and pro-
vided Corinth with revenue from tolls.
Periander’s city was the cultural capital of mainland
Greece. Poets such as the famous ARION came to Perian-
der’s court. The tyrant’s public-building program stimu-
lated the development of the form of monumental
ARCHITECTURE known as the Doric order. In painted POT-
TERY, Corinthian artists achieved the style that we call
Corinthian and that monopolized the Mediterranean
market in that day.
Periander could be ruthless. He used surveillance
and intimidation against Corinthians who might pose a
threat to his power, and he executed the most important
of them. After one of Periander’s sons was killed in Cor-
cyra (probably as governor), Periander took 300 boys
from Corcyra’s foremost families and shipped them as a
gift to the Lydians, to be turned into eunuchs. (As it
happened, they were rescued.) Periander’s passions were
uncontrolled: Gossip claimed that he murdered his
beloved wife, Melissa, in an irrational rage of jealousy
and then, in remorse, had sexual intercourse with her
corpse.
Dying at an old age, Periander left his dynasty belea-
guered. His son Psammetichus reigned for three years
before being ousted in favor of a liberal OLIGARCHY.
See also COLONIZATION.
Further reading: J. P. Vernant, “From Oedipus to
Periander: Lameness, Tyranny, Incest in Legend and His-
tory,” in Oxford Readings in Greek Religion, edited by
Richard Buxton (New York: Oxford University Press,
2000).
Perikles (ca. 495–429 B.C.E.) Greatest Athenian states-
man
Despite his aristocratic blood, Perikles entered politics as
a left-wing radical and by the mid-440s B.C.E. was preem-
inent in the government, steering ATHENS through its
heyday of power and cultural achievement. More than
any other individual, Perikles shaped classical Athens as
252
Periander

a radical DEMOCRACY and naval power, as a center of
learning, and as a city of architectural splendors, ascend-
ing to the PARTHENON. Perikles’ ambitious vision created
this Athens that (to use his own phrase) was an EDUCA-
TION to the rest of Greece. As his influence increased,
however, his political policies became increasingly impe-
rialist, despite his left-wing roots. He ended his days in
disfavor, after his belligerence toward other Greek states
had provoked the PELOPONNESIAN WAR and his defensive
military strategy had brought plague and demoralization
to his city.
Perikles never held any such post as “president” of
Athens, since no such job existed under the democracy.
His highest title was strat¯egos, “military general,” a post
to which the Athenians elected 10 different men annually.
Unlike most other generals, however, Perikles was elected
at least 20 times; we know that he served without inter-
ruption from 443 to 430 B.C.E.
Perikles’ source of power was the d¯emos—the com-
mon people, the mass of lower- and middle-income citi-
zens. He was a politician they trusted to protect them
against the rich and to guide the city. A rigorously intel-
lectual man, Perikles was an accomplished orator, whose
speeches in the public ASSEMBLY could sway his listeners
to vote for his proposals.
Most of our knowledge of him comes from the Athe-
nian historian THUCYDIDES (1), who wrote ca. 430–400
B.C.E., and from the biographer PLUTARCH, who wrote ca.
100 C.E. Thucydides is especially helpful because he
knew Perikles personally and understood his politics.
Some details are added by other writers and by inscrip-
tions recording Periklean-inspired legislation.
Perikles’ father was XANTHIPPUS, a distinguished
Athenian soldier-politician. Perikles’ mother was Aga-
riste, a niece of the Athenian statesman KLEISTHENES (1)
and a member of the noble clan of the ALCMAEONIDS. The
family’s wealth and influence no doubt helped Perikles
enter politics, but he soon disassociated himself from the
Alcmaeonids and from other right-wing connections.
At about age 23 he served as chor¯egos (paying spon-
sor) for AESCHYLUS’s stage drama The Persians (472
B.C.E.). Perikles’ involvement in this politically charged
play identifies him as a follower of the beleaguered left-
wing Athenian statesman THEMISTOKLES. In the 480s
B.C.E. Themistokles had pushed two interrelated pro-
grams—radical democracy and a buildup of the navy. The
lower-income citizens who followed Themistokles were
the same men who served as crews in the labor-intensive
warships. Gradually Perikles emerged as Themistokles’
political heir.
In 463 B.C.E., at about age 32, Perikles (unsuccess-
fully) prosecuted the conservative leader KIMON for
bribery. The following year Perikles assisted the radical
reformer EPHIALTES in proposing legislation that disman-
tled the power of the AREOPAGOS. Ephialtes’ death and
Kimon’s OSTRACISM (both in 461 B.C.E.) left Perikles as
the foremost Athenian politician. His influence can be
seen in the next decade, in Athens’ left-leaning domestic
policies and in its bellicose stance toward SPARTA and cer-
tain other Greek states, such as AEGINA.
In 461 B.C.E. Perikles urged the creation of the LONG
WALLS, which were to stretch four miles from Athens
down to its harbor at PIRAEUS. Completed in about 457
B.C.E., the walls turned Athens into an impregnable naval
fortress. They also brought Piraeus’s laborers and citizen-
sailors more directly into Athenian politics.
Around 457 B.C.E. Perikles sponsored a bill creating
jury pay. This important democratic measure effectively
opened jury duty to lower-income citizens. It was proba-
bly also Perikles who, sometimes in the mid-400s B.C.E.,
instituted public assistance for the poorest citizens.
By 460 B.C.E. Athens had slipped into an unde-
clared war against Sparta and its allies. Repeatedly
elected as general, Perikles led a seaborne raid against
the enemy city of SIKYON (in about 454 B.C.E.) and led
an Athenian fleet to the BLACK SEA to make alliance
with Greek cities there that could supply precious grain
to Athens (452 B.C.E.).
In about 449 B.C.E. Perikles convinced his fellow citi-
zens to accept an offered peace with PERSIA, officially
ending the PERSIAN WARS. To mark the event and to glo-
rify the city, Perikles initiated a public building program,
directed by the sculptor PHEIDIAS. This program—which
created most of the famous buildings still standing today
on the Athenian ACROPOLIS—amounted to a show of
dominance over Athens’s Greek ally states in the DELIAN
LEAGUE. The league had been formed (around 478 B.C.E.)
as a mutual-defense alliance against Persia, but now
Perikles was demonstrating that, rather than reduce or
forgive the allies’ war dues on account of the new peace,
Athens would continue collecting dues and would use
them as it pleased.
Perikles’ imperialism is also evident in the use of
Athenian garrison colonies (known as cleruchies) to pun-
ish and guard resistant Delian League states. Among the
Greek regions that received these hated, land-grabbing,
Athenian settler communities were Aegina, EUBOEA, and
the Cycladic island of Naxos.
As reported by Thucydides, Perikles’ grim imperial-
ism is summarized in a speech to the Athenian assembly
in 430 B.C.E., after the outbreak of the Peloponnesian
War. “It is no longer possible for you to give up your
empire,” Perikles told the people. “You hold the empire
as a tyrant holds power: you may have been wrong to
take it, but you cannot safely let it go.” He went on in the
speech to glorify Athens as “the greatest name in
history . . . the greatest power that has ever yet arisen, a
power to be remembered forever.”
In 446 B.C.E. the Spartans invaded Athenian territory.
Although Perikles was able to appease them with bribery
and diplomatic concessions, the resulting Thirty Years’
Peace was unpopular at Athens. Perikles was attacked by
Perikles
253

an Athenian right-winger named THUCYDIDES (2)—not
the historian, but his maternal grandfather. By 443 B.C.E.
Perikles and his followers had rallied, convincing the
Athenian people to ostracize Thucydides.
Having become preeminent, Perikles became inacces-
sible. The biographer Plutarch records a change in Perik-
les’ personality at this point; no longer the straightforward
man of the people, Perikles adopted a formal style that
Plutarch calls “aristocratic or even kingly.” More than just
indulging in arrogance, Perikles apparently was seeking to
keep control of the people and to make himself impervi-
ous to bribery or undue influence. He became known for
never accepting an invitation to dinner or to the drinking
parties where rich men discussed politics. His cold, ratio-
nal aloofness earned him the nickname “the Olympian”
(as though he were a god of Mt. OLYMPUS).
His supremacy was severely tested by the revolt of
the Delian League allies SAMOS and BYZANTIUM (440
B.C.E.). The defeat of Samos required a huge Athenian
naval effort, and Perikles’ generalship seems to have
come in for some criticism on the Athenian comic stage.
In 440 or 439 B.C.E. Perikles sponsored a law suspending
the performance of all comedy for three years.
He endured an indirect political attack in around 438
B.C.E, when his friends Pheidias and ANAXAGORAS were
charged with the crime of impiety. ASPASIA, Perikles’ com-
mon-law wife, might have been a third defendant. Pheidias
and Anaxagoras each departed from Athens at this time.
In the late 430s B.C.E., when hostilities with Sparta
and CORINTH loomed, Perikles apparently saw war as
inevitable, and refused to appease. It was undoubtedly he
who advised the Athenians to make their fateful defense
pact with CORCYRA (433 B.C.E.), which Corinth found so
alarming, and he was likewise the author of the bellicose
Megarian Decree (432 B.C.E.), directed against the nearby
city of MEGARA.
When the Peloponnesian War broke out (431 B.C.E.),
Perikles advised defense by land and offensive strikes by
sea. With his faith in Athens’s immense resources and for-
tifications, he convinced the rural citizens to evacuate
their homes and contain themselves within the city walls,
while the invading Spartans ravaged the countryside.
This strategy backfired, however, when plague broke out
among the Athenian refugees in their unsanitary encamp-
ments and swept the city (430 B.C.E.). At the same time,
large Athenian expeditions failed to capture either
Megara or (in a siege directed by Perikles himself) EPI-
DAURUS.
The angry Athenians voted to depose the 65-year-old
Perikles from office and fine him a crushing 10 TALENTS.
Relenting, they elected him as general for the following
year. But in that year, 429 B.C.E., he died, probably of the
plague.
Perikles had two sons by an Athenian wife, whom he
divorced for Aspasia around 450 B.C.E. By a law of his
own sponsoring, Perikles, being an Athenian citizen,
could not legally marry Aspasia, who was an immigrant
from MILETUS, but they lived together for 20 years until
his death. Their son, named Perikles, was made an Athe-
nian citizen by a special vote of the assembly, but he was
one of the six Athenian generals executed by the people
after the sea battle of Arginusae in 406 B.C.E.
See also FUNERAL CUSTOMS; KALLIAS; KLEON; KRATI-
NUS; LAWS
AND
LAW
COURTS; MARRIAGE; PROTAGORAS;
RHETORIC; SOPHOKLES; THEATER; WARFARE, NAVAL; WOMEN.
Further reading: A. Andrews, “The Opposition to
Perikles,” Journal of Hellenic Studies 98 (1978): 1–16;
Donald Kagen, Pericles of Athens and the Birth of Democ-
racy (New York: Free Press, 1991); A. L. Boegehold,
“Perikles’ Citizenship Law of 451/0 B.C.,” in Athenian
Identity and Civic Ideology, edited by A. L. Boegehold and
A. C. Scafuro (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,
1994), 57–66; Editors of Time-Life Books, What Life Was
Like at the Dawn of Democracy: Classical Athens 525–322
B.C. (Alexandria, Va.: Time-Life Books, 1997); A. J.
Podlecki, Perikles and His Circle (London: Routledge,
1998); B. S. Ridgway, “An Issue of Methodology.
Anakreon, Perikles, Xanthippos,” American Journal of
Archaeology 102 (1998): 717–738.
perioikoi (perioeci)
The Greek term perioikoi means
dwellers around and describes certain second-class citi-
zens in some Greek states. Perioikoi were typically free-
born and native; they had basic legal protections and
obligations, such as military service, but were excluded
by birth from taking part in government. By occupation,
many were smallholding farmers.
This citizen class existed at ARGOS, CRETE, THESSALY,
and elsewhere. But the perioikoi usually are spoken of in
connection with SPARTA,
where they were literally
“dwellers around,” inhabiting the foothills and secondary
sites around the Eurotas River valley. The heart of this
fertile plain was reserved for true Spartans—the Sparti-
atai. Together, Spartiates and perioeci constituted the
united people known as Lakedaimonioi.
See also LACONIA; POLIS.
Further reading: A. Andrews, “Argive ‘perioikoi’,” in
Owls to Athens. Essays on Classical Subjects Presented to
Sir Kenneth Dover, edited by E. M. Craik (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1990), 171–178; J. Roy, “The
Perioikoi of Elis,” in The Polis as an Urban Centre and as a
Political Community. Symposium, August 29–31 1996,
edited by Mogens Herman Hansen (Copenhagen: Munks-
gaard, 1997), 282–320; N. M. Kennell, “From Perioikoi
to Poleis. The Laconian Cities in the Late Hellenistic
Period,” in Sparta. New Perspectives, edited by S. Hodkin-
son and A. Powell (London: Duckworth, 1999), 189–210.
Peripatetic School
See LYCEUM.
254
perioikoi

Persephone
This Greek goddess was the queen of the
Underworld and the wife of the god HADES. In MYTH,
Persephone was identified with Kore, the daughter of
the grain goddess, DEMETER. Modern writers, for the
sake of thoroughness, sometimes refer to her as Kore-
Persephone.
Persephone appears to have been the name of a pre-
Greek, native goddess who was probably a judge and
ruler among the spirits of the dead. When the Greeks
first entered the Greek mainland around 2100 B.C.E.,
they amalgamated her into their own religion. Perse-
phone, whose name is translatable as “destroyer” in
Greek, was identified with the minor Greek goddess
Kore (“maiden”).
The Persephone, or Kore, of Greek myth was the
daughter of Demeter and the great god ZEUS. Her most
significant myth, first told by HESIOD (ca. 700 B.C.E.),
tells how she was gathering flowers one day when her
uncle, the god Hades, abducted her to become his queen
in the Underworld. After searching frantically for her and
causing the earth to become barren, the anxious Demeter
appealed to Zeus. He ruled that Persephone should be
returned to her mother on earth, but because she had
eaten four seeds of a pomegranate while in the Under-
world, she was required to spend four months of every
year with her husband and eight months in the upper
world. The Classical Greeks interpreted the goddess’s
double name as a sign of her dual nature: Kore the
maiden on earth and the sterner Queen Persephone
below. Neither Persephone nor Hades, however, was
thought of as evil; death was seen as a natural part of the
life-cycle.
By the 600s B.C.E., Persephone had also become part
of the fringe cult called ORPHISM. This cult involved a
complicated belief in reincarnation after death, believing
that only by living successive lives (on earth as well as in
the Underworld) could a person’s soul achieve eternal
bliss. Persephone, as the judge of the dead, directed each
soul’s sequence of transmigrations, according to how
piously the person had lived each prior life.
Orphism became particularly popular among the
Greeks of SICILY and southern ITALY. Consequently, Perse-
phone became a major goddess of the Sicilian Greeks, and
her myth became localized in Sicily. It was supposedly near
the city of Henna (modern Enna) that Hades abducted
Persephone, and supposedly volcanic Mt. Etna served as
the hearth where Demeter lit two torches for searching by
night. Such details obviously represent a later layer of the
Persephone myth. The goddess was also adopted into the
Roman pantheon, where she was called Proserpina.
In art, Persephone is frequently represented with a
regal scepter and a small box. Other attributes include a
torch or torches, a cornucopia, ears of corn, pomegranates,
or a rooster (symbol of a new life as it signals a new day).
Some of the most famous images of Persephone, including
a fabulous 4th-century B.C.E. wall painting at the Macedo-
nian site of Vergina, show her being carried away by Hades.
See also AFTERLIFE; ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES.
Further reading: G. Kuntz, Persephone: Three Essays
on Religion and Thought in Magna Graecia (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1971); B. Lincoln, “The Rape of Perse-
phone. A Greek Scenario of Women’s Initiation,” Harvard
Theological Review 72 (1979): 223–235; N. Bookidis and
R. Stroud, Demeter and Persephone in Ancient Corinth
(Princeton, N.J.: American School of Classical Studies in
Athens, 1987); Christine Downing, ed., The Long Journey
Home: Re-visioning the Myth of Demeter and Persephone for
Our Time (Boston: Shambhala, 1994); Ann Suter, The Nar-
cissus and the Pomegranate: An Archaeology of the Homeric
Hymn to Demeter (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
Press, 2002); Tamara Agha-Jaffar, Demeter and Persephone:
Lessons from a Myth (Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland, 2002).
Perseus (1)
In MYTH, Perseus was a hero of ARGOS and
TIRYNS, and the slayer of the monster MEDUSA. The story
of his birth is one of the most picturesque Greek legends.
King Acrisius of Argos had a beautiful daughter, Danaë,
but he was warned by a prophecy that he was destined to
be killed by any son born to her. So he locked her in a
tower or a bronze chamber in order to prevent anyone
from approaching her. But the great god ZEUS came to her
in the form of a shower of GOLD, and in due time she
bore a son, whom she named Perseus (destroyer).
Acrisius, surprised to learn of these developments, put
Danaë and Perseus to sea in a chest, which drifted south
through the Aegean. Coming ashore at Seriphos, an island
of the CYCLADES, mother and child were welcomed by the
local king, Polydectes. There Perseus grew to manhood.
Polydectes—intending to force Danaë to marry him, and
wanting Perseus out of the way—sent the young man on a
seemingly deadly mission: to go to the far West (or far
South), find the three demon sisters known as the Gor-
gons, and bring back the head of the one called Medusa.
The Gorgons were so hideous that merely looking at any
one of them would cause a person to turn to stone.
Undaunted, Perseus set off, with sword and shield.
On the advice of the goddess ATHENA, Perseus con-
sulted the Graiai—three old sisters who had one eye and
one tooth among them. Stealing their one eye until they
would help him, Perseus received directions for finding
the Gorgons’ home. He also received from them a pair of
winged flying shoes and a cap that would turn him invisi-
ble, as well as a pouch for carrying Medusa’s severed
head. Flying invisible to the land of the Gorgons, he
sneaked up on Medusa with his face averted, guiding
himself by watching her harmless reflection in his shield.
Shearing off her head, he immediately hid it in his
satchel, since even the head itself could turn people to
stone. Perseus flew off, still invisible, evading Medusa’s
two sisters.
Perseus
255

Soaring over the sea toward Seriphos, he then saved
the Ethiopian princess Andromeda from a sea monster.
(Andromeda’s parents had planned to sacrifice her, to
save their kingdom from the god POSEIDON’s wrath.)
Perseus killed the monster, married Andromeda, and
resumed his journey by ship with her. At Seriphos,
Perseus rescued his mother, using Medusa’s head to turn
Polydectes and his followers to stone. Then, leaving the
island in the hands of Polydectes’ righteous brother Dic-
tys, Perseus returned with Andromeda to his native Argos.
The prophecy that Perseus would kill his grandfather
Acrisius was fulfilled when the hero, throwing the discus
in competition, inadvertently struck and killed Acrisius,
who was sitting among the spectators. Leaving the throne
of Argos to a kinsman, Perseus became the king of Tiryns
and, according to one tradition, founded the nearby city
of MYCENAE. One of his sons, Perses, supposedly became
the father of the Asian people known as the Persians.
The Perseus tale may distortedly recall the political
unification of the Argive plain in early Mycenaean times
(ca. 1600 B.C.E.), as well as Mycenaean naval conquests
in the Cyclades and beyond.
See also MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION.
Further reading: E. Phinney Jr., “Perseus’ Battle with
the Gorgons,” Transactions of the American Philological
Association 102 (1971): 445–463; Jocelyn M. Woodward,
Perseus: A Study in Greek Art and Legend (New York: AMS
Press, 1976); J. H. Oakley, “Danae and Perseus on
Seriphos,” American Journal of Archaeology 86 (1982):
111–115; E. Pemberton, “A Late Corinthian Perseus from
Ancient Corinth,” Hesperia 52 (1983): 64–69; J. H. Oak-
ley, “Perseus, the Graiai, and Aeschylus’ ‘Phorkides’,”
American Journal of Archaeology 92 (1988): 383–391.
Perseus (2)
See MACEDON.
Persia
The vast, rich, non-Greek kingdom of Persia
played a crucial role in Greek history—largely as an
antagonist, but also as an employer, overlord, or ally for
many Greeks, especially those in ASIA MINOR. The Per-
sian Empire reached its height around 500 B.C.E., at
which time it stretched westward from the Indus Valley
(modern Pakistan) to THRACE and MACEDON, on the
northeastern border of Greece, with EGYPT also included.
Encompassing about 1 million square miles, unified by a
complex network of roads, and ruled by an absolute
monarch, Persia was the greatest empire the world had
ever seen.
The Persians originated as a nomadic, pastoral people
in the western Iranian plateau. We know that by 850
B.C.E. they were calling themselves the Parsa and their ter-
ritory (which shifted constantly) was known as Parsua. By
the 600s B.C.E., the Persians had settled in the southwest
Iranian plateau, bounded on the west by the Tigris River
and on the south by the Persian Gulf; this region came to
be their heartland. In these years, the Persians were sub-
jects of the kindred Medes, another Iranian people. As
vassals of the Medes, the Persian kings reigned out of
their provincial capital at Susa, near the head of the Per-
sian Gulf.
In 549 B.C.E., the Persian king CYRUS (1) led a revolt
against the Median overlords. The Persians captured the
Median capital and imposed a new dynasty—a Persian
one. Henceforth the Persians were the ruling class; the
Medes became their subordinates, although still partners
in the empire.
Cyrus’s conquest of western Asia Minor in 546 B.C.E.
brought the Persians into contact with the Greeks in the
cities of IONIA. The Persians made plans to conquer main-
land Greece under King DARIUS (1) in the early fifth cen-
tury B.C.E. but, amazingly, were defeated by the relatively
puny Greek states. This conflict, known as the PERSIAN
WARS, refers primarily to the invasions in 490 and
480–479 B.C.E.
The vast size of the Persian Empire eventually proved
to be its undoing, as the delegation of power to local gov-
ernors gradually weakened the king’s central authority.
When the Macedonian king ALEXANDER
THE GREAT
256
Perseus
Perseus, wearing his cap of invisibility, cuts off the head of
Medusa. (Alison Frantz Photographic Collection, American
School of Classical Studies at Athens)

invaded the Persian Empire in 334 B.C.E. with a mere
37,000 soldiers, he encountered a disunified realm under
a weak monarch, ripe for destruction. By the time of
Alexander’s death (323 B.C.E.), Persia was ruled as a
Greek-Macedonian kingdom, eventually known as the
SELEUCID EMPIRE. The Iranian cultures of the central
plateau, however, continued to thrive and reclaimed
power by the second century B.C.E.
See also AGESILAUS; CAVALRY; CYPRUS (1); DARIUS (1);
DELIAN LEAGUE; HERODOTUS; KALLIAS; KING’S PEACE;
XENOPHON.
Further reading: J. M. Cook, The Persian Empire
(New York: Schocken Books, 1983); John Boardman, ed.,
Persia, Greece, and the Western Mediterranean, c. 525 to
479 B.C., 2d ed. (New York: Cambridge University Press,
1988); John Sharwood Smith, Greece and the Persians
(Bristol, U.K.: Bristol Classical Press, 1990); Jack M. Bal-
cer, A Prosopographical Study of the Ancient Persians Royal
and Noble, c. 550–450 B.C. (Lewiston, N.Y.: Edwin Mellen
Press, 1993); Josef Wiesehöfer, Ancient Persia: From 550
BC to 650 AD, translated by Azizeh Azodi (London: I. B.
Tauris, 1996); John Curtis, Ancient Persia, 2d ed. (Lon-
don: British Museum Publications, 2000); Pierre Briant,
From Cyrus to Alexander: A History of the Persian Empire,
translated by Peter T. Daniels (Winona Lake, Ind.: Eisen-
brauns, 2002).
Persian Wars
Although the Greeks and Persians were
in intermittent conflict for over 200 years, the term Per-
sian Wars refers mainly to the campaigns of 490 and
480–479 B.C.E., in which the Greeks successfully defended
mainland Greece against two Persian invasions. These
were the famous campaigns of MARATHON, THERMOPYLAE,
and SALAMIS (1).
The Persian Wars were immensely important for
Western civilization. The Greeks, a relatively small and
disunified nation, unexpectedly defeated the greatest
empire on earth. Afterward, this experience compelled
the Greeks to identify themselves culturally. The world’s
first real historian, the Greek HERODOTUS, writing in the
mid-400s B.C.E., chose the Persian Wars as his story to
tell; it was the greatest understandable event in human
memory, and it distinguished the Greek from the “barbar-
ian.” Similarly, the amazing Athenian cultural achieve-
ments of the 400s and 300s 
B.C.E.—in 
THEATER,
PHILOSOPHY, SCULPTURE, ARCHITECTURE, and the develop-
ment of DEMOCRACY—were products of a confidence or
arrogance adopted because of the Persian Wars. Had the
invading Persians won and had Greece become just
another province of their empire, there would have been
no brilliant Athenian century to serve as the foundation
of modern culture.
The first stage of the conflict was the Persians’ west-
ward push into ASIA MINOR in the mid-500s B.C.E., when
the Persian king CYRUS (1) conquered the east Greek
region known as IONIA. Cyrus and his successors ruled
moderately but demanded tribute, labor, and military ser-
vice from their Greek subjects, governing them by means
of Greek puppet rulers.
In 513 B.C.E. the Persian king DARIUS (1) led an army
across the BOSPORUS and received the submission of
THRACE and MACEDON. Southwest of Macedon, the land
of Greece itself was still free, but for how long? It seemed
obvious that the Persians would attack eventually, and
equally obvious—to many—that Greece would fall. Cer-
tain Greeks began making friendly overtures to their
expected overlords. A new verb appeared in the Greek
language: M¯edizein, “to Medize,” or to collaborate with
the Medes (i.e., with the Persians). Among the most egre-
gious Medizers were those local Greek despots known as
TYRANTS (tyrannoi), who hoped to retain power and
become the Persians’ puppets after the conquest. Another
Medizing force was the priesthood of the god APOLLO at
DELPHI. The Persian kings had traditionally sent gifts to
Delphi in order to develop contacts inside Greece; appar-
ently the priesthood now decided that a Persian conquest
would be to their god’s advantage. During the Persian
Wars, therefore, the Delphic oracle consistently gave
advice that was defeatist in tone.
The IONIAN REVOLT of 499–493 B.C.E. saw the Greek
cities of Asia Minor rise up, ill-fatedly, against their Per-
sian masters. Before being crushed, the revolt attracted
help from two cities of mainland Greece: ATHENS and
ERETRIA. This intervention backfired, convincing the Per-
sians to subdue Greece immediately. Soon Persian heralds
appeared in the cities and islands of Greece, demanding
the tokens of earth and water that were the formal sym-
bols of submission to the Persian king. Many frightened
Greek states obeyed, but the Athenians, in a violation of
diplomatic sacrosanctity, threw the Persian envoys into
the condemned criminals’ pit. At SPARTA the envoys were
thrown down a well, where (they were told) there was
plenty of earth and water. Thus did the militaristic state
of Sparta, with the best army in Greece, signal its inten-
tion to stand alongside Athens, against Persia.
Darius had at his court an Athenian adviser, HIPPIAS
(1), the former tyrant of Athens who had been expelled
in 510 B.C.E. Darius resolved to capture Athens and
install the aged Hippias as his puppet. In the summer of
490 B.C.E. a Persian seaborne expedition crossed the
AEGEAN SEA, landed at Eretria, destroyed that city, and
sailed south to the coastal town of Marathon, about 26
miles from Athens. There a Persian army of perhaps
20,000 troops disembarked; with them was Hippias. But
at the Battle of Marathon the attackers were totally
defeated by 9,000 Athenians and a few hundred
Plataeans, in a plan devised by the general MILTIADES.
After Darius’s death, his son and successor, XERXES,
decided to invade Greece in full force. He gathered a mas-
sive army, perhaps 300,000 land troops, including subject
peoples as well as Persian regulars. His navy, numbering
Persian Wars
257

perhaps 600 warships, was drawn from seafaring provinces
such as PHOENICIA, EGYPT, and Greek Ionia. Other prepara-
tions included spanning of the HELLESPONT with twin
bridges of boats, a marvel of Persian engineering skill.
Preparations were under way on the Greek side as
well. At Athens the brilliant statesman and general
THEMISTOKLES convinced the democratic ASSEMBLY to vote
to build 100 new trireme warships, thereby giving Athens
about 180 ships in all—the biggest navy of any Greek
city. Themistokles foresaw that the defense of Greece
would depend on fighting at sea. The Persians’ land army
was too vast to destroy; but cripple their navy, and the
army would founder—from lack of transport, supply, and
communication. With a large fleet, Athens could be pro-
tected or, if need be, evacuated.
The uneasy alliance of Greek states, dominated by
the land power Sparta, mapped out a grand strategy. The
terrain and shoreline of Greece naturally compel a south-
ward-moving invader through a series of bottlenecks on
land and sea, and the Greek plan was basically to fight at
certain defensible bottlenecks—a mountain pass, a sea
channel—where the invader’s advantage of superior num-
bers would be canceled. On land, the Greeks would avoid
battle in the open plains, where the mighty Persian CAV-
ALRY would rule. Similarly, for a sea fight, a narrow chan-
nel would tend to offset the superior seamanship of the
Persians’ elite contingent, the Phoenicians.
One advantage for the Greeks, of which they were
not yet fully aware, was that their HOPLITE heavy infantry-
man was better than the Persian counterpart—not in
courage, but in equipment and training. The hoplite wore
a BRONZE breastplate and helmet, and carried a bronze-
plated shield and a thrusting spear up to eight feet long;
the Persian trooper wore less armor and carried a shorter
spear and a shield made only of wickerwork. In the crush
of battle, the hoplites usually could push through. But
hoplites were not invincible, and the Persians had the
greatest advantage in numbers.
Led by Xerxes, the Persians crossed the Hellespont
and descended through Thrace and Macedon (spring of
480 B.C.E.). A Greek army marched to the mountain
gorge of Tempe, in northern THESSALY, but then aban-
doned the site as being too far forward, in hostile terri-
tory. Thessaly submitted to the Persians, and the Greeks
drew up a line of defense on Thessaly’s southern frontier,
at two interrelated sites: the mountain pass of Thermopy-
lae and the six-mile-wide sea channel at ARTEMISION, on
the northern shore of EUBOEA.
Simultaneous battles were fought on land and sea.
The Battle of Thermopylae was a heroic Greek blunder;
an army under the Spartan king Leonidas held the pass
for three days but never received reinforcements, and was
overrun. More creditable was the sea fight at Artemision,
where about 370 Greek warships met an enemy fleet that
had been badly reduced—perhaps to 450 ships, from
600—by recent storms. The battle was a marginal Persian
victory, but it showed the Greeks what they could do
against the much-vaunted Phoenician crews, and it
apparently encouraged the Greek admirals in their strat-
egy of relying on narrow waterways to offset the enemy’s
advantages.
The defenders retreated south through central
Greece. BOEOTIA submitted to the invaders and, like
Thessaly, was forced to supply troops to fight against
their fellow Greeks. In a dramatic decision, the Athenians
voted to evacuate their city to the enemy: They would
not stay and surrender. The noncombatants were trans-
ported to safe locales nearby, and the Athenian troops and
warships remained on duty in the Greek forces. Athens
was occupied and sacked by the Persians.
The summer was ending. Certain Greek commanders
wanted to retreat farther south, to the naturally defensi-
ble Isthmus of CORINTH, but Themistokles and the Spar-
tan commanding admiral, Eurybiades, pressed to offer
battle at sea, in the one-mile-wide channel east of the
island of Salamis, in the Saronic Gulf. There the Greek
fleet stationed itself. Although Xerxes could have chosen
to bypass, he overconfidently ordered his navy to attack
the Greeks inside the channel, and the result was a com-
plete Greek victory at the Battle of Salamis.
Suddenly the tables had turned. With his armada
now in tatters, Xerxes was in danger of being trapped in
Europe. Taking much of his army, he hurried back to the
Hellespont before the Greek navy could arrive to sever
the bridges there. Meanwhile, his able general Mardonius
stayed in Greece with a force of perhaps 60,000.
Mardonius wintered in Thessaly and marched south
again in the spring of 479 B.C.E.; his army was supple-
mented by collaborationist Greek troops from Thessaly
and Boeotia. Athens, still evacuated, was reoccupied and
burned. Mardonius reached the northeastern outskirts of
MEGARA (1), the Persian high-water mark in Europe, but
on news of an approaching Greek force he withdrew
toward THEBES, the main Boeotian city, which was friendly
to the Persians. The Greek army—nearly 39,000 Spartan,
Peloponnesian, and Athenian hoplites, commanded by the
Spartan general Pausanias—approached the town of
PLATAEA in the late summer. Pausanias declined to attack,
probably fearing what Mardonius’s cavalry could do on
the Boeotian plain. After almost two weeks of waiting—
while both armies were plagued by a shortage of food and
water—Mardonius launched a surprise attack. He was
killed and his army destroyed at the Battle of Plataea.
Historians debate whether it was Salamis or Plataea
that saved Greece from Persian conquest. Probably the
Persians’ invasion was doomed once they had lost most
of their fleet at Salamis. Greece, a mountainous country,
does not lend itself to being conquered by a strictly
land-bound army. Had the Persians won at Plataea, they
would probably have lost the war anyway. The Greeks
would have retreated south to the isthmus, to beat them
there.
258
Persian Wars

That same year, 479 B.C.E., saw the Greek counterof-
fensive begin. Supposedly on the same day as the Battle
of Plataea, an amphibious Greek force under the Spartan
king Leotychides landed at Cape MYCAL¯E in western Asia
Minor; the Greeks beat a Persian army and burned the
remaining Persian fleet. Ionia had been liberated; over 90
years would pass before the Persians could reclaim it. By
winter an Athenian fleet under the general XANTHIPPUS
had captured the Hellespont after destroying the Persian
garrison at SESTOS. In 478 B.C.E. the Spartan Pausanias
took BYZANTIUM and the Bosporus. There the Spartans
dropped out of the counteroffensive, but the Athenians—
calculatedly building an empire—carried on their libera-
tion of the east Greeks in Asia Minor and CYPRUS.
Around 449 B.C.E., Persia negotiated a peace treaty
with Athens, and hostilities ceased. But the Persian kings
continued to scheme for the recovery of their lost terri-
tory of Ionia. As the patriotic Greek alliances of 480 B.C.E.
dissolve into the PELOPONNESIAN WAR (431–404 B.C.E.)
and CORINTHIAN WAR (395–386 B.C.E.), Persia eventually
began to help Sparta in exchange for a free hand in Ionia.
It took ALEXANDER THE GREAT, with his dismantling of
the Persian Empire in 334–323 B.C.E., finally to make
peace between Persia and the Greeks.
See also DELIAN LEAGUE; KALLIAS; KIMON; KING’S
PEACE; WARFARE, LAND; WARFARE; NAVAL.
Further reading: Jack M. Balcer, “The Persian Wars
against Greece. A Reassessment,” Historia 38 (1989):
127–143; J. F. Lazenby, The Defence of Greece, 490–479
B.C. (Warminster, England: Aris & Phillips, 1993); Jack
M. Balcer, The Persian Conquest of the Greeks, 545–450
B.C. (Konstanz, Germany: Universitätsverlag Konstanz,
1995); Philip de Souza, The Greek and Persian Wars,
499–386 B.C. (New York: Routledge, 2003).
Phaedra
See HIPPOLYTUS; THESEUS.
Phaethon
See HELIOS.
phalanx
The noun phalanx refers to a battle formation
of heavy infantry and is used by ancient Greek writers
from HOMER (ca. 750 B.C.E.) onward. Modern scholars
usually reserve the word to describe the distinctive battle
order of the Macedonian and Hellenistic heavy infantry
(mid-300s to mid-100s B.C.E.). These soldiers employed
equipment and tactics invented by the Macedonian king
PHILIP II (around 357 B.C.E.) and perfected by his son
ALEXANDER THE GREAT. In several battles of the latter
300s B.C.E., the Macedonian phalanx proved itself supe-
rior to the classic HOPLITE armies of the Greek city-states.
Designed as an improvement on hoplite tactics, the
Macedonian phalanx consisted of about 9,000 men
arranged in orderly rows, one behind the other, up to 16
in number, with several hundred men in each row. Every
man carried a 13- to 14-foot-long pike, called a sarissa.
When the first five rows presented their sarissas forward,
a hedge of metal pike-points was formed, extending in
serried rows to about 10 feet ahead. As the phalanx
moved forward, these points pushed toward the enemy
with great force. Behind the first five rows, the soldiers
kept their sarissas upright, waiting to move forward as
their comrades in front fell.
Because hoplites and other heavy infantrymen of the
day were armed only with six- to eight-foot-long jabbing
spears, the phalanx enjoyed an advantage in reach and in
density of offered weapons; the enemy formation could
present its spears only from a depth of two or three rows.
Also, the rows of the phalanx tended not to crush
together as tightly as did rows of hoplites or other troops,
and this made combat somewhat less exhausting for men
in the phalanx.
Because the sarissa needed to be held with two
hands, the man’s shield was strapped to his left forearm
or shoulder, without engaging the hand. This shield was
necessarily smaller than the kind carried by Greek
hoplites. In general, Macedonian soldiers seem to have
worn less armor than their hoplite counterparts, using
leather or cloth for helmets and corsets, in place of
BRONZE. While this allowed the phalanx men greater
maneuverability and endurance (and less expense for
equipment), it also left them vulnerable to archers and
javelin men, who might easily stay out of reach. Another
weaknesses of the phalanx (one shared by the hoplite for-
mation) was its unshielded right flank and rear.
The proper use of the phalanx involved coordination
with CAVALRY and light-armed infantry to guard the flanks
and chase away enemy projectile troops. In combat, the
phalanx’s natural function was defensive—to hold the
enemy’s charge and damage his formation, while the cav-
alry looked for a weak point to attack.
The Hellenistic kingdoms of the 200s and 100s B.C.E.
continued the legacy of Macedonian-style warfare, but
the phalanx became enlarged to such unwieldy sizes as
20,000 men. The wars of ROME against MACEDON and the
SELEUCID EMPIRE saw the phalanx beaten repeatedly—at
Cynocephalae (197 B.C.E.), at Magnesia (186 B.C.E.), and
at Pydna (167 B.C.E.)—by the newly developed Roman
legions. The legions of the Roman army were successful
against the Greek phalanx due to their increased flexibil-
ity and maneuverability. The Roman legion was divided
into numerous subsections, each of which could operate
independently if an opportunity arose to take advantage
of a gap in the opposing phalanx. Also, in contrast to the
phalanx which required all of its troops to engage
together at the start of a battle, the Roman legion was
composed of several battle lines that could act as reserves
for the troops in front of them, if necessary. These adjust-
ments in organization and strategy contributed to the
immense success of the Roman military machine from
the first century B.C.E. onward.
phalanx
259

See also CHAIRONEIA; HELLENISTIC AGE; PHILIP V;
WARFARE, LAND.
Further reading: Hans vans Wees, “The Homeric
Way of War. The ‘Iliad’ and the Hoplite Phalanx, 1,”
Greece and Rome 41 (1994): 1–18; ———, “The Homeric
Way of War. The ‘Iliad’ and the Hoplite Phalanx, 2,”
Greece and Rome 41 (1994): 131–155; Victor Davis Han-
son, “From Phalanx to Legion 350–250 BC,” in The Cam-
bridge Illustrated History of Warfare: The Triumph of the
West, edited by Geoffrey Parker (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1995), 32–49; Antonio Santosuosso,
Soldiers, Citizens, and the Symbols of War: From Classical
Greece to Republican Rome, 500–167 B.C. (Boulder, Colo.:
Westview Press, 1997); R. H. Storch, “The Archaic Greek
Phalanx, 750–650 B.C.,” Ancient History Bulletin 12
(1998): 1–7; Hans van Wees, “The Development of the
Hoplite Phalanx: Iconography and Reality in the Seventh
Century,” in War and Violence in Ancient Greece, edited by
Hans van Wees (London: Duckworth and the Classical
Press of Wales, 2000), 125–166.
Pheidias (ca. 490–425 B.C.E.) Athenian sculptor
Pheidias’s masterpiece was the colossal GOLD-and-ivory
cult statue of the god ZEUS, constructed around 430 B.C.E.
for Zeus’s temple at OLYMPIA and considered one of the
SEVEN WONDERS OF THE WORLD for its size and solemn
majesty. Today, however, Pheidias is best remembered for
his work on the Athenian PARTHENON and for the prestige
he achieved as an associate of the Athenian statesman
PERIKLES.
Pheidias was the son of a man called Charmides (an
Athenian aristocratic name that also crops up in the fam-
ily of PLATO). The family was probably affluent enough
that the young Pheidias was free to pursue his art. His
genius encompassed not only SCULPTURE but also PAINT-
ING, engraving, and metalworking.
One of Pheidias’s early works (ca. 456 B.C.E.) was a
30-foot-high BRONZE statue of the armored Athena Pro-
machos (the Defender), which stood among the outdoor
statues on the Athenian ACROPOLIS. The gleam from the
point of the goddess’ upright spear was said to be visible
to ships as far as 15 miles away. Another early work was
Pheidias’s bronze statue known as the Lemnian Athena,
commissioned by inhabitants of the island of Lemnos
(probably Athenian colonists were recent settlers there).
This work’s grace and dignity were much admired in
ancient times.
In about 448 B.C.E., Pheidias was chosen as the
artistic director of the public-building program orga-
nized by Perikles to commemorate the end of the PER-
SIAN WARS. It was in this job that Pheidias oversaw the
building of the Parthenon and the execution of the tem-
ple’s famous architectural sculptures. We do not know
whether Pheidias himself carved any of these. But he
did sculpt one central work, the 35-foot-high gold-and-
ivory cult statue of the goddess ATHENA that stood
inside the Parthenon.
The Parthenon statue was completed by about 438
B.C.E., but soon Pheidias had to pay for his success, as
criminal charges were brought against him by politicians
hoping to discredit his friend Perikles. Pheidias was
accused of having stolen some of the gold entrusted to him
for the statue’s construction. This charge was disproved
when the gold plates—which Pheidias had constructed as
detachable—were taken off the statue and weighed.
A second accusation, of impiety was even more dam-
aging. Pheidias had incurred this charge by supposedly
including likenesses of himself and his patron Perikles
amid the relief figures on the shield of Athena. There, in a
battle scene of Greeks versus AMAZONS, Pheidias was said
to have portrayed himself as a bald old man hurling a
rock and Perikles as a warrior about to spear an Amazon.
Perhaps as a result of his legal troubles, Pheidias left
Athens soon after the Parthenon Athena was in place. (A
later legend, claiming that he died in an Athenian prison,
is untrue.) Around this time he won the prestigious
commission to sculpt his second giant gold-and-ivory
statue, at Olympia. The Olympian cult statue of Zeus
was arguably the most important religious statue of the
Greek world.
Further reading: J. A. K. E. de Waele, “Wondering
about a World Wonder. Phidias’ Work in Olympia,”
Kodaibunka 46 (1994): 15–28; A. Corso, “Competition
between Myron, Pheidias, and Polykleitos,” Numismatica
e antichità classiche 24 (1995): 173–188; Evelyn B. Harri-
son, “Pheidias,” in Personal Styles in Greek Sculpture,
edited by Olga Palagia and J. J. Pollitt (New York: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1996), 16–65; Nigel Spivey,
Understanding Greek Sculpture: Ancient Meanings, Modern
Readings (New York: Thames and Hudson, 1997); B.
Lundgreen, “A Methodological Enquiry. The Great
Bronze Athena by Pheidias,” Journal of Hellenic Studies
117 (1997): 190–197; Kenneth D. S. Lapatin, Chrysele-
phantine Statuary in the Ancient Mediterranean World
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2001).
Pheidon (600s B.C.E.) Powerful king of ARGOS who prob-
ably reigned ca. 675–655 B.C.E.
Pheidon brought his city to a brief preeminence at the
expense of its perennial enemy, SPARTA. With his army,
Pheidon seized the sacred site of OLYMPIA and personally
took over management of the OLYMPIC GAMES—“the
most arrogant thing ever done by a Greek,” according to
the ancient Greek historian HERODOTUS. Probably after
this coup, Pheidon introduced a uniform system of
weights and measures throughout the PELOPONNESE (a
step meant to extend Argive control over TRADE).
The philosopher ARISTOTLE, in his treatise Politics,
written around 340 B.C.E., states that Pheidon began as a
king and ended as a tyrant (Greek: tyrannos). This means
260
Pheidias

not that Pheidon’s rule grew more harsh but that, after
coming to the Argive throne by legal succession, he
seized absolute power, probably at the expense of the
city’s aristocrats and with the support of the middle class.
As such he anticipated the first wave of Greek TYRANTS,
who began taking power violently at CORINTH, SIKYON,
and other cities in the mid-600s B.C.E.
It was almost certainly under Pheidon that the
Argives reorganized their army for HOPLITE tactics and
became the best soldiers in Greece. In 669 B.C.E. an
Argive army soundly defeated a Spartan army at the Battle
of Hysiae, in the eastern Peloponnese. According to the
most plausible modern explanation, this battle marked
the triumph of Argive hoplites over an enemy still using
the older, disorganized tactics. It may have been in the
following year that Pheidon marched his army across the
Peloponnese to Olympia.
See also WARFARE, LAND.
Further reading: Donald Kagen, “Pheidon’s Aegine-
tan Coinage,” Transactions of the American Philological
Association 91 (1960): 121–136; Z. Rubinson, “Pheidon
of Argos. Military Reformer or Capitalist?” Rendiconti.
Instituto Lombardo
105 (1971: 636–642; Carol G.
Thomas, “Pheidon (c. 600 B.C.), King of Argos,” in Great
Leaders, Great Tyrants?: Contemporary Views of World
Rulers Who Made History, edited by Arnold Blumberg
(Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1995), 242–247.
Philemon
See THEATER.
Philip II (ca. 382–336 B.C.E.) Macedonian king who
reigned 359–336 B.C.E. and fell to an assassin’s knife at
about age 46
A brilliant soldier and diplomat, Philip took his backward
Greek kingdom of MACEDON and turned it into the
mightiest nation in the Greek world. His creation of a
new-style army and his subjugation of mainland Greece
both proved essential for the subsequent career of his
son, ALEXANDER THE GREAT. Although he did not live to
see Alexander’s conquest of the Persian Empire (334–323
B.C.E.), Philip made it possible.
In the absence of better surviving sources, our
knowledge of Philip comes mostly from book 16 of the
World History of DIODORUS SICULUS, a later Greek writer
(ca. 60–30 B.C.E.) prone to distortion. However, the fol-
lowing narrative seems plausible. Philip (Philippos,
“horse lover”) was the youngest son of the Macedonian
king Amyntas. As a hostage for three years at the power-
ful city of THEBES, in central Greece, the teenage Philip
probably had contact with the great Theban leader
EPAMINONDAS. Another model that may have inspired the
young Philip was the dynasty of rulers at Pherai, in the
northern Greek region called THESSALY. In 359 B.C.E.
Philip’s brother Perdiccas, king of Macedon, was killed in
battle. Philip, then about 23, became king.
Soon he began his military reforms, which were des-
tined to change ancient warfare. Previously, the Macedo-
nian army had consisted of a capable, aristocratic CAVALRY
alongside a ragamuffin light infantry of peasant levies.
With training and new equipment, Philip created an expert
heavy infantry, armed with 13- to 14-foot-long pikes, fight-
ing in the formation known as the PHALANX. Philip also
pioneered new tactics of siege warfare, daring to storm for-
tified sites in direct attacks using siege-towers and arrow-
shooting catapults. Among his other accomplishments,
Philip was the most successful besieger of his day.
His early imperialism involved two strategies: the
subjugation of Macedon’s warlike, non-Greek neighbors,
the Thracians and Illyrians; and the seizure of Greek
cities of the north Aegean coast, to provide revenue and
shipping outlets. Philip’s rival for possession of this sea-
coast was the distant city of ATHENS, with its mighty
navy.
In 357 B.C.E., the second year of his reign, Philip cap-
tured the north Aegean city of AMPHIPOLIS, a former
Athenian colony located near the GOLD- and SILVER-min-
ing region of Mt. Pangaeus. The Athenians declared war,
but hostilities trailed off amid Athenian reluctance to
commit land troops so far from home (a recurring factor
that worked to Philip’s advantage during the next two
decades). Meanwhile the Pangaeus mines provided Philip
with an enormous yearly sum of 1,000 TALENTS.
Another foreign policy success of 357 B.C.E. was
Philip’s MARRIAGE to Olympias, a young noblewoman
from the northwestern Greek region called EPIRUS. For 20
years Olympias was the foremost of Philip’s multiple
wives. (Eventually he had seven.) Although the royal
marriage proved unhappy, it produced a son and a daugh-
ter; the boy, born in 356 B.C.E., was Alexander.
By involving himself in the Third Sacred War against
the central Greek state of PHOCIS (35–346 B.C.E.), Philip
began to influence affairs in Greece. Soon he dominated
the leadership of Thessaly and made an alliance with
formidable Thebes. Amid these events, Philip lost an eye
when he was hit by an arrow during his siege of the
rebellious Macedonian city of Methone (354 B.C.E.)
In 349 B.C.E. Philip moved to devour the Greek cities
of the north Aegean region known as CHALCIDIC¯E. He
besieged the Chalcidic capital, OLYNTHOS, whose inhabi-
tants appealed for help to Athens. The Athenians again
declared war on Philip but again declined to send troops,
despite the fiery oratory of the Athenian statesman
DEMOSTHENES (1). Captured by Philip, Olynthos was lev-
eled to the ground.
The year 346 B.C.E. saw Philip preparing to conquer
mainland Greece. As was typical of his style, he first
made peace with Athens. When the Third Sacred War
finally ended in Phocis’s defeat, Philip marched his Mace-
donians unchallenged through THERMOPYLAE and into
Phocis. At meetings of the influential AMPHICTYONIC
LEAGUE, at DELPHI, Philip was admitted in place of the
Philip II
261

Phocian delegates and was personally awarded the two
votes previously controlled by the Phocian people.
Through influence, he also controlled the votes of the
Thessalian delegates and others. King of Macedon, over-
lord of Thessaly, master of Phocis, and boss of Delphi—
he was by now the most powerful man in Greece.
It was in this year that the Athenian orator ISOKRATES
published his pamphlet Philip, urging the Macedonian
king to liberate the Greek cities of ASIA MINOR from Per-
sian rule. No doubt Philip welcomed the propaganda
value of this romantic plea, but he also took the idea to
heart. In his way, Philip was a lover of Greek culture. He
may have sincerely wished to lead a united Greece
against its traditional enemy, PERSIA.
The idea of conquest also held a strong financial
appeal for Philip, who was running out of money, despite
his Mt. Pangaeus revenues. His ceaseless military cam-
paigning and frequent resort to bribery had taken a heavy
financial toll. Only the booty of a rich conquest could
save him from bankruptcy and downfall.
Meanwhile his Greek enemies organized against him,
with funding from the alarmed Persian king, Artaxerxes
III. Supported by the Athenian navy, the northeastern
Greek colonies of BYZANTIUM and Perinthus held out
against Philip’s siege (340 B.C.E.). Then his erstwhile
Greek ally Thebes turned against him, ejecting his garri-
son from Thermopylae (338 B.C.E.).
Philip invaded central Greece in the spring of 338
B.C.E. Bypassing the Theban garrison at Thermopylae, he
marched through Phocis toward Thebes. In response,
Athens and Thebes, although traditional enemies,
patched together a hasty alliance and faced Philip’s
advancing army at the Battle of CHAIRONEIA, northwest
of Thebes.
The battle was a complete Macedonian victory, and
Thebes and Athens surrendered. Philip treated Athens
leniently but Thebes harshly, staging executions and sell-
ing war prisoners as SLAVES. After 20 years of scheming,
he had conquered Greece in one campaign.
Almost immediately, Philip began preparations for an
invasion of Persian-held Asia Minor, for which his trusted
general Parmenion secured a crossing of the HELLESPONT
(337 B.C.E.). But in 336 B.C.E. Philip was assassinated at
the old Macedonian royal city of Aegai (modern Vergina),
on the morning of his daughter’s wedding. The killer, an
aggrieved Macedonian noble, probably acted at the insti-
gation of Olympias (whom Philip had recently divorced)
and the 20-year-old Alexander. Philip’s new number-one
wife had recently borne Philip a son, and no doubt
Olympias feared this threat to Alexander’s succession to
the throne. The young wife and child were later mur-
dered on Olympias’s orders. Alexander, acclaimed as
king, took up Philip’s invasion plan and crossed to Asia
Minor in 334 B.C.E.
In 1977–1980 C.E. archaeological excavations at
Vergina uncovered two tombs dating from the 300s B.C.E.
that were filled with treasure. The cremated remains in
the tombs are thought to be those of Alexander’s father
and son (Alexander IV, who was murdered at age 13, in
310 B.C.E.). The skull believed to be Philip’s apparently
shows signs of an injured right eye socket—the wound
from an arrow at the siege of Methone.
See also ARCHAEOLOGY; ILLYRIS; THRACE; WARFARE,
LAND; WARFARE, SIEGE.
Further reading: W. Lindsay Adams and Eugene N.
Borza, eds., Philip II, Alexander the Great, and the Macedo-
nian Heritage (Washington, D.C.: University Press of
America, 1982); John Bunkler, Philip II and the Sacred
War (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 1989); N. Sawada,
“Philip II’s Policy toward Greece. A Reconsideration of
the Peace of Philocrates,” Kodai. Journal of Ancient History
4 (1993): 21–50; A. J. N. W. Prag, “Reconstructing King
Philip II. The Nice Version,” American Journal of Archae-
ology 94 (1990): 237–247; Elin C. Danien, ed., The World
of Philip and Alexander: A Symposium on Greek Life and
Times (Philadelphia: University Museum of Archaeology
and Anthropology, University of Pennsylvania, 1990);
James R. Ashley, The Macedonian Empire: The Era of War-
fare under Philip II and Alexander the Great, 359–323 B.C.
(Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland, 1998).
Philip V (238–179 B.C.E.) Last great king of MACEDON
(reigned 221–179 B.C.E.)
Seeking to enlarge Macedon’s traditional control over
mainland Greece, Philip came to grief against a rival con-
tender—the Italian city of ROME.
Philip ascended the Macedonian throne at age 17, on
the death of his grandfather, Antigonus III. During the
so-called Social War against the powerful Aetolian League
in Greece, Philip led an army into the heart of enemy
AETOLIA and sacked its capital, Thermon (218 B.C.E.).
Faced with Roman domination of the nearby Illyrian
coast, Philip in 215 B.C.E. made an anti-Roman alliance
with the North African city of CARTHAGE (whose brilliant
general Hannibal seemed on the verge of capturing Rome
in the Second Punic War).
The Carthaginian alliance proved to be a disastrous
decision. The Romans, despite their troubles with Hanni-
bal, declared war on Philip and dispatched a fleet and land
troops to Greece. This First Macedonian War (214–205
B.C.E.) saw Philip campaigning in Greece against an
alliance of Romans and Aetolians. Hostilities ended in a
treaty. A few years later, however, after defeating Carthage
(201 B.C.E.), the Romans lent a ready ear to reports from
their Greek allies PERGAMON and RHODES, complaining of
Philip’s naval aggression in the eastern Mediterranean.
Again the Roman senate declared war on Philip. The
Second Macedonian War (200–197 B.C.E.) culminated in
Philip’s defeat by a Roman-Aetolian army at the Battle of
Cynocephalae (“dog heads,” a hill in THESSALY). At the
battle, the Roman general Titus Quinctius Flamininus
managed to send his troops around the flank of the
262
Philip V

Macedonian PHALANX, to destroy it from behind. Cyno-
cephalae marked the end of an independent Macedon;
more significantly, it marked the end of the military era
of the phalanx.
Philip was compelled to pay the Romans a huge cash
penalty, hand over his son Demetrius as a hostage, and
withdraw his troops forever from mainland Greece,
which was declared by the Romans to be free of foreign
taxation and interference. Philip became Rome’s ally; his
life’s last decade was spent repairing Macedon’s finances
and warring against non-Greek peoples in the Balkans.
Philip died on a military campaign and was succeeded by
his son Perseus, Macedon’s last king.
See also ILLYRIS; WARFARE, LAND.
Further reading: F. W. Walbank, Philip V of Macedon
(Hamden, Conn.: Archon Books, 1967, 1940); E. S.
Gruen, “The Last Years of Philip V,” Greek, Roman, and
Byzantine Studies 15 (1974): 221–246; D. Mendels, “Poly-
bius, Philip V, and the Socio-Economic Question in
Greece,” Ancient Society 8 (1977): 155–174; E. S. Gruen,
“Philip V and the Greek Demos,” in Ancient Macedonian
Studies in Honor of Charles F. Edson (Thessaloníki: Insti-
tute for Balkan Studies, 1981), 161–182; W. E. Thomp-
son, “Philip V’s Peloponnesian Campaigns in the Social
War,” Rheinisches Museum für Philologie 132 (1989):
141–148; A. Meadows, “Four Rhodian Decrees. Rhodes,
Iasos, and Philip V,” Chiron 26 (1996): 251–266.
Philoktetes
This mythical hero of the TROJAN WAR
was an expert archer from Central Greece. Philoktetes’
name means “lover of possessions,” and he led five ships
in the allied Greek expedition against TROY. En route he
went ashore on Lemnos or another Aegean island and
was bitten on the foot by a serpent. The wound was ago-
nizing, foul-smelling, and incurable, and so the Greeks—
on 
ODYSSEUS’s 
advice—abandoned 
Philoktetes 
on
Lemnos. There he languished, neither dying nor recover-
ing. He lived by hunting, using the unerring bow and
arrows that had once belonged to the hero HERAKLES
(and that had been bequeathed by Herakles to Philok-
tetes’ father, Poeas).
Nearly 10 years went by. As the Greek siege of Troy
became stalled, the Greeks learned of a prophecy that said
the city could be captured only with the aid of Herakles’
bow and arrows. Consequently two Greek leaders—in
most versions, Odysseus and DIOMEDES—sailed to Lem-
nos and brought Philoktetes and the charmed weapons to
the siege of Troy. There, at the Greek camp, Philoktetes
was healed by the physician sons of ASKLEPIOS, Machaon
and Podalirius. Taking to the field with Herakles’ bow,
Philoktetes killed the Trojan prince PARIS in an archery
duel. After Troy’s fall, Philoktetes survived the homeward
voyage that claimed the lives of many other Greeks. He
was said to have traveled to the West to establish Greek
cities in eastern SICILY and southern ITALY.
The Athenian tragedian SOPHOKLES wrote a Philok-
tetes (performed in 409 B.C.E.), which survives today. In
presenting the tale of the wounded hero on Lemnos, the
play investigates the question of private wishes versus
public duty. In Sophokles’ version, the two arriving Greek
captains are Odysseus and NEOPTOLEMOS (ACHILLES’
son). Philoktetes loathes Odysseus as the one responsible
for his being abandoned; but finally the honest, young
Neoptolemos, with help from the gods, persuades Philok-
tetes to accompany them to the war to fulfill his destiny.
See also FATE.
Further reading: Joe Park Poe, Heroism and Divine
Justice in Sophokles’ Philoctetes (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J.
Brill, 1974); Oscar Mandel, Philoctetes and the Fall of Troy:
Plays, Documents, Iconography, Interpretations (Lincoln:
University of Nebraska Press, 1981); S. J. Harrison,
“Sophokles and the Cult of Philoctetes,” Journal of Hel-
lenic Studies 109 (1989): 173–175; R. G. Ussher, ed.,
Philoloctetes/Sophokles
(Warminster, 
U.K.: 
Aris 
&
Phillips, 1990); I. Malkin, “The Middle Ground. Philok-
tetes in Italy,” Kernos 11 (1998): 131–141.
philosophy
Philosophia is a Greek word, literally
meaning “love of wisdom,” but, in effect, translating to
something like “love of arcane knowledge” or “a desire to
find out the truth.” The Greeks invented the concept of
philosophy; for them, it meant a way of looking for real-
ity and truth without strict reference to the traditional
gods of RELIGION and mythology.
Philosophy began as a form of SCIENCE. The first
philosophers, such as THALES of MILETUS (ca. 560 B.C.E.),
sought to discover the essential element in the material
world and to explain the causes of physical change. The
Italian-Greek philosopher PARMENIDES
(ca. 515–445
B.C.E.) revolutionized Western thought by theorizing that
ultimate reality lies outside of the material world. Par-
menides’ younger contemporary SOCRATES of ATHENS
(469–399 B.C.E.) redirected philosophy toward the pur-
suit of ethical truths and such moral questions as “What
is virtue?” Both of these thinkers helped pave the way for
PLATO (427–347 B.C.E.), who produced the first surviving
philosophical system, in which questions about reality
might shed light on ethical and epistomological ques-
tions. Plato’s onetime pupil ARISTOTLE (384–322 B.C.E.)
developed a system of logic and forever divorced science
from philosophy by reorganizing them as separate disci-
plines. During the HELLENISTIC AGE (around 300–150
B.C.E.) new Greek philosophies such as STOICISM and EPI-
CUREANISM sought to assure people about their place in
the universal order.
See also
ACADEMY;
ANAXAGORAS;
ANAXIMANDER;
ANAXIMENES; CYNICS; DEMOCRITUS; EMPEDOCLES; HERA-
CLITUS; LEUCIPPUS; LYCEUM; PYTHAGORAS; SKEPTICISM;
SOCRATES; XENOPHANES.
Further reading: Robert Trundle, Ancient Greek Phi-
losophy: Its Development and Relevance to Our Time
philosophy
263

(Aldershot, U.K.: Avebury, 1994); R. W. Sharples, Stoics,
Epicureans, and Sceptics. An Introduction to Hellenistic Phi-
losophy (London: Routledge, 1996); A. A. Long, ed., The
Cambridge Companion to Early Greek Philosophy (New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1999); Julia Annas,
Ancient Philosophy: A Very Short Introduction (New York:
Oxford University Press, 2000); Richard Gotshalk, The
Beginnings of Philosophy in Greece (Lanham, Md.: Univer-
sity Press of America, 2000); Jonathan Barnes, Early
Greek Philosophy, 2d ed. (London: Penguin, 2001); Hans-
Georg Gadamer, The Beginning of Knowledge, translated
by Rod Coltman (New York: Continuum, 2002); David
Sedley, ed., The Cambridge Companion to Greek and
Roman Philosophy (New York: Cambridge University
Press, 2003); Christopher Shields, Classical Philosophy: A
Contemporary Introduction (London: Routledge, 2003).
Phocaea (Greek: Phokaia)
This Greek city of IONIA is
situated on the central west coast of ASIA MINOR. During
the 600s and 500s B.C.E. Phocaea was at the forefront of
long-range Greek TRADE and COLONIZATION, particularly
in the western Mediterranean.
Located on the north shore of the entrance to the
Bay of Smyrna, Phocaea was established around 1050
B.C.E. by IONIAN GREEKS who had emigrated from main-
land Greece. The Phocaeans developed as brilliant sea-
men and began establishing anchorages and colonies to
enlarge their shipping network. Probably one of their
earliest colonies was Lampsacus, on the HELLESPONT
(around 650 B.C.E.).
Around 600 B.C.E., in a westward drive for raw tin,
SILVER, IRON, and other resources, the Phocaeans founded
their famous colony, MASSALIA (modern-day Marseille), at
the mouth of the Rhone on the southern coast of France.
This depot facilitated trade with the local Ligurians and
CELTS. Farther west, the Phocaeans traded with the Celtic
kingdom of Tartessus, in southern Spain. Such ventures
brought Phocaean sailors into battle with the Carthagini-
ans, a non-Greek people who had previously held a
monopoly on maritime trade in the West.
The Greek historian HERODOTUS describes Phocaea’s
abrupt decline. Around 545 B.C.E. the city was besieged
by the invading Persians under King CYRUS (1). The Pho-
caeans, taking to their ships en masse, abandoned their
home to the enemy. By way of an oath, they dropped an
iron ingot into the sea and swore never to return until the
metal should float up. (Nevertheless, half of them did
decide to return.) The refugees sailed west. Rebuffed
from Corsica by allied fleets of Carthaginians and ETR-
USCANS, these Phocaeans eventually founded a new
colony, Elea, on the southwestern coast of ITALY.
Phocaea, repopulated by the group that had returned,
endured reduced fortunes under Persian rule. The city
joined the doomed IONIAN REVOLT against the Persians
(499–493 B.C.E.). After Ionia was liberated at the end of
the PERSIAN WARS (479 B.C.E.), Phocaea became part of
the Athenian-controlled DELIAN LEAGUE.
Like the rest of Ionia, Phocaea passed to Spartan con-
trol at the end of the PELOPONNESIAN WAR (404 B.C.E.)
and was handed back to the Persians by the terms of the
KING’S PEACE (386 B.C.E.). Liberated by ALEXANDER THE
GREAT’s conquest of the region in 334 B.C.E., Phocaea
later passed to the Macedonian-Greek SELEUCID EMPIRE,
then to the kingdom of PERGAMON, and finally, in 129
B.C.E., to the domain of ROME.
See also BRONZE; CARTHAGE; SHIPS AND SEAFARING.
Further reading: Donald F. McCabe and Allen
Hilton, Phokaia Inscriptions: Texts and List (Princeton,
N.J.: Institute for Advanced Study, 1989); W. Trillmich,
“Early Iberian Sculpture and Phocaean Colonization,” in
Greek Colonists and Native Populations. Proceedings of the
First Australian Congress of Classical Archaeology, Sydney
9–14 July 1985, edited by Jean-Paul Descoeudres (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1990), 607–611; Ö.
Özyigit, “The City Walls of Phokaia,” Revue des études
anciennes 96 (1994): 77–109.
Phocis
This small region is located among the moun-
tains of central Greece. The Phocians’ significance was
their intermittent control of the important sanctuary of
the god APOLLO at DELPHI, located within Phocian terri-
tory. Their designs on Delphi brought them into periodic
conflict with Apollo’s priests and administrators there,
who sometimes went so far as to declare holy war against
Phocis.
Settlement in Phocis centered on two separate val-
leys: in the west, the Crisaean valley, adjoining the north-
ern Corinthian Gulf; in the east, the valley of the middle
Cephissus River, bordering BOEOTIA. Between the two
Phocian valleys stood the traversible southern spur of Mt.
Parnassus, where Delphi was located.
Coveted for its envelopment of Delphi and for its
communication routes through mountainous central
Greece, Phocis was surrounded by hostile Greek neigh-
bors: Boeotia (to the east), West LOCRIS and Doris (to the
west), and East Locris (to the north). Farther north lay
another occasional enemy, THESSALY. In response to these
pressures, the Phocians had by 600 B.C.E. become a uni-
fied, warlike people. They extended their power north of
their home territory, even walling up the distant pass of
THERMOPYLAE against southward attacks by the Thes-
salians. The Phocians’ major conflicts with their neigh-
bors were the three “Sacred Wars,” so named because
each involved Delphi’s declaration of war. The Sacred
Wars were consequential in allowing opportunities for
intervention to such powerful states as ATHENS, SPARTA,
THEBES, and MACEDON.
In the First Sacred War (around 590 B.C.E.), Phocis
was overrun by an alliance of Sikyonians, Thessalians,
Locrians, and Athenians. The Phocians were deprived of
264
Phocaea

the fertile Crisaean plain (which was henceforth left as an
uncultivated offering to Apollo), and control of Delphi
was handed over to a league of neighboring states
(including Phocis) known as the AMPHICTYONIC LEAGUE.
At regular meetings of the League delegates, the Phocians
had two of the 12 votes.
In 457 B.C.E. Delphi was recaptured by the Phocians,
by now in alliance with the powerful city of Athens.
There followed the bloodless Second Sacred War (448
B.C.E.), in which the Spartans marched into Phocis and
restored Delphi to the Amphictyonic League. As soon as
the Spartans had withdrawn, the Athenians—on PERIK-
LES’ direction—marched to Delphi and returned it to the
Phocians. But sometime in the next decades, the Pho-
cians lost Delphi again and ceased to be Athenian allies.
In the PELOPONNESIAN WAR (431–404 B.C.E.) and years
following, Phocis was allied with SPARTA against Athens.
The Third Sacred War (355–346 B.C.E.) involved
most of mainland Greece and gave the Macedonian king
PHILIP II a chance for serious involvement in Greek
affairs. The war began as a struggle between Phocis and
the powerful Boeotian city of Thebes. At Thebes’s
prompting, Delphi declared war against certain Phocians
who were impiously growing food on the Crisaean plain.
But the Phocians seized Delphi and used funds stolen
from the sanctuary to hire a mercenary army. With this
force the Phocians fought back a coalition of Boeotians,
Locrians, and Thessalians. A Phocian army even invaded
Thessaly, where the Phocian commander was killed in
battle against Macedonian Philip, who had entered the
war as a Theban-Thessalian ally (352 B.C.E.). But in 346
B.C.E. an exhausted Phocis, its stolen funds depleted,
surrendered to Philip. He garrisoned the region, occu-
pied Delphi, and personally took over Phocis’s two votes
on the Amphictyonic council. The Phocians were made
to pay an indemnity against their theft of Apollo’s trea-
sure, and the Crisaean plain was once more left fallow
for the god.
In the 200s B.C.E. Phocis ceased to be important in
Greek politics, as new Greek powers, such as AETOLIA,
arose to dominate Delphi.
See also KLEISTHENES (2).
Further reading: B. V. Head, Catalogue of Greek
Coins. Central Greece (Locris, Phocis, Boeotia, and Euboea)
(Bologna, Italy: A. Forni, 1981); J. M. Fossey, The Ancient
Topography of Eastern Phokis (Amsterdam: J. C. Gieben,
1986); J. McInerney, The Folds of Parnassus. Land and Eth-
nicity in Ancient Phokis (Austin: University of Texas Press,
1999).
Phoenicia
This region corresponds roughly to modern-
day Lebanon, located on the southern part of the east
Mediterranean coast of ancient Syria. The Phoenicians
were non-Greeks of Semitic race. They called themselves
the Kinanu, and it is their ancestors who are known as
Canaanites in the Bible. In the late second millennium
B.C.E. these Canaanites were battered by foreign invaders,
including the Jewish tribes led by Joshua (around 1230
B.C.E.) and the Philistines (who may have been Myce-
naean Greeks displaced by turmoil at home, around 1190
B.C.E.). But by 1000 B.C.E. the Canaanites had compen-
sated for lost territory by becoming the greatest seafarers
of the ancient world.
Our word Phoenician comes from the Greeks, who
called these people Phoinikes, “red men”—probably a
reference to skin color (not, apparently, to the purple
murex dye, porphyra, which was among the Phoenicians’
most precious commodities). By about 900 B.C.E. Phoeni-
cian sea traders were visiting Greece as part of their mid-
dleman’s network that stretched throughout the ancient
Near East to the Red Sea and Persian Gulf, touching on
EGYPT, Assyria, Babylonia, and the kingdoms of ASIA
MINOR. Also by 900 B.C.E. (as ARCHAEOLOGY reveals) the
Phoenicians had begun exploring the western Mediter-
ranean, seeking out suppliers of SILVER, tin, and other
coveted metals. To facilitate western TRADE, the Phoeni-
cians founded colonies, notably CARTHAGE
(Kart
Hadasht, “new city,”) in what is now Tunisia, and Gaddir
(“walled place,” modern Cádiz) in southern Spain.
At home, the three Phoenician seaports of BYBLOS,
Sidon, and Tyre became wealthy commercial and manu-
facturing centers. The primary industry at Sidon was the
manufacture of beautiful glass vessels, while Tyre was the
center of production for the purple murex dye. It was
probably at Tyre prior to 1000 B.C.E. that the Phoenicians
invented their 22-character Semitic ALPHABET, a vast
improvement over their prior, cuneiform script. When
the Greeks learned to adapt this Phoenician alphabet to
represent the Greek language (before 750 B.C.E.), Greek
literature was born.
In other ways as well, the brilliant Phoenicians
deeply affected the formative Greek culture of 900–700
B.C.E. Near Eastern textiles and bronzework, brought to
Greece by Phoenician traders, helped to spark the Greek
artistic revolution of the “Orientalizing period” (around
730–630 B.C.E.). Certain oddities of Greek MYTH—such as
the filial violence of both CRONUS and ZEUS, the flood of
Deucalion, and the dying ADONIS—are best understood as
being Near Eastern ideas that made their way to Greece
via the Phoenicians (before 700 B.C.E.). Other Phoenician
exports to Greece include the chicken (first domesticated
in India) and the Semitic custom of reclining at meals,
which the Greeks adapted to their drinking party known
as the SYMPOSIUM.
The Greeks copied Phoenician shipbuilding tech-
niques, around 900–700 B.C.E. It was surely also in
emulation of the Phoenicians that the Greeks embarked
on their own seaborne trade and COLONIZATION in the
800s–500s B.C.E. Inevitably the Greeks came into con-
flict with their former mentors, in competition for west-
ern trade privileges. Around 600 B.C.E., related to the
Phoenicia
265

founding of a Phocaean-Greek colony at MASSALIA (in
southern France), a first sea battle was fought between
Greeks and Carthaginian Phoenicians. Many such con-
flicts were to follow, particularly between Greeks and
Carthaginians in SICILY.
Phoenicia surrendered to the conquering Persian
king CYRUS (1) around 540 B.C.E., and henceforth the
Phoenicians, like other subject peoples, supplied levies
for the Persian armed forces. Phoenician ships and crews
were the pride of the Persian navy. Phoenician squadrons
fought fiercely against the Greeks in the PERSIAN WARS,
in 499–480 B.C.E.
Phoenicia revolted unsuccessfully from Persian rule
in the 300s B.C.E. When the Macedonian king ALEXAN-
DER THE GREAT invaded the Persian Empire, the Phoeni-
cians surrendered readily except for the Phoenician
fortress of Tyre, which fell only after a monumental siege
(332 B.C.E.).
In the HELLENISTIC AGE (300–150 B.C.E.), Phoenicia
became a province of the SELEUCID EMPIRE, providing
fleets and revenues. By the time of the Roman conquest
(63 B.C.E.), Phoenicia had ceased to exist as a separate
entity.
See also AL MINA; CADMUS; CYPRUS; SHIPS AND SEA-
FARING; THALES; WARFARE, NAVAL.
Further reading: Labib Boutros, Phoenician Sport: Its
Influence on the Origin of the Olympic Games (Amster-
dam: J. C. Gieben, 1981); E. Lipinski, ed., Phoenicia and
the East Mediterranean in the First Millennium B.C. (Leu-
ven, Belgium: Peeters, 1987): R. J. Harrison, Spain at the
Dawn of History. Iberians, Phoenicians, and Greeks (Lon-
don: Thames and Hudson, 1988); C. Grottanelli, “Of
Gods and Metals. On the Economy of Phoenician Sanc-
tuaries,” Scienze dell’antichità 2 (1988): 243–255; D. W.
J. Gill, “Silver Anchors and Cargoes of Oil. Some Obser-
vations on Phoenician Trade in the Western Mediter-
ranean,” Papers of the British School at Rome 56 (1988):
1–12; J. W. Shaw, “Phoenicians in Southern Crete,”
American Journal of Archaeology 93 (1989): 165–183; H.
G. Niemeyer, “The Phoenicians in the Mediterranean. A
Non-Greek Model for Expansion and Settlement in
Antiquity,” in Greek Colonists and Native Populations.
Proceedings of the First Australian Congress of Classical
Archaeology, Sydney 9–14 July 1985, edited by Jean-Paul
Descoeudres (New York: Oxford University Press, 1990),
469–489; Glenn Markoe, “The Emergence of Phoenician
Art,” Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research
279 (1990): 13–26; R. J. Clifford, “Phoenician Religion,”
Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research 279
(1990): 55–64; John Grainger, Hellenistic Phoenicia (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1991); Glenn Markoe,
Phoenicians (Berkeley: University of California Press,
2000); Muriel Moity, Murielle Rudel, and Alain-Xavier
Wurst, Master Seafarers: The Phoenicians and the Greeks
(London: Periplus, 2003).
phratry
See KINSHIP.
Phrygia
See ASIA MINOR.
Phrynichus (late 500s–early 400s B.C.E.) Athenian tragic
playwright
A pioneer of early Athenian tragedy, Phrynichus was
reportedly the first to introduce female characters
onstage. He exerted a strong influence on the younger
tragedian AESCHYLUS, particularly with his innovative use
of recent events from the PERSIAN WARS. Only a few frag-
ments of Phrynichus’s work survive.
Competing at the annual drama festival known as the
City Dionysia, Phrynichus won his first victory in about
510 B.C.E. In around 492 B.C.E. he presented The Capture
of Miletus, based on the recent ravaging of that Greek city
by the Persians after the failed IONIAN REVOLT. The Athe-
nian audience burst into tears at the rendition of their
ally’s fate, but Phrynichus was fined 1,000 drachmas for
reminding the Athenians of their woes, and future perfor-
mance of the play was banned.
In around 476 B.C.E. he presented another historical
drama, The Phoenician Women, giving the tragic, Persian
viewpoint of the recent Greek naval victory at SALAMIS
(1). This play surely inspired Aeschylus’s tragedy The Per-
sians (472 B.C.E.).
See also MILETUS; THEATER.
Further reading: E. J. Bloedow, “Phrynichus, the
Intelligent Athenian,” Ancient History Bulletin 5 (1991):
89–100.
phyle
See KINSHIP.
Pindar (Greek: Pindaros) (ca. 518–438 B.C.E.) Greatest
choral poet of ancient Greece
Born near the central Greek city of THEBES but often trav-
eling, Pindar apparently claimed kinship with the noble
Aegid clan, which had branches at SPARTA and other
Greek cities. Much of his poetry beautifully conveys the
old-fashioned values of the aristocratic class, whose
power was waning throughout Greece during Pindar’s
own lifetime. Pindar wrote various types of LYRIC POETRY,
most of it choral poetry—that is, intended for public per-
formance by a chorus. He is best remembered for his vic-
tory odes (epinikia), composed in honor of various
patrons’ triumphs at such important Greek sports festi-
vals as the OLYMPIC GAMES. In ornate language that often
attains magnificence, Pindar combines a sense of joyous
occasion with a sublime religious piety and a sadness
over human transience or human injustice.
Forty-five of Pindar’s victory odes survive whole, hav-
ing come down to us numbered and arranged by a later
ancient editor into four categories—Olympians, Pythians,
Nemeans, and Isthmians. These categories reflect the four
266
phratry

major sports festivals that occasioned nearly all the
poems. The odes’ honorees include winners in WRESTLING,
PANKRATION, footraces, and the four-horse chariot race.
In Pindar’s day, international athletes were always
rich and male, and were usually members of the tradi-
tional noble class, for whom the games were part of a dis-
tinctive aristocratic identity. Pindar’s patrons, from many
Greek cities, included three rulers: King Arcesilas IV of
CYRENE (1), the tyrant Theron of ACRAGAS, and the tyrant
HIERON (1) of SYRACUSE, the most powerful individual in
the Greek world. Pindar wrote four odes for Hieron; of
these, two are usually considered the poet’s master-
pieces—Olympian 1 and Pythian 1.
Perhaps invented by the poet IBYCUS (ca. 530 B.C.E.),
the Greek victory ode was composed for a fee paid by the
victor or his family, and was performed by a chorus of
men or boys at the athlete’s home city sometime after the
sports event. Like most choral verse, Pindar’s odes are
written in a Doric Greek dialect (although Pindar himself
would have spoken a different dialect, Aeolic). The
meters and lengths vary; most of Pindar’s odes run
between about 45 and 120 lines.
Employing an associative flow of ideas and images,
the typical Pindaric ode salutes the athlete’s home region,
praises the inherited superiority of the upper class, and
broods over the precariousness of human happiness.
Many odes recount one or another Greek MYTH in such a
way as to compare the mythical hero with the poem’s
patron. Beyond flattery, these comparisons convey the
message that victory—for hero or athlete—is proof of
divine favor. Pindar’s frequent use of myth makes him
one of our important sources for these stories; among
many examples are Pythian 9’s tale of APOLLO and the
nymph CYRENE (2), and Nemean 10’s tale of CASTOR AND
POLYDEUCES. But the reverent Pindar always minimizes or
bowdlerizes the god’s cruelty and injustice, in compari-
son with other extant versions of such myths.
We know little of Pindar’s life. His parents’ names are
variously reported. As a boy he studied poetry at ATHENS
when that city had recently emerged as the world’s first
DEMOCRACY (508 B.C.E.). Significantly, Pindar’s Athenian
contacts came from right-wing, aristocratic circles; these
friends included Megakles of the noble Alcmaeonid clan
and Melesias, a champion wrestler who was the future
father of the conservative Athenian politician THUCYDIDES
(2). Both Megakles and Melesias represented Athenian
upper-class forces that were soon destined to come to grief
against the radical policies of the democracy. Megacles was
ostracized by the Athenians in 486 B.C.E., and Pindar’s ode
Pythian 7—written to celebrate Megakles’ chariot victory
at the PYTHIAN GAMES at DELPHI that same year—is partly a
consolation for his friend’s political misfortune.
Pindar’s fateful connection with Greek SICILY was
forged in 490 B.C.E., when he wrote ode Pythian 6 for
Xenocrates, a nobleman of the Sicilian Greek city of Acra-
gas. (Xenocrates’ brother was Theron, who was destined
to become dictator of Acragas and one of Pindar’s
patrons.) Xenocrates had won the chariot race, which
was the most prestigious event and one of the few in
which contestants did not have to compete personally:
The drivers were usually professionals, and the official
contestants were considered to be the chariot’s owners.
Xenocrates had a teenage son named Thrasybulus.
Pythian 6 is remarkable for its frank expression of Pin-
dar’s infatuation with Thrasybulus. Homosexual attach-
ments were a prominent part of Greek aristocratic life in
that era, and Thrasybulus was probably the sort of glam-
orous youth who created a sensation amid the games’
intense social atmosphere. We know that Pindar also
wrote a drinking song for Thrasybulus and a later ode,
Isthmian 2, for a chariot victory by him (around 470
B.C.E.). Pindar’s tone in these verses—confident, personal,
not at all subservient in addressing his eminent employ-
ers—is a sign of his high social status.
Pindar’s comfortable world was soon shaken, how-
ever, when Persian armies invaded mainland Greece in
490 and 480 B.C.E. The allied Greeks’ victory over the
Persians brought on changes that eventually swept away
the aristocrats’ traditional way of life. Pindar’s Thebes fell
into deep disgrace for having collaborated with the occu-
pying Persian forces, and the two cities that had led the
Greek defense—Sparta and Athens—emerged as rival
leaders of Greece.
Meanwhile, in Sicily, the Greek city of Syracuse had
become the foremost power of the western Mediter-
ranean, having led the Sicilian Greeks in defeating a
Carthaginian invasion (480 B.C.E.). And it was at Syra-
cuse that Pindar would deliver his greatest poetry.
He visited in 476 B.C.E., probably at the invitation of
the dictator Hieron, who had won the horse-and-rider
race at that summer’s Olympic Games. (Like the chariot
race, the horse race was officially won by the owner, not
the rider.) Pindar’s victory ode for Hieron that year is per-
haps the most famous lyric poem of antiquity, placed by
ancient editors at the beginning of the Pindaric corpus, as
Olympian 1:
Best of things is water. And gold,
Like a fire at night, outshines all other wealth.
And if you wish to sing of glory in the Games,
Look no further in the daytime sky for any star
More warming than the sun,
Nor any contest grander than at Olympia. (lines 1–8)
The 116-line ode celebrates Hieron’s victory by
telling the legend of PELOPS, who supposedly established
the first Olympic Games. Just as Pelops was beloved by
the god POSEIDON, so is Hieron blessed by some god.
While in Sicily, Pindar may have indulged in a feud
with the poet SIMONIDES of Keos and his poet-nephew
BACCHYLIDES, who were likewise guests at Hieron’s court.
Pindar’s Olympian 2 contains a mysterious reference to a
pair of crows who “chatter vainly against the sacred eagle
Pindar
267

of ZEUS”—which is sometimes interpreted as the poet’s
rebuke to his rivals.
Pindar left Sicily in around 475 B.C.E. In 474 B.C.E.
Hieron defeated an Etruscan invasion of Greek southern
ITALY, at the sea battle of CUMAE. Soon thereafter Hieron
founded a new Sicilian city, Aetna, near volcanic Mt. Etna.
Then, in 470 B.C.E., Hieron won the chariot race at the
Pythian Games and commissioned an ode from Pindar.
Pindar’s resultant poem, Pythian 1, is probably his
best. The 100-line ode successfully interweaves the above-
mentioned events with a worldview of harmony versus
discord, justice versus evil. The poem contains an unfor-
gettable description of the mythical monster TYPHON, the
god Zeus’s defeated enemy, who now lies shackled beneath
Mt. Etna and whose fire-breathing fury supposedly causes
the volcano’s eruptions. Cleverly linked to local geogra-
phy, Pindar’s Typhon serves as a cosmic symbol for the
ETRUSCANS, Carthaginians, and other defeated enemies of
Hieron and Greek civilization. Yet the poem ends with a
bold warning to Hieron not to abuse his power, lest he too
provoke the gods’ anger.
In 468 B.C.E. Hieron, then dying, crowned his
achievements with a chariot victory at the Olympic
Games. But he hired Bacchylides, not Pindar, to com-
memorate this triumph. The ruler may have been
offended by Pythian 1’s presumptuous warning.
Pindar’s last years saw the final erosion of his familiar
world, with Greece divided by hostility between Sparta and
the imperialist Athens of PERIKLES. One prominent victim
of Athenian aggression was the Greek island of AEGINA.
The anti-Athenian anger of Pindar’s friends is suggested in
the anxious tone of Pindar’s last surviving victory ode,
Pythian 8, written in 446 B.C.E. for a boy wrestler of
Aegina. The poem also contains (lines 95–97) a poignant
expression of Pindar’s aristocratic religious outlook, which
saw victory in SPORT as a god-given gift providing a brief
triumph over the doom that awaits all mortals:
We are creatures of a day. What is someone? What is 
he not?
A human being is a shadow in a dream.
But when a god grants a brightness,
Then humans have a radiant splendor and their life 
is sweet.
Pindar lived until age 80. Supposedly he had a wife
and three children, but we hear also of another young
male friend, Theoxenus of Tenedos, in whose arms the
poet is said to have died at the city of ARGOS. Pindar’s
memory was revered for centuries. Supposedly the priests
of APOLLO at Delphi would close the temple daily with
the words “May Pindar join the gods at dinner.” And
when the Macedonian king ALEXANDER THE GREAT cap-
tured and destroyed Thebes in 335 B.C.E., he is said to
have spared the house that had been Pindar’s.
See also ALCMAEONIDS; ARISTOCRACY; CATANA; CHAR-
IOTS; CORINNA; FATE; GREEK LANGUAGE; HIMERA; HOMO-
SEXUALITY; ISTHMIAN GAMES; NEMEAN GAMES; PERSIAN
WARS.
Further reading: G. Nagy, “Pindar’s Olympian I and
the Aetiology of the Olympic Games,” Transactions of the
American Philological Association 116 (1986): 75–81; H.
M. Lee, “Pindar and Classical Art,” in Studies in Honor of
T. B. L. Webster, 2 (Bristol, U.K.: Bristol Classical Press,
1988): 75–81.
Piraeus (Greek: Peiraieus)
The main port and naval
base of ATHENS, Piraeus is located about four miles
southwest of the city.
The westward-jutting peninsula known as the
Piraeus was neglected in early Athenian times, when
ships sheltered at the more southerly beachfront of
Phalerum. In 510 B.C.E. the Athenian tyrant HIPPIAS (1)
built a citadel on the Piraeus’s hilltop, which was called
Munychia. But it was the Athenian statesman THEMISTOK-
LES who, in 492 B.C.E., began developing the harbor for a
growing Athenian war fleet.
By the mid-400s B.C.E. a walled town proper had
arisen, laid out on a rectilinear grid by the city planner
HIPPODAMUS. The naval base contained dockyards, arse-
nals, and ship sheds (covered drydocking for individual
ships, the pride of Athenian naval technology). In addi-
tion, the port was a bustling commercial center, home to
many of the METICS (resident aliens) who conducted
Athens’ import-export TRADE. It was also home to work-
ing-class Athenian citizens of left-wing loyalties, staunch
supporters of such democratic politicians as PERIKLES.
Piraeus had three harbors, whose entrances—flanked
by half-immersed stone walls—could be sealed completely
by the raising of massive chains. By 448 B.C.E. the town
and harborfront were enclosed on north and south by the
LONG WALLS, running up to Athens. The Long Walls made
Piraeus and Athens into a single, linked fortress; even the
Spartan land invasions in the PELOPONNESIAN WAR could
not breach these defenses or obstruct Athens’ communica-
tions with its naval base. The Long Walls were torn down
after Athens’s defeat in the war (404 B.C.E.), but were
rebuilt by the Athenian general KONON (393 B.C.E.).
From 322 until 196 B.C.E. the citadel at Munychia
held a Macedonian garrison—one of the Macedonians’
four “fetters” of Greece. Today Piraeus remains vital as
the harbor of modern Athens.
See also GREECE, GEOGRAPHY OF; MACEDON; THIRTY
TYRANTS, THE; WARFARE, NAVAL.
Further reading: M. Chambers, “Themistokles and
the Piraeus,” in Studies Presented to Sterling Dow on His
Eightieth Birthday, edited by Alan L. Boegehold (Durham,
N.C.: Duke University Press, 1984), 43–50; H. Conwell,
“Topography and Toponyms between Athens and
Piraeus,” Rivista di topografia antica 3 (1993): 49–64; S. v.
Reden, “The Piraeus. A World Apart,” Greece and Rome
42 (1995): 24–37; Robert Garland, The Piraeus: From the
Fifth to the First Century B.C., 2d ed. (Bristol, U.K.: Bristol
268
Piraeus

Classical Press, 2001); A. Michalopoulos, The Museums of
Athens: Piraeus, Attica, and the Islands of the Argosaronic
Gulf (Athens: Erevnites Editions, 2001).
Pithecusae (Greek: Pithekoussai, “monkey island”)
This Greek trading colony is located on a volcanic island
now called Ischia, off the western coast of southern ITALY,
near modern-day Naples. First occupied by Greeks from
CHALCIS and ERETRIA around 775 B.C.E., Pithecusae was
apparently the earliest substantial Greek settlement in the
West. It was the first landfall in a wave of westward
Greek COLONIZATION that swept across southern Italy and
SICILY over the following two centuries.
Most knowledge of Pithecusae comes from modern
ARCHAEOLOGY on the site. The first Greeks found the
island unoccupied. Their settlement site—atop a tall
peninsula with two harbors, on the island’s north shore—
was chosen with an eye toward local seafaring. The island
provided a safe base from which Greek merchant ships
could sail the six miles to the Italian mainland, to con-
duct TRADE with the non-Greek peoples there. Foremost
of these Italian trading partners were the ETRUSCANS,
whose home region lay far to the north but who had an
outpost at Capua, inland of the Bay of Naples.
What brought Greek traders from mainland Greece
to western Italy was the lure of raw metals—IRON, SILVER,
tin (for making BRONZE), and others—that would fetch
high prices in the Greeks’ home cities of Chalcis and Ere-
tria. The Etruscans mined large amounts of iron ore on
the island of Elba, off the western coast of northern Italy,
and at least some of this valuable ore was then traded to
the Greeks at Pithecusae. Archaeology at Pithecusae has
yielded the remnants of ancient Greek foundries, proba-
bly indicating that the acquired iron was refined and
forged into ingots by Greek smiths right there, before
being shipped to Greece.
In exchange for Italian metals, the Pithecusae Greeks
supplied WINE, painted POTTERY, worked metal, and other
luxury goods. Modern discoveries at Pithecusae of ceram-
ics and metalwork from ancient EGYPT and ASIA MINOR
suggest that some of the Greeks’ luxury items originated
in the non-Greek Near East, traveling west via Greek
trade networks.
By about 750 B.C.E. Pithecusae was crowded and
prosperous. Affluence is suggested by the quantities of
imported Near Eastern artifacts found in Greek tombs
there. The most important archaeological item from
Pithecusae is the so-called cup of Nestor, made between
about 750 and 700 B.C.E. This is a Greek clay drinking
cup, painted in Geometric style and inscribed with one
of the earliest surviving examples of Greek alphabetic
WRITING.
Pithecusae was largely abandoned in the late 700s
B.C.E. One cause may have been the start of the LELANTINE
WAR, which pitted Chalcidean Greeks against Eretrian
Greeks as enemies. At least some of the Pithecusans—pos-
sibly the Chalcidean party—founded a new colony,
CUMAE, on the Italian mainland opposite Pithecusae.
See also ALPHABET.
Further reading: David Ridgway, The First Western
Greeks (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1992);
Giorgio Buchner and David Ridgway, Pithekoussai (Rome:
G. Bretschneider, 1993); David Ridgway, “The Trading
Port of Pithekoussai,” in Old World Civilization: The Rise
of Cities and States, edited by Göran Burenhult (San Fran-
cisco: HarperSanFrancisco, 1994), 148–149; David Ridg-
way, “Seals, Scarabs, and People in Pithekoussai,” in
Periplous: Papers on Classical Art and Archaeology Pre-
sented to Sir John Boardman, edited by G. R. Tsetskhladze,
A. J. N. Prag, and A. M. Snodgrass (London: Thames and
Hudson, 2000), 235–243.
Pittacus
Constitutional dictator of the city of MYTI-
LENE, on the island of LESBOS around 580 B.C.E. Among
his enemies was the poet ALCAEUS, whose loathing of Pit-
tacus has been immortalized in verse. Nevertheless, Pitta-
cus seems to have governed well, calming the civil strife
at Mytilene between the nobles and the middle class. His
rule supplied an alternative to the brutal TYRANTS who in
those years were arising throughout the Greek world to
wrest power from the ARISTOCRACY. Pittacus later was
listed among the SEVEN SAGES.
Born of noble blood, he was an illustrious soldier,
having once killed an enemy champion in single combat
during Mytilene’s war against Athenian settlers at Sigeum,
in northwestern ASIA MINOR, around 600 B.C.E. Later Pit-
tacus was elected as dictator for a term of 10 years. Like
his contemporary, SOLON of ATHENS, he made new laws
that loosened the aristocrats’ monopoly on political
power. By turning his back on the partisan interests of his
own noble class, Pittacus earned the hatred of old-fash-
ioned aristocrats such as Alcaeus.
Further reading: Nigel Spencer, “Exchange and Sta-
sis in Archaic Mytilene,” in Alternatives to Athens: Vari-
eties of Political Organization and Community in Ancient
Greece, edited by Roger Brock and Stephen Hodkinson
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2000), 68–81.
Plataea
This town of southern BOEOTIA, in central
Greece, lies just north of Mt. Cithaeron, by the River Aso-
pus. Due to fear of its powerful neighbor THEBES, Plataea
formed an alliance with ATHENS in about 519 B.C.E. and
remained a staunch ally during the PERSIAN WARS and
PELOPONNESIAN WAR. Alone among the Greek states,
Plataea sent soldiers to fight alongside the Athenians
against the Persians at the Battle of MARATHON (490 B.C.E.).
During the invasion of the Persian king XERXES, Plataea
was occupied and sacked by the Persians (480 B.C.E.). Near
the town in 479 B.C.E. the allied Greeks won the Battle of
Plataea, which destroyed the Persian threat in Greece.
Plataea
269

At the outbreak of the Peloponnesian War in 431
B.C.E., Plataea was unsuccessfully attacked by Thebes.
Plataea’s civilians were soon evacuated to Athens. A garri-
son, left to defend Plataea, surrendered and was massa-
cred after a grueling, two-year siege by the Spartans and
Thebans (427 B.C.E.). Later the empty town was razed to
the ground.
Rebuilt, Plataea was again destroyed by Thebes in 373
B.C.E. After conquering Greece in 338 B.C.E., the Macedo-
nian king PHILIP II rebuilt Plataea in order to humiliate
Thebes, and the town survived down to Roman times.
See also: PLATAEA, BATTLE OF.
Further reading: G. S. Shrimpton, “When Did
Plataea Join Athens?” Classical Philology 79 (1984):
295–304; E. Badian, “Plataea between Athens and Sparta.
In Search of Lost History,” in Boiotika. Vorträge vom 5.
Internationalen Böotien-Kolloquium, München 13–17 Juni
1986, edited by Hartmut Beister and John Bucker
(Munich: Editio Maris, 1989), 95–111; N. G. L. Ham-
mond, “Plataea’s Relations with Thebes, Sparta, and
Athens,” Journal of Hellenic Studies 112 (1992): 143–150;
E. Badian, From Plataea to Potidaea. Studies in the History
and Historiography of the Pentecontaetia (Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1993).
Plataea, Battle of
This climatic land battle took place
during the Greeks’ defense of their homeland in the PER-
SIAN WARS. This hard-fought Greek victory occurred in
the late summer of 479 B.C.E., on the plain near the Boeo-
tian town of PLATAEA. Coming about a year after the
Greek naval triumph at SALAMIS (1), the Battle of Plataea
destroyed the last remaining Persian force in Greece and
ended the Persian king XERXES’ dream of conquering
Greece.
After his unexpected defeat at Salamis, Xerxes led
most of his troops home in 480 B.C.E. To pursue the sub-
jugation of Greece, he left behind his able general (and
brother-in-law) Mardonius, with an army numbering per-
haps 60,000. Mardonius’s army included Greek soldiers
from the mainland regions of THESSALY and BOEOTIA,
whose cities were actively collaborating with the Persians.
After wintering in Thessaly, Mardonius and his army
marched south in the spring of 479 B.C.E. On receiving
news of a Greek allied army’s approach from the south,
Mardonius withdrew toward friendly THEBES, the chief
city of Boeotia. About five miles south of Thebes, just
north of Plataea, where the level terrain favored his CAV-
ALRY, Mardonius and his army awaited the Greeks.
The Greek army, commanded by the Spartan general
Pausanias, contained about 38,700 HOPLITES—armored
infantry—with perhaps as many light-armed troops. The
largest hoplite contingents came from SPARTA, ATHENS,
and CORINTH. The town of Plataea fought on the Greek
side, as a staunch ally of Athens and longtime enemy of
Thebes.
The allied Greeks had the advantage of heavier armor
and the high morale of a patriotic army. The Persians’
advantage was their mighty cavalry, drawn from the Ira-
nian plateau, from Scythia, and from Thessaly and Boeo-
tia. In action against foot soldiers, these horsemen would
ride up, send out arrows and javelins, then spur quickly
out of reach, only to wheel and attack elsewhere. On flat
land, they proved highly effective against the allied
Greeks, who had no horse soldiers.
The battle was preceded by 12 days of waiting and
skirmishing. The two main armies faced each other, sep-
arated by the Asopus River; they stood in battle array in
the hot summer sun all day and retired to camps at
night. Trying to provoke an attack, Mardonius repeatedly
sent his horsemen to harass the Greeks and raid their
arriving supply wagons. Both sides suffered from lack of
food and fresh water. Pausanias was unwilling to risk an
attack, yet each passing day made his army’s position
more difficult.
At dawn on the 13th day the Persians saw that the
entire Greek force had withdrawn toward Plataea. The
Greeks were marching in some disarray, having split into
three different groups in the dark. Seizing his chance,
Mardonius led a full-scale attack across the plain.
The Persian army rushed upon the two nearer Greek
contingents. One of these numbered about 11,500
hoplites and contained the best soldiers in Greece, the
Spartans, commanded by Pausanias. The other embattled
Greek contingent was from Athens and (fittingly enough)
Plataea; it numbered about 8,600 and was commanded by
the Athenian general ARISTIDES. The Battle of Plataea con-
sisted of two simultaneous actions, separated by perhaps
a mile. Meanwhile the third Greek division, farthest away,
began marching back toward the fighting.
In attacking so eagerly, Mardonius evidently underes-
timated the Greeks’ discipline and defensive strength.
Near a rural temple of DEMETER, the Spartans and their
allies formed into battle order, while Mardonius, atop a
white charger, brought on his elite Persian infantry.
Equipped as archers, the Persians halted a distance from
the Greeks and shot volleys of arrows. Greek hoplites,
although armored, tended to be vulnerable at the neck,
legs, and groin, and many were felled by the arrows
before the command finally came to charge.
The hoplites pushed forward into the Persian ranks.
The melee wore on until Mardonius was killed, hit in the
head with a stone thrown by a Spartan. Seeing their gen-
eral fall, the Persians broke ranks and fled. At the other
end of the battlefield, the Athenians were locked in com-
bat with Boeotian Greeks serving on the Persian side. But
at the sight of their Persian masters running away, the
Boeotians retreated toward Thebes.
Many Persians ran to a large wooden palisade that
Mardonius had built before the battle. This fort became a
slaughterhouse, as the pursuing Greeks broke through
and massacred the fugitives within. Although a sizable
270
Plataea, Battle of

Persian contingent may have escaped back to Asia, the
battle was a stunning Greek victory.
But Plataea marked a fleeting glory. Before the battle,
the Greeks had sworn an oath of camaraderie—the
famous Oath of Plataea—pledging, among other things,
never to harm Athens, Sparta, or the town of Plataea. Yet
within a few years hostilities had erupted between Athens
and Sparta, and in the PELOPONNESIAN WAR Plataea itself
was destroyed by the Spartans.
See also WARFARE, LAND.
Further reading: P. Hunt, “Helots at the Battle of
Plataea,” Historia 46 (1997): 129–144; Philip De Souza,
The Greek and Persian Wars, 499–386 B.C. (New York:
Routledge, 2003).
Plato (Greek: Platon “wide”, perhaps a nickname) (ca.
427–347 B.C.E.) Athenian philosopher
Plato was one of the most influential thinkers in world
history. He founded the Western world’s first important
institution of higher learning, the ACADEMY, which
helped shape the course of PHILOSOPHY for the next
1,000 years. Among Plato’s teachings, his theory of
Forms provided a revolutionary concept of reality—a
concept that he tied into corresponding theories of
ethics and human knowledge, in a way that seemed to
explain the universe.
Most earlier Greek philosophers had searched for the
universe’s primal elements by examining the physical
world. Plato, however, influenced by the earlier Greek
philosopher PARMENIDES, theorized that true reality is not
to be found in the visible, physical world but in an ideal
world of eternal Forms. Our earthly phenomena are just
imperfect copies of these Forms, Plato said. Such earthly
copies include not only material items such as beds and
tables, but human virtues such as justice and knowledge.
Above all other Forms stands the Form of the Good,
whose central and nutritive role in the universe in analo-
gous to that of the Sun in the visible world.
To later generations, Plato’s concept of a supreme
Form of the Good seemed to anticipate Christian
monotheism, and so Plato’s teachings enjoyed great pres-
tige in the Christian-influenced Roman Empire, around
100–400 C.E. when a movement called Neoplatonism
arose. Probably because of his posthumous association
with Christianity, Plato is almost unique among ancient
Greek authors in that every major written work by him
has been preserved.
For his philosophical writings, Plato chose a style
that was unusual in his day—prose dialogue. We have
about 30 of these. (A few, ascribed to Plato, are probably
forgeries.) Each dialogue typically presents a philosophi-
cal discussion among several characters, many of whom
are fictionalized versions of real-life personages of fifth-
century-B.C.E. ATHENS. The characters debate a specific
topic, such as the nature of courage. The beauty of Plato’s
technique is that it draws the reader directly into the
inquiry. Of the dialogues, Plato’s masterpiece is the
Republic (Greek: Politeia, better translated as “form of
government”), written circa 385–370 B.C.E. The Republic
first addresses the question “What is justice?” and pro-
ceeds to sketch Plato’s ideal government, run by a
philosopher-king. Plato’s theory of Forms receives its
classic explanation in the lengthy Republic.
The scanty knowledge of Plato’s life comes partly
from information in the works of later ancient writers,
such as the biographers Diogenes Laertius (200s C.E.)
and PLUTARCH (ca. 100 C.E.). Also preserved are a num-
ber of epistles supposedly written by Plato. Although
these letters seem to be forgeries, many scholars today
accept as accurate the autobiographical information in
the famous “Seventh Letter.”
Plato was born into a rich and aristocratic Athenian
clan with strong political links; his mother’s family
claimed descent from the lawgiver SOLON. Plato grew up
entirely during the epic PELOPONNESIAN WAR (431–404
B.C.E.). Like other wealthy Athenian youths, Plato proba-
bly did military service in the CAVALRY, perhaps on patrol
in the countryside around Athens, around 409–404 B.C.E.
Possibly through association with his slightly older
kinsmen KRITIAS and Charmides, the young Plato joined
the circle of the dynamic Athenian philosopher SOCRATES
(ca. 469–399 B.C.E.). Socrates’ ethical-political inquiries
proved to be the single greatest influence on Plato’s
thought. In most of his dialogues, written after Socrates’
death, Plato immortalized his old mentor by making him
the central speaker. Plato’s choice of the dialogue form
was undoubtedly an attempt to convey the mental excite-
ment of Socrates’ discussions.
The convulsive end of the Peloponnesian War
changed Plato’s life. After Athens’s defeat (404 B.C.E.),
Kritias and Charmides became central figures in the dic-
tatorship of the THIRTY TYRANTS. Invited to join them,
Plato hesitated, and meanwhile the Thirty fell from
power; Kritias and Charmides were killed (403 B.C.E.).
In 399 B.C.E., under the restored Athenian DEMOCRACY,
Socrates was tried and executed—partly because of his
association with Kritias. As Socrates’ disciple, Plato him-
self may have been in danger; in any case he seems to
have been sickened by the bloody excesses of both right
wing and left wing, and he rejected any plan of a politi-
cal career, choosing instead a life of travel and reflec-
tion. But Socratic-type questions about politics and
human nature remained foremost in Plato’s mind, and
he concluded (to use his later words) that there could
be no end to human troubles until “either philosophers
should become kings, or else those now ruling should
become inspired to pursue philosophical wisdom”
(Republic 473c).
Between about 399 and 387 B.C.E. Plato probably
wrote many or all of the dialogues that modern scholars
classify as “early.” This group begins with the Euthyphro,
Plato
271

Apology, and Krito—concerning Socrates’ arrest, trial, and
imprisonment—and culminates in the Protagoras and
Gorgias. The early dialogues mainly explore ethical
issues, of which the most important is the Protagoras’
question, “Is moral virtue teachable?”
During these years Plato traveled to Greek southern
ITALY, where he met followers of the early philosopher
PYTHAGORAS. Aspects of Plato’s views on death and the
soul’s immortality seem influenced by Pythagorean belief.
Also, historical memories of a Pythagorean ruling class—
which in prior centuries had existed in certain Italian-
Greek cities—may have helped to shape Plato’s goal to
create a government of philosophers.
In about 387 B.C.E., at about age 40, Plato made his
fateful first voyage to SICILY, to the important Greek city
of SYRACUSE, where the ruthless dictator DIONYSIUS (1)
reigned. There Plato became both friend and teacher of a
kinsman of the ruler—a handsome young nobleman
named Dion. In keeping with prevalent Greek upper-class
mores of the day, this male relationship was probably sex-
ual: Plato’s homosexual feelings are evident in surviving
verses that he wrote for Dion. At the same time, the
friendship may have suggested to Plato that he could win
followers from among the Syracusan ruling circle and
thus create his philosophers’ government.
According to one story, the Sicilian visit became a
fiasco when the cruel Dionysius, tiring of Plato’s criti-
cism, arranged for the philosopher to be sold into slav-
ery; Plato’s friends bought back his freedom. In any
case, Plato soon returned to Athens and bought land
and buildings in a park sacred to the mythical hero
Academus, about a mile north of Athens’s Dipylon Gate,
in about 386 B.C.E.
This holding became Plato’s
Academy, a university dedicated to philosophical
inquiry and the preparation of future leaders of Athens
and other Greek cities.
Plato devoted nearly the next 20 years to supervising
the Academy and to writing the dialogues that modern
scholars assign to his “middle” period. In addition to the
Republic, these include the Phaedo (which combines an
account of Socrates’ last days in prison with Plato’s intro-
duction of his own theory of Forms) and the Symposium
(on the nature of sexual love). The modern, popular
notion of nonsexual, “Platonic” love is a distortion of
Plato’s views: Specifically addressing the aristocratic, male
HOMOSEXUALITY of his own day, Plato believed that such
feelings could ennoble and educate those partners who
channeled their passion into a spiritual, not just a sexual,
union. There is no evidence that Plato ever married, and
from his writings he seems to have been of an abstemious
homosexual nature.
Much of Plato’s thought surely developed from life at
the Academy—especially from his informal discussions
and disputations with his colleagues (a procedure that
derived from Socratic technique). This method of ques-
tion-and-answer disputation was called dialectic (Greek:
dialektik¯e, “discussion” or “dialogue”). In Plato’s dialogues,
Socrates employs dialectic to refute his opponents’ precon-
ceptions, by showing that certain conclusions logically
drawn from those preconceptions are false. Plato saw
dialectic as the premier philosophical technique, “the
coping-stone set atop the other types of learning” (Repub-
lic 534e).
Only through dialectic can people hope to gain some
knowledge of reality—that is, of the Forms. Otherwise
we are in the dark. In the most famous allegory in all
philosophical literature, the Republic compares nonphilo-
sophical inquiry with the plight of prisoners trying to
learn about reality by observing shadows in firelight on
the wall of a cave.
In 367 B.C.E. Dionysius of Syracuse died and was suc-
ceeded by his son, Dionysius II. The 60-year-old Plato—
at the invitation of his old friend Dion—again voyaged to
Syracuse, in the hope of making a philosophical convert
of the new ruler. But the younger Dionysius proved to be
a weak and decadent leader, and was eventually ejected in
a coup led by Dion himself (357 B.C.E.). Plato meanwhile
returned to Athens (361 B.C.E.), having despaired of ever
creating an ideal state in Sicily.
The third and last stage of Plato’s career covers the
years from about 360 B.C.E. until his death, in 347 B.C.E.
These years at the Academy saw the advancement of the
brilliant “graduate student” ARISTOTLE, whom some con-
sidered to be Plato’s likely successor as head of the
school. Plato’s dialogues of this period include the
Timaeus (presenting Plato’s picture of the physical cos-
mos) and the Laws (his longest and probably final work).
Like the Republic, the Laws portray an ideal Platonic city-
state, but in this later dialogue Plato’s authoritarian bent
is more pronounced—the laws of his utopian “Cretan
city” include generous use of the death penalty—and the
Laws can be read as evidence of an old man’s embitter-
ment. Plato died at age 80, pen in hand (according to leg-
end). He was succeeded as head of the Academy by his
nephew Speusippus.
See also AFTERLIFE; ATLANTIS; EDUCATION; GORGIAS;
MATHEMATICS; PROTAGORAS; SOPHISTS; SYMPOSIUM.
Further reading: C. J. de Vogel, Rethinking Plato and
Platonism, 2d ed. (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 1988);
R. B. Rutherford, The Art of Plato: Ten Essays in Platonic
Interpretation (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1995); Thanassis Samaras, Plato on Democracy
(New York: P. Lang, 2002); Ann N. Michelini, ed., Plato
as Author: the Rhetoric of Philosophy (Leiden, Nether-
lands: E. J. Brill, 2003); Christopher Rowe, Plato (Bristol,
U.K.: Bristol Classical Press, 2003); Julia Annas, Plato: A
Very Short Introduction (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2003); Rosemary Desjardins, Plato and the Good: Illumi-
nating the Darkling Vision (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J.
Brill, 2004).
272
Plato

Plutarch (Greek: Ploutarchos) (ca. 50–125 C.E.) Greek
biographer and moral essayist who lived during the early
Roman Empire
Born in the central Greek region of BOEOTIA, Plutarch
lived in Greece but was also a Roman citizen, and may
have held the local Roman post of procurator. He trav-
eled, read, and wrote widely, and for the last 30 years of
his life was a priest at the god APOLLO’s shrine at DELPHI.
Plutarch embodies the Greek-Roman assimilation under
the Roman Empire.
Although he did not exactly write history, he hap-
pens to be a major source of information for events in the
Greek world of around 600–200 B.C.E. This is due to one
of his writings, known by the title Parallel Lives of the
Noble Greeks and Romans, which in its surviving form
consists of 22 paired short biographies (“Lives”), one of a
Greek leader, one of a Roman. Most of these biographical
subjects lived in the great centuries of classical Greece
and the Roman Republic, prior to Plutarch’s time. Among
his more important Greek Lives are those of SOLON,
PERIKLES,
ALCIBIADES,
and ALEXANDER
THE
GREAT.
Although often sloppy about chronology, the Lives are
full of historical and personal detail.
Further reading: A. Podlecki, “Plutarch and Athens,”
Illinois Classical Studies 13 (1988): 231–243; S. C. R.
Swain, “Hellenic Culture and the Roman Heroes of
Plutarch,” Journal of Hellenic Studies 110 (1990): 126–145;
Judith Mossman, “Plutarch’s Use of Statues,” in Georgica.
Greek Studies in Honor of George Cawkwell, edited by
Michael Flower and Mark Toher (London: University of
London, Institute of Classical Studies, 1991), 98–119; L.
van der Stockt, ed., Plutarchea Lovaniensia. A Miscellany of
Essays on Plutarch (Leuven, Belgium: Universitas catholica
lovaniensis, 1996); Judith Mossman, ed., Plutarch and His
Intellectual World: Essays on Plutarch (London: Duck-
worth, 1997); F. E. Brenk, Relighting the Souls. Studies in
Plutarch, in Greek Literature, Religion, and Philosophy, and
in the New Testament Background (Stuttgart, Germany:
Steiner, 1998); D. A. Russell, Plutarch, 2d ed. (Bristol,
U.K.: Bristol Classical Press, 2001); Robert Lamberton,
Plutarch (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2001);
C. B. R. Pelling, Plutarch and History: Eighteen Studies
(Swansea: Classical Press of Wales, 2002).
polis
Polis (from which word is derived the English
word “politics”) refers to the ancient Greek city-state and
was the basic political unit of the classical Greeks.
Between about 800 B.C.E. and 300 B.C.E., the map of
Greece was a patchwork of autonomous city-states, some
linked together by alliance or kinship, and some vying to
dominate their neighbors, but each one capable of ruling
itself as a self-contained political entity. Beginning as aris-
tocracies, city-states developed as democracies or oli-
garchies in the 500s–400s B.C.E. The most important
DEMOCRACY was ATHENS.
Two factors contributed to the emergence of the city-
state. One was the geography of Greece; mountains,
islands, and small farming valleys naturally created dis-
crete, small population centers, many with their own
dialects and religious cults. The second reason, more spe-
cific to the 900s–800s B.C.E., has to do with the rejection
of kingship in Greece during that era. A king may strive
to unite various peoples under his single rule, because he
is the government. But members of an aristocratic clan—
who may rely for their power on local lands and on local
religious cults, for which they supply the priesthood—
might be prone to concentrate their rule in a smaller,
more homogeneous area.
In population, the polis consisted of the following
social groups: full citizens (usually males over age 18,
born of citizen parents); female and children citizens
(protected by the law but without any voice in govern-
ment); second-class citizens, such as PERIOIKOI; resident
aliens or METICS; and SLAVES.
The age of the polis ended with the Macedonian con-
quest of Greece (338 B.C.E.), the campaigns of ALEXAN-
DER THE GREAT (334–323 B.C.E.), and the subsequent rise
of rich and powerful Greco-Macedonian kingdoms in the
eastern Mediterranean and Near East. In the HELLENISTIC
AGE (300–150 B.C.E.), individual Greek cities were not
strong enough to survive independently.
See also APOLLO; ARISTOCRACY; GREECE, GEOGRAPHY
OF; HELOTS; HOPLITE; LAWS AND LAW COURTS; OLIGARCHY;
TYRANTS; WOMEN.
Further reading: Roger Brock and Stephen Hodkin-
son, eds., Alternatives to Athens: Varieties of Political Orga-
nization and Community in Ancient Greece (New York:
Oxford University Press, 2000); Pernille Flensted-Jensen,
Thomas Heine Nielsen, and Lene Rubinstein, eds., Polis
and Politics: Studies in Ancient Greek History (Copen-
hagen: Museum Tusculanum Press, 2000); Pernille Flen-
sted-Jensen, Further Studies in the Ancient Greek Polis
(Stuttgart, Germany: F. Steiner, 2000); Rainer Kattel, The
Constitution of the Polis (Tartu, Estonia: Tartu University
Press, 2001); Thomas Heine Nielsen, ed., Even More Stud-
ies in the Ancient Greek Polis (Stuttgart, Germany: F.
Steiner, 2002); Catherine Morgan, Early Greek States
Beyond the Polis (New York: Routledge, 2003); Thomas
Heine Hielsen, ed., Once Again: Studies in the Ancient
Greek Polis (Stuttgart, Germany: F. Steiner, 2004).
Polycrates (ca. 600s B.C.E.) Dynamic tyrant of the Greek
island of SAMOS
Reigning circa 540–522 B.C.E., Polycrates was the last
great Greek ruler in the eastern Aegean, in the path of the
advancing Persians. Usurping power at Samos with the
help of his two brothers, Polycrates soon ruled alone,
executing one brother and banishing the other. He made
an alliance with the Egyptian pharaoh Amasis and built a
navy of 100 longboats, arming them with bowmen.
Polycrates
273

Under him, Samos became the preeminent eastern Greek
state—replacing Samos’s nearby rival, MILETUS, now
under Persian rule.
Polycrates was a visionary of naval power. The histo-
rian HERODOTUS (the main source for Polycrates’ story)
called him “the first Greek to plan an empire by sea,” and
the historian THUCYDIDES (1) saw his domain as a fore-
runner of the Athenian sea empire of the 400s B.C.E.
True to his name (“ruling much”), Polycrates led
his fleet east and west across the Aegean, mainly against
his fellow Greeks. Many of his ventures were probably
aiming to drive the Persians from the ASIA MINOR coast
and capture the Greek cities there for himself. Like
other tyrants, Polycrates glorified his capital city (also
named Samos), while providing employment and
amenities for the common people. He completed
Samos’s grand temple of the goddess HERA, which was
one of the largest existing Greek temples at that time.
He developed Samos’s harbor and built or completed a
tunneled aqueduct, an engineering marvel of its day,
bringing water to Samos city.
Polycrates maintained the most magnificent court of
the Greek world. With generous retaining fees, he
attracted the distinguished physician Democedes of CRO-
TON and the famous lyric poets IBYCUS of RHEGIUM and
ANACREON of Teos. In keeping with the upper-class tastes
of the era, Polycrates (although married and a father) was
an enthusiastic lover of boys and young men. It was
probably for Polycrates that Anacreon wrote many of his
extant poems of homosexual content.
Eventually the shadow of disaster fell across this
glamorous despot, as he became caught between the
unstoppable Persian advance and the antityrant elements
of the Greek world. Around 525 B.C.E. the skippers of a
Samian war fleet rebelled and attacked Polycrates on
Samos. They were defeated, but the survivors sailed west
to get help from SPARTA, the foremost antityrant state of
mainland Greece. The Spartans sent out an overseas
expedition, their first in recorded history. However, Poly-
crates held out against their six-week siege of Samos city,
and they went home.
Polycrates did not survive for long. Around 522
B.C.E. the Persian governor of western Asia Minor lured
Polycrates in person to the mainland, then had him
seized and killed. A few years later the Persian king DAR-
IUS (1) conquered Samos and installed, as his vassal,
Polycrates’ surviving brother, Syloson (“preserver of
booty”). Samos’s sea holdings were lost, and henceforth
Samos’s warships served in the Persian navy.
Among the folktales that sprang up around Poly-
crates, one has been retold in variations over the cen-
turies. According to Herodotus, Polycrates, at the height
of success, was warned that—because the gods are jeal-
ous of human happiness—he should offset the danger by
throwing away whatever he valued most in the world. He
decided to discard his priceless signet ring, an engraved
emerald set in GOLD. Aboard one of his ships, he threw
the ring into the sea. But a few days later, as Polycrates
sat down to dinner, his servants brought in that very ring;
it had been found in the belly of a fine fish being pre-
pared for the ruler’s meal. The gods had rejected Poly-
crates’ offering, and he was doomed to die a miserable
death.
See also FATE; HOMOSEXUALITY; TYRANTS; WARFARE,
NAVAL.
Further reading: H. T. Wallinga, “Polycrates and
Egypt. The Testimony of the Samaina,” in Achaemenid
History, 6. Asia Minor and Egypt. Old Cultures in a New
Empire. Proceedings of the Groningen 1988 Achaemenid
History Workshop, edited by H. Sancisi-Weerdenburg and
A. Kuhrt (Leiden, Netherlands: Nederlands Institut voor
het Nabije Oosten, 1991), 179–197.
Polygnotus
See PAINTING.
Polykleitos (mid-late 400s B.C.E.) Prominent sculptor
known for his idealized view of the male body
Polykleitos was born at ARGOS. Working mainly in BRONZE,
he established his reputation with a number of commis-
sioned statues of victorious Olympian athletes, displayed
at OLYMPIA. Two famous nudes by Polykleitos have sur-
vived in the form of later marble copies—the Doryphoros
(spear carrier, in the Naples Museum), representing a mus-
cular athlete; and the more sensual Diadumenos (ribbon
binder, in the Athens National Museum and elsewhere),
showing a youth tying an athlete’s ribbon around his head.
The Doryphoros illustrated Polykleitos’s Canon—his con-
cept of the ideal human properties. It also brought to per-
fection the Contrappositio (“counterpoise”) stance: weight
on one leg, knee locked, the other leg drawn back. This
stance became a standard pose for statuary down through
Renaissance times.
Polykleitos’s masterpiece was considered to be the
giant GOLD and ivory cult statue of the goddess HERA,
sculpted for Hera’s temple at Polykleitos’s native Argos
(ca. 420 B.C.E.). The statue, now lost, showed the goddess
seated, with a scepter in one hand and a pomegranate in
the other. The statue was in ancient times compared with
the colossal statue of Olympian ZEUS sculpted by Polyk-
leitos’s rival, PHEIDIAS. The Roman geographer Strabo
considered the Hera to be the more lovely in technique,
although smaller and less magnificent than the Zeus.
See also SCULPTURE.
Further reading: Cornelius Vermeule, Polykleitos
(Boston: Museum of Fine Arts, 1969); Warren G. Moon,
Polykleitos, the Doryphoros, and Tradition (Madison: Uni-
versity of Wisconsin Press, 1995); Adolf H. Borbein,
“Polykleitos,” in Personal Styles in Greek Sculpture, edited
by Olga Palagia and J. J. Pollitt (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1996), 66–90.
274
Polygnotus

Polynices
See SEVEN AGAINST THEBES.
Polyphemos
In HOMER’s epic poem the Odyssey (writ-
ten down around 750 B.C.E.) Polyphemos (“much fame”)
is a CYCLOPS—one of a race of gigantic, savage, one-eyed
creatures who inhabit a legendary region in the West,
vaguely associated with SICILY. Polyphemos is the son of
the god POSEIDON and the nymph Thoösa. In what is
probably the Odyssey’s best-known episode, Polyphemos
captures the Greek hero ODYSSEUS (book 9).
Odysseus discovers the monster’s cave after landing
his ship in the Cyclopes’s territory on his voyage home
from the TROJAN WAR. With 12 of his men, Odysseus
enters the deserted cave to steal supplies, then willfully
remains inside the cave, hoping to have a look at the
Cyclops. But when Polyphemos returns with his goats
and sheep, he immediately traps the Greeks by sealing
the cave mouth with a slab of rock, too large for humans
to drag away. Then, catching two of the Greeks in his
hands, Polyphemos beats out their brains and eats them
raw for dinner. Stretching out amid his sheep, he falls
asleep. The Greeks do not attack him, realizing that they
can never escape without Polyphemos to move that mas-
sive boulder.
The next morning Polyphemos eats two more men
for breakfast, leaves the Greeks penned inside as he pas-
tures his flock and herd for another day, and then eats two
more men for supper. By then Odysseus has a plan. He
makes Polyphemos drunk by giving him a goatskin-full of
WINE. When the Cyclops falls into a drunken sleep,
Odysseus and his men ram a sharpened post into the
monster’s one eyeball, blinding him forever. The other
Cyclopes, hearing Polyphemos’s cries, gather outside the
cave and ask what’s wrong; Polyphemos shouts out that
“Nobody” is hurting him—Nobody (Outis) being the false
name by which Odysseus had identified himself to the
giant. The other Cyclopes wander off, assuming that
Polyphemos’s affliction must come from the gods. Then
the blind Polyphemos drags away the door boulder and,
squatting at the cave mouth, waits furiously for the
Greeks to try to run out.
Again Odysseus has a scheme. He ties each of his six
remaining men to the underbellies of three sheep abreast,
and himself takes hold of the fleecy underbelly of a big
ram. As the Cyclops’s sheeps and goats move out of the
cave for grazing, the Greeks ride concealed among them.
The giant strokes each animal’s back as it passes, but he
misses the Greeks hiding underneath.
The Greeks escape back to their beached ship and
shipmates. Once safely aboard and headed out to sea,
Odysseus cannot resist the impulse to shout out taunts to
Polyphemos and tell him his own true name and lineage.
Guided by the voice, Polyphemos hurls a boulder that
nearly smashes the departing ship, then he prays to his
divine father, Poseidon, to curse Odysseus. Thereafter, in
the Odyssey, Poseidon is Odysseus’s enemy, working to
disrupt the hero’s voyage home.
Centuries later, in the HELLENISTIC AGE, Polyphemos
became the subject of poetic elaboration. The Sicilian
Greek poet THEOKRITUS (ca. 275 B.C.E.) wrote two poems
describing how, prior to the Odysseus episode, Polyphe-
mos loved and wooed the sea nymph Galatea. The idea of
turning a savage, ugly giant into a romantic hero is typical
of the frivolous intellectual tastes of the Hellenistic era.
Unrelated to the Cyclops story, the name Polyphemos
also belonged to one of the Argonauts who sailed with
the Thessalian hero JASON (1) in search of the Golden
Fleece.
Further reading: Gösta Säflund, The Polyphemus and
Scylla Groups at Sperlonga (Stockholm: Almqvist & Wik-
sell, 1972); J. Glenn, “The Polyphemus Myth. Its Origins
and Interpretation,” Greece and Rome 25 (1978): 141–155;
M. Knox, “Polyphemos and His Near Eastern Relations,”
Journal of Hellenic Studies 99 (1979): 164–165; Bernard
Evslin, The Cyclopes (New York: Chelsea House, 1987).
Poseidon
The Greek god of the sea and all other bod-
ies of water, Poseidon was also the god of earthquakes
and horses. According to the Greek creation legend,
Poseidon received the sea as his domain when he and his
brothers, ZEUS and HADES, drew lots for their portions of
the world, after deposing their royal father, CRONUS.
Poseidon was variously described as younger or older
than Zeus, but he was subordinate to Zeus in wisdom and
moral significance.
A patron god of mariners and fishermen, Poseidon
had important temples in certain Greek coastal regions in
historical times. These sanctuaries included Cape MYCAL¯E,
on the central west coast of ASIA MINOR, and Cape
Sunium, in the Athenian territory of ATTICA. The god was
commemorated in the names of seaport cities such as
POSEIDONIA and POTIDAEA. But his most famous shrine was
at the Isthmus of CORINTH, in south-central Greece, where
the biennial ISTHMIAN GAMES were held in his honor.
Poseidon was especially associated with storms at
sea, which posed a deadly hazard to ancient shipping. In
the god’s sea-front temples, voyagers prayed for safe pas-
sage, and survivors of shipwrecks gave thanks for deliver-
ance. When storms off the Thessalian coast in 480 B.C.E.
destroyed part of the invading Persian fleet during the
PERSIAN WARS, the Greeks paid thanks to Poseidon.
The name Poseidon clearly contains the Greek root
pos-, “lord,” but the rest of the meaning is lost to us. In
Greek RELIGION, Poseidon (like Zeus) probably dates back
to the earliest Greek-speaking tribesmen who arrived in
Greece around 2100 B.C.E. Poseidon’s earliest form was
probably not that of a sea god. (According to modern
scholarship, the Greeks originally came from a landlocked
region, the Danube basin, and at first lacked a word for
“sea.”) The prehistoric Poseidon may have been a deity of
Poseidon
275

lakes, rivers, and mountain torrents. He became associated
with earthquakes because they were thought to be caused
by underground watercourses. In historical times, Posei-
don’s most common titles were “shaker of the Earth”
(Ennosigaios) and “holder of the Earth” (Gaieochos).
Probably before or during the years of MYCENAEAN
CIVILIZATION (around 1600–1200 B.C.E.), Poseidon took
on his familiar role as the sea god. This change surely
occurred as the early Greeks learned shipbuilding and
ventured out to sea for food supply, war, and TRADE.
Poseidon is mentioned frequently in the surviving LINEAR
B tablets from the late Mycenaean era, circa 1400–1200
B.C.E., but his precise roles in those years are unclear.
In taking over the sea, Poseidon’s cult seems to have
displaced the worship of certain pre-Greek sea deities.
Apparently some of these survived in Greek MYTH in the
guise of lesser sea gods, such as NEREUS and his mermaid
daughters, the Nereids. Poseidon was said to have mar-
ried a Nereid named Amphitrit¯e, after subduing her by
pursuit and abduction. She bore him a son, Triton. The
sound trit, which the names of mother and son share, is
considered by scholars to be non-Greek and may repre-
sent a prehellenic word for “sea.”
Poseidon’s function as the horse god may date back
to his earliest roots among prehistoric Greek-speaking
tribes, who evidently arrived in mainland Greece with
domesticated horses. In historical times there was a
widespread cult of Poseidon Hippios (of the horse);
images in some shrines showed the god as a horseman.
According to one myth, the first horse had been born out
of a rock where Poseidon’s semen had fallen. Poseidon
oversaw the horse- and chariot-racing at all Greek sports
festivals, not just at his own Isthmian Games. He was said
to have been the mentor of the hero PELOPS, founder of
the OLYMPIC GAMES.
Mythologically, Poseidon embodied the raw power
found in his elements—the sea, earthquakes, and horses.
Legends portrayed him as strong, yet brutish and not
276
Poseidon
An array of gods watching the progress of humans, from the Parthenon frieze. Poseidon, god of the sea, is at the left; his trident is
missing from his hands. Apollo and Artemis are to his left. (Alison Frantz Photographic Collection, American School of Classical
Studies at Athens)

clever, sometimes in contrast with the wise goddess
ATHENA. Poseidon was an important god for the Atheni-
ans—he was associated with the hero THESEUS, and he
had a shrine inside the patriotic-cult building known as
the Erectheum, on the ACROPOLIS. But he was said to have
lost a contest with Athena over who would become the
chief Athenian deity. HOMER’s Odyssey echoed this com-
petition: Poseidon failed to destroy the wily hero
ODYSSEUS, who was aided by Athena. Other legends
described Athena as a civilizing influence over Poseidon’s
realm—she invented shipbuilding and the bridle, to bring
humans to the sea and to tame the horse.
Poseidon’s myths tended to associate him with mon-
sters. He was the lover of the demon MEDUSA, and lover
or father of the HARPIES. His beautiful mistress SCYLLA
was transformed into a hideous sea monster by the jeal-
ous Amphitrit¯e. His liaison with the earth goddess GAEA
(who was technically his grandmother) produced the
fierce giant Antaeus, later killed by HERAKLES. With the
nymph Thoösa, Poseidon was father of the brutal
POLYPHEMOS. Less grotesquely, the Elean princess Tyro
bore Poseidon twin sons, Neleus (later king of PYLOS and
father of NESTOR) and Pelias (later king of Iolcus, in
THESSALY, and enemy of JASON [1]).
In Greek art, Poseidon supplied a study in pure
strength. He was often shown holding his trident—a
three-pronged fish spear used by Greek fishermen. He
resembled Zeus in his beard, physique, and mature age. A
superb classical Greek statue found in the sea off Cape
ARTEMISION in the 1920s C.E., now identified as a likeness
of Zeus, was for decades thought to represent Poseidon.
See also CHARIOTS; GREEK LANGUAGE; SHIPS AND SEA-
FARING.
Further reading: Elizabeth Gebhard, “Caves and
Cults at the Isthmian Sanctuary of Poseidon,” in Pelopon-
nesian Sanctuaries and Cults: Proceedings of the Ninth
International Symposium at the Swedish Institute at Athens,
11–13 June 1994, edited by Robin Hägg (Stockholm:
Svenska Institutet i Athen, 2002), 63–74.
Poseidonia
This Greek city is situated on the south-
western coast of ITALY, on the Bay of Salerno. Located at
the edge of a wide plain, Poseidonia was founded by
colonists from the Italian Greek city of SYBARIS in the last
quarter of the 600s B.C.E. and was named for the sea god
POSEIDON. It was a sprawling city, encircled by a wall
nearly three miles long but without natural defenses, and
it thrived from FARMING and seaborne TRADE. Captured
around 390 B.C.E. by neighboring Italian tribesmen, the
Lucanii, the city passed in 273 B.C.E. into the hands of
the Romans, who called it Paestum.
The site now boasts the standing remnants of three
Doric-style temples, built between about 550 and 450
B.C.E., which are among the best-preserved examples of
Greek monumental ARCHITECTURE. Of these, the famous
“Temple of Neptune” (actually a temple of HERA) rivals
the Athenian PARTHENON in magnificence. The site also
contains tombs of the 400s and 300s B.C.E. that have pro-
vided some of the few surviving Greek wall paintings.
See also PAINTING.
Further reading: J. G. Pedley, Paestum. Greeks and
Romans in Southern Italy (London: Thames and Hudson,
1990); Emanuele Greco, Ilaria D’Ambrosio, and Dinu
Theodorescu, Archaeological and Historical Guide to the
Excavations, the Museum, and the Antiquities of Poseidonia
Paestum, translated by B. Marenco and V. Romano
(Taranto, Italy: Scorpione editrice, 1996); J. G. Pedley,
“Problems in Provenance and Patronage. A Group of Late
Hellenistic Statuettes from Paestum,” in Regional Schools
in Hellenistic Scupture. Proceedings of an International Con-
ference Held at the American School of Classical Studies at
Athens, March 15—17, 1996, edited by Olga Palagia and
William Coulson (Oxford: Oxbow Books, 1998),
199–209; Ernesto De Carolis, Paestum; A Reasoned
Archaeological Itinerary (Naples: T & M, 2002).
Potidaea (Greek: Poteidaia, a form of the name of the
god Poseidon)
This important Corinthian colony was
founded around 600 B.C.E. on the northern Aegean sea-
coast known as CHALCIDIC¯E. Located on the narrow neck
of the westernmost of Chalcidic¯e’s three peninsulas,
Potidaea had a fine harbor, facing west into the Thermaic
Gulf and protected in later years by walls and by moles
across the harbor mouth. Potidaea was the only major
Chalcidic city founded by Greeks who were not IONIAN
GREEKS; it was also the only Corinthian colony located
in the Aegean rather than in the Adriatic or farther west.
Potidaea’s location made it a gateway from Greece to the
north Aegean. Exporting to Corinth, it was a source for
TIMBER, SILVER,
and SLAVES,
available from nearby
THRACE.
Potidaea became a foremost Chalcidic city, later sur-
passed only by its neighbor OLYNTHOS. With Thracian sil-
ver, Potidaea was minting coins by about 550 B.C.E. It led
the local Greek resistance to the invading Persians of
480–479 B.C.E., its formidable defenses withstanding a
Persian siege. After the Persian retreat, Potidaea joined the
Athenian-led DELIAN LEAGUE. However, the city main-
tained close ties with Corinth—for instance, it received its
chief political executives from Corinth every year.
As Athenian-Corinthian relations worsened in the
mid-400s B.C.E., Potidaea became the object of increas-
ing Athenian mistrust. In 434 B.C.E. the Athenians raised
Potidaea’s Delian annual tribute from six to 15 TALENTS.
In resistance to Athenian demands, Potidaea rebelled,
appealing to Corinth for help. Soon ATHENS and Corinth
were in collision over Potidaea. At the Battle of Potidaea,
fought outside the city (432 B.C.E.), an Athenian expedi-
tionary force of 2,000 HOPLITES defeated a slightly
smaller Corinthian-led army. This episode—like similar
Potidaea
277

Athenian-Corinthian hostilities at the Adriatic city of
CORCYRA—was a major cause in igniting the PELOPON-
NESIAN WAR.
Potidaea finally was captured by the Athenians in
early 429 B.C.E., after an immense siege in which the
Athenian army suffered from plague and the starving
defenders were reduced to cannibalism. The Athenians
allowed the Potidaeans to evacuate, and the city was
repopulated with Athenian colonists. But after Athens’s
defeat in the Peloponnesian War (404 B.C.E.), the local
Chalcidic Greeks took over the city.
As the second city (after Olynthos) of the powerful
Chalcidic League, Potidaea again became a target of Athe-
nian imperialism, in the early 300s B.C.E. It was captured
by Athenian troops in 363 B.C.E. The Athenians were
expelled by the Macedonian king PHILIP II in 358 B.C.E.,
but Potidaea probably was destroyed by Philip in 348
B.C.E., in his war against Olynthos.
In around 316 B.C.E. the city was refounded as the cap-
ital of MACEDON under the ruler KASSANDER; the city’s new
name was Kassandreia. In the HELLENISTIC AGE (300–150
B.C.E.) it remained a major port of the north Aegean, and
passed into the empire of ROME after the Romans disman-
tled the Macedonian kingdom in the mid-100s B.C.E.
Knowledge about Potidaea comes mostly from a few
ancient 
literary 
sources: 
HERODOTUS,
THUCYDIDES,
XENOPHON, and DEMOSTHENES (1). The site has not been
systematically excavated, but some of its archaeological
remains have been discovered due to the cutting of a
canal through the isthmus of the peninsula in 1935–1937
C.E. There are numerous silver and bronze coins from the
site, as well as some bronze and terra-cotta sculptures. In
addition, one of the treasuries at DELPHI was built by the
Potidaeans.
See also PERIANDER; PERSIAN WARS.
Further reading: John A. Alexander, Potidaea: Its His-
tory and Remains (Athens, Ga.: University of Georgia
Press, 1963); A. Alexander, “Cassandreia During the
Macedonian Period: An Epigraphical Commentary,” in
Ancient Macedonia,
edited by B. Laourdas and C.
Makaronas (Thessaloníki: Institute for Balkan Studies,
1970); G. S. Shrimpton, “Strategy and Tactics in the Pre-
liminaries to the Siege of Potidaea (Thuc. 1.61–65),”
Symbolae Osloensis 59 (1984): 7–12; E. Badian, From
Plataea to Potidaea. Studies in the History and Historiogra-
phy of the Pentecontaetia (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity Press, 1993).
pottery
The term Greek pottery
refers mainly to
ceramic vessels—storage jars, drinking cups, mixing
bowls, plates, and the like—shaped from wet clay on a
potter’s wheel and fired to brittleness in a kiln heated to
about 1,000 degrees Fahrenheit. In addition to hardening
the pot, the baking permanently sets any glaze or paint,
often with predictable changes of color.
278
pottery
Athenian amphora of the mid-700s B.C.E., 16 inches tall,
painted in the style known as Geometric. Geometric vase paint-
ing provides the first surviving sign of an awakened Greek artis-
tic genius after the Dark Age (1100–900 B.C.E.). This impressive
example shows how painters began to break up their abstract
designs with renderings of live figures—in this case, deer
(above), goats (middle), and geese (below). The repeated key
pattern, sometimes called a meander, remained a familiar
design on Greek textiles and other goods throughout antiquity.
(Margaret Bunson)

Items of ceramic (Greek: keramos, “potter’s clay”)
obviously played a large role in the TRADE and daily life of
all ancient cultures. However, for modern archaeologists,
pottery takes on a paramount importance well beyond its
importance in ancient times, due to the simple fact that
pottery is nearly indestructible. A fired clay pot may shat-
ter easily, but the sherds will last for 10,000 years once
buried in the ground. Pottery is thus different from such
perishable materials as textiles or wood, which also
served major uses in ancient times but which have disap-
peared with barely a trace. Pottery provides the most
available material link to the ancient world. Not every
ancient site has a PARTHENON to offer, but almost every
site has a buried wealth of potsherds, full of data for the
archaeologist.
For example, Greek pottery is the best-surviving
medium for ancient Greek PAINTING. The painted scenes
that once adorned walls, wooden panels, and canvases in
ancient Greece are lost, but the scenes on pottery, baked
onto the clay, have survived. Such vase paintings suggest
the developing techniques of all Greek painting, and the
rendered scenes also provide priceless information about
life in ancient Greece—for RELIGION, FARMING, warfare,
and the like. Many of the illustrations in this book depict
scenes that were originally painted on pottery.
More generally, the geographic distribution of pottery
remnants can reveal ancient trade routes and waves of
migrations. Mycenaean potsherds found in southern
CYPRUS reveal that the early Greeks probably settled there
around 1300 
B.C.E.
Similarly, the huge troves of
Corinthian and Athenian pottery found at sites in former
Etruria (in northern ITALY, a region where the Greeks
never settled) are a dramatic sign of the insatiable market
for Greek goods that existed among the ETRUSCANS,
around 600–500 B.C.E.
The invention of pottery predates by thousands of
years the dawn of Greek civilization, starting with pots
shaped without a potter’s wheel in Mesopotamia and east-
ern China, around 5000 B.C.E. By 2500 B.C.E. pottery was
being produced in the pre-Greek CYCLADES and by the
Minoan people of CRETE. Technique was improved by
introduction of the potter’s wheel around 2100 B.C.E.
Mainland Greece, with its soil rich in clay, was pro-
ducing pottery before the Greeks arrived. The invading
Greeks’ conquest of Greece (around 2100 B.C.E. and
after) is probably signified by the disappearance of prior
styles of pottery and the abrupt emergence (around 1900
B.C.E.) of a new type, known to modern archaeologists as
Minyan ware. Distinguished by its unadorned gray or
gray-yellow glazing and its shape that resembles vessels
of beaten metal, Minyan ware was discovered and named
in 1880 C.E. by the great archaeologist Heinrich Schlie-
mann. This pottery has been found throughout Greece
and is the earliest surviving vestige of those people whose
descendants would create the MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION
(around 1600–1200 B.C.E.)
More imaginative pottery shapes and painted
designs emerge at the height of Mycenaean culture
(around 1400—1200 B.C.E.). Clearly influenced by Min-
oan pottery, Mycenaean ware included many shapes—
such as the drinking cup (kylix), pitcher (lekythos),
and storage jar (amphora)—that would see use in later
pottery
279
A sampling of Greek pottery designs from the 500s and 400s
B.C.E. Several of these types had their specialized use at the
upper-class drinking party known as the symposium. (a)
Amphora, meaning “two handled”—the classic Greek wine-
storage vessel; sealed with a lid or plug, the amphora was
used for domestic storage and (in a modified shape) for
seaborne export. (b) Pelike, another type of storage vessel. (c)
Krater (“mixer”), used for mixing wine and water at a meal or
symposium; this particular design is known as a volute (curl-
handled) krater. (d) Bell Krater. (e) Loutrophorous, a ceremo-
nial water vase, used at Athens or the special bath on the
wedding day and for the funerary washing corpse. (f) Stam-
nos, a jar for storing wine or oil. (g) Psykter (“cooler”), used to
cool undiluted wine prior to mixing and serving; the psykter’s
shape allowed it to fit partly inside a bowl of cold water. (h)
Hydra, a water jug. (i) Lebes, a basin used like a krater, for
mixing wine and water. (j) Lekythos, an oil flask. (k)
Oinochoë, a “wine pourer,” for dispensing wine from the
krater. (l) Kantharos, a type of wine cup. (m) Kylix, another
type of wine cup; the shallow bowl was suited to a drinker
reclining at a symposium. (n) Rhyton, a decorative form of
wine cup, ending at bottom, in an animal’s head or other
shape. (o) Skyphos, another wine cup. (p) Alabastron, a jar for
perfumes and unguents; the jar acquired its name, in ancient
times, because many specimens were carved from alabaster.
(Margaret Bunson)

centuries in classical Greece. Mycenaean artists typically
painted brown on pale yellow. Designs include concen-
tric bands and floral patterns, but a few discovered
Mycenaean pots show animal figures such as birds and
an octopus. One spectacular vase shows a column of
soldiers.
The downfall of Mycenaean society (by 1100 B.C.E.)
was followed by the gradual emergence of new pottery
shapes and painted designs, recognizably derived from
Mycenaean types. This new style, emerging specifically at
ATHENS around 1050 B.C.E., is today called Protogeomet-
ric—the forerunner to the Geometric style that developed
around 900 B.C.E. Protogeometric vase painting is distin-
guished by certain brown or black designs: concentric
circles or half circles (drawn with a compass on the vase’s
side), triangles, cross-hatching, and the earliest appear-
ance of the typically Greek right-angle pattern known as
the meander.
The Geometric period (around 900–700 B.C.E.) saw
new methods of decoration, along with certain new pot-
tery shapes. On a background of tan or light yellow, the
best Geometric ware shows a density of design, including
(after about 800 B.C.E.) silhouette stick figures represent-
ing animal life or human activity, at first confined to hori-
zontal panels around the vase. One of the most
characteristic Geometric human scenes (around 750
B.C.E.) is on the Dipylon amphora, named because it was
discovered near Athens’s ancient Dipylon Gate. Amid
bands of meanders and diamond shapes, a panel shows
triangular-torsoed stick figures in postures of mourning
around a skirted figure on a bier. Appropriately, the five-
foot-tall vase was deposited as an offering in an aristo-
cratic tomb. This vase’s artist, named the Dipylon painter
by scholars, is considered to be the first recognizably
individual Greek artist.
Geometric style spread to workshops throughout
Greece, but by about 730 B.C.E. artists at the mighty com-
mercial center of CORINTH had abandoned Geometric in
favor of new designs, strongly influenced by artwork
imported from the Near East. The first stage of this devel-
opment—part of a larger Orientalizing movement in all
Greek art—is known as the protocorinthian style
(730–625 B.C.E.). Next came the ripe Corinthian style
(ca. 625–550 B.C.E.). Widely popular, Corinthian-made
potteries monopolized the market, both inside the Greek
world and beyond, for nearly 150 years.
Protocorinthian and Corinthian vase painting shows
mainly human or animal scenes, with some intervening
decorations (typically floral, copied from Near Eastern
motifs). Gone are the dark stick figures of Geometric art;
there is wide use of color and detail, with attempts at fore-
shortening. One of the most admired such works is the
Chigi Vase (around 650 B.C.E.), illustrated with a warfare
scene. Under influence of the emerging Athenian black-fig-
ure technique, the full Corinthian style (around 560 B.C.E.)
combined color with solemnity in a packed, friezelike
scene. New pottery shapes also came into use in this era.
In imitation of Corinthian technique, the region of
SPARTA produced a school of pottery painting in the early
500s B.C.E. A number of lively scenes survive on the
inside bottoms of Spartan cups.
Meanwhile Athenian black-figure pottery, destined to
oust Corinthian ware from the world market, was being
produced by 600 B.C.E. Early black figure saw the vast
reduction of decorative designs in favor of scenes from
MYTH; later scenes from daily life—farming, seafaring—
become more common. The name black figure refers to
the fact that men’s skin was painted dark and rendered
into black by glazing and firing; in contrast, women’s
flesh was shown as white. Incisions helped create detail
and fire lines. One early epitome of the style is the Athe-
nian-made Francoise Vase (ca. 570 B.C.E.), discovered in
what used to be Etruscan territory and now in the Flo-
rence archaeological museum. The small vase (a volute
krater, or form of mixing bowl) uses a light background
to present lively mythological scenes in miniature. The
black-figure technique reached its zenith in about
550–525 B.C.E., with the work of such Athenian artists as
the Amasis Painter.
But by 520 B.C.E. a new Athenian style had emerged,
now called red figure. Red figure reversed the black-fig-
ure technique; the human and animal figures were left
open to the clay’s red color, and now the background was
painted and fired black. This represented a breakthrough
for creating realistic figures and precise detail. The style
reached perfection in the work of the artist now known
as the Berlin Painter (ca. 480 B.C.E.), who was able to
show beautifully realistic musculature and detail.
280
pottery
A terra-cotta cart with amphorae from Euboea ca. 560 B.C.E.
This was a decorative way to keep perfumed oils nearby.
(Alison Frantz Photographic Collection, American School of
Classical Studies at Athens)

Another popular Athenian style of the 400s B.C.E.
was the white-ground technique, which rendered figures
in delicate lines against a white background. This style
was used particularly for lekythoi (pitchers) deposited as
offerings in tombs.
The decline of Athenian red-figure style around 400
B.C.E. marks the end of the great phases of Greek vase
painting. But red-figure continued—the painted scenes
become more crowded, the figures more florid—into the
300s B.C.E., especially in Greek south Italy and SICILY
(where Athenian-influenced vase-painting movements
arose in the 440s B.C.E.). By 300 B.C.E. the new trade
routes of the Hellenistic world were making metal pots
and vessels more accessible, thereby removing any rich
market for vase painting. But the 200s B.C.E. saw a renais-
sance of sorts, in the polychrome ware from Greek Sicily.
See also ARCHAEOLOGY; FUNERAL CUSTOMS; MINOAN
CIVILIZATION.
Further reading: R. M. Cook, Greek Painted Pottery,
2d ed. (London: Methuen, 1972); Joseph V. Noble, The
Techniques of Painted Attic Pottery, 2d ed. (London:
Thames and Hudson, 1988); Brian A. Sparkes, Greek Pot-
tery: An Introduction (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1991);
Ioana E. Phoca and Panos D. Valavanis, Greek Pottery: A
Culture Captured in Clay, translated by Timothy Cullen
(Athens: B. Kagia, 1992); Michael Vickers and David Gill,
Artful Crafts: Ancient Greek Silverware and Pottery, 2d ed.
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1996); Toby Schreiber, Athe-
nian Vase Construction: A Potter’s Analysis (Malibu, Calif.:
J. Paul Getty Museum, 1999); Dyfri Williams, Greek
Vases, 2d ed. (London: British Museum Publications,
1999).
Praxiteles (ca. 400–325 B.C.E.) Important Greek sculptor
An Athenian, Praxiteles worked in the mid-300s B.C.E.
and was famous for his gorgeous, idealized nudes. He
developed marble (as opposed to BRONZE) as a medium
for free-standing statuary, and in keeping with the emerg-
ing tastes of the late classical period, he promoted the
female nude as an object of artistic reverence, alongside
the male.
Praxiteles’ most celebrated work was his statue of
APHRODITE for that goddess’s temple at KNIDOS in ASIA
MINOR (ca. 350–340 B.C.E.). Originally made for and
rejected by the island of Kos, the statue was the first
major cult statue showing a goddess in the nude. It even-
tually became one of the most famous statues in the
world and was considered to be the most beautiful image
of Aphrodite ever created. It showed the goddess having
disrobed for her bath, with one hand vainly attempting to
conceal her naked body. Many copies of this statue were
created during the Roman period; one now stands in the
Vatican Museum.
Another famous statue by Praxiteles, made around
340 B.C.E., showed the god HERMES holding the divine
infant DIONYSUS. The Roman traveler PAUSANIAS men-
tions seeing this statue in the sanctuary of ZEUS at
OLYMPIA. A statue of this type found there is the subject
of debate among modern art historians; it is either Prax-
iteles’ original or a slightly later copy, probably of the
HELLENISTIC AGE (ca. 300–150 B.C.E.). It shows Hermes
teasing the baby Dionysus with a bunch of grapes that he
dangles above him (the grapes are not preserved but are
known from a Roman wall painting of the group). This
amusing, very human view of the gods is typical of Prax-
iteles’ compositions and is one reason for his fame.
See also SCULPTURE.
Further reading:
Christine M. Havelock, The
Aphrodite of Knidos and Her Successors: A Historical Review
of the Female Nude in Greek Art (Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press, 1995); A. Ajootian, “Praxiteles,” in Per-
sonal Styles in Greek Sculpture, edited by Olga Palagia and
J. J. Pollitt (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1996),
91–129; A. Corso, “The Hermes of Praxiteles,” Numismat-
ica e antichità classiche 25 (1996): 131–153; A. Corso,
“Love as Suffering. The Eros of Thespiae of Praxiteles,”
Praxiteles
281
Statue of the god Hermes holding the infant Dionysus,
sculpted by Praxiteles ca. 340 B.C.E., considered one of his
existing masterpieces. (Alison Frantz Photographic 
Collection, American School of Classical Studies at Athens)

Bulletin of the Institute of Classical Studies 42 (1997–1998):
63–91.
prayer
In the ancient Greek world, worshippers asked
for favors from the gods through prayer and sacrifice.
Images of people praying generally show them standing,
with both arms raised and outstretched. Public prayers
followed specific formulas and generally ended with the
promise of a sacrifice or votive offering to the deity in
thanks for the positive fulfillment of the request. Prayers
did not necessarily take place in a sanctuary or near a
temple, but sometimes people might choose to visit a cult
space in the hopes that the god would respond more
quickly and favorably.
Prayers to the gods were sometimes accompanied by
votive offerings, and numerous such offerings (often
works of SCULPTURE) survive. One is the so-called Man-
tiklos Apollo, a bronze statue from THEBES that dates to
around 700 B.C.E. In this instance, the donor (Mantiklos)
was not praying for anything specific, just for good for-
tune. The inscription on the male figure reads as follows:
“Mantiklos offers me (the statue) as a tithe to APOLLO of
the silver bow. Do you, Phoibos (Apollo), give some
pleasing favor in return.”
Further reading: J. Maringer, “Adorants in Prehis-
toric Art. Prehistoric Attitudes and Gestures of Prayer,”
Numen 26 (1979): 215–230; H. S. Versnel, ed., Faith,
Hope, and Worship. Aspects of Religious Mentality in the
Ancient World (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 1981); B.
Rutkowski, “Prayer (Adoration) Gestures in Prehistoric
Greece,” Archeologia. Rocznik Instytutu archeologii i
etnologii Polskiej akademii nauk.
41 (1990): 9–20;
Christopher Faraone and Dirk Obbink, eds., Magika
Hiera: Ancient Greek Magic and Religion (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1991); P. W. van der Horst,
“Silent Prayer in Antiquity,” Numen 41 (1994): 1–25; D.
Lateiner, “Homeric Prayer,” Arethusa 30 (1997): 241–272;
M. Kiley, ed., Prayer from Alexander to Constantine. A Crit-
ical Anthology (London: Routledge, 1997); M. Depew,
“Reading Greek Prayers,” Classical Antiquity 16 (1997):
229–258; Simon Pulleyn, Prayer in Greek Religion (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1997).
Priam
In MYTH, Priam was the last king of TROY, killed
in the Greeks’ capture of the city in the TROJAN WAR. He
was the son and successor of King Laomedon and the
husband of HECUBA, by whom he had 17 sons, including
HECTOR and PARIS. Between wife and concubines, Priam
had 50 sons and 12 daughters in all.
In HOMER’s epic poem the Iliad, which describes
events of the 10th year of the war, Priam appears as an
important secondary character, elderly and wise. He dis-
approves of Paris’s abduction of the Spartan princess
HELEN, which has caused the war, but he shows nobility
in his courtesy to her and his determination not to give
her back to the Greeks against her will. Near the poem’s
end, after Hector has been slain by the Greek hero
ACHILLES, Priam journeys, with the supernatural aid of
the gods ZEUS and HERMES, to the Greek camp. There he
successfully pleads with Achilles for the privilege of ran-
soming back Hector’s corpse. The old king’s grief and
suppliant posture clearly foreshadow the destruction of
his city.
The story of Priam’s death was originally told in
another Greek epic poem titled The Capture of Troy (Iliou
Persis), which has not survived but whose general plot is
known. During the Greeks’ sack of the city, Priam took
refuge at an altar of Zeus but was impiously slain there by
Achilles’ son, NEOPTOLEMUS. For the classical Greeks,
Priam represented the extremes of good and bad fortune
that can visit a man in his lifetime.
Priam’s name is apparently not Greek, and he may
represent a memory of a real-life Trojan king of the his-
torical Trojan War, around 1220 B.C.E.
See also EPIC POETRY; HELEN OF TROY.
Further reading: J. D. Madden, “The Palms Do Not
Weep. A Reply to Professor Hurwit and a Note on the
Death of Priam in Greek Art,” Classical Journal 78
(1982–1983): 193–199; Margaret C. Miller, “Priam, King
of Troy,” in The Ages of Homer: A Tribute to Emily
Townsend Vermeule, edited by Jane B. Carter and Sarah P.
Morris (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1995),
449–466.
Priapus
This east Greek fertility god and guardian of
orchards and gardens is often pictured as a puny or mis-
shapen man with an enormous, erect penis. Priapus orig-
inated in the non-Greek regions of ASIA MINOR, and in
classical times (400s B.C.E.) his worship among the
Greeks was confined mainly to Lampsacus, on the east
shore of the HELLESPONT. During the HELLENISTIC AGE
(ca. 300–150 B.C.E.), however, Priapus’s cult spread and
became popular at ALEXANDRIA (1) and later at ROME.
His worship involved the non-Greek custom of sacrific-
ing donkeys. He seems to have had no MYTH, being
described merely as the son of APHRODITE and DIONYSUS.
His name is commemorated in the modern English
adjective priapic.
Priapus’s monstrous organ signified his guardian
powers as well as his fertilizing aspect, for the Greeks had
a notion that trespassers and thieves (male or female) are
liable to rape by the rightful owners of a territory.
See also HERMES.
Further reading: C. Johns and M. Henig, “A Statuette
of a Herm of Priapus from Pakenham, Suffolk,” The Anti-
quaries Journal 71 (1991): 236–239.
Procrustes
In MYTH, this sadistic brigand was the son
of the god POSEIDON; he preyed upon travelers in ATTICA
until slain by the Athenian hero THESEUS.
282
prayer

Meeting a wayfarer on the road, Procrustes (“ham-
merer-out”) would deceptively offer him lodging for the
night and then force the victim to lie down on one of two
beds. He would place tall men on the shorter bed and saw
off their lower legs in order to make them fit; he placed
short men on the longer bed and stretched them out (for
the bed was a rack).
The modern English adjective procrustean describes
an attempt to fit facts or individual examples into a pre-
conceived, inappropriate theory or rule.
Further reading: Bernard Evslin, Procrustes (New
York: Chelsea House, 1987).
Prometheus
In MYTH, this benevolent Titan (demigod)
championed the cause of humankind against the gods.
Although several characters in Greek myth defied or
challenged the great god ZEUS, Prometheus is the only
one who appears in a heroic light. Classical Greeks saw
him as an example of the wily “trickster”—a type also
represented by the god HERMES, the hero ODYSSEUS, and
the real-life Athenian statesman THEMISTOKLES. Appropri-
ately enough, Prom¯etheus means “having forethought.”
According to one version of the myth, it was
Prometheus himself who created the first humans, shap-
ing them out of clay while the goddess ATHENA breathed
life into them. Zeus then called on Prometheus to decide
the question of how humans should sacrifice to the
gods—that is, which part of the sacrificed beast should
be assigned as the gods’ portion and which part should
be eaten by mortals. In this arbitration, Prometheus
chose to deceive and humiliate Zeus. As described in
HESIOD’s epic poem Theogony (ca. 700 B.C.E.), Pro-
metheus butchered an ox and disguised the bones in a
wrapping of fat, but hid the ox’s flesh and edible organs
inside the stomach. He showed both items to Zeus, invit-
ing him to choose between a bundle glistening with fat
or a tripe. The king of the gods chose the inviting-look-
ing bundle, and that is why (according to the legend)
humans customarily keep the best sacrificial portions for
themselves to eat, while burning only the animal’s bones
and hide for the gods.
Zeus retaliated by withholding the use of fire from
humankind, but Prometheus stole fire from heaven inside
a fennel stalk and bestowed it on mortals.
Enraged at Prometheus’s defiance, Zeus plotted
revenge against him and his race of mortals (who up until
then had included only one gender, the male). Zeus
ordered the craftsman god HEPHAISTOS and other gods to
create a new kind of human, lovely but treacherous: This
was Pandora (“all gifts”), the first woman. She was sent
to earth, where she married Prometheus’s simple-minded
brother, Epimetheus (“having afterthought”). Pandora
brought with her, or otherwise acquired, a supernatural
clay jar containing pain, toil, illness, and other evils not
yet known in the world. When, out of curiosity, she
opened the jar, the hateful contents flew out and propa-
gated, leaving only hope inside the jar, to delude mortals.
For Prometheus himself, Zeus had a more terrible
punishment. Hephaistos chained Prometheus to a lonely
mountain crag; every day an eagle would fly up and tear
out the prisoner’s liver, devouring it. Prometheus never
died, however and every night his liver was restored, so
that the torture could be repeated daily. Eventually the
hero HERAKLES released Prometheus, with Zeus’s permis-
sion.
Prometheus’s punishment is the subject of the stage
tragedy Prometheus Bound (ca. 455 B.C.E.), which tradi-
tionally has been ascribed to the Athenian playwright
AESCHYLUS, but which currently is thought not to be his
work.
See also RELIGION; TITANS; WOMEN.
Further reading: Larry J. Kreitzer, Prometheus and
Adam: Enduring Symbols of the Human Situation (Lanham,
Md.: University Press of America, 1994); Karl Kerényi,
Prometheus: Archetypal Image of Human Existence, trans-
lated by Ralph Manheim (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 1997).
prophecy and divination
Because the ancient Greeks
believed that the gods had a hand in human events, they
also believed that humans could interpret the gods’
wishes. While prayer and sacrifice sought to win the
gods’ favor, the interpretation of divine will was the goal
of certain other activities, which the Greeks called man-
teia, denoting prophecy and other forms of divination.
Prophets and soothsayers abounded in Greek MYTH, but
they also remained important among living Greeks right
down to the end of the ancient world.
In its strictest English-language use, the word
prophecy refers to a form of soothsaying in which the god
speaks directly through the mouth of the human prophet
(Greek: proph¯et¯es). “Divination,” a more general word,
includes less inspirational forms of future-telling. The
most famous ancient Greek example of inspirational
prophecy was the Delphic oracle. The oracle was a priest-
ess of APOLLO, at the god’s most holy sanctuary at DELPHI
in central Greece. In response to an inquirer’s question,
she would go into a trance and deliver frenzied utterings,
which a male priest would interpret and write down in
verse. Similar oracles of Apollo were found at CUMAE and
elsewhere.
Apollo’s father, ZEUS, was the other main god of
prophecy. At Zeus’s very ancient sanctuary at DODONA, in
northwestern Greece, the priests gave answers after lis-
tening for Zeus’s prompting in the rustle of leaves in the
god’s sacred oak tree.
Other modes of divination were practiced by a seer
(mantis), whose methods might involve observation of
animal life, such as the flights and cries of passing birds—
a practice now called augury. But the most common of the
prophecy and divination
283

seer’s duties was extispicy—that is, examining the
removed organs (particularly the liver) of a newly sacri-
ficed animal: A healthy-looking liver meant that the gods
approved of the inquirer’s intended course of action; an
unhealthy one meant disapproval.
Still other forms of divination sought to find mes-
sages in dreams, in random consultations of texts of
HOMER’s poems, or in events of everyday life. A sneeze,
for instance, was considered a good omen, applicable to
whatever was being discussed or thought of at the
moment. One peculiar rite, known as kledon, was prac-
ticed at various shrines of the god HERMES. After whisper-
ing a question into the ear of the god’s cult statue, the
worshipper would immediately stop up his or her own
ears and leave the temple; outside, beyond the town mar-
ketplace, the worshipper would unplug his or her ears
and listen for the god’s answer delivered in the chance
conversations of passersby.
Despite the scorn of intellectuals such as the philoso-
pher XENOPHANES (ca. 520 B.C.E.) and the historian
THUCYDIDES (1) (ca. 410 B.C.E.), a belief in divination ran
deep and wide in Greek society. City governments
employed official seers, and in times of crisis populations
sought guidance in oracles and published prophecies. A
Greek army on the march brought along a detail of seers,
to determine divine will for military purposes; they usu-
ally did this by examining the entrails of sacrificial birds.
The poet SIMONIDES wrote an epitaph for a Spartan seer,
Megistias, killed at the Battle of THERMOPYLAE (480
B.C.E.). Supposedly Megistias foresaw the Spartans’s anni-
hilation, but chose to remain beside his fighting king.
See also CASSANDRA; RELIGION.
Further reading: S. Price, “Delphi and Divination,”
in Greek Religion and Society, edited by P. E. Easterling
and J. V. Muir (New York: Cambridge University Press,
1985), 128–154; H. W. Parke, Sibyls and Sibylline
Prophecy in Classical Antiquity
(London: Routledge,
1988); Samson Eitrem, “Dreams and Divination in Magi-
cal Ritual,” in Magika Hiera. Ancient Greek Magic and
Religion (New York: Oxford University Press, 1991),
175–187; F. Graf, “Magic and Divination,” in The World of
Ancient Magic. Papers from the First International Samson
Eitrem Seminar at the Norwegian Institute at Athens, 4–8
May 1997, edited by David Jordan, Hugo Montgomery,
and Einan Thomassen (Bergen: Norwegian Institute at
Athens, 1999), 283–298; Robert Temple, Netherworld
(London: Century, 2002).
Propontis
See MARMARA, SEA OF.
Propylaea
See ACROPOLIS.
prostitutes
A society such as ancient Greece—with its
slave population, discrimination against female employ-
ment, and lack of charitable relief for the poor—was
bound to have many prostitutes of both genders, drawn
from a needy underclass. There was also a strong demand
for prostitutes because the unromantic nature of most
ancient Greek marriages, combined with the enforced
seclusion of citizen WOMEN, led many married men to
seek sexual adventure outside the home. A market for
teenage boys was fueled by the homosexual atmosphere
of upper-class life in the 600s–300s B.C.E.
As with other aspects of ancient Greek society, most
of our evidence for prostitution comes from ATHENS in
the 400s–300s B.C.E. References to male or female prosti-
tution occur in such Athenian writers as the comic play-
wright ARISTOPHANES (ca. 410 B.C.E.) and the orator
AESCHINES (ca. 340 B.C.E.). The practice was legal at
Athens, so long as the prostitute was not an Athenian cit-
izen. If a male citizen was proved to have prostituted
himself, he would basically lose his citizenship rights; a
prostituted female citizen might suffer a similar penalty,
while criminal charges could be brought against her male
guardian. Prostitutes at Athens typically came from two
social classes: METICS (resident aliens, meaning any
284
Propontis
As his tenth labor, Herakles had to steal the cattle of Geryon,
a fierce, three-bodied warrior. Herakles advances, and one of
Geryon’s bodies senses defeat and tries to run. The eagle is
shown flying toward Herakles, an omen foretelling his 
victory. (The J. Paul Getty Museum)

Greeks not born of Athenian parents) and SLAVES. The
slaves would be women or boys sent out by their owners
to earn money, which the owner then took.
No doubt many prostitutes lived the grim life of the
streetwalker. But among females, the Greeks distinguished
this lower-class type of prostitute, whom they called a
porn¯e, from the high-class hetaira (literally “companion,”
often translated as “courtesan”). The hetairai were women
skilled in flute-playing, singing, dancing, or acrobatics,
skilled also in flirtation and sexual techniques, artful in
conversation, and better educated than most citizen
women. A number of extant Athenian vase paintings of
the 400s B.C.E. give an idea of the hetaira’s typical appear-
ance and activities, while a later Greek writer, Athenaeus
(ca. 200 C.E.), has preserved a collection of the sayings
and exploits of famous Athenian hetairai.
Hetairai were often organized into “houses” run by
managers, who would protect the women and supervise
their schedules and fees. Such houses flourished at all
commercial centers of the Greek world, including
CORINTH and NAUKRATIS, in addition to Athens. Only
SPARTA—austere, anticommercial, and with notoriously
promiscuous citizen women—was said to have no prosti-
tutes at all.
The natural setting for hetairai was the upper-class
drinking party known as the SYMPOSIUM. Hired for the
night, or perhaps owned as slaves of the host or guests,
the hetairai might dance or provide flute music, but they
were also obliged to give sexual favors to the guests, all of
whom would be men. Certain verses of the poet
ANACREON convey his infatuation with one or another
hetaira at a symposium.
Such women were the only ones permitted to social-
ize with men informally outside of their homes. In one
speech, the Athenian orator DEMOSTHENES (1) maintains
that a certain woman cannot be an Athenian citizen, for
she has been observed dining and drinking in male com-
pany, “just as a hetaira would do.” Prostitutes, especially
hetairai, were frequent subjects on Greek vase paintings.
Since many of the vessels were used for serving or drink-
ing wine at the symposium, scenes of these drinking par-
ties were common. Because respectable citizen women
were not permitted at the symposium, the women shown
in these scenes are clearly hetairai, present for the pur-
poses of entertainment, companionship, and sex. The
women are thin, beautiful, and elegant, usually wearing
fine garments (when clothed) and jewelry. They are often
represented nude or bare-breasted, sometimes playing the
flute or drinking and sometimes in the act of having sex.
The hazard of hetairai—from the established male
viewpoint—was that they might captivate rich young
men, who would squander entire fortunes on them. From
the hetaira’s viewpoint, the best she could hope for was to
win a rich man’s heart, so that he would purchase her
freedom (if she were a slave) and set her up as his wife or
mistress. At Athens, where a hetaira could not legally
marry a citizen, she might at least become a common-law
wife, or pallak¯e. Among the best-known hetairai were
Thaïs, who was the mistress and mother of three children
of PTOLEMY (1), and Phryne, who served as the sculptor
PRAXITELES’ model for his celebrated statue of APHRODITE.
Crude forms of birth control were no doubt an essen-
tial skill of the prostitute; unfortunately, little is known
about this aspect. Ancient medical writers mention vagi-
nal suppositories of woven fabric that were used for con-
traception, as well as herbal potions thought to suppress
fertility. Probably more significant are the several ancient
references to abortion. A clause of the ancient Hippo-
cratic Oath, for example, forbade physicians from induc-
ing abortion, while the Roman poet Ovid (ca. 20 B.C.E.)
wrote a short poem lamenting his mistress’s serious ill-
ness following a self-induced abortion.
See also ASPASIA; HIPPOCRATES; HOMOSEXUALITY; MAR-
RIAGE; MUSIC; SAPPHO.
Further reading: Daniel Ogden, Polygamy, Prostitutes,
and Death: The Hellenistic Dynasties (London: Duckworth,
1999); Jenifer Neils, “Others within the Other. An Inti-
mate Look at Hetairai and Maenads,” in Not the Classical
Ideal. Athens and the Construction of the Other in Greek Art,
edited by Beth Cohen (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J. Brill,
2000), 203–226; Julie Velissaropoulos-Karakostas, “Mer-
chants, Prostitutes, and the ‘New Poor’: Forms of Contract
and Social Status,” in Money, Labor, and Land: Approaches
to the Economies of Ancient Greece, edited by Paul Car-
gledge, Edward Cohen, and Lin Foxhall (London: Rout-
ledge, 2002), 130–139; Debra Hamel, Trying Neaira: The
True Story of a Courtesan’s Scandalous Life in Ancient Greece
(New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2003).
Protagoras (ca. 485–415 B.C.E.) The first and most
famous of the SOPHISTS
Born at the Greek city of ABDERA, Protagoras had a long
and lucrative career. He traveled from city to city, instruct-
ing students in intellectual skills such as disputation and
the arts of reasoning. Protagoras was the first thinker to
acquire the title sophist¯es, “professor” or “disputer.” One
of Protagoras’s doctrines—that any question could admit
two contradicting but equally true answers—became the
hallmark of later sophists, who were notorious for their
ability to debate a controversy from either side.
Visiting ATHENS, Protagoras may have influenced the
thinking of the young SOCRATES. Protagoras was also a
friend of the Athenian statesman PERIKLES, who once spent
a whole day arguing with him over a famous criminal case,
in which a boy at a GYMNASIUM had been accidentally
killed by a thrown javelin: Was the javelin-thrower guilty
in the death, or was the javelin itself guilty? In 443 B.C.E.,
when the Athenians organized a colonizing expedition to
Thurii, in southern ITALY, Protagoras was chosen, no doubt
on Perikles’ influence, to draw up the law code for the
departing colonists.
Protagoras
285

Protagoras taught an extreme form of moral rela-
tivism—that is, that there are no absolute truths, neither
morally nor scientifically. Rather, he said, human conven-
tion and opinion determine completely what we can call
“right” and “wrong” or “hot” and “cold.” By Protagoras’s
teaching, perception is reality, for reality is determined by
what we perceive. This was the background of Protago-
ras’s best-known statement, which opened his treatise
titled Truth: “Man is the measure of all things.” Rather
than extolling the beauty of the human spirit (as it is
sometimes interpreted), the statement simply introduces
the idea that there are no absolute truths outside of what
humans agree upon.
Protagoras’s writings survive only as quotations or
references by later authors. He appears as a fictionalized
character in PLATO’s dialogue Protagoras, where he
debates with Socrates the question, “Can moral virtue
(aret¯e) be taught?”
See also ANTIPHON; LAWS AND LAW COURTS.
Further reading: Larry Goldberg, A Commentary on
Plato’s Protagoras (New York: P. Lang, 1983); J. K. New-
man, “Protagoras, Gorgias, and the Dialogic Principle,”
Illinois Classical Studies 11 (1986): 43–61; J. Sihvola,
Decay, Progress, the Good Life? Hesiod and Protagoras on
the Development of Culture (Helsinki: Societas Scientiarum
Fennica, 1989); Oded Balaban, Plato and Protagoras: Truth
and Relativism in Ancient Greek Philosophy (Lanham, Md.:
Lexington Books, 1999); Edward Schiappa, Protagoras
and Logos: A Study in Greek Philosophy and Rhetoric, 2d
ed. (Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 2003).
Psyche
See EROS.
Ptolemy (1) (ca. 367–282 B.C.E.) Macedonian general
and, eventually, founder of a ruling dynasty in EGYPT
Ptolemy (Ptolemaios, “warlike”) was born the son of a
Macedonian nobleman at the court of King PHILIP II;
Ptolemy’s mother, Arsinoë, was probably at some point
the king’s mistress. The young Ptolemy was a friend of
Philip’s son, later known as ALEXANDER THE GREAT; after
Alexander became king (336 B.C.E.), Ptolemy was
appointed to his bodyguard and general staff. He accom-
panied Alexander on the conquest of the Persian Empire
(334–323 B.C.E.) and later published a campaign memoir
that, although now lost, served as a major source for the
surviving account written by Arrian.
When Alexander died in 323 B.C.E., Ptolemy was
serving as his governor in Egypt. In the ensuing turmoil,
Ptolemy emerged as one of the DIADOCHOI (Successors),
who seized great chunks of Alexander’s empire for them-
selves. Ptolemy’s dangerous adversary in these years was
the Macedonian general ANTIGONUS (1), who, from his
base in ASIA MINOR, sought to reknit the old empire
under his own rule. By 315 B.C.E. Ptolemy had joined the
coalition of secessionist Diadochoi—SELEUCUS (1), KAS-
SANDER, and LYSIMACHOS—against Antigonus and his
son, DEMETRIUS POLIORKETES.
At the sea battle of Cyprian Salamis (360 B.C.E.),
Ptolemy suffered a major defeat at Demetrius’s hands,
and lost control of the AEGEAN SEA, but his Egyptian
fleets remained strong in the southeastern Mediter-
ranean. In 304 B.C.E. Ptolemy officially declared himself
king of Egypt—modern scholars denote him henceforth
as Ptolemy I. In 301 B.C.E. his army joined in the mas-
sive campaign that destroyed his enemy Antigonus.
Ptolemy took the honorary title Sot¯er (savior) to com-
memorate this victory. The next 15 years saw Ptolemy
pushing to acquire or recapture territory in Antigonus’s
old empire, including CYPRUS, Asia Minor, and the
Aegean.
Ruling from his capital at ALEXANDRIA (1), Ptolemy
began organizing his Egyptian kingdom along lines that
would last 700 years, down through the Roman Empire.
He instituted such important “Ptolemaic” features as
careful registration and taxation throughout the land, and
established military colonies for the breeding of the vital
Macedonian soldiering class.
In his private life, Ptolemy was devoted to his mis-
tress, Thaïs, who bore him three children. More officially,
his third wife, Berenice—who was also his half sister—
bore him two children: a girl, Arsinoë, and a boy, PTOLEMY
(2) II (born in 308 B.C.E.). In 285 B.C.E. the younger
Ptolemy became joint ruler with his ailing father.
Ptolemy’s descendants would rule Egypt until 30 B.C.E.
See also CLEOPATRA; COLONIZATION; WARFARE, NAVAL.
Further reading: C. A. Kincaid, Successors of Alexan-
der the Great: Ptolemy I, Pyrrhus of Epirus, Hiero of Syra-
cuse, Antiochus III (Chicago: Ares, 1980); B. R. Brown,
“Art History in Coins. Portrait Issues of Ptolemy I,” in
Alessandria e il mondo ellenistico-romano. Studi in onore di
Achille 
Adriani
(Rome: 
L’Erma 
di 
Bretschneider,
1983–1984), 405–417; W. M. Ellis, Ptolemy of Egypt
(London: Routledge, 1994); N. L. Collins, “The Various
Fathers of Ptolemy I,” Mnemosyne 50 (1997): 436–476.
Ptolemy (2) II (309–246 B.C.E.) Macedonian-descended
king of EGYPT
Ptolemy II reigned ca. 283–246 B.C.E., after succeeding
his father, PTOLEMY (1). Under the younger Ptolemy’s
rule, the land of Egypt—already rich, powerful, and
ancient—became home to a great Greek culture. Ptolemy
turned his capital at ALEXANDRIA (1) into the cultural
center of the Hellenistic world, a magnet for Greek
thinkers, poets, and craftsmen, far surpassing contempo-
rary ATHENS. It was Ptolemy II who built, at Alexandria,
those famous institutions of learning and patronage, the
Library and Museum, and who sponsored such “Alexan-
drian” poets as KALLIMACHUS and APOLLONIUS. It was also
Ptolemy who built the lighthouse at Pharos, considered
one of the SEVEN WONDERS OF THE WORLD.
286
Psyche

Ptolemy developed his father’s administrative system
for the kingdom, creating an efficient bureaucracy to tax,
govern, and police Egypt. Militarily, Ptolemy clashed with
the SELEUCID EMPIRE, with which Egypt shared a shifting,
uneasy border in the Levant. The resulting First Syrian
War (ca. 274–271 B.C.E.) ended with important Ptolemaic
gains in Syria and ASIA MINOR. The Second Syrian War
(266–253 B.C.E.), less conclusive, ended with the MAR-
RIAGE of Ptolemy’s daughter Berenice to the Seleucid ruler
Antiochus II.
Around 289 B.C.E. Ptolemy married Arsinoë, daugh-
ter of LYSIMACHUS,
the Macedonian-born king of
THRACE. She bore Ptolemy three children but was even-
tually banished for plotting to kill him. Then in about
276 B.C.E. he married his own full sister, also named
Arsinoë. This Arsinoë II died within a few years, but her
influence was great and her reign marked the most bril-
liant years of the Alexandrian court. It was this marriage
to his sister that earned Ptolemy the title—which he
bore with pride—of Philadelphos (lover of his sibling).
Brother-sister marriage among members of the royal fam-
ily was an Egyptian tradition dating back to the
pharaohs, and many subsequent Ptolemies embraced this
custom so as to minimize the range for court intrigues
and problems of succession.
When Ptolemy died, he was succeeded by Ptolemy
III, his son by the first Arsinoë.
See also HELLENISTIC AGE; JEWS; WOMEN.
Further reading: E. E. Rice, The Grand Procession of
Ptolemy Philadelphos (New York: Oxford University Press,
1983); R. A. Hazzard, “The Regnal Years of Ptolemy II
Philadelphos,” Phoenix 41 (1987): 140–158; V. Foertmeyer,
“The Dating of the Pompe of Ptolemy II Philadelphos,”
Historia 37 (1988): 90–104; W. S. Greenwalt, “Argaeus,
Ptolemy II, and Alexander’s Corpse,” Ancient History Bul-
letin 2 (1988): 39–41.
Ptolemy (3)
See ASTRONOMY.
Pygmalion
This mythical king of CYPRUS sculpted an
ivory statue of the goddess APHRODITE and then fell in
love with it. The goddess herself, taking pity on him,
breathed life into the statue, which became a living
woman named Galatea. She and Pygmalion had a daugh-
ter, Paphos, after whom the Cypriot city was named.
Further reading:
Geoffrey Miles, ed., Classical
Mythology in English Literature: A Critical Anthology (Lon-
don: Routledge, 1999); Esseka Joshua, Pygmalion and
Galatea: The History of a Narrative in English Literature
(Aldershot, U.K.: Ashgate, 2001).
Pylos
This coastal area of the southwest PELOPONNESE,
encompasses the Bay of Navarino. In historical times,
Pylos (“the gate”) was part of the larger region known as
MESSENIA.
Sheltered by the mile-and-a-half-long island of
Sphacteria (“wasp place”), the bay provided an excellent
harbor, one of the few of the entire Peloponnese. North
and east of the harbor stretched the narrow but fertile
coastal plain of western Messenia.
In Greek MYTH, Pylos was the home of King NESTOR,
a Greek hero of the TROJAN WAR. Modern ARCHAEOLOGY
confirms that the Pylos area was a western center of
MYCENAEAN
CIVILIZATION; excavations in the foothills
eight miles northeast of the bay have uncovered the foun-
dations of an elaborate palace complex. This palace, built
1400 B.C.E., was one of the largest Mycenaean citadels,
after only MYCENAE and TIRYNS. Archaeologists have
named this fortress the Palace of Nestor.
The palace consisted of three buildings, each two sto-
ries in height; their construction slightly resembled
Tudor-style half-timbering. Their outer walls were made
of limestone; interior elements included wooden columns
and wainscoting. The complex was destroyed by fire
around 1200 B.C.E., probably amid the internecine wars
that ended Mycenaean society.
Among the items recovered from the ruins by archae-
ologists are more than 1,200 clay tablets inscribed in LIN-
EAR B script. A few of these tablets (datable to a spring
season just before the palace’s destruction) record the
inhabitants’ keeping of a coastal watch, presumably
against enemy naval attack. It was probably just such an
attack that demolished the palace.
Despite Pylos’s rich natural resources and geographi-
cal features, the region remained unoccupied for cen-
turies after the Mycenaean era (although it retained its
name). In 425 B.C.E., during the PELOPONNESIAN WAR,
the Athenian general DEMOSTHENES (2) fortified and gar-
risoned Pylos’s harbor, which lay only 50 miles west of
the enemy city of SPARTA. The establishment of an Athe-
nian naval base in Messenia was especially crucial to the
war effort because the leaders hoped that the region’s sub-
jugated population might be incited to rebel against their
Spartan overlords.
The threat of an Athenian-inspired Messenian revolt
brought Spartan naval and land forces rushing against
Pylos. In the ensuing sea battle, the victorious Athenians
trapped 420 Spartan hoplites on the island of Sphacteria.
The loss of these soldiers—then confined by Athenian
naval patrols around the island—was disastrous for
Sparta; all the young men belonged to the dwindling
Spartan warrior class, and perhaps a third of them were
“Spartiates” (Spartiatai), members of the military elite.
At the end of the summer of 425 B.C.E., Sphacteria
was overrun by an Athenian force of 800 hoplites and
several thousand light-armed troops, under the leader-
ship of Demosthenes. Of the Spartans, 292 surrendered
and survived. The political impetus for this Athenian
assault had come from KLEON, who was present at Pylos
as an elected Athenian general.
Pylos
287

After the battle, the Athenian fort at Pylos remained
garrisoned until 409 B.C.E. Thereafter, the harbor front
was uninhabited for the rest of antiquity. The general
region is now home to the modern Greek city of Pylos,
also called Navarino, located at the south end of
Navarino Bay.
Archaeological exploration at Pylos began in 1932
under the American archaeologist Carl Blegen. He discov-
ered the above-mentioned Linear B tablets in the first
trench he dug on the site. His work was interrupted by
World War II, and he returned in 1952 to work for 12
years. Currently, a project known as PRAP (Pylos Regional
Archaeological Project) is focusing on surveying the area
around the Palace of Nestor and understanding the settle-
ment patterns of the region during the BRONZE AGE.
See also KLEON.
Further reading: Thomas G. Palaima, The Scribes of
Pylos (Rome: Edizioni dell’Ateneo, 1988); Piotr Dyczek,
Pylos in the Bronze Age: Problems of Culture and Social
Life in Messenia (Warsaw: Wydawnictwa Uniwersytetu
Warszawskiego, 1994); P. A. Mountjoy, “The Destruction
of the Palace at Pylos Reconsidered,” Annual of the British
School at Athens 92 (1997): 109–137; Yannos Lolos, The
Capital of Nestor and Its Environs: Sandy Pylos: Palace of
Nestor, Museum of Chora, History, Monuments, translated
by John Davis (Athens: Oionos, 1998); Michael L. Galaty
and William A. Parkinson, eds., Rethinking Mycenaean
Palaces: New Interpretations of an Old Idea (Los Angeles:
University of California, 1999); Carl William Blegen, A
Guide to the Palace of Nestor: Mycenaean Sites in Its Envi-
rons and the Cora Museum, revised by Jack L. Davis and
Cynthia W. Shelmerdine (Princeton, N.J.: American
School of Classical Studies at Athens, 2001).
Pyrrhus (318–272 B.C.E.) King of the Molossian tribes in
the northwestern Greek region called EPIRUS, reigning
297–272 B.C.E.
With his magnetic but erratic personality, Pyrrhus
brought his kingdom to a brief preeminence in Greek
affairs. However, his ambition of conquering a western
empire was destined to fail against the Romans’ growing
power in ITALY. Pyrrhus was the first Greek commander
ever to fight the Romans, and is best remembered for his
“Pyrrhic victory” at Ausculum, in southeastern Italy,
where he lost so many men that he supposedly declared,
“Another such victory and we are ruined.”
Pyrrhus (“fiery”) was the son of the Molossian king
Aiacides. The family was related by blood to the recently
deceased Macedonian king ALEXANDER THE GREAT; they
also claimed descent from the mythical hero NEOPTOLE-
MOS. When Aiacides was desposed and banished in 317
B.C.E., Pyrrhus began an exile that eventually involved
him with some of the greatest personages of the day. As a
teenager, Pyrrhus served as an officer for the Macedonian
dynast DEMETRIUS
POLIORKETES,
who had married
Pyrrhus’s sister Deidameia. At about age 20, Pyrrhus mar-
ried Antigone, the stepdaughter of King PTOLEMY (1) of
EGYPT. With Ptolemy’s support, Pyrrhus in 297 B.C.E.
became a joint king of the Molossians. (He never offi-
cially called himself king of Epirus, although he is always
referred to as such.) His partner-king was his kinsman
Neoptolemos, whom he soon had murdered.
Discontented with the confines of humble Epirus,
Pyrrhus spent much of his reign trying to conquer—or
otherwise win the throne of—the nearby kingdom of
MACEDON, the great realm to the northeast. In these years
Macedon was ruled by Pyrrhus’s former friend (now
enemy) Demetrius, and later by Demetrius’s son,
Antigonus II.
At the same time, Pyrrhus sought to expand his
domain westward toward the Adriatic and Italy. After his
first wife died, Pyrrhus married Lanissa, the daughter of
the Syracusan dictator AGATHOKLES (295 B.C.E.). Lanissa’s
dowry included the important Adriatic-Greek city of
CORCYRA, to which Pyrrhus soon added other northwest-
ern acquisitions, such as AMBRACIA, which he made into
his capital. But when he polygamously took two more
wives, Lanissa left him and married Demetrius (who soon
claimed Corcyra).
In late 281 B.C.E. Pyrrhus received an appeal from the
Greek city of TARAS, on the “heel” of Italy. The Tarentines
had been contacting various Greek rulers, requesting mil-
itary aid against the encroaching Romans. Lured by the
hope of conquest, Pyrrhus sailed to Italy with 22,500
men and 20 Indian war ELEPHANTS. In the spring of 280
B.C.E. the fighting began at Heraklea, on the Italian south-
coast “instep,” not far from Taras. The Romans—terrified
by Pyrrhus’s elephants (beasts they had never seen
before)—retreated before the massed pikes of the Greek
PHALANX. The Romans lost 7,000 men, with another
1,800 captured but Pyrrhus lost 4,000.
Pyrrhus marched his army north to within 40 miles
of ROME, but—discouraged by the lack of local Italian
help—turned back south. The next year he experienced
the costly victory at Ausculum that inspired his famous
lament. After abruptly removing his forces to SICILY, to
defend the Greek cities there against the Carthaginians,
Pyrrhus returned to Italy to renew his Roman war. But he
was defeated in battle near Capua, at Beneventum (where
the Romans stampeded his elephants by shooting fire
arrows), and he sailed back to Epirus, reportedly having
lost two-thirds of his army (275 B.C.E.).
In a war against Antigonus II, Pyrrhus nearly con-
quered Macedon (274–272 B.C.E.). But he abruptly aban-
doned his advantage, marching far south to invade the
territory of SPARTA. There the Spartans and Macedonians
combined against him. Battling his way back northward,
he encountered street-fighting in ARGOS and was killed—
supposedly when an old woman threw a roof tile down
onto his head.
288
Pyrrhus

A romantic figure and brilliant battlefield comman-
der, Pyrrhus lacked the perseverance and long-range
judgment to win an empire.
See also DODONA; WARFARE, LAND.
Further reading: Petros Garoufalias, Pyrrhus King of
Epirus (London: Stacey International, 1979); C. A. Kin-
caid, Successors of Alexander the Great: Ptolemy I, Pyrrhus
of Epirus, Hiero of Syracuse, Antiochus III (Chicago: Ares,
1980); Tony Hackens, ed., The Age of Pyrrhus; Papers
Delivered at the International Conference, Brown University,
8–10 April, 1988 (Providence: Center for Old World
Archaeology and Art, Brown University, 1992); Blanche
Brown, Royal Portraits in Sculpture and Coins: Pyrrhos and
the Successors of Alexander the Great (New York: P. Lang,
1995).
Pythagoras (ca. 570–500 
B.C.E.) Greek philosopher,
mathematician, and reputed miracle-worker
No writings by Pythagoras survive, and his life and work
are clouded in mystery; most information comes from
statements by later writers.
Pythagoras apparently pioneered the study of MATHE-
MATICS in the Western world. Today he is best remem-
bered for the discovery, made by him or one of his
disciples, that the square of the hypotenuse of a right tri-
angle is equal to the sum of the squares of the two other
sides—the famous Pythagorean theorem.
Born on the island of SAMOS, Pythagoras emigrated
west in about 531 B.C.E., reportedly to escape the power
of the Samian tyrant POLYCRATES. Settling at CROTON,
the foremost Greek colony of south ITALY, Pythagoras
founded a religious-philosophical society. He is said to
have risen to great local influence. He wrote new laws
for Croton and in effect governed the town with his fol-
lowers, who numbered 300 and came from the Croto-
nian elite. This OLIGARCHY
eventually provoked a
people’s revolution, and Pythagoras and his followers
withdrew to the nearby Greek colony of Metapontum,
where Pythagoras died and where his tomb stood in
later days.
Two reported tenets of his teachings stand out. One
is that the universe’s secrets can be learned through the
study of numbers. Pythagoras apparently drew great sig-
nificance from his discovery that musical notes comprise
an arithmetic progression; if a lyre string is stopped at its
halfway point, the note produced by plucking the half-
string is exactly one octave above the whole string’s note.
Since the Greeks associated MUSIC with the civilizing
power of the god APOLLO, this discovery was thought to
reveal part of the gods’ scheme for the world. Similarly,
Pythagoras saw the number 10 as a key to knowledge,
mainly because 10 is the sum of the first four integers: 1
+ 2 + 3 + 4. The Pythagoreans were known to observe a
mystic symbol of 10 dots arranged in rows forming an
equilateral triangle:
. 
.   .
.   .   . 
.   .   .   .
The second major Pythagorean concept was the trans-
migration of souls, meaning that the individual soul does
not descend to the Underworld at the body’s death (as
taught by Greek RELIGION) but passes into a new bodily
form. In this, Pythagoras may have been influenced by the
mystical cult of ORPHISM, which was popular in Greek
southern Italy. Like the Orphics, the Pythagoreans viewed
the human soul as a fallen divinity, imprisoned in the body
and condemned to a series of reincarnations as human,
animal, or even vegetable life, until the soul’s impurities
are cleansed away. As the soul becomes purified in succes-
sive lives, it is rewarded with higher forms of incarnation,
such as statesmen or poets, until at last it wins some kind
of release among the gods; more often, however, the soul
might descend from human to beast. One tale records how
Pythagoras saw a man beating a puppy and asked him to
stop, because (said Pythagoras) he recognized in the
puppy’s howls the human voice of a deceased friend.
To purify the soul, Pythagoras developed elaborate
rules of right conduct for his followers; several such rules
are described by later writers. The eating of certain meats
was prohibited, since an animal might house a human
soul. (It is unclear, however, whether Pythagoras was a
complete vegetarian.) The most famous Pythagorean
taboo, forbidding the eating of beans probably involved a
belief that beans contain little souls (whose attempts to
escape are the cause of the bean-eater’s flatulence).
The list of Pythagorean commandments strikes a
modern reader as odd. The emphasis is not on ethical
conduct but on what might be called superstition. Disci-
ples were forbidden to wear rings, to stir a fire with IRON,
or to speak of Pythagorean matters in the dark. On rising
from bed, a Pythagorean was obliged to smooth away the
body’s impression in the bedclothes. These and other pre-
cepts apparently involved an attempt to avert the “evil
eye” or similar bad luck.
Such superstitions reveal how primitive Pythagoras’s
society was, and how great were his achievements in
mathematics and other areas. Pythagoras was said to
admit WOMEN to his following on an equal footing with
men—which, if true, represents a revolutionary notion in
sixth-century-B.C.E. Greek society. The Pythagorean doc-
trine of transmigration influenced the Sicilian Greek
philosopher EMPEDOKLES (mid-400s B.C.E.) and the Athe-
nian philosopher PLATO (early 300s B.C.E.).
After Pythagoras’s death, his followers split into two
sects. Of these, the group known as the Mathematicians
became a force in early Greek ASTRONOMY. It was these
Pythagoreans who first concluded that the Earth is spher-
ical, not flat. They also originated the famous theory of
the music of the spheres, which imagined that the Earth,
Pythagoras
289

Sun, Moon, and planets all revolve around a central fire
and create a harmonious sound by virtue of their syn-
chronized speeds; the music is inaudible to us humans.
The political history of the Pythagoreans was unhappy.
In the late 400s B.C.E. they were nearly exterminated in a
civil war at Metapontum. The next century saw the school
reorganize itself at the Italian-Greek city of TARAS, before
dying out by 300 B.C.E.
See also AFTERLIFE.
Further reading: Peter Gorman, Pythagoras, A Life
(London: Routledge, 1979); R. R. R. Smith, “A New Por-
trait of Pythagoras,” in Aphrodisias Papers 2. The Theatre,
a Sculptor’s Workshop, Philosophers, and Coin Types,
edited by R. R. R. Smith and Kenan T. Erim (Ann Arbor:
Department of Classical Studies, University of Michigan,
1991), 159–167; K. I. Boudouris, ed., Pythagorean Philos-
ophy (Athens: International Center for Greek Philosophy
and Culture, 1992); Christopher Bamford, ed., Homage
to Pythagoras: Rediscovering Sacred Science (Hudson,
N.Y.: Lindisfarne Press, 1994); John Strohmeier and
Peter Westbrook, Divine Harmony: The Life and Teachings
of Pythagoras (Berkeley, Calif.: Berkeley Hills Books,
1999); Charles Kahn, Pythagoras and the Pythagoreans: A
Brief History (Indianapolis: Hackett, 2001).
Pythia
See DELPHI.
Pythian Games
This event was the second-most
important of the great religious sports festivals of the
ancient Greek world, after the OLYMPIC GAMES. The
Pythian Games were held every four years in honor of the
god APOLLO, at Apollo’s holiest shrine, DELPHI. The name
refers to Delphi’s inner sanctum, known as Pytho.
An eight-yearly festival of Apollo at Delphi, featuring
competitions of the lyre and choruses, was the ancient
forerunner of these games. In 582 B.C.E., after an allied
Greek coalition had broken the local power of PHOCIS
during the First Sacred War, the Pythian Games were reor-
ganized in their classic form and were placed under the
administration of the AMPHICTYONIC LEAGUE. But the
games never lost their original aspect—celebrating Apollo
as the god of MUSIC.
Unlike other panhellenic fetes, these games included
competitions in singing and drama. The footraces were
held in a stadium on the slopes of Mt. Parnassus, near
Delphi; the horse and chariot races took place far below,
on the Crisaean plain.
The prize for victors in the Pythian Games was a
garland of bay laurel leaves. The laurel tree was sacred
to Apollo because when he was pursing his beloved
Daphne, she fled from him and prayed to her father, the
river god Peneus, for help. As a result, she was trans-
formed into a laurel tree, which was subsequently con-
sidered to be sacred to Apollo. In modern times, the
tradition of the laurel victory wreath is preserved in the
title of the poet laureate, an honorary office that has
existed in England since 1668 and in America since
1937.
The four-yearly Pythian Games fell halfway along
the four-yearly Olympic cycle; that is, in the second
spring after the last Olympics, and two years before the
next one.
Further reading: Olga Tzachou-Alexandri, ed., Mind
and Body: Athletic Contests in Ancient Greece (Athens:
Ministry of Culture; National Hellenic Committee
I.C.O.M., 1989).
290
Pythia

R
291
religion
The ancient Greeks believed that their gods
had a guiding hand in human affairs. Events as diverse as
the annual sprouting of crops, disease epidemics, victory
or defeat in war, and individual victories in sports
events—which modern observers might assign to scien-
tific causes—were seen by the Greeks as proof of the
gods’ involvement in human events great and small.
Greek MYTH told of gods in “the old days” who had actu-
ally descended to Earth to make love or war among mor-
tals. Although the Greeks of 400 B.C.E. did not expect to
meet a god in the street, they did expect their gods to be
invisibly present—at least for major, public events.
This made the Greeks generally more pious than we
are today, but also more legalistic and practical-minded
in religious matters. Feeling close to their gods, the
Greeks expected the gods to be influenced by prayers
and sacrifices of animals or crops. The Greeks expected
results from their faith. A farmer sowed his seeds in the
field, then prayed to the gods to send the proper
weather. To the ancient Greeks, both activities seemed
equally practical.
Modern American society views religion as a purely
private concern, legally separated from civic life. But the
Greeks had the opposite view; religion was a public mat-
ter. The goodwill of the gods toward the community was
something to be carefully maintained (like the water sup-
ply or military defense). Greek states therefore kept cer-
tain priesthoods and temples at public expense, to
oversee festivals, offer sacrifices, and generally safeguard
the gods’ benefaction. Relatedly, the crime of impiety
(asebeia) was a serious one. When an Athenian jury con-
demned the philosopher SOCRATES to death on charges
including impiety (399 B.C.E.), it was because some Athe-
nians believed that Socrates’ philosophical questioning
had genuinely offended the gods and had threatened their
care of ATHENS.
As is well known, Greek religion was polytheistic.
This means that—unlike the JEWS, but like most other
ancient peoples—the Greeks generally worshipped more
than one god. Their gods were anthropomorphic, that is,
they were pictured in human shape, male or female. The
major gods were 12 in number; each was imagined as hav-
ing power over one or more important aspects of human
life. ATHENA was the goddess of handicraft and wisdom,
but in “wisdom” she might overlap somewhat with
APOLLO, whose province included reason and intellect,
while in “handicraft” she might overlap with HEPHAISTOS,
god of metallurgy. The king of the gods was ZEUS, sky-
father, lord of justice and of universal order. Below him
were 
HERA,
POSEIDON,
Athena, 
Apollo, 
ARTEMIS,
APHRODITE, DIONYSUS, DEMETER, HERMES, HEPHAISTOS,
and ARES. Because they were imagined as dwelling in
Zeus’s palace in the sky atop Mt. OLYMPUS, these 12 were
known as the Olympian gods.
The Greeks also recognized a second important
group of gods, called the chthonians (from the Greek
word chthon, earth). These were deities of the earth and
the Underworld, chief of whom were HADES and PERSE-
PHONE, the Underworld’s king and queen. In SICILY and
other parts of the western Greek world, Persephone
became an important object of worship, as a guardian and
judge of souls after death. The Greeks worshipped chtho-
nian deities with rites different from those used for
Olympian gods.

In addition to the Olympians and chthonians, there
were lesser gods, demigods, and heroes, who might have
shrines and cults confined to specific locales (such as the
cult of HYACINTHOS in the region of SPARTA). Heroes were
usually worshipped as the spirits of extraordinary,
deceased mortal men. A few major heroes, such as HER-
AKLES, were worshipped throughout the Greek world and
were imagined as having turned into immortal gods after
their death.
Worship of the gods involved the use of idols—man-
made images, usually statues of wood, clay, stone, or
BRONZE. With the advances in Greek marble carving in
the 600s B.C.E. and the discovery of improved bronze-
casting techniques in the 500s B.C.E., the representation
of the gods became the highest calling of ancient Greek
SCULPTURE. A god’s idol might be miniature, life-size, or
colossal (from the Greek kolossos, “a giant statue”). The
god inhabited the idol, but not exclusively; a god could
be everywhere at once, and many official statues of the
same god might stand within a single city. All gods were
portrayed as physically beautiful. They had been born but
would never die; they lived forever in young adulthood
or vigorous middle age. They were omniscient regarding
human affairs and were able to assume any shape. Every
city probably kept a shrine to each of the major gods, but
certain deities had special care of specific places. Athena
for instance, was the guardian of Athens, Poseidon of
CORINTH, and Hera of ARGOS and SAMOS.
The gods were imagined as concentrations of energy;
the faces of their statues might be painted red, signifying
life and power. But the gods were also capable of human
flaws and emotions, such as anger, cruelty, and brutal
sexual desire. In the latter 500s B.C.E. the philosopher
XENOPHANES complained that conventional religion had
ascribed to the gods “everything that is shameful and dis-
graceful among human beings—thieving and adultery
and deceiving one another.” One reason why Greek
mythology has cast a spell over readers through the cen-
turies is its vivid, endearing character portrayal of the
gods, particularly in the epic poems of HOMER.
Modern scholars believe that the religious system
presented by Homer (around 750 B.C.E.) and HESIOD
(around 700 B.C.E.) arose gradually, starting with a fusion
of two or three different cultures after 2100 B.C.E. The
facts are lost in prehistory, however, and scholars must
rely on scant evidence from ARCHAEOLOGY in order to
trace this process of religious fusion.
The Greeks were an Indo-European people, with a
language and social patterns akin to other Indo-European
peoples, such as the ancient Romans, Germans, and Per-
sians. Almost certainly the Greek-speaking tribesmen
who first invaded mainland Greece around 2100 B.C.E.
brought a patriarchal, warrior religion whose chief god
was the skyfather, Zeus (a figure that scholars recognize
under other names in other Indo-European mythologies).
Over time, the Greek conquerors absorbed certain reli-
gious elements from the subjugated, pre-Greek inhabi-
tants of the land (an agrarian, non-Indo-European folk
with possible origins in ASIA MINOR). This people, like
the non-Greeks of Asia Minor in later centuries, may
have worshipped a central mother goddess or family of
goddesses. Similarly, the non-Greek MINOAN CIVILIZATION
of the Aegean islands, which strongly influenced the
emerging Greek culture around 2000–1400 B.C.E. evi-
dently had important female deities. The prime result of
these influences was the introduction into Greek religion
of a few major goddesses not originally Greek; eventually
they became known by the names Hera, Athena, Artemis,
and Persephone.
By 1600 B.C.E. the mainland Greeks had organized
themselves into the warlike and technologically advanced
MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION. It is this era that offers modern
scholars the first clear glimpse at Greek religion, in the
LINEAR B tablets excavated at Mycenaean KNOSSOS (ca.
1400 B.C.E.) and PYLOS (ca. 1200 B.C.E.). In their lists of
religious ceremonies performed for various gods, the
tablets reveal that the Mycenaean faith was surprisingly
similar to the Greek religion of 700 or 1,000 years later.
The tablets mention Zeus and Poseidon as important
gods, as well as Hera, Athena, Dionysus, and other deities
(some with names unfamiliar).
Of the 12 gods later to be known as the Olympians,
only Apollo and Aphrodite definitely are not mentioned
on the existing Linear B tablets. Scholars believe that
these two latecomers entered Greek religion during the
DARK AGE, after the collapse of Mycenaean society
around 1200 B.C.E. Both deities probably reached Greece
from the Near East, via the mercantile island of CYPRUS.
In general, Greek religion remained open to foreign
deities, particularly goddesses; later in ancient times vari-
ous Greek locales had important cults of the Egyptian
goddess Isis, the Anatolian goddess Cybele, and the Thra-
cian goddess Bendis.
By the 600s B.C.E., the principal gods and forms of
worship were well established. Statues of the gods were
housed in temples of simple design but elaborate crafts-
manship. In the 600s B.C.E. wooden temples began to be
replaced by buildings largely of stone, either limestone or
marble. The famous Greek “orders” of ARCHITECTURE—
the Doric, Ionic, and Corinthian—originated as styles of
temples.
A Greek temple was the sanctuary of a particular
god; rarely would more than one god be worshipped in
the same building. Unlike a modern church, a temple was
not a place where congregations gathered. It had no rows
of pews for multitudes of worshippers. Rather, the temple
receive individuals or small groups for prayer or sacrifice.
The temple’s priests or priestesses might be minor func-
tionaries under the direction of a high priest who typi-
cally came from an aristocratic family associated with
that specific sanctuary. At Athens, for example, a noble
family named the Eteoboutadai traditionally supplied the
292
religion

priest and priestess for the two major cults on the ACROP-
OLIS. But Greek religion was noteworthy for the lack of
power exercised by its priests (one important exception
being Apollo’s priesthood at DELPHI). Technically, prayer
and sacrifice could be conducted by worshippers without
any priest.
A society as intellectual as the Greeks’ was bound to
produce religious doubt. Independent thinkers such as
the sophist PROTAGORAS (mid-400s B.C.E.) and the trage-
dian EURIPIDES (later 400s B.C.E. were rumored to be
atheists, disbelieving in the gods. Certain philosophers,
such as Xenophanes, PLATO (early 300s B.C.E.), and ARIS-
TOTLE (mid-300s B.C.E.), believed in a single, universal
god. During the HELLENISTIC AGE (around 300–150
B.C.E.), the rise of giant Greco-Macedonian kingdoms cre-
ated a new social order, and traditional religion—express-
ing as it did the public life of the old-fashioned Greek
city-state—came in for questioning and modification.
The philosophy STOICISM inclined toward a monotheism
built around Zeus; the rival school of EPICUREANISM
claimed that multiple gods existed but had no concern
for humankind. Meanwhile there arose fringe “mystery”
religions (Greek: myst¯eria, from myst¯es, “an initiate”),
offering to their followers a more personal faith and the
promise of a happy life after death. These became increas-
ingly popular during the course of the Hellenistic period,
probably due in part to their all-inclusiveness. Divinities
from the eastern Mediterranean, such as Isis and Mithras,
also became more and more popular. Related trends, such
as magic and astrology, also gained new followings in the
Hellenistic age.
The great society of the Roman Empire saw further
religious percolation, including the rise of Christianity
among Greek communities of the eastern Mediterranean
in the first century C.E. But many Greeks were still wor-
shipping the old-fashioned gods in 391 C.E. when the
Byzantine emperor Theodosius closed all pagan temples
throughout his realm and decreed Christianity to be the
only legal religion.
The religious beliefs and practices of the ancient
Greeks had a tremendous influence on later cultures,
including those of the Romans, the Jews, and the early
Christians, as did their iconography, symbolism, and
sacred architecture. The image of Christ as the good shep-
herd, for example, evolved from idyllic pastoral scenes of
pagan shepherds with their flocks in classical art.
See also ADONIS; AFTERLIFE; ASKLEPIOS; CASTOR AND
POLYDEUCES; ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES; FATE; FUNERAL CUS-
TOMS;
FURIES;
HECAT ¯E;
HESTIA;
NYMPHS;
OLYMPIA;
ORPHISM; PAN; PARTHENON; PHILOSOPHY; PHOENICIA; PIN-
DAR; POLIS; PROPHECY AND DIVINATION; ROME; SAMOTH-
RACE; THEATER.
Further reading: Irad Malkin, Religion and Coloniza-
tion in Ancient Greece (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J. Brill,
1987); John Ferguson, Among the Gods. An Archaeological
Exploration of Ancient Greek Religion (London: Routledge,
1989); Jon D. Mikalson, Athenian Popular Religion
(Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1989);
Robert Parker, “Spartan Religion,” in Classical Sparta.
Techniques behind Her Success, edited by Anton Powell
(London: Routledge, 1989), 142–172; Robert Parker,
Athenian Religion: A History (New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1996); Richard Buxton, ed., Oxford Readings in
Greek Religion (New York: Oxford University Press,
2000); Matthew Dillon, Girls and Women in Classical
Greek Religion (London: Routledge, 2002); Erika Simon,
Festivals of Attica: An Archaeological Commentary (Madi-
son: University of Wisconsin Press, 2002); Jon Mikalson,
Ancient Greek Religion (Oxford: Blackwell, 2004).
Rhadamanthys
See AFTERLIFE; MINOS.
rhapsodes
See EPIC POETRY.
Rhegium (Greek: Rh¯egion)
This Greek seaport on the
west coast of the “toe” of ITALY commanded the Straits of
Messina. Rhegium was founded in the late 700s B.C.E. by
Ionian Greek colonists from CHALCIS; a second group
founded a sister-city, ZANCL¯E, across the straits in SICILY.
With its strategic position, Rhegium became one of the
most important Ionian Greek cities of the West. Accord-
ingly, it was an enemy of such powerful Dorian Greek
cities as SYRACUSE, in eastern Sicily, and LOCRI, on the
eastern Italian “toe.”
Rhegium’s most famous citizen was the lyric poet
IBYCUS (ca. 535 B.C.E.). The city reached a peak under its
energetic tyrant Anaxilas (reigned 494–476 B.C.E.), who
fortified the straits against Etruscan war fleets and
enlarged the city population with refugees from the Spar-
tan-dominated, Peloponnesian region of MESSENIA. In
433 B.C.E. Rhegium made an alliance with ATHENS for
protection against Syracuse and Locri. In 415–413 B.C.E.
during the PELOPONNESIAN WAR, Rhegium served as a
naval base for the Athenians’ campaign against Syracuse.
In about 387 B.C.E. the Syracusan tyrant DIONYSIUS
(1) captured Rhegium and destroyed it. Rebuilt, it even-
tually passed into the hands of ROME. The site is now the
Italian seaport of Reggio.
Recent archaeological excavation at Rhegium has
discovered traces of the city wall, the AGORA, a concert
hall, temples, bath buildings, houses, and nearby ceme-
teries. Numerous inscriptions, pieces of POTTERY, and
evidence of the city’s water supply system have also been
found.
See also DORIAN GREEKS; ETRUSCANS; IONIAN GREEKS.
Further reading: E. Ruoff-Väänänen, “The Roads
Leading to Rhegium,” Arctos 9 (1975): 93–98; E. E.
Clain-Stefanelli, “Late Silver Issues of Rhegium. A Janus
Head Type in Rhegium,” in Florilegium numismaticum.
Studia in honorem U. Westermark edita (Stockholm: Sven-
ska Numismatiska Föreningen, 1992), 119–126.
Rhegium
293

rhetoric
Meaning the art of public speaking, the word
rhetoric in modern English often implies empty or
overblown verbiage. For the ancient Greeks, however the
skill of rh¯etorik¯e meant nothing less than the ability to
communicate in public. Rhetoric (also called oratory) was
considered an essential skill for any active citizen in a
DEMOCRACY because, in an age before telecommunications,
newspapers, or advertising, the one way for an individual
citizen to help shape public policy was to stand up before
the citizen ASSEMBLY and make a speech. Although
speeches might also play decision-making roles in an OLI-
GARCHY such as SPARTA or CORINTH, it was at the demo-
cratic cities—and particularly at the greatest of these,
ATHENS—that the best speakers emerged. Among the more
famous Athenian orators were DEMOSTHENES (1) (ca. 340
B.C.E.) and the statesman PERIKLES (ca. 440 B.C.E.). The
philosopher ARISTOTLE (ca. 340 B.C.E.) wrote an extant
treatise on rhetoric, one of many produced in antiquity.
The roots of Greek rhetoric go back to the war coun-
cils of the Mycenaean princes (around 1200 B.C.E.) and the
civic councils of the early Greek aristocratic states (around
800 B.C.E.). The poems of HOMER (written down around
750 B.C.E.) show the assembled Greek heroes delivering
speeches in turn at war council. There an artful speaker
such as ODYSSEUS is admired for his ability to persuade his
fellow captains toward a certain course of action.
It was in the 400s B.C.E. that rhetoric emerged as an
organized study, under the impetus of the developing
Greek democracies. The strong poetic traditions of SICILY
also may have played a role, because it was a Sicilian
Greek who first brought advanced rhetoric to Athens—
GORGIAS of Leontini who amazed the sophisticated Athe-
nians with his spoken “display pieces” (427 B.C.E.).
Aside from the assembly, the other great arena for
public speaking was the law courts, where citizens spoke
as defendants or prosecutors in front of juries usually
numbering several hundred. Some of the best-known sur-
viving speeches are Athenian courtroom speeches from
the 300s B.C.E. delivered by such powerful arguers as
LYSIAS. Other men became rich as speechwriters, who did
not usually deliver speeches personally but who would,
for a fee, compose a courtroom speech for a client.
Among the best known of these was ISOKRATES, who
opened a school of rhetoric (the first one known) in
around 390 B.C.E.
See also AESCHINES; ANTIPHON; EDUCATION; ISAEUS;
LAWS AND LAW COURTS; SOPHISTS.
Further reading: Ian Worthington, ed., Persuasion:
Greek Rhetoric in Action (London: Routledge, 1994);
Thomas Cole, The Origins of Rhetoric in Ancient Greece,
2d ed. (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,
1995); S. E. Porter, ed., Handbook of Classical Rhetoric in
the Hellenistic Period, 330 B.C.–A.D. 400 (Leiden, Nether-
lands: E. J. Brill, 1997); Robert Wardy, The Birth of
Rhetoric: Gorgias, Plato, and their Successors (London:
Routledge, 1998); Edward Schiappa, The Beginnings of
Rhetorical Theory in Classical Greece (New Haven, Conn.:
Yale University Press, 1999).
Rhetra
See LYKOURGOS (1).
Rhodes
This large Greek island is located off the
southwest coast of ASIA MINOR. By 300 B.C.E. Rhodes had
emerged as one of the foremost maritime powers of the
Hellenistic world—wealthy from commerce and with a
strong navy.
ARCHAEOLOGY has shown that the island engaged in
Mycenaean-Greek TRADE and perhaps received settlers
around 1300 B.C.E., following an era of Minoan domina-
tion. But the main inhabitants at this time were most
likely of non-Greek, Carian stock. Rhodes’s recorded his-
tory begins around 1000 B.C.E. with the arrival of DORIAN
GREEKS, who sailed east from mainland Greece and
founded three cities on the island—Ialysos, at the north-
ern tip, Kameiros, on the northwest coast, and Lindos
(the largest of the three), in the east. These three cities
formed part of a local Dorian federation that included the
nearby island of Kos and the city of KNIDOS, on the Asia
Minor coast. The Greek name Rhodos probably did not
refer to the roses (rhodai) that still grow throughout the
island, but rather came from some Carian name.
The Rhodian Greeks acquired certain non-Greek tra-
ditions from the East, chief of which was their national
cult of the sun god, worshipped under his Greek name,
HELIOS. Rhodes was unique among early Greek states in
having a sun cult. According to one myth, Helios had
chosen Rhodes as his own kingdom and had populated it
with the descendants of his seven sons.
Rhodes’s location made it a natural middleman
between East and West, although it was overshadowed
initially by other east Greek sea powers, such as MILETUS
and SAMOS. The Rhodians took part in the trading and
colonizing expansion in the 700s–500s B.C.E. Rhodian
Geometric POTTERY is among the main types found by
archaeologists at the ancient Greek trade depot at AL
MINA (on the Syrian coast), and it is known that Rhodi-
ans helped establish colonies in SICILY and south ITALY. By
the 500s B.C.E. popular dictators known as TYRANTS had
arisen in the Rhodian cities, as elsewhere in the Greek
world. One such ruler, Kleobulos of Lindos, was later
reckoned among the SEVEN SAGES of Greece.
After being conquered by the Persians in around 494
B.C.E. Rhodes was liberated in 478 B.C.E. by the mainland
Greeks, at the end of the PERSIAN WARS. Over the next 65
years the three Rhodian cities were members of the Athe-
nian-dominated DELIAN LEAGUE. By then the Rhodian
cities were governed as Athenian-inspired democracies—
as they would remain, with one interruption, until the
Roman conquest. But in 411–407 B.C.E., during the PELO-
PONNESIAN WAR, the Rhodian cities joined the widespread
Delian revolt and won independence from ATHENS.
294
rhetoric

Then the three Rhodian cities agreed to combine
their individual governments and form a union, with a
new capital city, Rhodos. This Rhodes city—a seaport at
the island’s northern tip, near Ialysos—eventually became
one of the most spectacular Greek cities, thriving from
the shipping of grain and other essentials across the east-
ern Mediterranean. The city of Rhodes received its urban
plan from the architect HIPPODAMUS of MILETUS, and it
displays the rectangular grid design typical of his work
(as at, for instance, PIRAEUS). Since the modern city of
Rhodes sits on top of the ancient remains, excavation has
been sporadic but has revealed parts of this city grid plan.
Rhodes was recaptured by the Persians in 355 B.C.E.
but regained independence and DEMOCRACY after the
Macedonian king ALEXANDER THE GREAT invaded the Per-
sian Empire (334 B.C.E.). Amid the turmoil following
Alexander’s death (323 B.C.E.), the island became a
tempting target for the various DIADOCHOI (Successors)
who battled over Alexander’s vast empire, and in 305–304
B.C.E. Rhodes city withstood a huge siege by the Macedo-
nian prince DEMETRIUS POLIORKETES.
In the burst of self-confidence following this defense,
the Rhodians erected a giant BRONZE statue of Helios in
about 290 B.C.E. that became known as the Colossus of
Rhodes.
Designed by one Chares of Lindus, the 90-foot-tall
Colossus (Greek: Kolossos, “giant statue”) was counted as
one of the SEVEN WONDERS OF THE WORLD. Although it
collapsed in an earthquake after only about 65 years, its
general appearance is known from ancient coins and an
ancient writer’s description. The Colossus may have
stood alongside the city’s harbor or in the city center; it
did not bestride the harbor entrance, legs apart, with
ships passing between, as is sometimes claimed. The
statue consisted of bronze plating over a frame with an
interior staircase. The god, with a halo of sun rays, was
shown holding up a torch, which workmen inside oper-
ated as a beacon fire to aid ships at sea. The design of the
Colossus helped to inspire New York City’s Statue of Lib-
erty, erected in 1886 C.E.
The Rhodians were among the first east Greek allies
of the emerging power of ROME; it was complaints from
Rhodes and PERGAMON that brought the Romans into the
Second Macedonian War against the Macedonian king
PHILIP V (200–197 B.C.E.). But Rhodes lost its prosperity
when the Romans—seeking to punish Rhodes for its
insufficient help in the Third Macedonian War (172–167
B.C.E.)—promoted the Aegean island of DELOS as the new
center of east Mediterranean trade. Rhodes later became a
Roman subject.
See also COLONIZATION; SHIPS AND SEAFARING; WAR-
FARE, NAVAL.
Further reading: R. M. Berthold, Rhodes in the Hel-
lenistic Age (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1984);
S. Dietz and I. Papachristodoulou, eds., Archaeology in the
Dodecanese. Symposium Copenhagen, April 7th to 9th, 1986
(Copenhagen: National Museum of Denmark, 1988);
Vincent Gabrielsen, The Naval Aristocracy of Hellenistic
Rhodes (Aarhus, Denmark: Aarhus University Press,
1997); Vincent Gabrielsen, ed., Hellenistic Rhodes: Poli-
tics, Culture and Society (Aarhus, Denmark: Aarhus Uni-
versity Press, 1999).
Rome
This non-Greek city of west-central ITALY is
located in Latium, about 16 miles from the Tyrrhenian
coast. After being strongly influenced by the Greeks in such
cultural rudiments as its ALPHABET and RELIGION, Rome
emerged in the 300s B.C.E. as a dynamic military force, des-
tined to conquer an empire that (by 117 C.E.) stretched
from Britain to Mesopotamia. The Romans subdued many
peoples, but their conquest of the Greek world, accom-
plished between about 338 and 30 B.C.E., deeply affected
their own civilization by introducing them to the material
and literary splendors of the Greeks. As the Roman poet
Horace wrote (ca. 19 B.C.E.): “Captive Greece took mighty
Rome captive, forcing culture onto rustic folk.”
The Romans belonged to the Latin ethnic group, but
early on they were dominated by another Italian people,
the ETRUSCANS. The name Roma may be of Etruscan ori-
gin; its meaning is unclear. Supposedly founded in 753
B.C.E. Rome surely partook of the pro-Greek atmosphere
of Etruscan society in the 600s B.C.E. Greek goods and
customs made their way north from Greek colonies of
Campania, such as CUMAE and Neapolis (Naples). The
Roman alphabet, used today for English as well as for
most other European languages, was first adapted by the
Romans (perhaps around 600 B.C.E.) from an Etruscan
model, itself based on the Greek alphabet. By the 400s
B.C.E. the Romans were vigorously assimilating Greek
gods, heroes, and MYTH into their own religion.
Rome supposedly expelled its last Etruscan king in
510 B.C.E. The next 150 years saw political strife between
rich and poor; eventually Rome’s government took shape
as a republic, in which a wide citizen base was governed
by a well-born elite, sitting on a legislative body called
the senate.
These centuries also saw the spread of Roman con-
trol through Italy. First came the unification of Latium.
By the mid-300s B.C.E. the Romans had reached Campa-
nia, where they entered into their first diplomatic rela-
tions with Italian-Greek cities. There followed an
accelerated hellenization of Roman culture, including the
first Roman copying of Greek ARCHITECTURE, COINAGE,
and POTTERY.
After subduing the central-Italian people known as
the Samnites, the Romans had by 290 B.C.E. won all of
central Italy. In the extreme south, conflict with the
Greek city of TARAS brought the Romans into their first
war against a Greek army, led by the Epirote king
PYRRHUS. The hard-won defeat of Pyrrhus (275 B.C.E.) left
the Romans masters of all Italy south of the Po River.
Rome had become a world power, comparable with the
Rome
295

Hellenistic kingdoms of the eastern Mediterranean or—
closer 
to 
home—the 
African-Phoenician 
city 
of
CARTHAGE. By this era the formidable Roman army could
draw on a manpower pool of several million men, due to
Rome’s policy of requiring military service from its Ital-
ian-ethnic subject peoples.
Rome now became drawn into conflict with other
great Mediterranean powers—particularly Carthage and
MACEDON—which led eventually to the Romans’ subju-
gation of the Mediterranean Greek world. First came two
bitter wars with Carthage. The First Punic (Carthaginian)
War was fought from 264 to 241 B.C.E. It turned Rome
into a naval power and left the victorious Romans in pos-
session of SICILY, with the important Sicilian-Greek city of
SYRACUSE as a Roman ally.
The Second Punic War (218–201 B.C.E.) saw Rome
fighting for its life on Italian soil against the brilliant
Carthaginian general Hannibal. Syracuse, siding this time
with Carthage, was captured, plundered, and annexed by
the vengeful Romans (211 B.C.E.). Another ally of
Carthage was the dynamic Macedonian king PHILIP V,
whose domain included most of mainland Greece. In a
Punic War sideshow, the Romans invaded Philip’s Greek
territories—their first advance into Greece (214 B.C.E.).
This First Macedonian War ended in a truce (205 B.C.E.),
but Philip was by then a hated enemy of an increasingly
eastward-looking Rome.
After the Second Punic War ended with Carthage’s
defeat, the Romans turned a receptive ear to complaints
from their eastern Greek allies PERGAMON and RHODES
against Philip’s adventuring. The Second Macedonian
War (200–197 B.C.E.) saw the second Roman invasion of
mainland Greece. With the help of Greek allies from
AETOLIA, the Roman general Titus Quinctius Flaminius in
197 B.C.E. won a total victory against Philip’s army at the
Battle of Cynocephalae (“dog heads”), in THESSALY. The
battle broke Macedon’s imperial power forever and inci-
dentally established the superiority of Roman battle tac-
tics against the more cumbersome Macedonian PHALANX.
But by the terms of a lenient treaty, Macedon was allowed
to continue as an independent state.
It was at the ISTHMIAN GAMES of 196 B.C.E.—after
Macedonian control of Greece had been removed—that
Flamininus issued his famous proclamation declaring
freedom for the mainland Greeks; neither Macedon nor
Rome would be overlord there. In 194 B.C.E. Roman
troops evacuated Greece.
Even unwillingly, however, the Romans found them-
selves embroiled in Greek events. The Aetolians, disgrun-
tled over Rome’s light treatment of their defeated enemy
Philip, invited the Seleucid king ANTIOCHUS (2) III to
invade Greece as a new liberator. Reentering Greece in
response, Roman forces defeated Antiochus at THERMOPY-
LAE (191 B.C.E.) and pursued him to ASIA MINOR—the
Romans’ first campaign in Asia—where they defeated him
again, at the Battle of Magnesia (190 B.C.E.). This victory
foreshadowed the future Roman conquest of the entire
Greek East. By the treaty of Apamea (188 B.C.E.), Antiochus
lost most of Asia Minor, which the Romans parceled to
their allies Pergamum and Rhodes. In Greece, meanwhile,
the Aetolians were defeated and their power curtailed.
The accession of Philip’s ambitious son Perseus
brought new Macedonian adventurism, and another
Roman invasion. The Third Macedonian War (172–167
B.C.E.) ended with Perseus’s complete defeat at the Battle
of Pydna, in southern Macedon. Deposed, Perseus died in
a Roman prison. His kingdom was dismantled and was
later annexed as a Roman province called Macedonia. In
Greece, the League of ACHAEA was punished for its pro-
Macedonianism with the removal of 1,000 well-born
hostages to Rome. (One of these, named Polybius, was
destined to become the last great Greek historian; so
impressed was he by Roman power that he chose to
write, in Greek, about the rise of Rome.)
When the Achaean League resumed anti-Roman agi-
tation in 148 B.C.E. Roman patience with Greece was at
an end. Marching south from the province of Macedonia,
a Roman army defeated the Achaeans in battle. CORINTH,
the league’s major city, was besieged and captured. By
order of the Roman senate the city was leveled to the
ground as a warning to the Greeks (146 B.C.E.).
Greece’s freedom was at an end, and the country was
then incorporated into the Roman province of Macedo-
nia. In the following centuries the Greek East fell. Much
of Asia Minor was legally bequeathed to the Romans by
the last Pergamene king, Attalus III, in 133 B.C.E. In 64
B.C.E. the Roman general Pompey annexed Syria, once
the Seleucid heartland. And in 30 B.C.E. the Romans cap-
tured the last remaining Hellenistic Kingdom, EGYPT.
Despite being under Roman control, Greece (along
with the rest of the eastern Mediterranean) continued to
prosper and, in fact, retained much of its cultural her-
itage. The Romans, in fact, became strongly influenced by
numerous aspects of Greek culture such as SCULPTURE,
ARCHITECTURE, PHILOSOPHY, THEATER, and RELIGION.
See also AENEAS; CASTOR AND POLYDEUCES; CLEOPA-
TRA; HELLENISTIC AGE; HERAKLES; SELEUCID EMPIRE.
Further reading: Sarah Macready and F. H. Thomp-
son, eds., Roman Architecture in the Greek World (London:
Thames and Hudson, 1987); Susan Walker and Averil
Cameron, eds., The Greek Renaissance in the Roman
Empire: Papers from the Tenth British Museum Classical
Colloquium (London: University of London, Institute of
Classical Studies, 1989); S. E. Alcock, Graecia Capta: The
Landscapes of Roman Greece (New York: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1993); Erik Nis Ostenfeld, ed., Greek
Romans and Roman Greeks: Studies in Cultural Interaction
(Aarhus, Denmark: Aarhus University Press, 2002); Fer-
gus Millar, Rome, the Greek World, and the East (Chapel
Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2002).
Roxane
See ALEXANDER THE GREAT.
296
Roxane

S
297
Sacred Wars
See DELPHI; PHOCIS.
sacrifice
The rite of sacrifice—practiced in various
forms by many ancient religions—probably dates back to
Stone Age hunters’ rituals. The Greeks saw it as the
essential way to win divine favor. “Gifts persuade the
gods,” a proverb ran. Although “bloodless” sacrifices of
grain, cakes, or fruit might be offered, a more significant
act involved the slaughter of a domestic animal. The
noblest victim was a bull; the most common was a sheep.
Goats, pigs, and chickens were also used. To the best
modern knowledge, human sacrifice was extremely rare
among the Greeks; one of the few such cases was the sac-
rifice of Persian prisoners during the national emergency
of the PERSIAN WARS.
Greek sacrifice involved the notion that the god
somehow fed upon the victim’s blood—an essential rite
was the splashing of the blood onto the altar (typically
located outside the temple). First, however, the live ani-
mal would be led to the altar in a procession featuring the
priest and the person who was providing the animal. The
worshippers would be dressed in clean finery, their heads
decked with garlands of leaves appropriate to the god:
oak for ZEUS, laurel for APOLLO, and so on. A flute player
would provide stately background MUSIC.
Preliminary rituals included pelting the altar and the
live animal with barley grains. Then the priest would cut
the animal’s throat. The carcass would be skinned and
gutted. The inedible organs and bones would be burned
at the altar for the god, the smoke ascending to the god’s
heavenly realm (for Olympian gods; for chthonian
deities, the sacrifice emphasized the act of pouring blood
into the ground). Then the edible flesh would be cooked
as a meal for the celebrants. Large-scale animal sacrifices,
sometimes at public expense, might provide community
feasts for holidays.
See also PROMETHEUS.
Further reading: Nanno Marinatos, Minoan Sacrifi-
cial Ritual: Cult Practice and Symbolism (Stockholm: P.
Aström, 1986); Marcel Detienne and Jean-Pierre Vernant,
The Cuisine of Sacrifice among the Greeks, translated by
Paula Wissing (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1989); Vincent Rosivach, The System of Public Sacrifice in
Fourth-century Athens (Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1994);
Fritz Graf, “What Is New about Greek Sacrifice?” in
Kykeon: Studies in Honour of H. S. Versnel, edited by H. F.
J. Horstmanshoff (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 2002),
113–126; Walter Burkert, “From Homo Necans: The
Anthropology of Ancient Greek Sacrificial Ritual and
Myth,” in Understanding Religious Sacrifice: A Reader,
edited by Jeffrey Carter (London: Continuum, 2003),
210–238.
Salamis (1)
An inshore island in the northern Saronic
Gulf, in central Greece, Salamis’s eastern side is sepa-
rated from the coast of ATTICA by a curved channel less
than a mile wide in the narrows. It was there that the
crucial sea battle of the PERSIAN WARS was fought in late
summer of 480 B.C.E., after the invading army of the Per-
sian king XERXES had overrun northern and central
Greece. The allied Greek victory at Salamis broke the
Persian navy and stopped the invasion, opening the way
for the Greeks’ final land victory, at PLATAEA, the follow-
ing summer.

Well before the sea battle, Salamis was an important
place, associated with the mythical hero AJAX (1). Salamis
lay close offshore between the territories of ATHENS and
MEGARA (1), and not far from the powerful island state of
AEGINA. In the 600s B.C.E. the island was a bone of con-
tention among those three warring states. By the mid-
500s B.C.E. it was held by Athens.
In 480 B.C.E. the Persians and their allies overran a
Spartan-led force at the Battle of THERMOPYLAE and swept
southward into central Greece. The Persian navy sailed in
escort. Reaching Athens, Xerxes’ army found the city
abandoned. The noncombatants had been evacuated,
while most of Athens’ fighting men were in the allied
Greek navy, stationed inside Salamis’ eastern channel.
Rounding the southern tip of Attica, the Persian navy
sailed north into the Saronic Gulf. Not literally “Persian,”
this navy was manned largely by subject peoples—
Phoenicians, Egyptians, and even IONIAN GREEKS—who
were fighting for Xerxes. The Phoenician crews seem to
have been superior seamen to any Greeks. Battered by
prior fighting and storms, the Persians’ warships by then
probably numbered less than 400. Waiting at Salamis was
a combined Greek fleet of perhaps 300 warships, with
Athens supplying the largest contingent, almost 180
ships. The fleet’s commander was Eurybiades, a Spartan.
The Greek plan to make a stand at Salamis probably
originated with the brilliant Athenian soldier-statesman
THEMISTOKLES, who foresaw that the way to offset the
Persians’ advantage in numbers and faster ships would be
to lure them to battle inside the narrow straits. By vision
and force of personality, he convinced Eurybiades and the
other Greek sea commanders to stay together and risk a
major fight, rather than dispersing to defend their homes.
According to two fifth-century-B.C.
writers—the
Athenian playwright AESCHYLUS (who may have fought at
Salamis) and the historian HERODOTUS—Themistokles
tricked the Persian king by sending him an untruthful
message, couched as a plea for personal favor, saying that
the Greeks were ready to disband and flee. Supposedly
Xerxes actually believed this report from an enemy com-
mander. Whether this is true or not, we do know that
Xerxes, overconfident and impatient, ordered his fleet to
enter the Salamis channel at night and attack the Greeks
at dawn. What followed was one of the most dramatic
events in world history—the saving of Greece from for-
eign domination.
At dawn the Greeks sang their battle paean and
launched their fleet in a concave crescent formation in
the narrow waterways around Salamis. By filling the
entire width of the channel, the Greeks minimized the
advantage provided by the greater numbers of ships in
the Persian fleet. If the battle were to take place in more
open waters, the Greeks realized that the overwhelming
size of the enemy force might result in a defeat. With the
Persian ships rowing into this Greek “net,” the two fleets
collided.
As Themistokles had expected, the Persians’ advan-
tage in numbers and skill was lost in the crowded nar-
rows. Whereas boarding tactics had been the rule at the
recent sea battle at ARTEMISION, Salamis saw more use of
Greek ramming techniques. The Persian ships—jammed
together by the Greek enveloping tactic, and not as able
to withstand ramming as the heavier ships of the
Greeks—soon began to get the worst of it. Aeschylus
gives a vivid description, presented from the Persian
viewpoint, in his tragedy The Persians (472 B.C.E.). “The
Greek ships, arrayed in a circle around us, bore in and
rammed: our ships capsized, the sea was hidden in
wrecks and corpses, and all the shores and reefs were
heaped with dead . . .”
After most of the elite Phoenician squadron had been
destroyed, the other Persian allies broke off and rowed
away, pursued by the Greeks. At this point an amphibious
landing of Athenian HOPLITES, under the general ARIS-
TIDES, overran a contingent of Persian infantry on the
nearby islet of Psytalleia.
The battle was over. The Greek side had lost 40
ships, the Persians (probably) several times that number.
Among the Persian dead was the admiral Ariabignes, a
brother of Xerxes.
Xerxes himself had watched the battle from a throne
set up on the shore, and was so alarmed by his fleet’s ruin
that he soon started overland for home. Then vulnerable
by sea, he was anxious to reach the HELLESPONT before
the Greek navy could destroy his bridges there, to trap
him inside Europe. Along with most of his huge invasion
force, Xerxes crossed back into Asia, leaving behind a
small army under his general Mardonius to continue the
campaign on land. This army, in turn, was later destroyed
by the Greeks at Plataea.
For the Athenians, who had abandoned their city yet
still supplied the bulk of the Greek navy, the Battle of
Salamis was a patriotic triumph and a springboard to
Athens’s naval empire in the following decades. For the
Persians, Salamis marked the turning point on their west-
ern frontier; no longer would they be purely the aggres-
sors, as they had been for 70 years. With their naval
power crippled for a decade, the Persians would subse-
quently go on the defensive—first against Athenian naval
action in the eastern Mediterranean, and later, in the 300s
B.C.E., against Spartan and Macedonian invasions of Asia.
The process that would end with ALEXANDER THE GREAT’s
conquest of PERSIA (334–323 B.C.E.) began in the narrows
at Salamis.
See also WARFARE, NAVAL.
Further reading: Peter Green, Xerxes at Salamis
(New York: Praeger, 1970); B. Jordan, “The Honors for
Themistokles after Salamis,” American Journal of Philology
109 (1988): 547–571; J. Barron, “All for Salamis,” in Owls
to Athens. Essays on Classical Subjects Presented to Sir Ken-
neth Dover, edited by E. M. Craik (New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1990), 133–141; J. S. Morrison, “The Greek
298
Salamis 

Ships at Salamis and the ‘diekplous’,” Journal of Hellenic
Studies 111 (1991): 196–200; Martha Taylor, Salamis and
the Salaminioi: The History of an Unofficial Athenian
Demos (Amsterdam: J. C. Gieben, 1997); C. Higbie, “The
Bones of a Hero, the Ashes of a Politician. Athens,
Salamis, and the Usable Past,” Classical Antiquity 16
(1997): 278–307; Hans Rupprecht Goette, Athens, Attica,
and the Megarid: An Archaeological Guide (London: Rout-
ledge, 2001).
Salamis (2)
This Greek city is situated on the east
coast of the island of CYPRUS and was apparently
founded sometime in the 1000s B.C.E. as a successor to
the Mycenaean city of Enkomi when that harbor was
silted up. Salamis became the most important city of
Cyprus in the 500s B.C.E. In its early history, the entire
island was under the control of various imperial powers:
the Assyrians (673–669 B.C.E.), the Egyptians (560–545
B.C.E.), and the Persians (545–332 B.C.E.). The Cypriots
rebelled against Persian domination under King Onesi-
los around 500 B.C.E., but this freedom was short-lived.
A later king, Euagoras I (reigned 411–373 B.C.E.), also
attempted to escape the control of the Persians but
eventually failed and was forced to resubmit to the Per-
sian king.
After the death of the Macedonian king ALEXANDER
THE GREAT in 323 B.C.E., two of his successors (DIADO-
CHOI) fought for control of Salamis, DEMETRIUS POLIOR-
KETES
and PTOLEMY
(1). Ptolemy finally defeated
Demetrios and took over Salamis and all Cyprus. Another
city, Paphos, grew in importance and supplanted Salamis
as the primary city of the island. Later, in the 300s C.E.,
Salamis regained its dominance and became the metropo-
lis of Christian Cyprus.
Salamis was first excavated in the late 1800s C.E., and
additional archaeological work has been done there in
recent years. Its major monuments include the gymna-
sium, public bath buildings, theater, reservoir, AGORA, a
temple dedicated to the god ZEUS, part of the city wall,
two early Christian churches, and the Royal Tombs.
Much of the city, however, has not yet been excavated.
Further reading: Vassos Karageorghis, Sculptures
from Salamis
(Nicosia: Department of Antiquities,
Cyprus, 1964); ———, Salamis in Cyprus: Homeric, Hel-
lenistic, and Roman (London: Thames and Hudson,
1969); ———, Salamis: Recent Discoveries in Cyprus
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 1969); ———, Excavating at
Salamis in Cyprus, 1952–1974 (Athens: A. G. Leventis
Foundation, 1999).
Samos
This fertile and mountainous Aegean island,
190 square miles in area, is located two miles off the cen-
tral west coast of ASIA MINOR. Samos was among the
most prosperous and powerful Greek states of the
600s–400s B.C.E. The Samians were known for their sea-
faring, their domestic WINE, and their national cult of
HERA, patron goddess of the island.
Occupied before 1200 B.C.E. by Greek colonists of the
MYCENAEAN
CIVILIZATION, Samos was resettled around
1100–1000 B.C.E. by a new wave of immigrants—IONIAN
GREEKS, fleeing from the Dorian invasion of mainland
Greece. A capital city, also named Samos, arose in the
southeast part of the island, opposite the Asia Minor coast;
today it is the site of the modern village of Tigani. Outside
the ancient city was the important sanctuary of Hera.
Samos island became a foremost state of the eastern
Greek region called IONIA, and played a major role in the
Greek world’s expansion through seaborne TRADE and
COLONIZATION in the 800s–500s B.C.E. The principal
Samian colony was at the north Aegean island of
SAMOTHRACE (which, as the name suggests, served as an
anchorage between Samos and THRACE). To buy luxury
goods and raw metals, the Samians exported domestic
products such as wine and woolens, along with Thracian
SLAVES and SILVER acquired via Samothrace. Markets
included both mainland Greece and Near Eastern king-
doms such as EGYPT. One Samian sea captain made a
famously lucrative trading stop at the Celtic kingdom of
Tartessus, in southern Spain, around 650 B.C.E.
In this era Samos was governed as an ARISTOCRACY,
with a ruling class known as geomoroi, “landholders.”
The island was home to famous craftsmen such as the
architect Rhoikos, whose temple of Hera, begun around
560 B.C.E., was the largest Greek building of its day (320
× 160 feet). All that survives of that proud structure
today is a single Ionic column, standing at the site of
ancient Samos city.
The island reached its zenith under POLYCRATES, who
held supreme power around 540–522 B.C.E. Polycrates
carved out an Aegean sea empire and glorified Samos
with engineering marvels such as an underground aque-
duct and sea walls to defend the harbor entrance. His
palace, of which no trace remains, was situated on the
ACROPOLIS of the city, and his lavish court attracted many
intellectuals and artisans. But Samos’s most important cit-
izen, the philosopher and mathematician PYTHAGORAS,
fled Polycrates’ rule and emigrated to south ITALY.
After Polycrates was captured and murdered by the
encroaching Persians under King DARIUS (1), Samos
became a Persian holding, ruled by Greek puppet rulers.
Joining the IONIAN REVOLT against the Persians, Samos
contributed its entire navy, 60 ships. But at the revolt’s cli-
mactic sea battle of Lade, fought near Samos, the Samian
ships deserted for Persian offers of preferential treatment
(494 B.C.E.). In 480 B.C.E., under Persian command,
Samian crews fought against their fellow Greeks in King
XERXES’ invasion of Greece. The following year, Samos
was liberated by the victorious Greek counteroffensive.
Then under the heavy influence of ATHENS, Samos
became a DEMOCRACY and foremost member of the Athe-
nian-run DELIAN LEAGUE. Samos was one of the few
Samos
299

Delian states to supply warships and crews in lieu of sil-
ver tribute. In 440 B.C.E. however the island rebelled
against Athens. The nine-month-long revolt amounted to
an Athenian crisis: An attacking Athenian fleet was
defeated by 70 ships under the Samian leader Melissus,
but eventually Samos fell to an Athenian siege and block-
ade commanded by PERIKLES himself. The island was
purged of anti-Athenian elements and reduced to subject
status, paying a yearly tribute as well as a huge war
penalty of 1,400 TALENTS.
Samos remained a staunch Athenian ally—although
no longer contributing warships—throughout the PELO-
PONNESIAN WAR (431–404 B.C.E.). After 413 B.C.E. the
island was a major Athenian naval base. During the right-
wing coup of the FOUR HUNDRED at Athens, the Samians
supported the Athenian democratic government-in-exile,
formed by the Athenian fleet and troops at Samos (411
B.C.E.). For their loyalty, the Samians received the unique
honor of being made Athenian citizens (405 B.C.E.). But
in the following year, at the war’s end, Samos was cap-
tured by SPARTA.
In the next decades an independent Samos again fell
into conflict with the Athenians, who captured the island
and repopulated it with Athenian colonists (365 B.C.E.).
Later the native population was allowed to return, by
edict of the Macedonian conqueror ALEXANDER
THE
GREAT (effected posthumously, in 321 B.C.E.).
A bone of contention among the warring DIADOCHOI
(Successors) who divided up Alexander’s empire after his
death, Samos eventually passed to King PTOLEMY (2) II of
Egypt (ca. 281 B.C.E.). By then Samos was waning as an
east Greek sea power, surpassed by the growing commer-
cial might of RHODES. In 127 B.C.E. Samos was annexed
by the Romans.
Samos, especially the Sanctuary of Hera, has been
visited and explore by European travelers since the early
1700s C.E. Some small-scale archaeological excavation
took place on the site in the early 20th century, first in
1902–1903 by the Archaeological Society of Athens and
then in 1910–1914 (until interrupted by World War I) by
the Koenigliche Museen of Berlin. Systematic excavation
began in 1925 under the auspices of the German Archae-
ological Institute at Athens and has continued to the pre-
sent day, with the exception of the period from 1939 to
1951, when World War II and the Greek civil war inter-
vened. The major monuments of the Hera sanctuary
include the temple itself, a few subsidiary buildings, the
Great Altar, and the “Sacred Road” leading back to the
city of Samos.
See also BRONZE; PERSIAN WARS; SHIPS AND SEAFARING;
TYRANTS.
Further reading: T. J. Quinn, Athens and Samos, Les-
bos, and Chios, 478–404 B.C. (Manchester, U.K.: Manch-
ester University Press, 1981); Graham Shipley, A History of
Samos, 800–188 B.C. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1987); H.
Kienast, “The Tunnel of Eupalinos at the Island of Samos,”
in Ancient Technology. Symposium Athens 30.3–4.4.1987
(Helsinki: Museum of Technology, 1990), 38–45; Helmut
Kyrieleis, “The Heraion at Samos,” in Greek Sanctuaries.
New Approaches, edited by Nanno Marinatos and Robin
Hägg (London: Routledge, 1993), 125–153.
Samothrace
A small Greek island of the northeast
AEGEAN SEA. Samothrace sits 25 miles south of the north-
ern coast, which in antiquity belonged to the non-Greek
land of THRACE. The oval island, only 68 square miles,
consists of a single mountain, rising to 5,250 feet and
heavily forested in ancient times. The pre-Greek inhabi-
tants were probably of Thracian stock. Sometime between
700 and 550 B.C.E., Samothrace was conquered by seafar-
ing Greeks, who sought it as a safe anchorage from which
to make the trading run to the Thracian coast. (The main-
land Thracians were a potentially hostile folk who never-
theless could offer such precious goods as SILVER and
SLAVES.) As suggested by the name Samothrak¯e (Samos’s
Thrace), the island was probably occupied by Greeks from
the island state of SAMOS; possibly the Samians were pre-
ceded by Greeks from another (and nearer) Greek island
state, LESBOS. Samothrace seems to have been a mixed set-
tlement, where Greek and Thracian inhabitants lived in
harmony; modern archaeological excavations have uncov-
ered a cemetery that (as inscriptions reveal) was used by
both peoples in the latter 500s B.C.E.
In classical times, Samothrace was known for its
unique Greek religious cult, colored by the place’s pre-
Greek origins. This cult worshipped the Kabeiroi—male
deities, originally non-Greek, possibly from Thrace or
Phrygia (in ASIA MINOR). The Kabeiroi varied between
two and four in number and were patron gods of smiths
and sailors as well as of fertility. Also called the Great
Gods, they were sometimes identified with the Greek
deities CASTOR AND POLYDEUCES. If the name Kabeiroi is
Greek (which is uncertain), it probably means “the
burners,” in reference to the forge fire of an ancient
smithy.
The Kabeiroi had cults at several shrines in the Greek
world, but their main sanctuary was at Samothrace city,
high in the island’s hills. There were held the Mysteries of
Samothrace—a secret cult, open only to initiates. These
Mysteries (Greek: myst¯eriai, from myst¯es, “an initiate”)
are often mentioned but rarely discussed by ancient writ-
ers, who feared to divulge secret details lest they provoke
the Kabeiroi’s wrath. Unlike the mysteries at ELEUSIS, the
Samothracian cult could be joined by anyone—male or
female, free or slave—and initiations could take place at
any time of the year, not only during the annual festival.
The initiation consisted of two stages, myesis and
apopteia. At least some of the rituals took place at night,
but their details remain unknown. Although access to
certain buildings was limited to those who had under-
gone the initiation, the sanctuary itself was open to visi-
tors. Since the Great Gods were special patrons of sea
300
Samothrace

travel in an era when this mode of transportation was
quite dangerous, many travelers did visit the sanctuary to
make offerings. The cult became popular in the HEL-
LENISTIC AGE (300–150 B.C.E.); men and WOMEN flocked
to Samothrace for initiation and worship. King PTOLEMY
(2) II of EGYPT (ca. 270 B.C.E.) was an important patron
of the sanctuary; remnants of the buildings that he
financed can be seen today. Among the costly offerings
that adorned the site was the wonderful second-century-
B.C.E. marble statue known as the Winged Victory of
Samothrace, excavated by French archaeologists in 1863
C.E. and now displayed at the Louvre.
Politically Samothrace became an ally of ATHENS,
serving as a member of the Athenian-controlled DELIAN
LEAGUE (478–404 B.C.E.) and the subsequent SECOND
ATHENIAN LEAGUE (378–338 B.C.E.). Attractive as a naval
base and propagandistic pawn, in Hellenistic times the
island changed hands frequently, among the Macedo-
nians, Ptolemaic Egyptians, and Seleucids.
The first archaeological exploration in the sanctuary
at Samothrace was conducted around the Nike monu-
ment by the French consul M. Champoiseau in 1861.
Other French teams excavated the area of the theater in
1866 and 1891. More systematic excavations were done
under Austrian archaeologists in 1873 and 1875. The
current archaeological project was begun in 1938 by New
York University, directed by Karl Lehmann until his death
in 1960 and from then (until the present) by James
McCredie.
See also AFTERLIFE; SCULPTURE.
Further reading: S. G. Cole, Theoi Megaloi. The Cult
of the Great Gods at Samothrace (Leiden, Netherlands: E.
J. Brill, 1984); Yiannis Kizis, Samothrace, translated by
Philip Ramp (Athens: Melissa Publishing House, 1991);
Walter Burkert, “Concordia discors. The Literary and the
Archaeological Evidence on the Sanctuary of Samoth-
race,” in Greek Sanctuaries. New Approaches, edited by
Nanno Marinatos and Robin Hägg (London: Routledge,
1993), 178–191; J. Bouzek, “Notes on the Topography of
the City of Samothrace,” Eirene 30 (1994): 169–173; Ira
S. Mark, “The Victory of Samothrace,” in Regional Schools
in Hellenistic Sculpture. Proceedings of an International
Conference Held at Athens, March 15–17, 1996, edited by
Olga Palagia and William Coulson (Oxford: Oxbow
Books, 1998), 157–165.
Sappho (ca. 630–570 B.C.E.) Lyric poet of MYTILENE on
the island of LESBOS
Sappho’s verses, of which perhaps two short poems and
some 150 fragments survive today, have been much
admired since ancient times for their directness of expres-
sion and personal honesty. Most of her poems were com-
posed for solo recitation to the accompaniment of the
lyre. She wrote in the Aeolic dialect and vernacular of
Lesbos, a place whose strong lyric tradition had already
produced such poets as TERPANDER, ARION, and Sappho’s
contemporary ALCAEUS. Sappho is one of the few female
poets whom we know of from ancient Greece.
The typical subject of Sappho’s verse is her physical
love for several of the young WOMEN who were her
comembers in a local cult of the goddess APHRODITE. The
clearly homosexual nature of Sappho’s poetry (and the
presumably homosexual atmosphere of her female circle
on Lesbos) gave rise in the 19th century C.E. to the word
lesbian, meaning “a woman who has sexual feelings for
other women.”
The only reliable facts about Sappho’s life are those
that can be gleaned from her verses. She was born into an
aristocratic family of Mytilene. Although her poetry does
not deal with politics, she apparently shared in the privi-
leges and hazards of upper-class life. She went into brief
exile in SICILY during a period of civil unrest on Lesbos
circa 600 B.C.E., and she writes of happier days when her
brother Larichus served as cupbearer at aristocratic
drinking parties in Mytilene. Sappho had another brother,
Charaxus, who sailed as a trader to NAUKRATIS, in EGYPT,
where he squandered a fortune on a courtesan named
Doricha; in certain verses Sappho rails against Doricha
and wishes Charaxus a return to sanity. Later writers say
that Sappho was married—as most women of her social
class were bound to be—and we know that she had a
daughter, Cleïs; in one poem Sappho expresses joy at the
beauty of her daughter’s face. In later centuries there
arose a ridiculous tale that Sappho had died by jumping
off a cliff for hopeless love of a sturdy ferryman.
Modern writers often assume that Sappho was a
music teacher or similar, but her poems show only that
she led a group of younger women, probably teenagers,
in an official worship of Aphrodite—specifically, in
observing the goddess’ religious calendar and in main-
taining various shrines in and around Mytilene. Some of
Sappho’s loveliest verses show the women venturing into
the countryside or plaiting wildflower garlands to adorn a
cult statue or altar. Sappho’s sexual involvements with
her young colleagues would seem to grow out of this sin-
cere devotion to the goddess of sex and nature. The one
poem by Sappho that definitely survives in its complete
form is a hymn to Aphrodite in which the goddess,
appearing before Sappho, promises to help the poet woo
her beloved.
Not that love always means happiness in Sappho’s
poetry. “O Atthis,” she writes to a girlfriend, “you have
come to hate me in your mind, and flee to Andromeda!”
(Andromeda was a rival of Sappho’s, possibly the leader
of a rival cult.) There was also the melancholy fact that,
no matter what liaisons might arise between the girls in
Sappho’s group, all of these aristocratic maidens were
detained to be married off by their families. (In ancient
Greece girls were usually married by age 18; often by 14
or even 12.) Several of Sappho’s poems are wedding
songs, while other verses show distress within the group
as members depart for MARRIAGE. Sappho’s most famous
Sappho
301

poem, which survives nearly complete, records her own
unabated desire as she watches a girlfriend talk with a
handsome young man—probably the girl’s husband and
evidently at their wedding feast. He looks calm and god-
like, the poet writes, “but whenever I even glance at you,
my voice is lost, my tongue is stopped, and a delicate fire
has spread under my skin . . .”
In another poem, which survives only as a mutilated
fragment, Sappho recalls how she consoled a girlfriend
who was departing from the group. “‘Honestly I want to
die,’” the fragment begins, with the other woman talking.
“‘Sappho, I swear it’s against my will that I’m leaving you.’
And I answered her thus: ‘Go gladly and remember me,
for you know how we cherished you. Or let me remind
you, if you forget, what blissful days we enjoyed—how at
my side you often put on garlands of violets and roses
and crocuses . . . and on soft mattresses gently you satis-
fied desire. And there was . . . nothing sacred from which
we kept away . . .’”
In the modern age of commercialized sex and sexual
politics, it takes some effort to imagine the innocence of
Sappho’s world. Although Sappho has been appropriated
as a feminist forerunner since the 1970s, the poems sug-
gest a woman with an open and honest heart living in a
land of private emotion, completely removed—as almost
all women of those days were—from politics or grand
social concerns. Certain verses by the male Spartan poet
ALCMAN (ca. 630 B.C.E.) seem to commemorate similar
emotional tides within a Spartan girls’ chorus.
The private world of Sappho and her lovers repre-
sents the female response to an outside world created by
men—a world of politics, war, and male HOMOSEXUALITY,
which excluded even upper-class women except as wives
and mothers. One of Sappho’s best-known poems
involves a gentle rejection of male militarism: “Some say
that a host of cavalry is the loveliest sight on earth, some
say foot soldiers, some say warships. But I say it is the
person you love.”
What makes such verses great, despite their self-
absorption, is their apparent honesty and unselfcon-
sciousness. Sappho’s eroticism is miles apart from the
amused, detached male homosexuality in the poetry of
IBYCUS or ANACREON (mid- and late 500s B.C.E.). Sappho’s
genius lies in her ability to convey her sincere feelings, in
simple lyric meters and vocabulary. Her metaphors and
similes are beautifully apt and often come from the natu-
ral world, as when she writes of a maiden who outshines
other women as the Moon outshines the stars. Among
Sappho’s admirers in later generations was the philoso-
pher PLATO, who called her the tenth Muse. The Roman
poet Catullus (ca. 55 B.C.E.) imitated her verses in at least
two of his poems.
See also ARISTOCRACY; LYRIC POETRY; MUSES.
Further reading: H. N. Parker, “Sappho School-
mistress,” Transactions of the American Philological Associ-
ation 123 (1993): 309–351; J. M. Snyder, “Sappho in Attic
Vase Painting,” in Naked Truths. Women, Sexuality, and
Gender in Classical Art and Archaeology, edited by Ann
Olga Koloski-Ostrow and Claire L. Lyons (London: Rout-
ledge, 1997), 108–119; Margaret Reynolds, ed., The Sap-
pho Companion (New York: Palgrave for St. Martin’s Press,
2001); André Lardinois, “Keening Sappho: Female
Speech Genres in Sappho’s Poetry,” in Making Silence
Speak: Women’s Voices in Greek Literature and Society,
edited by André Lardinois and Laura McClure (Prince-
ton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2001), 75–92; Mari-
lyn B. Skinner, “Aphrodite Garlanded: Eros and Poetic
Creativity in Sappho and Nossis,” in Among Women: From
the Homosocial to the Homoerotic in the Ancient World,
edited by Nancy Sorkin Rabinowitz and Lisa Auanger
(Austin: University of Texas Press, 2002), 60–81; Ellen
Greene, “Subjects, Objects, and Erotic Symmetry in Sap-
pho’s Fragments,” in Among Women: From the Homosocial
to the Homoerotic in the Ancient World, edited by Nancy
Sorkin Rabinowitz and Lisa Auanger (Austin: University
of Texas Press, 2002), 82–105; Anne Carson, trans., If
Not, Winter: Fragments of Sappho (New York: Alfred A.
Knopf, 2002).
satyrs
The satyrai were mythical spirits of the country-
side and wilderness, personifying fertility and sexual
desire. Satyrs were semihuman in form, with the ears,
tail, legs, and hooves of a goat (or, in some earlier ver-
sions, of a horse). They were favorite subjects in vase
painting and other art, and were always shown naked,
with beards and pug noses, often with bald heads, and
usually with erect penises. Satyrs were typically shown
getting drunk or pursuing sexual gratification with their
female counterparts, the NYMPHS.
The satyrs were associated with DIONYSUS, the god of
WINE and fertility. Processions honoring Dionysus and
the satyrs were held in the Athenian countryside (among
other places), and these bawdy ceremonies apparently
supplied the origin for Athenian stage comedy. Classical
Athens retained a form of stage farce, less elaborate than
formal comedy, known as the satyr play (satyrikon).
See also THEATER.
Further reading: Guy Hedreen, Silens in Attic Black-
figure Vase-painting (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
Press, 1992); Francois Lissarrague, “On the Wildness of
Satyrs,” in Masks of Dionysus, edited by Thomas H. Car-
penter and Christopher A. Faraone (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell
University Press, 1993), 207–220; N. Vogeikoff, “A Smil-
ing Satyr in Context,” in Stephanos: Studies in Honor of
Brunilde Sismondo Ridgway, edited by Kim J. Hartswick
and Mary C. Sturgeon (Philadelphia: University Museum,
University of Pennsylvania, 1998), 235–239; J. M. Pad-
gett, “The Stable Hands of Dionysus. Satyrs and Donkeys
as Symbols of Social Marginalization in Attic Vase Paint-
ing,” in Not the Classical Ideal. Athens and the Construc-
tion of the Other in Greek Art, edited by Beth Cohen
(Leiden, Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 2000), 43–70; J. M. Pad-
302
satyrs

gett, “Horse Men: Centaurs and Satyrs in Early Greek
Art,” in The Centaur’s Smile: The Human Animal in Early
Greek Art, edited by J. M. Padgett (New Haven, Conn.:
Yale University Press, 2003), 3–48.
science
The ancient Greeks were the first Europeans to
make inquiries into ASTRONOMY, physics, and biology, yet
they were slow to recognize a separate discipline that
might be called science. Greek scientific studies in the
500s and 400s B.C.E. were bound up in the concept of
philosophia (love of arcane knowledge) and the search for
philosophical truth. Such studies were conducted in imi-
tation of MATHEMATICS, with emphasis on theory rather
than on experiment and observation. It took the catego-
rizing genius of ARISTOTLE (384–322 B.C.E.) to identify a
separate discipline that he called physik¯e (natural stud-
ies), in contrast to mathematics or PHILOSOPHY.
The origin of Western science is associated with the
philosopher THALES of MILETUS (ca. 585 B.C.E.). Thales
was the first Greek to try to explain the universe without
appeal to MYTH or RELIGION, but rather with reference to a
primary physical substance (which he identified as
water). Further crude theorizing in physics came from
Thales’ disciples ANAXIMANDER (ca. 560 B.C.E.) and
ANAXIMENES (ca. 550 B.C.E.), and from such later philoso-
phers as HERAKLEITOS (ca. 500 B.C.E.), PARMENIDES (ca.
490 B.C.E.), EMPEDOKLES (who originated the concept of
four primal elements—earth, fire, water, and air, ca. 450
B.C.E.), and the atomists LEUKIPPOS (ca. 440 B.C.E.) and
DEMOCRITUS
(ca. 430 
B.C.E.). These thinkers all
addressed, in highly original ways, the basic problem of
physical change: How is it that matter apparently comes
into being and grows out of nothing? (For instance, how
is it that trees sprout leaves?)
But the single most important figure in ancient sci-
ence was Aristotle, whose voluminous inquiries into all
existing branches of knowledge served to create certain
scientific categories still recognized today, such as physics
and biology. Aristotle introduced the practice of studying
by empirical observation, purely for the sake of scientific
knowledge—a practice that became traditional at his
Athenian school of higher learning, the LYCEUM (founded
in about 335 B.C.E.).
In zoology specifically, Aristotle’s inquiries were sim-
ply epoch-making. His zoological writings make refer-
ence to over 500 animal species, including about 120
kinds of fish and 60 kinds of insects, observed either in
their natural habitat or in dissection. Although not the
first Greek to practice animal dissection, he was the first
to do so with a wide variety of species and to document
his researches.
Aristotle tackled the problem of change with typical
restraint and common sense, suggesting that a thing can
come to be both what it already is and what it is not—in
the sense that it fulfills an inborn potential, or telos. For
example, the acorn “is” an oak tree, in terms of its telos.
In physics, Aristotle pioneered the study of motion,
which is now called dynamics.
Aristotle’s work dominated Western science, for better
or worse, for over 2,000 years, down to the 1600s A.D. His
acceptance of Empedocles’ notion of four elements guar-
anteed that that theory would remain for centuries the
authoritative theory of chemistry. Even Aristotle’s grosser
errors became canonical; his treatise On the Heavens con-
tains the notoriously inaccurate statement that a heavier
object will fall at a proportionately faster speed than a
lighter one. Although questioned in late antiquity, this
false law of physics was taught in European schools until
it was finally disproved by Galileo in around 1590 C.E.
Aristotle’s successor at the Lyceum, THEOPHRASTUS
(president ca. 323–287 B.C.E.), carried on the master’s
studies in biology and physics, as did Theophrastus’s suc-
cessor, Straton (president ca. 287–269 B.C.E.). Theophras-
tus’s achievements in botany were particularly important
contributions to later scientific thought. Meanwhile, the
Athenian philosophical movement of STOICISM popular-
ized the Empedoclean-Aristotelian theory of four ele-
ments, while the rival school of EPICUREANISM adapted
Leucippus’s and Democritus’s concept of atoms (atomoi,
“indivisible particles”). But by the early 200s B.C.E. the
center of scientific research was shifting from Athens to
the wealthy court of the Ptolemies at ALEXANDRIA (1),
where the Library and Museum attracted scholars from
around the Greek world. Whereas the scientific studies in
Greece during the HELLENISTIC AGE tended to be very
theoretical, Egyptian science focused on more practical
issues and solutions.
The main scientific advances at Alexandria were in
the previously neglected field of mechanical engineering.
From at least the 500s B.C.E. onward, the Greeks had pos-
sessed such simple mechanical devices as the lever, pulley,
and winch, but in the 200s B.C.E. Alexandrian scientists
explored new constructions and mechanical theories.
Fueling this advance was the Ptolemies’ eager financing of
military technology, specifically the creation of bigger and
better siege artillery, powered by torsion. The Alexandrian
inventor Ktesibios (ca. 270 B.C.E.) is credited with
improvements in catapult design as well as with such
peaceful inventions as the water pump and the water
clock (which measured the passing hours through the
controlled dripping of water). Ktesibios also pioneered the
study of pneumatics (the action of air under pressure).
The century’s greatest Greek scientist—and one of
its greatest mathematicians—was ARCHIMEDES (active
260–212 B.C.E.), a lifelong citizen of the Sicilian-Greek
city of SYRACUSE. Among his many accomplishments,
Archimedes invented the branch of physics known today
as hydrostatics (the study of properties of standing
water). Archimedes added one important invention to
Mediterranean technology—the Archimedes screw, still
used today to draw water uphill continually, without
science
303

suction. Another significant Hellenistic scientist was
Euclid, whose basic mathematical “Elements” remains a
fundamental part of modern geometry.
One technological breakthrough of the late Greek
world (around 100 B.C.E.) was the simple expedient of
powering a millstone by means of a donkey tethered to a
pole, treading a circle. Further advances appeared under
the Roman Empire, although these tended to be mainly
in the fields of medicine and engineering. One significant
event was the Alexandrian inventor Hero’s famous experi-
ment with steam power around 60 C.E. The relatively
slow advance of Greek technology can be explained
partly by the availability of slave labor and by a lack of
government funding for nonmilitary research.
See also SLAVES; WARFARE, SIEGE.
Further reading: G. E. R. Lloyd, The Revolution of
Wisdom. Studies in the Claims and Practice of Ancient
Greek Science (Berkeley: University of California Press,
1987); Robin Waterfield, Before “Eureka”: The Presocratics
and Their Science (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1989);
George Sarton, Ancient Science through the Golden Age of
Greece (New York: Dover, 1993); Patrick H. Byrne, Analy-
sis and Science in Aristotle (Albany: State University of
New York Press, 1997); Malcolm Wilson, Aristotle’s The-
ory of the Unity of Science (Toronto: University of Toronto
Press, 2000).
sculpture
Arguably the greatest artistic achievement of
the ancient Greeks was their development of high-quality
marble and metal sculpture, particularly their representa-
tion of the human body. By the mid-400s B.C.E., Greek
sculptors (working mainly at the preeminent city of
Athens) had attained a level of realism in portraying
human forms that went unequaled for the next 2000
years, until the Italian Renaissance. Modern art historians
refer to the years 480–323 B.C.E. (from the PERSIAN WARS
to the death of ALEXANDER THE GREAT) as the Greek Clas-
sical era. (This terminology indicates many scholars’ belief
that that was when the Greeks established standards of
excellence—in sculpture as well as in ARCHITECTURE—
that helped to define those art forms for all time.) Prior to
the Classical period, from about 600 to 480 B.C.E., is the
time period called “archaic,” and the following time
period, from 323 to 31 B.C.E. (the battle of Actium and the
conquest of ROME), is called “Hellenistic.”
Relatively few original Greek sculptures have survived
from ancient times. During late antiquity and the Middle
Ages, numerous pieces were lost to neglect or plundered
for their raw material. Today, many ancient sculptures exist
only as Roman copies of vanished Greek works. Most of
these Roman copies are made of marble, even in those
instances where the Greek original was BRONZE.
There were several media for ancient Greek sculp-
ture. Statues are by definition freestanding and carved in
the round. Greek statues frequently represented a human
figure, male or female, mortal or divine. Among the
most important statues were cult images of gods or
goddesses set up in those deities’ temples. Another
important category of sculpture is architectural sculp-
ture meant to be fastened to panels on the outside of
temples and other public buildings. These figures were
carved of limestone or marble and were either carved in
the round (like a statue) or left unfinished in back,
where they would be fixed to the building. Another
type of architectural sculpture was relief, in which case
a panel of stone would be carved so that the figure or
group of figures would rise three-dimensionally from
the surface of the panel. In addition to appearing on
buildings, relief sculpture was also used for gravestones
and public plaques.
304
sculpture
Clay female figurine from Boeotia, in central Greece, late
700s B.C.E. The bell-shaped body was molded on a potter’s
wheel, then painted and baked in a kiln; the legs were made
separately and fastened inside. (Alison Frantz Photographic
Collection, American School of Classical Studies at Athens)

The earliest Greek sculptors probably worked in
wood, but none of these pieces survives in the archaeo-
logical record since wood is a perishable material. Even
as late as the 400s B.C.E., wooden idols were still being
worshipped in some Greek sanctuaries. Other early
small-scale figures were made of ivory, clay, or metals
such as bronze or GOLD. The earliest extant large-scale
Greek sculpture is in stone—specifically, the soft lime-
stone plentiful in the mountains of mainland Greece. The
best-known early work of carved limestone is the relief
slab over the gateway of MYCENAE, called the Lion Gate
(around 1250 B.C.E.).
After the collapse of the MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION, the
grim DARK AGE (around 1100–900 B.C.E.) saw artistic
impoverishment throughout the Greek world. Sculpture
may have been reduced largely to wood carving and the
shaping of clay. Sculpture in stone reemerged around 600
B.C.E., at the beginning of the archaic era. Influenced by
the monumental statuary carved in granite and porphyry
that could be seen in EGYPT, Greek sculptors chose the
most suitable hard stone found in Greece—marble (a
compacted form of limestone). The Greeks also copied
from the Egyptians the typical pose of their human fig-
ures: frontal, arms stiffly at sides, left leg advanced. The
Greek statues, however, were more freestanding than the
Egyptian ones and soon developed new postures and
movements. A number of these Greek archaic statues sur-
vive, with the earliest dating from around 600 B.C.E. They
are the figures known today as kouroi (“male youths,” sin-
gular: kouros); typically they show a naked young man,
slightly larger than life-size. The kouroi and their some-
what later female counterparts, the clothed figures known
as korai (“maidens,” singular: kore), were works commis-
sioned by wealthy families to stand at a young person’s
grave or as a dedicatory offering in a temple. Most extant
kouroi and korai come from Athens and ATTICA.
A comparison of individual kouroi made between 600
and 500 B.C.E. reveals the advances made by Greek sculp-
tors during this time. Figures made in the later part of the
century show more realistic musculature, facial expres-
sions, and posture. Greek statues begin to show the
famous “archaic smile”—intended to represent, not happi-
ness necessarily, but the vividness of a living human face.
The defeat of the invading Persians in 480–479 B.C.E.
opened a new phase in Greek art—the Classical period—
in which artistic confidence, religious piety, and prosper-
ity all combined to produce one of the greatest cultural
eras in world history. From about 450 to 404 B.C.E., the
rich, imperial city of Athens—with its lavish public-
building program begun by the statesman PERIKLES—
dominated the field. Greek sculptors broke away from the
styles of previous generations and developed a new real-
ism in showing the posture and proportions of the
human form, particularly the male form. This break-
through is embodied in the Athenian marble statue that
modern scholars call the “Kritios Boy,” carved around
480 B.C.E. By the mid-400s B.C.E., the Argive sculptor
POLYKLEITOS had perfected the proportions of the stand-
ing male figure, with his statue known as the Doryphoros
(“Spear bearer”).
The fifth century B.C.E. also saw an improved ability
to show bodies in motion or in emotional poses. The
beginning of this development is evident when compar-
ing different figures from one building, the temple of
Aphaia at AEGINA, which was carved at the very begin-
ning of the Classical period. The best-known surviving
examples of such figures are the marble sculptures that
adorned the temple of ZEUS at OLYMPIA (ca. 470–456
B.C.E.) and the Athenian PARTHENON (ca. 447–432 B.C.E.).
Greek sculpture was also revolutionized in the early
400s B.C.E. by improvements in metal casting technology.
Around this time, artists invented a method of casting
molten bronze around a wooden core, thus creating a
hollow metal figure rather than (as in previous bronze
sculpture
305
During the 300s B.C.E. sculpture began capturing the female
form. This statuette attempts to show the woman’s body draped
yet visible through thin and thick clothing. (Alison Frantz 
Photographic Collection, American School of Classical Studies
at Athens)

sculptures) a solid one. The new method allowed for
greater realism in the rendering of musculature, clothing,
and such fine details as beards and hair. Relatively few
original Greek bronze statues survive today (many were
melted down in late antiquity for reuse); among the most
famous extant examples are the Charioteer of DELPHI
(478 or 474 B.C.E.) and the Artemision Zeus (460–450
B.C.E.). The new metal-casting method also helped to cre-
ate the century’s two most famous statues—the colossal
gold and ivory images of ATHENA and Zeus, both sculpted
by the Athenian PHEIDIAS in the 430s B.C.E. but now lost.
Athens’s defeat in the PELOPONNESIAN WAR (404
B.C.E.) saw the start of a less confident, less public-
minded, but still innovative artistic era. In place of the
former patriotism and piety, tastes in sculpture during the
300s B.C.E. turned to more personal subjects. Portraiture
of living people became a growing field. In mythological
subjects, the prior era’s fascination with the male form
was finally counterbalanced by an interest in the female
form (usually show clothed, sometimes partially or com-
pletely nude). At the same time, sculptors worked to
achieve better realism in the rendering of flowing cloth-
ing fabric and facial expression. The spirit and values of
the mid-300s B.C.E. were embodied in the work of the
Athenian sculptor PRAXITELES.
The conquests of the Macedonian king Alexander the
Great (334–323 B.C.E.) re-created the map of the Greek
world, with new centers of Greek culture and patronage
arising in the eastern Mediterranean. The classical era was
followed by the HELLENISTIC AGE (323–31 B.C.E.), which
saw further advances in conveying emotion or movement
through pose, facial gesture, and clothing. Among the
masterpieces of Hellenistic sculpture are the reliefs carved
on the Great Altar of Zeus from the Greek city of PERGA-
MON in ASIA MINOR, carved around 180 B.C.E. Now dis-
played in the Staatliche Museum in Berlin, the Pergamene
sculptures show a favorite mythological subject—the
primeval battle between the gods and the GIANTS, repre-
senting the triumph of civilization over savagery.
Most ancient Greek sculpture, both marble and
metal, was painted. The flesh, clothing, jewelry, and other
attributes of sculpted figures were vividly colored so as to
be clearly seen from a distance. On buildings, architec-
tural sculptures stood out against dark painted back-
grounds of red or blue. Today the paint on most of the
surviving Greek sculpture has faded away through time,
but traces of it remain visible in some instances.
See also FUNERAL CUSTOMS; LAOCOON; MELOS; RELI-
GION; RHODES; SAMOTHRACE; SEVEN WONDERS OF THE
WORLD; WOMEN.
Further reading: J. J. Pollitt, Art and Experience in
Classical Greece
(Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1972); Andrew Stewart, Greek Sculpture: An Explo-
ration (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1990);
R. R. R. Smith, Hellenistic Sculpture: A Handbook (New
York: Thames and Hudson, 1991); Olga Palagia and J. J.
Pollitt, eds., Personal Styles in Greek Sculpture (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1996); Diana Buitron-Oliver,
ed., The Interpretation of Architectural Sculpture in Greece
and Rome (Washington, D.C.: National Gallery of Art,
1997); Brunilde S. Ridgway, Prayers in Stone: Greek Archi-
tectural Sculpture ca. 600–100 B.C.E. (Berkeley: University
of California Press, 1999); Nikolaos Kaltsas, Sculpture in
the National Archaeological Museum, Athens, translated by
David Hardy (Athens: Kapon Editions, 2002); Katerina
Karakasi, Archaic Korai (Los Angeles: J. Paul Getty
Museum, 2003).
Scythia
See BLACK SEA.
Second Athenian League
This name is given by
modern historians to the alliance formed by ATHENS and
various other Greek states in 378 B.C.E. and modeled after
the DELIAN LEAGUE, which had been founded exactly 100
years before. The league arose in response to Spartan
repression in the generation following SPARTA’s victory in
the PELOPONNESIAN WAR (404 B.C.E.) and particularly as
a result of the unpopular Spartan-Persian treaty known as
the KING’S PEACE (386 B.C.E.).
To entice Greek allies into the league, Athens had to
promise to avoid its previous imperialistic excesses of the
Delian League, including the levying of tribute and the
imposition of Athenian garrison colonies; the latter
promise was not kept scrupulously. The most important
ally in the league was THEBES. But, after defeating the
Spartans at the Battle of LEUKTRA in 371 B.C.E., Thebes
led other central Greek states in seceding from the
league. Indeed, the rapid decline of Sparta after 371 B.C.E.
removed much of the league’s original reason for being.
The league received another blow in 357 B.C.E., when
three major east Greek member states—CHIOS, RHODES,
and BYZANTIUM—revolted. The league was dissolved by
the Macedonian king PHILIP II, after he had seized main-
land Greece in 338 B.C.E.
Further reading: Jack Cargill, The Second Athenian
League: Empire or Free Alliance? (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1981); Jack Cargill, “Hegemony, not
Empire. The Second Athenian League,” Ancient World 5
(1982): 91–102; R. M. Kallet-Marx, “Athens, Thebes, and
the Foundation of the Second Athenian League,” Classi-
cal Antiquity 4 (1985): 127–151; C. M. Fauber, “Was
Kerkyra a Member of the Second Athenian League?”
Classical Quarterly 48 (1998): 110–116.
Seleuceia
See ANTIOCH; SELEUCID EMPIRE.
Seleucid Empire
This was the largest of several Hel-
lenistic kingdoms that emerged from the eastern con-
quests of the Macedonian king ALEXANDER THE GREAT
(died 323 B.C.E.). At its greatest secure extent, around
280 B.C.E., the Seleucid Empire occupied much of what
306
Scythia

had been Alexander’s domain, from ASIA MINOR and the
Levant to Afghanistan, but excluding EGYPT. The Seleu-
cids’ governing and soldiering classes came from a Greek
and Macedonian minority based in the western cities and
in military colonies throughout; these people ruled a
population of Syrians, Persians, Phoenicians, Babyloni-
ans, JEWS, and others. Unfortunately, this unwieldy
domain lacked a unifying identity and had trouble
replenishing its Greco-Macedonian soldiery. For most of
its 250-year history, the empire was losing territory.
The term Seleucid Empire is a translation of the king-
dom’s Greek name, Seleukis, which was derived from the
name of the founding dynast, SELEUCUS (1), who lived ca.
358–281 B.C.E. Seleucus began his career as a Macedo-
nian nobleman and soldier under Alexander. After
Alexander’s death, he was one of several Macedonian gen-
erals, known collectively as the DIADOCHOI (Successors),
who seized portions of the conqueror’s domain; Seleucus’s
share was by far the largest.
In 300 B.C.E. Seleucus built the Syrian coastal city of
ANTIOCH, which later became the Seleucid capital, super-
seding the prior capital of Seleuceia-on-the-Tigris, in
Mesopotamia. Brilliantly located to be a gateway between
the Mediterranean and the East, Antioch became the seat
of a lively Syro-Greek culture, personified for us by the
poet and anthologist Meleager of Gadara (ca. 100 B.C.E.)
Antioch was named for Seleucus’s son and eventual suc-
cessor, Antiochus, who reigned 281–261 B.C.E. The
names Antiochus and Seleucus (also Demetrius) became
traditional for the Seleucid royal house.
Despite their Eastern holdings, the Seleucid rulers
tended to look westward, being preoccupied with territo-
rial conflicts against Ptolemaic Egypt. The six Syrian
Wars (274–168 B.C.E.), fought over the two empires’
shared frontier in the Levant, involved use of war ele-
phants and huge phalanxes of heavy infantry. Meanwhile
the city of PERGAMON, revolting from Seleucid rule, estab-
lished a rival domain in Asia Minor (around 262 B.C.E.).
Farther east, the hellenized kingdom of BACTRIA rebelled
(around 250 B.C.E.), and the non-Greek kingdom of
Parthia emerged to deprive the Seleucids of territories on
PERSIA and Mesopotamia (mid-200s–mid-100s B.C.E.).
ANTIOCHUS (2) III (reigned 223–187 B.C.E.), the
greatest Seleucid king, re-created much of the old empire;
but he came to grief against the overseas armies of the
Italian city of ROME. The Romans defeated Antiochus in
battle in Greece (191 B.C.E.) and Asia Minor (190 B.C.E.),
and forced him to relinquish his holdings in Asia Minor
(188 B.C.E.). Weakened by palace factions and by the
Maccabean Revolt of the Palestinian Jews (167 B.C.E.),
the Seleucid realm gradually shrank into the region that
was called Syria (including modern Syria and Lebanon).
The Seleucid kingship was dismantled in 64 B.C.E., when
Syria became a Roman province.
The Seleucid Empire’s significance for history is its
role in hellenizing the Levant. This effect can be seen
today in Greek-style ruins at such sites as Palmyra, in the
Syrian desert. Long after the end of the Seleucid Empire,
Greek was still the language of commerce, government,
and higher learning in the Near East. Under Roman rule,
in the first century C.E., the Bible’s New Testament was
written in Greek—rather than in Hebrew, Aramaic, or
Latin—as a result of the Seleucid legacy.
See also CELTS; HELLENISTIC AGE; WARFARE, LAND.
Further reading: P. Bilde, T. Engberg-Pedersen, and
L. Hannestad, eds., Religion and Religious Practice in the
Seleucid Kingdom (Aarhus, Denmark: Aarhus University
Press, 1990); A. Kuhrt and S. Sherwin-White, “Aspects of
Seleucid Royal Iconography. The Cylinder of Antiochus I
from Borsippa,” Journal of Hellenic Studies 111 (1991):
71–86; S. Sherwin-White and A. Kuhrt, From Samarkhand
to Sardis. A New Approach to the Seleucid Empire (London:
Duckworth, 1993); L. MacKenzie, “Problems in Seleucid
Administration. Macedonian or Near Eastern?” Mediter-
ranean Archaeology 7 (1994): 61–68.
Seleucus (1) (ca. 358–281 B.C.E.) Founder and first
king of the Seleucid Empire, which was named after him
Seleucus was one of the most capable of the DIADOCHOI
(Successors), who fought over the dismembered empire
of ALEXANDER
THE GREAT. He assumed the surname
“Nikator” (Victor), and the kingdom that he received was
the largest of any Successor’s, extending from the Levant
to the Indus River valley.
This Oriental despot was born—neither Oriental nor
royal—in MACEDON, as the son of a Macedonian nobleman
in the service of the Macedonian king PHILIP II. At about
age 24, Seleucus (Shining one) accompanied Philip’s son
and successor, Alexander, on his invasion of the Persian
Empire (334 B.C.E.). Although not mentioned as a promi-
nent commander, Seleucus may have been a close friend of
the young king, who was his near contemporary.
Following Alexander’s spectacular conquests and his
death, Seleucus became the Macedonian governor at Baby-
lon (321 B.C.E.). Coming into conflict with ANTIGONUS (1),
who was based in ASIA MINOR, in 316 B.C.E. Seleucus fled
to the protection of PTOLEMY (1), in EGYPT, but in 312
B.C.E. he returned to Babylon with an army and recaptured
the city. Later Seleucus conquered eastward to seize an
empire that nearly compared with Alexander’s. Soon Seleu-
cus, like the other Diadochoi, was calling himself “king”
(basileus). In 301 B.C.E. he and the Macedonian dynast
LYSIMACHUS destroyed Antigonus at the Battle of Ipsus, in
central Asia Minor. An essential element in the victory was
Seleucus’s 480 trained Indian war ELEPHANTS, acquired
from an Indian king in exchange for Seleucid territorial
concessions in the Indus region.
The Ipsus victory left Seleucus with secure gains in
Syria and southeastern Asia Minor. He then sought west-
ward outlets; no doubt he saw that his domain could
survive only by remaining a part of the Greek world and
by attracting Greek immigration. Having established an
Seleucus
307

eastern capital, Seleuceia, on the River Tigris (in about
312 B.C.E.), he then founded a western capital, the great
city of ANTIOCH, near the Syrian seacoast (300 B.C.E.).
Antioch was named for Seleucus’s son and eventual
successor, Antiochus. Prince Antiochus’s mother was
Apama, a noblewoman of BACTRIA whom Seleucus had
married under Alexander’s supervision, in 324 B.C.E. In
298 B.C.E., without divorcing, the 60-year-old Seleucus
took a second wife—Stratonic¯e, the 20-year-old daughter
of his prior enemy, DEMETRIUS POLIORKETES (Antigonus’s
son). Later, when the dynamic but unstable Demetrius
invaded Asia Minor, Seleucus captured him (285 B.C.E.)
and chivalrously provided a comfortable captivity in
which Demetrius ate and drank himself to death.
In 281 B.C.E. Seleucus took aim at what would be his
last great acquisition—Asia Minor, most of which was
held by his former ally, Lysimachus, now king of Mace-
don. For Seleucus, Asia Minor represented the crucial
westward link to the central Greek world. Seleucus
defeated Lysimachus at the Battle of Corupedium, near
Sardis. Lysimachus’s death in the fighting inspired the 77-
year-old Seleucus with dreams of seizing the vacant
Macedonian throne. Seleucus invaded Macedon and was
on the point of capturing the kingdom when he was mur-
dered by one of his followers, a son of Ptolemy who
wanted the throne for himself. Seleucus was succeeded
by Antiochus, who had been reigning as his father’s part-
ner since 292 B.C.E.
The Seleucid Empire continued under Seleucus’s
descendants for nearly another 220 years, but the vast
conquests of Seleucus I gradually were eroded.
See also WARFARE, LAND.
Further reading: A. Houghton, “A Colossal Head in
Antakya and the Portraits of Seleucus I,” Antike Kunst 27
(1986): 52–62; J. D. Grainger, Seleukos Nikator. Construct-
ing a Hellenistic Kingdom (London: Routledge, 1990).
Seleucus (2)
See SELEUCID EMPIRE.
Selinus
The westernmost Greek city in SICILY, ancient
Selinus is now uninhabited and boasts one of the grand-
est collections of Greek temple ruins from the 400s B.C.E.
Founded in about 628 B.C.E. by Dorian-Greek colonists
from the city of Megara Hyblaea (on Sicily’s east coast), Seli-
nus occupied a terrace of land overlooking the southwest-
ern Sicilian coastline, just south of modern Castelvetrano.
According to one tale, Selinus was named for local growths
of wild celery (Greek: selinon). Selinus enjoyed access to
rich coastal farmland and sea trade, but it also lay within
the territory of the Greeks’ traditional enemies, the
Carthaginians, who occupied western Sicily. This menace
was decreased by the immense Greek victory over the
Carthaginians at the Battle of HIMERA (480 B.C.E.), after
which the Selinuntines became allies of the preeminent
Sicilian-Greek city, SYRACUSE.
It was during these years—late 500s–early 400s
B.C.E.—that the prosperous Selinuntines constructed the
eight Doric-style temples whose remnants grace the site
today. They were constructed on the ACROPOLIS, to the
south of the city itself, and on a second hill west of the
city. Scholars have speculated about the deities to whom
the temples were dedicated, and it appears as though
Temple C was dedicated to APOLLO, Temple A to Leto,
Temple O to ARTEMIS, Temple D to APHRODITE, Temple E
to HERA, Temple F to ATHENA, and Temple G to ZEUS. Of
these buildings, the one now known as Temple G must
have been planned as one of the largest buildings in the
Greek world; it was left incomplete around 480 B.C.E. The
temples all seem to have been toppled by earthquake in
ancient times.
A traditional enmity existed between Selinus and the
northwestern city of Segesta (inhabited by a non-Greek
native people, the Elymi). This conflict took on interna-
tional proportions in 415 B.C.E., when the Segestans
appealed for help to the powerful city of ATHENS, in main-
land Greece. During the subsequent, ill-fated Athenian
invasion of Sicily, Selinuntine troops fought alongside
their Syracusan allies, against the Athenians (415–413
B.C.E.). But soon Segesta had found a new ally, CARTHAGE,
and in 409 B.C.E. Selinus was destroyed by the Carthagini-
ans in their drive to reconquer Sicily.
Reinhabited by refugees, Selinus probably remained a
Carthaginian vassal until 250 B.C.E., when it was again
destroyed in the course of the First Punic War, between
Romans and Carthaginians.
Archaeological exploration at Selinus began in the
early 1800s C.E., at which time three sculpted relief pan-
els (metopes) were discovered from one of the Doric tem-
ples (Temple C). Sporadic surveys of the site have
continued since then, but there has been no systematic
excavation of the city, and the ACROPOLIS remains almost
entirely unexcavated.
See also ARCHITECTURE; DORIAN GREEKS; PELOPON-
NESIAN WAR; ROME.
Further reading: C. Arnold-Biucchi, “The Beginnings
of Coinage in the West. Archaic Selinus,” in Florilegium
numismaticum. Studia in honorem U. Westermark edita
(Stockholm: Svenska Numismatiska Föreningen, 1992),
13–19; P. Danner, “Megara, Megara Hyblaea, and Selinus.
The Relationship between the Town Planning of a Mother
City, a Colony, and a Sub-colony in the Archaic Period,”
Acta Hyperborea. Danish Studies in Classical Archaeology 7
(1997): 143–165.
Semele
See DIONYSUS.
Semonides (late 600s B.C.E.) Early Greek lyric poet
Semonides came from the island of SAMOS but emi-
grated—possibly because of social unrest—to Amorgos,
an island of the CYCLADES.
308
Seleucus

Semonides’ work survives in one apparently com-
plete poem and one fragment, both written in iambic
meter, a form associated with satire. The poem—a social
satire on the nature of WOMEN—is typical of the misog-
yny of Greek male culture of the 600s–400s B.C.E. The
gods (the poem explains) made women from different
materials or animals: from mud, the changeable sea, the
weasel, the donkey, and so forth. According to the poem,
only one type is good to marry: the one made from the
quiet, industrious bee.
Semonides should not be confused with the more
famous SIMONIDES of Keos, who lived a century later.
See also LYRIC POETRY.
Further reading: Hugh Lloyd-Jones, Females of the
Species: Semonides on Women (Park Ridge, N.J.: Noyes
Press, 1975); David Mulroy, trans., Early Greek Lyric
Poetry (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1992);
M. L. West, trans., Greek Lyric Poetry: The Poems and
Fragments of the Greek Iambic, Elegiac, and Melic Poets
(excluding Pindar and Bacchylides) down to 450 B.C.
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1994); Douglas E.
Gerber, ed., A Companion to the Greek Lyric Poets (Lei-
den, Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 1997); Douglas E. Gerber,
ed., Greek Iambic Poetry: From the Seventh to the Fifth
Centuries B.C. (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1999).
Sestos
This small Greek city on the European shore of
the HELLESPONT is situated midway along the strait, at the
narrowest section. Sestos was the fortress of the Helles-
pont, with a hilltop citadel whose walls ran down to flank
the best harbor in the region. Ideally situated to control
shipping in the channel, Sestos served as a naval base for
ATHENS in the 400s–300s B.C.E., protecting Athenian
imports of precious grain from the BLACK SEA.
Sestos was founded by colonists from LESBOS in the
600s B.C.E. Around 512 B.C.E. The city was annexed by
the Persian king DARIUS (1). The Persian king XERXES, in
his campaign to conquer Greece, marched his vast army
across the Hellespont on two pontoon bridges that
reached the European shore near Sestos (480 B.C.E.).
After the Persian defeat in Greece, Sestos was immedi-
ately captured and occupied by Athenian forces (479
B.C.E.). For nearly the next 75 years, Sestos was a mem-
ber of the Athenian-led DELIAN LEAGUE.
Athenian-held Sestos played a prominent role in naval
campaigns for the Hellespont in the later PELOPONNESIAN
WAR. After Athens’s defeat (404 B.C.E.), Sestos was taken
over by SPARTA. Sestos became Athens’s subject again in
365 B.C.E. but soon rebelled. The Athenians crushed and
rebellion, captured the city, sold the inhabitants as SLAVES,
and repopulated the place with Athenian colonists (357
B.C.E.). In 334 B.C.E. the Macedonian king ALEXANDER THE
GREAT brought his army to Sestos for his shipborne inva-
sion of Persian territory across the Hellespont.
On the Asian shore opposite Sestos, one mile away,
stood the Greek city of Abydos. In later Greek times there
arose the legend of Hero and Leander, about a man of
Abydos (Leander) who swam the Hellespont every night
to visit his sweetheart in Sestos.
See also EUROPE AND ASIA; PERSIAN WARS.
Further reading: John Boardman, The Greeks Over-
seas: Their Early Colonies and Trade, 4th ed. (London:
Thames and Hudson, 1999).
Seven against Thebes, the
This well-known MYTH is
part of the so-called Theban Cycle, about the legendary
woes of the royal house of THEBES (a city in central
Greece). By the 600s B.C.E. the myths of Thebes had been
collected in an epic poem, now lost, called the Thebaïd.
Like other episodes in the Theban Cycle, the tale of the
Seven was presented onstage by the great Athenian play-
wright AESCHYLUS, in his tragedy Seven against Thebes
(467 B.C.E.). In the early Roman period (ca. 80–92 C.E.),
the poet Statius composed another epic poem about the
expedition of the Seven against Thebes; this poem was
also called the Thebaïd.
According to the legend, the Theban king OEDIPUS
had two sons, Eteokles (“True Glory”) and Polynices
(Greek: Polyneikes, “Much Strife”). The brothers’ destiny
was not happy. After Oedipus’s death, they argued as to
who should be king—Eteokles was the elder, but the law
of primogeniture did not apply among the Greeks—and
they finally agreed to reign in alternate years. Eteokles
drew the lot allowing him to rule first, and Polynices
withdrew to the city of ARGOS, awaiting his turn.
With the year’s passing it became obvious that Eteok-
les would not relinquish his throne. So Polynices enlisted
the aid of Adrastus, king of Argos, whose daughter
(Argeia) he had married. Polynices and Adrastus col-
lected a mighty army, to be led by Polynices and six other
champions, usually identified as Tydeus of Calydon;
Amphiaraus of Argos; Capaneus of Argos; Hippomedon
of Argos; Parthenopaeus of ARCADIA (son of the huntress
ATALANTA); and, in most versions, King Adrastus.
Foremost among the Seven was Tydeus, a small but
valiant man who had gone to Argos after being banished
from Calydon for homicide. Like Polynices, Tydeus had
married one of Adrastus’s daughters, Deipyle. Their baby
son, DIOMEDES, was destined to outshine even his father,
as a hero in the TROJAN WAR.
Also notable among the Seven was Amphiaraus, a
seer who foresaw that the expedition would be a disaster
and that he himself would never return if he accompa-
nied it. Amphiaraus knew that his wife, Eriphyle, would
be approached to convince him to join the campaign,
and he forbade her to accept any gift from Polynices. She
disobeyed, and was bribed by the fabulous necklace that
had once belonged to Polynices’s great-grandmother Har-
monia (wife of the hero CADMUS). As a result, Eriphyle
Seven against Thebes, the
309

successfully convinced Amphiaraus to join the doomed
expedition—an odd concession by him, given his fore-
knowledge, but so runs the myth. In departing, Amphia-
raus compelled his son ALCMAEON (1) to pledge to
avenge his death by killing Eriphyle (i.e., Alcmaeon’s own
mother); he also made the boy vow to launch his own
attack on Thebes someday.
The tale of Amphiaraus was a favorite among the
Greeks, who liked stories, mythical or otherwise, about
people choosing a course of certain death. Amphiaraus’s
fateful departure from Argos is the subject of one of the
most beautiful surviving Corinthian-style vase paintings,
made around 560 B.C.E.
The Seven’s attack on Thebes was, as Amphiaraus
had predicted, a failure. At each of the seven gates of
Thebes, one of the Seven fought a Theban champion in
single combat. Polynices and Eteokles killed each other,
and the rest of the Seven died, with the exception of King
Adrastus, who escaped on his superlative horse. Amphia-
raus, attempting to flee in his chariot, was swallowed up
in the earth.
In the next generation, Amphiaraus’s son Alcmaeon,
true to his vow, marched to Thebes with six other heroes,
including Tydeus’s son, Diomedes; this time the city fell to
the attackers. Alcmaeon’s exploit was known as the Expe-
dition of the Epigoni (Descendants) and was described in
a now-lost epic poem titled Epigonoi (ca. 600 B.C.E.).
Because Greek myths often provide distorted reflec-
tions of events in the distant Mycenaean age (around
1600–1200 B.C.E.), this tale may contain a kernel of his-
torical truth. Thebes and Argos represent the two heart-
lands of Mycenaean Greek civilization, with Argos
equivalent to the royal city of MYCENAE. The legends of
the Seven and the Epigoni surely commemorate repeated
attempts by the king of Mycenae to capture Thebes and
its fertile plain, perhaps around 1350 B.C.E.
See also ANTIGONE; MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION.
Further reading: William G. Thalmann, Dramatic
Art in Aeschylus’s Seven against Thebes (New Haven,
Conn.: Yale University Press, 1978); Froma Zeitlin,
Under the Sign of the Shield: Semiotics and Aeschylus’
Seven Against Thebes (Rome: Edizioni dell’Ateneo, 1982);
D. R. Shackleton Bailey, ed. and trans., Thebaid, Books
I-VII/Statius (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
2003); ———, Thebaid, Books VIII–XII; Achilleid/Statius
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2003).
Seven Sages, the
This list consisted of seven men said
to be the wisest in ancient Greece. Each of the sages
(Greek: sophoi) was a real person, typically a statesman,
active in the 500s or late 600s B.C.E. One or two were
benign TYRANTS. The list first appears in PLATO’s dialogue
Protagoras, written circa 390 B.C.E.; but the tradition
probably dates back another 200 years. The seven were:
(1) THALES, a philosopher and scientist of MILETUS; (2)
PITTACUS, an elected ruler of MYTILENE, on the island of
LESBOS (3) Bias, a judge and diplomat of Pri¯en¯e (in
IONIA); (4) SOLON, an elected ruler and lawgiver at
ATHENS; (5) Kleobulus, tyrant of Lindos, on the island of
RHODES; (6) CHILON, an EPHOR (chief official) at SPARTA;
and (7) Myson of Chenae (in Trachis in central Greece), a
rustic sage.
In other versions, the obscure Myson is replaced by
PERIANDER, tyrant of CORINTH.
Further reading: R. P. Martin, “The Seven Sages as
Performers of Wisdom,” in Cultural Poetics in Archaic
Greece. Cult, Performance, Politics,
edited by Carol
Dougherty and Leslie Kurke (New York: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1993), 108–128; Constantine Cavarnos, The
Seven Sages of Ancient Greece: The Lives and Teachings of
the Earliest Greek Philosophers (Belmont, Mass.: Institute
for Byzantine and Modern Greek Studies, 1996).
Seven Wonders of the World, the
By a popular tra-
dition in the HELLENISTIC AGE (among 300–150 B.C.E.),
the Greeks counted seven monuments as preeminent in
size or grandeur among all man-made works. In the most
usual list, five of the seven wonders belonged to the
Greek world; the other two—the oldest—were built by
non-Greek civilizations. The seven included the follow-
ing monuments:
1. the pyramids of EGYPT, built between about 2700 and
1800 B.C.E.
2. the hanging gardens of Babylon, dating from the
early 500s B.C.E.
3. the temple of the goddess ARTEMIS at EPHESOS, con-
structed over the period 550–430 B.C.E.
4. the giant cult statue of ZEUS fashioned around 430
B.C.E. by the Athenian sculptor PHEIDIAS for the god’s
temple at OLYMPIA.
5. the Mausoleum, or tomb of the ruler Mausolus, at
HALICARNASSUS, built around 350 B.C.E.
6. the Colossus of RHODES—a statue of the sun god,
HELIOS, erected beside the harbor at Rhodes city
around 285 B.C.E.
7. the lighthouse at ALEXANDRIA (1), built on the isle of
Pharos, outside Alexandria harbor, around 270 B.C.E.
Of all these works, only the pyramids of Egypt sur-
vive today.
Further reading: Peter A. Clayton and Martin Price,
eds., The Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, 2d ed. (New
York: Barnes and Noble, 1993); John and Elizabeth Romer,
The Seven Wonders of the World: A History of the Modern
Imagination (New York; Henry Holt, 1995); Paul Jordan,
The Seven Wonders of the Ancient World (Harlow, U.K.:
Longman, 2002); Diana Bentley, The Seven Wonders of the
Ancient World (New York: Oxford University Press, 2002).
ships and seafaring
“We live around a sea like frogs
around a pond,” the Athenian philosopher SOCRATES is
310
Seven Sages, the

reported to have said (ca. 410 B.C.E.), summarizing the
ancient Greeks’ reliance on seaborne TRADE and trans-
port. Like the Phoenicians, but unlike many other
Mediterranean peoples, the Greeks had a genius for sea-
manship. Seafaring was proverbially dangerous in ancient
times, but it was also far faster, more efficient, and more
lucrative than overland freighting; mule teams or ox-
drawn carts could never compare with the speed and effi-
ciency of ships carrying cargo (or troops) under sail or
oar. New cities were established regularly to take advan-
tage of nearby natural harbors or waterways. The great
expansion of the Greek world in 800–500 B.C.E. was
largely the story of seaborne trade, COLONIZATION, and
conquest, along ever-enlarging shipping routes. On the
military side, sea power came to mean (by the mid-500s
B.C.E.) something like what air power means to modern
generals—the fastest way to bring harm to enemies at
various points, including the ability to stop their imports
and starve them. Sea power became the necessary condi-
tion for imperial strength among classical Greek states. It
was by sea that ATHENS became great in the 400s B.C.E.
Seafaring was encouraged by the geography of main-
land Greece—with its mountains, scarce farmland, and
immensely long overall coastline, nearly 2,000 miles
total. Many Greeks, such as the people of the island
AEGINA, took to the sea to compensate for their home
region’s lack of space or fertility.
Aside from Athens and Aegina, major Greek seagoing
states in various eras of history included CHALCIS,
CORINTH, MILETUS, PHOCAEA, SAMOS, CHIOS, LESBOS, and
RHODES.
The Mediterranean Sea—including its northeastern
corner, the Greeks’ AEGEAN SEA—offered inducements to
seafaring. Unlike the Atlantic Ocean, the Mediterranean
has no tides and is broken by many islands and peninsu-
las, with a reliable “window” of calm weather in summer.
Against these natural advantages, the ancient Greeks
were burdened by primitive means of navigation. Lacking
the compass and sextant, they depended on visible reck-
onings, such as coastal landmarks and position of the
stars. This need for landmarks—along with a fear of
straying too far from shelter—explains the ancient seafar-
ers’ persistent reliance on coastal routing. A Greek colony
such as CORCYRA, on the Adriatic coast, long remained an
important anchorage between Greece and ITALY, even
though on a map it looks to be a northern detour.
Ancient vessels were made from TIMBER and relied on
two forms of power—wind and oars. Most ships carried a
single mast, capable of hoisting one square sail typically
made of patchwork linen (from the flax plant) or canvas
(from Egyptian cotton). Unlike modern sailboats, ancient
square-riggers could make direct progress only if the
wind was fully or nearly astern; a wind from the side
(abeam) required the ship to sail close-hauled, on a
zigzag course of tacking, and a wind forward of the beam
tended to be unusable. Still, heavier ships, such as the
larger merchant vessels, had to rely mostly on wind
power. Smaller craft, such as warships, could make
progress under oars alone if that was preferable to using
the sail. War squadrons always rowed when moving into
battle, for better control and uniformity.
Despite changes in ship design during the Greek
epoch of 1600–100 B.C.E., these two basic categories per-
sisted: merchant vessel and war vessel. The merchantmen
were by far the larger type, designed to carry freight; such
ships had deep drafts, wide beams, and heavy masts; their
hulls were usually closed at top by a deck. They carried
only a small crew. A war craft, by contrast, was designed
for speed and was slender, shallow-drafted, and low-rid-
ing. Like a canoe or modern racing shell, the warship’s
hull was typically undecked (or only partly decked), and
almost every foot of space was taken by oarsmen or ship-
board soldiers.
The major difference in handling between warships
and merchantmen was that war crews, sitting at their
crowded benches, could not spend the night aboard ship
easily. To rest or cook, they needed to pitch camp ashore.
Merchant freighters, on the other hand, could sail day and
night. Sheltered under the top decking, the off-duty crew
could rest on mattresses and could feed from supplies
aboard. Under proper conditions, a freighter might leave
the shore behind and course out over the open sea; with a
favoring wind, such a ship might reach between four and
six knots, traveling 100 or more miles in 24 hours.
Because a merchant ship was capable of long-range
travel, ancient Greek merchant voyages tended to be
ambitious and dangerous. Shipwrecks were common—as
suggested by vase paintings, written references, and mod-
ern underwater ARCHAEOLOGY. Many harbors had temples
where mariners went to pray and sacrifice for a safe voy-
age. The main patron gods of seafaring were POSEIDON,
ATHENA, APHRODITE, and CASTOR AND POLYDEUCES.
For safety, shipping and naval operations normally
were confined to the season from May to mid-September,
when Mediterranean weather tends to be sunny and
calm. But even this period seemed too long to HESIOD
(ca. 700 B.C.E.), whose epic poem Works and Days men-
tions that seafaring is safe for only the 50 days following
the summer solstice—roughly June 21 to mid-August.
Only the extremes of war or greed could induce ships to
put to sea during autumn or winter. The hazard of winter
seafaring lay partly in violent storms, but also in reduced
visibility due to rain, fog, and short daylight. The apostle
Paul’s shipwreck of 57 C.E. (described in the New Testa-
ment book Acts of the Apostles, Chapter 27) occurred
because the skipper had risked sailing from CRETE after
the season’s end.
See also CYPRUS; GREECE, GEOGRAPHY OF; MASSALIA;
MINOAN CIVILIZATION; MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION; PHOENI-
CIA; WARFARE, NAVAL.
Further reading: A. F. Tilley and V. H. Fenwick,
“Ours Is to Reason Why. The Iconography of Ancient
ships and seafaring
311

Ships,” International Journal of Nautical Archaeology 9
(1980): 151–154; J. Morrison, Long Ships and Round
Ships. Warfare and Trade in the Mediterranean, 3000
B.C.–500 A.D. (London: H.M.S.O., 1980); P. F. Johnston,
“Bronze Age Cycladic Ships. An Overview,” in Trade and
Travel in the Cyclades during the Bronze Age. Temple Uni-
versity Aegean Symposium, 7. Philadelphia, March 5, 1982
(Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1982), 1–8;
Harry E. Tzalas, ed., First International Symposium on
Ship Construction in Antiquity, Piraeus, 30 August–1
September 1985 (Athens: Institute for the Preservation of
Nautical Traditions, 1989); ———, ed., Second Interna-
tional Symposium on Ship Construction in Antiquity, Del-
phi, 27–29 August 1987 (Athens: Institute for the
Preservation of Nautical Traditions, 1990); D. M. Good-
burn, “Some Further Thoughts on Reconstructions,
Replicas, and Simulations of Ancient Boats and Ships,”
International Journal of Nautical Archaeology 22 (1993):
199–203; H. T. Wallinga, Ships and Sea Power before the
Great Persian War. The Ancestry of the Ancient Trireme
(Leiden, Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 1993); J. Coates,
“Power and Speed of Oared Ships,” in Crossroads in
Ancient Shipbuilding. Proceedings of the Sixth Interna-
tional Symposium on Boat and Ship Archaeology, Roskilde
1991, edited by Christer Westerdahl (Oxford: Oxbow
Books, 1994), 249–255; J. P. Stronk, “Greek Sailing Mer-
chant-ships, c. 500–330 B.C. A Preliminary Research,”
Talanta 24–25 (1992–1993): 117–140; Lionel Casson,
Ships and Seafaring in Ancient Times (Austin: University
of Texas Press, 1994); Lionel Casson, Ships and Seaman-
ship in the Ancient World, 2d ed. (Baltimore: Johns Hop-
kins University Press, 1995); Harry Tzalas, ed., Third
International Symposium on Ship Construction in Antiq-
uity, Athens, 24–27 August 1989 (Athens: Hellenic Insti-
tute for the Preservation of Nautical Tradition, 1995); J.
S. Morrison and J. F. Coates, Greek and Roman Oared
Warships (Oxford: Oxbow Books, 1996); R. Gardiner,
ed., The Earliest Ships. The Evolution of Boats into Ships
(London: Conway Maritime Press, 1996; Harry Tzalas,
ed., Fourth International Symposium on Ship Construction
in Antiquity, Center for the Acropolis Studies, Athens,
28–31 August 1991 (Athens: Hellenic Institute for the
Preservation of Nautical Tradition, 1996); O. Dickinson,
“The Catalogue of Ships and All That,” Aegaeum 20
(1999): 207–210; Harry Tzalas, ed., Fifth International
Symposium on Ship Construction in Antiquity, Nauplia,
26–28 August 1993 (Athens: Hellenic Institute for the
Preservation of Nautical Tradition, 1999); J. S. Morri-
son, J. F. Coates, and N. B. Rankov, The Athenian
Trireme: The History and Reconstruction of an Ancient
Greek Warship, 2d ed. (New York: Cambridge University
Press, 2000); Harry Tzalas, ed., Sixth International Sym-
posium on Ship Construction in Antiquity, Lamia, 28–30
August 1996 (Athens: Hellenic Institute for the Preserva-
tion of Nautical Tradition, 2001); ———, ed., Seventh
International Symposium on Ship Construction in Antiq-
uity, Pylos, 26–29 August 1999 (Athens: Hellenic Insti-
tute for the Preservation of Nautical Tradition, 2002).
Sicily
The largest (9,860 square miles) island of the
Mediterranean, Sicily is situated just west of the “toe” of
ITALY. It is shaped roughly like an isosceles triangle, with
the base facing east.
Renowned in ancient times for its fertile coastlands,
Sicily attracted waves of Greek settlers at the outset of
the great colonizing epoch (beginning after 750 B.C.E.).
The island became a major part of the Greek world, pro-
ducing a dozen or so noteworthy Greek cities, particu-
larly the Corinthian colony of SYRACUSE, which grew to
be the greatest Greek city of the West (400s–200s B.C.E.).
Syracuse and other Sicilian-Greek cities supplied pre-
cious grain for CORINTH and other populous mainland
Greek cities.
Despite prosperity, Greek Sicily had a tragic history,
full of social unrest within cities and conflicts between
cities inhabited by DORIAN GREEKS and those inhabited
by IONIAN GREEKS. But worst of all were the repeated
wars with the non-Greek, Carthaginian settlers of west-
ern Sicily.
The name Sicily (Greek: Sikelia) commemorates the
Sicels—a native, non-Greek people of the island’s east coast,
whose prime land at Syracuse and on the plain of Catania
was seized by the early Greek colonists. Other native peo-
ples included the Sicani, in the island’s west-central region;
and the Elymi, in the west. The relatively unsophisticated
level of these peoples no doubt helped to attract early
Greek settlers. (The Greeks tended to plant colonies where
they knew they could subdue local inhabitants.)
Sicily’s earliest Greek colonies—NAXOS (2), Syracuse,
CATANA, and Leontini—arose around 734–728 B.C.E.
along the island’s 200-mile-long eastern coast. Among the
coast’s distinctive geographic features are volcanic Mt.
Etna (over 11,000 feet tall) and the plain of Catania
(whose fertility is due in part to volcanic lime, washed
down from Etna’s slopes). Toward the coast’s southern
end is the promontory of Syracuse, with its superb natu-
ral harbor and nearby farmland.
Most of the eastern coast was Ionian Greek, with the
exception of Dorian Syracuse. But a Dorian bloc soon
arose on Sicily’s southern coast, with the founding of
GELA (around 688 B.C.E.) and ACRAGAS (around 580
B.C.E.). After Syracuse, Acragas became the second most
important city of Greek Sicily (400s B.C.E.).
Sicily’s western side, meanwhile, had been occupied
by settlers from the African-Phoenician city of CARTHAGE
(which lay only about 135 miles southwest of Sicily). By
about 500 B.C.E. Greeks and Carthaginians had settled
into a bitter conflict that lasted over 250 years and
monopolized the energies of Greek Sicily. The constant
Carthaginian threat largely shaped the authoritarian
nature of Sicilian Greek politics. Long after the age of
TYRANTS had passed away in mainland Greece, Sicilian
312
Sicily

Greek cities were still relying on military tyrants who
could promise protection against the hated Carthagini-
ans. Foremost among such powerful rulers were the Syra-
cusan tyrants: GELON (reigned ca. 490–478 B.C.E.), his
brother HIERON (1) (478–467 B.C.E.), DIONYSIUS (1) (ca.
400–367 B.C.E.), and AGATHOKLES (317–289 B.C.E.).
Under these men, Syracuse dominated the other Greek
cities and several times came close to driving the
Carthaginians from the island. At other times leaders
from mainland Greece were called in to help the belea-
guered Sicilian Greeks. For example, the Corinthian com-
mander TIMOLEON
(345–340 
B.C.E.) defeated the
Carthaginians in battle and gave the Greek cities new
governments. King PYRRHUS OF EPIRUS arrived and beat
the Carthaginians (279 B.C.E.), then hurried away before
exploring his advantage.
The conquest of Sicily remained an elusive and dan-
gerous dream for Syracuse, for Carthage, and for the
mainland Greek city of ATHENS, whose attempt to capture
Syracuse during the PELOPONNESIAN WAR proved a disas-
ter (415–413) B.C.E.). It took the emerging might of Ital-
ian ROME to conquer Greeks and Carthaginians alike.
Sicily became a battlefield between Rome and Carthage in
the First Punic War (264–241 B.C.E.), before it passed to
Roman control. A defiant Syracuse was besieged and cap-
tured by the Romans in 213–211 B.C.E., during the Sec-
ond Punic War. Sicily was then made a province of the
Roman Empire.
See also
COLONIZATION; CYCLOPS; HIMERA; PERSE-
PHONE; SELINUS; ZANCL¯E.
Further reading: R. S. Bianchi, “The Greek Temples
of Sicily,” Archaeology 37 (1984): 26–32; S. C. Bakhuizen,
“Italy and Sicily in the Perception of the Early Greeks,”
Mededelingen van het Nederlands Instituut te Rome 48
(1988): 9–25; A. Di Vita, “Town Planning in the Greek
Colonies of Sicily from the Time of Their Foundations to
the Punic Wars,” in Greek Colonists and Native Population.
Proceedings of the First Australian Congress of Classical
Archaeology, Sydney, 9–14 July, 1985, edited by Jean-Paul
Descoeudres (New York: Oxford University Press, 1990),
343–363; R. R. Holloway, The Archaeology of Ancient
Sicily (London: Routledge, 1991); S. Berger, Revolution
and Society in Greek Sicily and Southern Italy (Stuttgart,
Germany: F. Steiner, 1992); N. K. Rutter, The Greek
Coinages of Southern Italy and Sicily (London: Spink,
1997); R. Leighton, Sicily before History. An Archaeological
Survey from the Palaeolithic to the Iron Age (London:
Duckworth, 1999); C. Smith and J. Serrati, eds., Sicily
from Aeneas to Augustus. New Approaches in Archaeology
and History (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press,
2000).
siege warfare
See WARFARE, SIEGE.
Sigeum
See HELLESPONT.
Sikyon
An important city of the northeast PELOPON-
NESE, Sikyon is situated about 15 miles west of CORINTH.
It is located two miles inland, on a fertile coastal plain
beside the Corinthian Gulf, at the foot of a lofty hill that
served as the city’s ACROPOLIS. The city had a mixed
Dorian and Achaean population, having been founded
(probably) from Dorian ARGOS around 1000 B.C.E. Sup-
posedly Sikyon was named for its local growths of
cucumbers (sikyai).
Sikyon was one of the first Greek cities to be seized
by TYRANTS. The dynasty created around 660 B.C.E. by the
tyrant Orthagoras lasted for over a century and made
Sikyon into a great power. Orthagoras’s descendant KLEIS-
THENES (2) ruled ca. 600–570 B.C.E., leading the First
Sacred War against PHOCIS and later celebrating his
daughter’s wedding with Homeric magnificence. This era
saw construction of the Sikyonians’ treasury house at
DELPHI, prominently occupying the start of the Sacred
Way up to APOLLO’s temple.
Under Kleisthenes wealthy Sikyon was a center for
manufacturing and art, particularly SCULPTURE and PAINT-
ING. A Sikyonian poet, Egigenes, is said to have been a
pioneer in the writing of “tragic choruses” in the early
500s B.C.E. The city’s schools of art remained important
for centuries; Sikyon’s most famous artist was the sculp-
tor Lysippos (ca. 330 B.C.E.).
The Sikyonian tyranny was extinguished around 550
B.C.E. by the Spartans. Sikyon became an OLIGARCHY and
a Spartan ally. Sikyonians fought alongside the Spartans
in the PERSIAN WARS (480–479 B.C.E.) and PELOPON-
NESIAN WAR (431–404 B.C.E.). In the mid-200s B.C.E.
Sikyon’s most famous son was the statesman and com-
mander Aratus.
See also ACHAEA; DORIAN GREEKS; THEATER.
Further reading: Audrey Griffin, Sikyon (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1982); Nicos Papahatzis, Ancient
Corinth: The Museums of Corinth, Isthmia, and Sicyon,
translated by Kay Cicellis (Athens: Edotike Athenon,
1989).
Silenus
A mythical semihuman creature, Silenus is dis-
tinguished by his horse ears, horse tail, pot belly, shaggy
hair, bald head, and pug nose. Like the SATYRS, whom he
resembled, Silenus was associated with the wine god
DIONYSUS. On vase paintings of the 500s–400s B.C.E.,
Silenus was portrayed cavorting in the god’s retinue or
lustily pursuing the NYMPHS. Sometimes he was shown as
several creatures (called by the plural, Silenoi or Sileni).
A widespread Athenian joke of the late 400s B.C.E.
claimed that Silenus resembled the living philosopher
SOCRATES.
Further reading: A. Ajootian, “Silenus at Sparta,” in
Sculpture from Arcadia and Laconia. Proceedings of an
International Conference Held at the American School of
Classical Studies at Athens, April 10–14, 1992, edited by
Silenus
313

Olga Palagia and William Coulson (Oxford: Oxbow
Books, 1993), 251–256.
silver
A precious metal in both ancient and modern
times, silver traditionally has been less prized than GOLD,
partly because silver ore is more common and less mal-
leable for shaping.
Throughout antiquity, silver was used for luxury
items such as plates, goblets, statuary, and jewelry; it was
particularly favored for cups and plates with repoussé
work. More important, silver was the prime substance for
Greek COINAGE (first appearing just after 600 B.C.E.).
Even before the invention of coinage, silver was being
used in ingot form for high-level exchange, in the mone-
tary unit known as the TALENT.
Unlike gold, silver existed as a natural mineral
deposit in mainland Greece. The publicly owned silver
mines at Laurion, 15 miles south of ATHENS, played a
large role in Athenian greatness in the 500s–400s B.C.E.
The Laurion mines helped finance naval fleets and the
social programs of the DEMOCRACY.
But the main supplier of raw silver for the Greek
world was the north Aegean coast (in the non-Greek land
of THRACE) and particularly Mt. Pangaeus, near the lower
Strymon River. From there—where silver seems to have
been available by panning in local rivers—the precious
ore reached Greek hands by TRADE and eventually by
conquest. In the 600s–500s B.C.E., Greek traders began
operating out of THASOS, SAMOTHRACE, ABDERA, and
AENUS, acquiring raw silver from local Thracian kings.
From the Thracian shore, this silver—typically in the
form of large, bowtieshape ingots—would be shipped to
markets in the Greek world or to foreign markets such as
EGYPT and PHOENICIA. In this early era (650–480 B.C.E.),
raw silver was one of the few goods that Greek traders
could offer to the sophisticated Near Eastern markets.
During the mid-400s B.C.E., Mt. Pangaeus seems to
have come under control of imperial Athens, through the
Athenian colony at AMPHIPOLIS. In the mid-300s B.C.E.
the region fell to the cash-hungry Macedonian king
PHILIP II. Other sources of raw silver included non-Greek
Asian kingdoms such as LYDIA and Phrygia, fabled for
their wealth. Another source, around 600–500 B.C.E., was
the Celtic kingdom in southern Spain known as Tartessus
(the Tarshish of the Bible). To this distant domain sailed
Greek traders from SAMOS and PHOCAEA.
In the HELLENISTIC AGE (300–150 B.C.E.), silver
became more plentiful among the Greeks, due to the for-
merly Persian-owned mines and treasure hordes
acquired by ALEXANDER THE GREAT. The silver mines of
Thrace, Asia Minor, and Mesopotamia made possible the
beautiful, large-denomination coins of the Hellenistic
Greek kings.
Further reading: Dionysios Kounas, ed., Studies on
the Ancient Silver Mines at Laurion (Lawrence, Kans.:
Coronado Press, 1972); H. Mussche, P. Spitaels, and F.
Goemaere-De Poerck, eds., Thorikos and the Laurion in
Archaic and Classical Times: Papers and Contributions of
the Colloquium held in March, 1973, at the State University
of Ghent (Ghent, Belgium: Belgian Archaeological Mis-
sion in Greece, 1975); N. H. Gale, “Some Aspects of Lead
and Silver Mining in the Aegean,” Thera and the Aegean
World. Papers and Proceedings of the Second International
Scientific Congress, Santorini, Greece, August 1978, edited
by Christos Doumas (London: Thera and the Ancient
World, 1980), 161–195; B. S. Strauss, “Philip II of Mace-
don, Athens, and Silver Mining,” Hermes 112 (1984):
418–427; J. E. Jones, “Laurion, Agrileza, 1977–1983.
Excavations at a Silver-mine Site,” Archaeological Reports
31 (1984–1985): 106–123; D. Harris, “Gold and Silver
on the Athenian Acropolis. Thucydides 2, 13, 4 and the
Inventory Lists,” Horos 8–9 (1990–1991): 75–82; Robert
Shepherd, Ancient Mining (London: Elsevier Applied Sci-
ence, 1993); M. Vickers and D. Gill, Artful Crafts: Ancient
Greek Silverware and Pottery (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1994); Michail Yu Treister, The Role of Metals in Ancient
Greek History (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 1996);
K. M. V. Shipton, “The Prices of the Athenian Silver
Mines,” Zeitschrift für Papyrologie und Epigraphik 120
(1998): 57–63.
314
silver
Statue of Silenus, a mythical semihuman creature, at the the-
ater of Dionysos, identified by his bald head, shaggy hair, and
pug nose. (Alison Frantz Photographic Collection, American
School of Classical Studies at Athens)

Simonides (ca. 556–468 B.C.E.) Lyric poet from the
island of Keos, in the CYCLADES
Over his long lifetime, Simonides enjoyed success with
many genres of poetry. He was famous for the epitaphs he
wrote to commemorate the Greek dead in the PERSIAN
WARS (490–479 B.C.E.). He developed the choral song
known as the victory ode (epinikion), thereby in effect
clearing the way for his younger and greater contempo-
rary, the Theban poet PINDAR. The only poems by
Simonides that survive complete are epigrams—short
poems in elegiac verse, written to be carved in stone.
Fragments of his victory odes and his dirges exist, but
other categories are largely lost, including Simonides’
dithyrambs—narrative poems on mythological topics,
performed by choruses.
Simonides’ work was admired in the ancient world
for its clarity, word choice, and sympathy for human tran-
science and suffering. His simple language went right to
the heart—particularly in its expressions of sorrow—and
was considered more effective than the grandiose phras-
ings of other great poets such as AESCHYLUS.
Simonides was also the first poet to work for hire—
that is, to compose poetry for a one-time fee from succes-
sive patrons rather than in a permanent position in the
retinue of some wealthy man. Simonides was said to be
fond of money and shrewd in business dealings. He
seems to have had an affable, worldly personality.
Keos—where Simonides, son of Leoprepes, was born
into an upper-class family—was an Ionian-ethnic island, 15
miles off the Athenian coast. After gaining repute for his
victory odes, Simonides was summoned to ATHENS (in
about 525 B.C.E.) by Hipparchus, the brother and cultural
minister of the Athenian tyrant HIPPIAS
(1). There
Simonides enjoyed high payments from Hipparchus, whose
majestic court hosted another famous poet, ANACREON.
At Athens in these years, Simonides surely wrote
some of his many dithyrambs, now lost. Late in life
Simonides set up an inscription commemorating his 56
victories in dithyramb contests at Athens; the inscription
mentions that he himself taught the choruses, which
were composed of men.
Simonides left Athens around 514–510 B.C.E., as the
tyranny crumbled. He traveled to THESSALY, and there
found employ with the wealthy Aleaud and Scopad clans.
But his stay ended after the Scopads were decimated by
the collapsing roof of a banquet hall. The disaster later
inspired Simonides to write a poem containing one of his
much-admired reflections on the brevity of human happi-
ness: “Since you are mortal, never say what tomorrow will
bring nor how long a man may be happy. For the darting
of the dragonfly is not so swift as change of fortune.”
By the early 490s B.C.E., Simonides, then approach-
ing 60, was back in Athens, his former intimacy with
the tyrants apparently pardoned. Amid the great events
of the Persian Wars he found a new calling as the poet
laureate of Greece. After the Athenian victory at
MARATHON (490 B.C.E.), the Athenians honored their
dead with an epitaph by Simonides, chosen over one
submitted by the young poet Aeschylus (himself an
Athenian who had fought at the battle). According to
the story, the Athenians decided that Simondes’ poem
conveyed a keener sympathy.
In 479 B.C.E., after the invasion by the Persian king
XERXES had been repelled, Simonides was again commis-
sioned to write patriotic verse. He produced choral odes
about the sea battles at ARTEMISION and SALAMIS (1) and
several much-admired epitaphs for the Greek dead.
In 476 B.C.E., at age 80, Simonides left Athens again,
this time for the grand court of the tyrant HIERON (1) of
SYRACUSE, in SICILY. Simonides’ departure might have
been related to the political downfall at Athens of his
friend THEMISTOKLES. At Syracuse, Simonides—with his
nephew and protégé, the poet BACCHYLIDES—is said to
have indulged in a feud with Pindar, who was also in
Sicily at that time. Another tale claims that Hieron’s wife
once asked Simonides which is better, to acquire wisdom
or wealth. “Wealth,” the poet replied. “For I see the wise
sitting at the doorsteps of the rich.”
Simonides died in Sicily and was buried at ACRAGAS.
See also IONIAN GREEKS; LYRIC
POETRY; THEATER;
THERMOPYLAE.
Further reading: John H. Molyneux, Simonides: A His-
torical Study (Wauconda, Ill.: Bolchazy-Carducci Publish-
ers, 1992); M. A. Flower, “From Simonides to Isocrates.
The Fifth-century Origins of Fourth-century Panhel-
lenism,” Classical Antiquity 19 (2000): 65–101; Deborah
Boedeker and David Sider, eds., The New Simonides: Con-
texts of Praise and Desire (New York: Oxford University
Press, 2001); Anne Carson, Economy of the Unlost: Reading
Simonides of Keos with Paul Celan (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 2002).
Sinope
This prosperous Greek city on the BLACK SEA
was founded in about 625 B.C.E. by colonists from MILE-
TUS. Sinope (modern Sinop, in Turkey) is located halfway
along the north coast of ASIA MINOR, where the coast
bulges advantageously northward. The city was built at the
neck of a lofty promontory with a fine double harbor—the
only first-rate harbor on the Black Sea’s southern shore.
Isolated by mountains inland, Sinope depended for
its prosperity on seaborne TRADE. The city was probably
an export center for goods shipped in from other Greek
ports of the Black Sea. Such goods would include the
metals of Asia Minor—GOLD, SILVER, IRON, and copper
and tin for BRONZE making—as well as “Sinopic earth”
(cinnabar, or red mercuric sulfide, used for making a
prized red dye). Sinope is located 220 miles due south of
the eastern Crimean peninsula, which was home to PAN-
TICAPAEUM and other Greek seaports in antiquity; the
shipping run between Sinope and the Crimea was a vital
link in the Greek navigation of the Black Sea.
Sinope
315

Sinope founded its own colonies, farther east on the
Black Sea coast. Chief among these daughter cities was
Trapezus (“the table,” named for a mountain landmark),
which is now the Turkish city of Trabzon. Unlike moun-
tain-girt Sinope, Trapezus had access to the Asia Minor
interior and the land route to the Near East.
Sinope probably offered nominal submission to the
Persian kings who had conquered Asia Minor by 545
B.C.E. The city was being ruled by a Greek dictator in the
mid-400s B.C.E., when an Athenian fleet under the com-
mander PERIKLES arrived on a Black Sea expedition. The
Athenians established DEMOCRACY at Sinope and settled
Athenian colonists there. The city may have henceforth
had some trading agreement with ATHENS, but it never
became a member of the DELIAN LEAGUE.
Occupied briefly by Persian troops in around 375
B.C.E., Sinope was liberated by ALEXANDER THE GREAT’s
conquest of the Persian Empire (334–323 B.C.E.). The
city seems to have remained independent of the several
Hellenistic kingdoms that subsequently dominated Asia
Minor, but was captured by the Iranian-ethnic kingdom
of Pontus in 183 B.C.E. and became the Pontic capital.
After the Romans’ conquest of Pontus (63 B.C.E.), Sinope
became a city of the Roman Empire.
Sinope was a center of Greek culture in the East,
with grand temples, markets, and a tradition of learning.
Its most famous citizen was the Cynic philosopher DIO-
GENES (mid-300s B.C.E.).
Sinope was first excavated in the 1950s C.E. by a
Turkish archaeologist, Ekrem Akurgal, who concentrated
on the city center and the surrounding cemeteries. He
discovered several monumental tombs as well as a Hel-
lenistic temple dedicated to the Egyptian god Sarapis.
Currently, an American team of archaeologists is conduct-
ing the Black Sea Trade Project, intended to investigate
thoroughly the area around Sinope and its trade relations,
using traditional land archaeology as well as underwater
archaeological techniques in the Black Sea.
Further reading: Owen Doonan, Sinop Landscapes:
Exploring Connection in a Black Sea Hinterland (Philadel-
phia: University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology
and Anthropology, 2004).
Sirens
In Greek MYTH the Seir¯enes were sea witches
who lured sailors to their deaths. The sailors, hearing the
Sirens’ enchanting song, would land their ship and go
ashore, where the Sirens would kill them.
The Sirens are first mentioned in book 12 of HOMER’s
epic poem the Odyssey (written down around 750 B.C.E.).
There they are two in number; their appearance is never
described. The seafaring hero ODYSSEUS defies the Sirens
by plugging his crewmen’s ears with beeswax beforehand.
However, wishing to hear the song himself, he has his
men bind him to the ship’s mast. As they row past the
Sirens’ island, Odysseus is bewitched by the song and
pleads to be untied. His crew pays him no heed, however,
and eventually the ship passes out of earshot. The Sirens,
whose name may mean “Scorchers” or “Binders,” are
among several female threats that Odysseus encounters
on his voyage home.
Later generations of Greeks named 11 Sirens and pic-
tured them as half woman, half bird. These Sirens resem-
ble other winged, malevolent, female creatures of Greek
myth—the HARPIES and the FURIES.
Further reading: Jenifer Neils, “Les Femmes Fatales.
Skylla and the Sirens in Greek Art,” in The Distaff Side.
Representing the Female in Homer’s ‘Odyssey’, edited by
Beth Cohen (New York: Oxford University Press, 1995),
175–184; Méri Franco-Lao, Sirens: Symbols of Seduction
(Rochester, Vt.: Park Street Press, 1998); W. R. Biers,
“Plastic Sirens from Corinth. An Addendum to Amyx,”
Hesperia 68 (1999): 135–146.
Sisyphus
Mentioned in book II of HOMER’s epic poem
the Odyssey, Sisyphus is one of three infamous sinners—
betrayers of the gods’ friendship and thus eternally
damned—encountered by the hero ODYSSEUS. In his visit
to the Underworld, Odysseus observes Sisyphus’s punish-
ment, which is to roll a great boulder up a hill but, on
nearing the top, to have it slip backward past him, back
down the slope. Sisyphus must pursue this frustrating
and exhausting labor forever. In theory, his punishment
would end if he could ever reach the summit and push
the boulder down the far slope, but the vindictive gods
would never allow this to happen.
The Odyssey does not mention Sisyphus’s original
offense, but later writers describe him as the conniving
founder of the city of CORINTH. In exchange for receiving a
perpetual water source for his city’s citadel, Sisyphus
informed the god Asopus that the great god ZEUS had
abducted Asopus’s daughter. When angry Zeus sent the god
HADES to fetch Sisyphus to the Underworld, the hero out-
witted Hades and tied him up, thus unnaturally stopping all
death in the world. Eventually the gods captured Sisyphus.
Sisyphus was a hero of the “trickster” type—a cate-
gory that included the god HERMES,
the Titan
PROMETHEUS, and Odysseus himself (sometimes said to
be Sisyphus’s illegitimate son).
See also AFTERLIFE; TANTALUS.
Further reading: C. Sourvinou-Inwood, “Crime and
Punishment. Tityos, Tantalos, and Sisyphos in ‘Odyssey’
11,” Bulletin of the Institute of Classical Studies 33 (1986):
37–58.
Skepticism
This Greek school of thought believed
than no positive knowledge is possible because every-
thing is in a constant state of flux. This notion appears
early in ancient Greek philosophy, related to statements
made by HERACLITUS (ca. 500 B.C.E.) and the belief of the
SOPHISTS (late 400s B.C.E.) that any argument could be
met by an equally true counterargument. The Skeptics
316
Sirens

(Greek: Skeptikoi) withheld judgment on all matters,
stating no positive doctrines but accepting tentatively the
outward appearances of things for the sake of daily life.
This outlook was supposed to bring the Skeptic to the
desired state of imperturbability (ataraxia).
The term “skepticism” derives from the Greek word
skepsis: “examination,” “inquiry,” “consideration.” The
founding of a formal school of Skepticism was the work
of Pyrrhon (363–273 B.C.E.), a native of ELIS (in the west-
ern PELOPONNESE) who had accompanied ALEXANDER THE
GREAT on his conquest of the Persian Empire (334–323
B.C.E.).
Alongside STOICISM and EPICUREANISM, Skepticism
became one of the major philosophies of the HELLENISTIC
AGE (ca. 300–150 B.C.E.). It had its greatest influence at
the ACADEMY,
the prestigious philosophical school
founded at ATHENS by PLATO in about 385 B.C.E. Skepti-
cism was introduced as a course of study at the Academy
around 270 B.C.E., and for nearly the next two centuries it
provided the basis of much Academic thought. Rejecting
many of their founder Plato’s doctrines, the Academics of
these years saw Skepticism as connecting back to
Socrates’ statement, “All I know is that I know nothing.”
They sought to prove the impossibility of positive knowl-
edge and also used Skepticism to attack the rival Stoics,
whose beliefs relied on sensory perception.
Further reading: Leo Groarke, Greek Scepticism:
Anti-realist Trends in Ancient Thought (Montreal: McGill-
Queen’s University Press, 1990); P. de Lacy, “Galen’s
Response to Skepticism,” Illinois Classical Studies 16
(1991): 283–306; Frederick F. Schmitt, Knowledge and
Belief (London: Routledge, 1992); R. J. Hankinson, The
Sceptics (London: Routledge, 1995); R. W. Sharples, Sto-
ics, Epicureans, and Sceptics: An Introduction to Hellenistic
Philosophy (London: Routledge, 1996); Juha Sihvola,
Ancient Scepticism and the Sceptical Tradition (Helsinki:
Philosophical Society of Finland, 2000).
Skopas
See SCULPTURE.
Skylla
A mythical, female sea monster, semihuman in
shape, Skylla is described in HOMER’s epic poem the
Odyssey (book 12). She lived in a narrow sea channel
sometimes identified as the Straits of Messina, between
SICILY and the “toe” of ITALY. Opposite her cave, the
whirlpool Charybdis operated; ships moving through the
channel had to risk encountering either Skylla at one side
or Charybdis at the other. Skylla (“Mangler”) had six
heads and 12 legs, and normally fed herself on fish; but
she would attack any passing ship, grabbing men from
shipboard and devouring them.
In the Odyssey the hero ODYSSEUS, having been fore-
warned by the witch CIRCE, steers his ship close by Skylla
to avoid the worse danger, Charybdis. Skylla, snatches six
of Odysseus’s men overboard, but the ship passes by,
rowed by the surviving crew. Odysseus’s adventure has
given rise to the expression “Steering on Skylla to avoid
Charybdis,” meaning to choose the lesser of two evils.
Later writers described Skylla as having genitalia
consisting of ferocious, snarling dogs’ heads. This defor-
mity was said to be the result of a magic spell. Skylla had
once been a beautiful woman who became the lover of
the sea god POSEIDON and was then hideously bewitched
in a magical bath prepared by Poseidon’s jealous wife,
Amphitrit¯e.
Further reading: G. Säflund, The Polyphemus and
Scylla Groups at Sperlonga (Stockholm: Almqvist &
Wiksell, 1972); G. B. Waywell, “The Scylla Monument
from Bargylia,” Antike Plastik 25 (1996): 75–119; D.
Buitron-Oliver and B. Cohen, “Between Skylla and
Penelope. Female Characters of the ‘Odyssey’ in Archaic
and Classical Greek Art,” in The Distaff Side. Represent-
ing the Female in Homer’s ‘Odyssey,’ edited by Beth
Cohen (New York: Oxford University Press, 1995),
29–58; Jenifer Neils, “Les Femmes Fatales. Skylla and
the Sirens in Greek Art,” in The Distaff Side. Representing
the Female in Homer’s ‘Odyssey,’ edited by Beth Cohen
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1995), 175–184; E.
Walter-Karydi, “Dangerous Is Beautiful. The Elemental
Quality of a Hellenistic Scylla,” in Regional Schools in
Hellenistic Sculpture. Proceedings of an International Con-
ference Held at Athens, March 15–17, 1996, edited by
Olga Palagia and William Coulson (Oxford: Oxbow
Books, 1998), 271–279.
slaves
Slave labor was a fundamental part of the
ancient Greek economy. No less a thinker than ARISTOTLE
(ca. 330 B.C.E.) believed that the use of slaves, although
lamentable, was unavoidable; to him, a slave was “a living
tool.” Only the mystical PLATO (ca. 360 B.C.E.) imagined a
society where slavery would be abolished (and where
WOMEN would be equal citizens). Unfortunately, we know
little about ancient Greek slavery; no extant ancient
Greek writer discusses it at length, and modern scholars
must rely on a patchwork of references in ancient Greek
poetry, written history, stage comedy, and courtroom and
political speeches. Archaeological evidence, such as
tombstone inscriptions, add valuable details. Inevitably—
as in all studies of ancient Greek society—the available
information focuses on the rich and literate city of
ATHENS, specially from the 300s B.C.E. onward.
Generally, a slave is a person without civil rights,
owned as a possession, usually by another individual.
The owner might have the power of life and death over
the slave; at Athens however, an owner could not legally
kill a slave at will, but needed state permission. To his or
her master, the slave owes all labor and service—includ-
ing, if required, sexual favors. In exchange, the master
shelters, clothes, and feeds his slaves, just as he would be
expected to care for his dogs or cattle. The origins of this
brutal institution are lost in prehistory; certainly slavery
was not confined to the Greeks. In HOMER’s epic poem
slaves
317

the Iliad (written down around 750 B.C.E.), slaves are
shown to be war captives; the proud Trojans preordained
fate is death or slavery at the Greeks’ hands.
War was a major source of slaves. A defeated people
would face slavery at the victors’ discretion. These
enslaved captives could be either Greeks or non-Greeks.
To take one of many examples: After subduing the defiant
Greek island of MELOS in 416 B.C.E., during the PELOPON-
NESIAN WAR, the Athenians put to death the entire adult
male population and sold the women and children into
slavery. Rather than being transported back to the con-
querors’ home city, such captives probably were sold on
the spot to slave traders, who followed every Greek army.
These traders were businessmen, with access to cash and
transport, who would bring their newly purchased slaves
to some major market for resale. The east Greek states of
CHIOS and EPHESOS were important slave markets in the
400s B.C.E.; other commercial centers, such as Athens and
CORINTH, played their roles.
The fate of war captives was surely ghastly. Families
must have been broken up. The demand for adult male
slaves (purchased for heavy labor) was far less than the
demand for women, teenagers, and children (purchased
for domestic duties). Children were especially prized as
being pliant, physically pleasing, and long-term invest-
ments, but the mothers surely were often left behind on
the auction block.
In times of peace, slaves might originate outside the
Greek world. References in Homer, along with other doc-
uments, show Greek pirates of the 700s B.C.E. swooping
down on the coast of ASIA MINOR or THRACE to carry
away captives. Thracian slaves are mentioned regularly in
Greek literature, and the Greek colonies founded on
Thrace’s Aegean coast—such as ABDERA and AMPHIPOLIS
probably were active in acquiring slaves. This was done
with the help of the feuding Thracian chieftains of the
interior, who would bring their war captives to the Greek
town, to sell.
In Greek cities the “exposure” of unwanted infants,
particularly girls, was a legal, common practice. Exposed
infants—that is, babies abandoned outdoors by their par-
ents—automatically assumed slave status and would
become the property of whoever rescued them. However,
Greek cities typically had laws forbidding, within the city,
the enslavement of any recognized citizen, whether child
or adult. The Athenian lawgiver SOLON (ca. 594 B.C.E.)
wrote famous legislation prohibiting the enslavement of
any Athenian for debt.
Except for SPARTA—with its large numbers of HELOTS,
or serfs—Greek cities tended to depend heavily on slave
labor. The Athenian state-run SILVER mines at Laurion
may have employed as many as 30,000 slaves in the
400s–300s B.C.E. Modern ARCHAEOLOGY has revealed the
hellish work conditions at Laurion, where slaves, includ-
ing children, worked 10-hour shifts in black crawl-tun-
nels with poor ventilation; it seems to have been cheaper
to let the workers sicken and die than to improve condi-
tions. Smaller and less gruesome were privately owned
factories, where skilled slaves produced beds, knives, and
other household goods. The largest such operation now
known of was an Athenian shield factory, owned by the
family of the orator LYSIAS, which employed 120 slaves.
Some Athenian slaves probably worked semiindepen-
dently of their owners. A slave might practice a trade or
keep a shop, delivering the profits to his master; a slave
might be bailiff of a country estate, overseeing the slave
farmhands and selling produce for the absentee owner.
Slaves might be educated men, serving as clerks or tutors.
Such slaves could earn wages and, by saving enough
money, might eventually buy their freedom. In other
instances, a trusted worker might be freed by his or her
master (perhaps in a legal last will). At Athens, a freed
slave took on the status of a metic, or resident alien.
Slave-population numbers are difficult to guess.
Modern estimates suggest that, at the outbreak of the
PELOPONNESIAN WAR (431 B.C.E.), Athenian territory was
home to slightly over 100,000 slaves; this figure is proba-
bly equivalent to the number of nonslaves living there at
that time. The ratio of 1:1 implies that slave ownership
went fairly far down the social ladder. At the bottom of
the scale might be (for example) a cobbler owning one
slave to assist him in the shop and to do domestic work
in the evening. Purely domestic slaves, bringing in little
or no income, were a sign of wealth; the richest Athenian
families might have 50 household slaves. No doubt many
Athenians were too poor to afford even one slave, but this
was viewed as a hardship.
With a 1:1 ratio, the Athenian slave population
seems ominously large; yet there never was a slave revolt
comparable to that led by Spartacus against the Romans
in 73 B.C.E. The closest we come to this is the Athenian
historian THUCYDIDES’ (1) statement that 30,000 skilled
slaves ran away from Athens during the latter part of the
Peloponnesian War (413–404 B.C.E.). Reasons for this rel-
ative lack of unrest include the diverse origins and lan-
guages of the slaves, and their piecemeal segregation by
owners and duties. In fact, when a Greek army marched
to war, each HOPLITE had a servant (probably a slave) to
carry armor and supplies. This would seem to provide a
golden opportunity for revolt or escape, but the slaves
lacked the motive and organization.
Slavery continued to be a fundamental social institu-
tion through the HELLENISTIC AGE and into the Roman
period. Modern theories estimate that 15 to 20 percent of
the entire population of the Roman Empire in the first
century C.E. were slaves (i.e., one out of every five or six
people). Slavery continued throughout antiquity, gradu-
ally becoming replaced by other sources of cheap labor
such as low-wage workers and serfs.
See also METICS; NICIAS; PROSTITUTES.
Further reading: Michael Grant, A Social History of
Greece and Rome (New York: Scribner, 1992); Sarah
318
slaves

Pomeroy, Goddesses, Whores, Wives, and Slaves: Women in
Classical Antiquity (New York: Schocken Books, 1995);
Peter Hunt, Slaves, Warfare, and Ideology in the Greek His-
torians (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1998);
Gary Reger, “Enslavement and Manumission in Ancient
Greece,” in Race and Racism in Theory and Practice, edited
by Berel Lang (Lanham, Md.: Rowman and Littlefield,
2000), 99–110; Robin Osborne, “The Economics and Pol-
itics of Slavery at Athens,” in Ancient Greek Democracy:
Readings and Sources, edited by Eric Robinson (Malden,
Mass.: Blackwell, 2004), 265–280.
Smyrna
See ARCHAEOLOGY; IONIA.
Socrates (469–399 B.C.E.) Athenian philosopher
Although Socrates left no writings, he is of landmark
importance in Western thought. By his example, PHILOSO-
PHY was turned away from its prior emphasis on natural
SCIENCE and became directed more toward questions of
ethics—that is, the right conduct of life. In the words of
the Roman thinker Cicero (ca. 50 B.C.E.), “Socrates was
the first to call philosophy down from the sky.”
Socrates profoundly influenced his pupil PLATO.
Socrates’ central conclusions—that happiness depends
solely on living a moral life, and that moral virtue is
equivalent to knowledge and is therefore teachable—
became the springboard for Plato’s elaborate theory of
reality and system of ethics. Socrates’ equation of virtue
with knowledge led to the daring corollary that evil is
ignorance and hence unintentional. According to
Socrates, the evildoer acts mistakenly in harming his or
her own soul.
Socrates himself taught no doctrine, claiming simply,
“I know nothing.” This professed ignorance was denoted
by the Greek word eironeia: that is, the famous Socratic
irony. Unlike other philosophers, he never founded a
school or charged fees for lessons. At ATHENS he attracted
a following of young, aristocratic men, with whom he
would dispute ethical or political issues. Since he took no
money, his goal was evidently to prepare these students
for public office by teaching them to think for them-
selves. His “Socratic method” consisted of asking ques-
tions, particularly in pursuit of definitions. For example:
“You say that this man is a better citizen than his oppo-
nent? Let us consider therefore what we mean by ‘good
citizen.’” This question-and-answer process forced the
respondent to examine his own preconceptions, in a
search for general truths.
Socrates’ disputations and skeptical outlook led him
to be associated—unfairly, from his viewpoint—with
those well-paid teachers of intellectual skills, the
SOPHISTS. One famous sophist, PROTAGORAS OF ABDERA,
who taught at Athens around 455–415 B.C.E., is recorded
as believing that expertise (Greek: aret¯e) in most fields is
teachable. Protagoras surely inspired Socrates’ similar but
more profound view that moral virtue (likewise denoted
by the Greek word aret¯e) is teachable.
Among Socrates’ well-heeled students were two des-
tined for great importance in Athenian politics: the bril-
liant but erratic ALCIBIADES and the extreme right-winger
KRITIAS (who was killed in 403 B.C.E. while trying to
abolish Athenian DEMOCRACY). The link with Kritias was
probably responsible for Socrates’ death. In 399 B.C.E. the
70-year-old philosopher was prosecuted for corrupting
the youth (a charge implicitly referring to Kritias and
Alcibiades) and for impiety. After making a flamboyantly
nonconciliatory defense speech, Socrates was found
guilty by the jury of 501 Athenians and was sentenced to
die by being given poison. The famous prison scene, in
which Socrates discusses the soul’s immortality with his
visitors before drinking the fatal hemlock, is recounted in
Plato’s dialogue Phaedo.
Information about Socrates comes mainly from two
sources. Plato’s fictional dialogues contain much bio-
graphical information about Socrates while also foisting
onto him Plato’s own more complex philosophical theo-
ries. Here the insoluble question arises: What aspects of
Plato’s Socrates show us the real Socrates, and how much
is just a mask for Plato’s own thought? Probably a more
biographical Socrates is portrayed in Plato’s early work
(such as the Krito or Euthyphro), while the Socrates in the
Republic and later dialogues is a more fictionalized char-
acter, who discusses concepts that the real Socrates never
explored. The other source is XENOPHON, a stolid Athe-
nian soldier and historian who was one of Socrates’ disci-
ples and who wrote about him in three nonfiction
memoirs, Memorabilia, Symposium, and Apology. (The lat-
ter two titles also belong to works by Plato.) That
Socrates could be the beloved mentor of two such differ-
ent people as Plato and Xenophon is itself revealing.
Other information comes from ARISTOPHANES’ stage com-
edy Clouds (performed in 423 B.C.E.), in which a crackpot
scientist named Socrates operates a “Thinking Shop.”
Clearly the real Socrates was a dynamic personality who
fascinated friend and foe alike. When one contemporary
Athenian asked the oracle at DELPHI who was the wisest
of all men, the answer came back “Socrates.”
He was born into the Athenian middle class, the son
of a stonecutter or sculptor named Sophroniskos.
Socrates came of age during the political primacy of
PERIKLES, when Athens reached its zenith as a radical
democracy and imperial naval power—twin develop-
ments that alienated many conservative Athenians. As a
youth, Socrates supposedly studied under a disciple of
the philosopher ANAXAGORAS, but became discouraged by
the emphasis on physics and cosmology rather than
ethics.
During the PELOPONNESIAN WAR between Athens and
SPARTA (431–404 B.C.E.), Socrates served as foot soldier in
the POTIDAEA campaign (432–430 B.C.E.), at the disas-
trous Battle of Delium (424 B.C.E.), and at AMPHIPOLIS
Socrates
319

(422 B.C.E.), by which time he would have been about 47
years old. On campaign, he distinguished himself by his
physical endurance and courage. One anecdote describes
Socrates striding calmly amid the Athenian retreat from
Delium, defying the pursuing enemy CAVALRY.
In later life he repeatedly resisted the political hyste-
ria of Athens in crisis. In 406 B.C.E., while serving a citi-
zen’s normal duty on the council panel to prepare the
agenda for the Athenian ASSEMBLY, Socrates refused to go
along with an illegal motion ordering a group trial for six
commanders charged with negligence after the sea battle
of Arginusae. In 403 B.C.E. Socrates defied his old pupil
Kritias, who had seized power in the coup of the THIRTY
TYRANTS: Brought before the Thirty, Socrates refused to
help them arrest a certain intended victim. No doubt
Socrates himself would have become a victim of the
Thirty, had not their reign of terror soon ended. Instead,
Socrates was denounced by prominent accusers after the
restoration of democracy.
That Socrates should have been prosecuted under the
democracy is significant. An original thinker who defied
convention, Socrates was known for his antidemocratic
sentiments. As Xenophon’s memoirs make clear, he criti-
cized the democracy’s inability to entrust its government
to the most apt and expert people. Without advocating
revolution or dictatorship, Socrates seems to have favored
a meritocracy, with power entrusted to a worthy ruling
class. Such beliefs—although purely theoretical—must
have seemed damning after Critias’ right-wing coup. Fol-
lowing the Thirty’s downfall, the Athenians’ wrath turned
against Socrates.
Across the centuries, Socrates’ eccentric personality
communicates itself. Although magnetic in character, he
was physically unattractive in middle age—balding, pug-
nosed, and paunchy. His contemporaries humorously
compared him to the mythical figure SILENUS. Socrates
was famous for his austerity: Impervious to cold and
fatigue, he almost always went barefoot, even over frozen
winter ground at the siege of Potidaea.
He had three sons by his wife, Xanthippe (whom sev-
eral sources describe as a bad-tempered shrew). Socrates
may have practiced a stonecutter’s trade, like his father,
but he evidently spent most of his time at the Athenian
sports grounds where educated men of leisure congre-
gated. There he would conduct semipublic debates with
his followers or rivals.
Socrates’ disciples (all male) included several of the
most glamorous youths of the day in the homosexual
society of aristocratic Athens. A homosexual ambiance
pervades many of Plato’s dialogues, such as the Sympo-
sium, where the topic is love and where the mutual
attraction between Socrates and Alcibiades is discussed.
But as so much is said about his indifference to physical
needs, it remains unclear whether Socrates actually was
intimate with these young men.
See also GYMNASIUM; HOMOSEXUALITY; LAWS AND LAW
COURTS; SKEPTICISM.
Further reading: Eugene Kelly, ed., New Essays on
Socrates (Lanham, Md.: University Press of America,
1984); M. Montuori, Socrates, an Approach (Amsterdam:
J. C. Gieben, 1988); K. J. Boudouris, ed., The Philosophy
of Socrates (Athens: International Center for Greek Phi-
losophy and Culture, 1991); G. Vlastos, Studies in Greek
Philosophy, 2. Socrates, Plato, and Their Traditions (Prince-
ton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1995); Mark
McPherran, Wisdom, Ignorance, and Virtue: New Essays in
Socratic Studies (Edmonton: Academic Printing and Pub-
lishing, 1997); Mark Lutz, Socrates’ Education to Virtue:
Learning the Love of the Noble (Albany: State University of
New York Press, 1998); Mark Munn, The School of His-
tory. Athens in the Age of Socrates (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 2000); Debra Nails, The People of Plato:
A Prosopography of Plato and Other Socratics (Indianapo-
lis, Ind.: Hackett, 2002).
Solon (ca. 638–559 B.C.E.) Athenian statesman who in
the early 500s B.C.E. drafted a new code of law
Solon’s reforms averted a revolution at ATHENS and laid
the foundations for Athenian DEMOCRACY. They came at a
time of major class tensions, both between the nobles and
the increasingly confident middle class, and also between
the country landowners and the tenant farmers who paid
rent under onerous conditions. Solon alleviated the bur-
dens of the poor farmers and, at the upper end of the
social scale, broke the nobles’ traditional monopoly on
political power.
Later generations revered Solon as one of the SEVEN
SAGES of Greece. The texts of his laws, carved into
wooden tablets, were kept on display in the Athenian
AGORA. These laws supplied the code at Athens for nearly
200 years, until the legal revisions of 410–400 B.C.E.,
even afterward, the Athenians still called their code “the
laws of Solon.”
Solon was also a poet. A number of his verses are
preserved in two later written works—ARISTOTLE’s Consti-
tution of Athens (ca. 340 B.C.E.) and PLUTARCH’s biography
of Solon (ca. 100 C.E.). But because Solon is the earliest
important figure in Athenian history, much of his life and
work remain unclear to us.
Born into an aristocratic Athenian family, Solon first
distinguished himself in a war against MEGARA (1). His
patriotism won the respect of his fellow citizens, and they
asked him to serve as arbitrator and lawgiver, to avert
civil war. It was probably in 594 B.C.E., the year in which
he served as chef ARCHON, that Solon instituted his
famous reforms.
The most grievous social problem facing Athens at
that time was the plight of the rural poor in ATTICA, the
1,000-square-mile district surrounding Athens. It seems
that the rich landowners were crushing the tenant farm-
320
Solon

ers who paid part of their produce as rent. The law
allowed loans to be secured on the person of the bor-
rower; that is, defaulting debtors were liable to be sold as
SLAVES. Tenant farmers who forfeited on their rent (in bad
harvest years, for example) were faced with catastrophe,
for both themselves and their families.
In the city, meanwhile, the better-off commoners had
their own grievances, directed against the government.
Citizens of the middle class—who supplied the backbone
of Athens’s army, serving as HOPLITE infantry—were chaf-
ing at being excluded from government. At this time,
Athens was still an ARISTOCRACY. All political power was
held by a few ancient, upper-class families (of which
Solon was a member). Only aristocrats could hold execu-
tive posts or be admitted to the powerful decision-mak-
ing council and supreme court known as the AREOPAGOS.
All of the law courts, overseen by aristocrats, showed a
strong upper-class bias; the existing law code, devised
around 620 B.C.E. by the nobleman DRACO, was mainly
repressive.
By the early 500s B.C.E. there was fear at Athens that
these two aggrieved classes—the peasantry and the
hoplite class—would join forces and place a dictator, or
tyrannos, on the throne. TYRANTS had seized power at
CORINTH and Megara, and Athens itself had seen a failed
coup by a would-be tyrant named KYLON in around 620
B.C.E. In this volatile atmosphere Athens turned to Solon,
whom all parties trusted. He could have exploited the sit-
uation to make himself tyrant, but he was a greater man
than that.
Solon rescued the tenant farmers and other poor
Athenians by forbidding that loans be secured on the bor-
rower’s person—henceforth no Athenian could be
enslaved for debt—Solon also cancelled all such existing
debts. “I plucked up the marker-stones,” he declares in
one poem, referring to the hated signs standing at repos-
sessed farms. He also freed Athenians who had been
enslaved, bringing home many who had been sold
abroad. Solon’s poverty-relief measures were known as
the seisachtheia, “the shaking off of burdens.”
Solon overhauled the crude Draconian law code and
created political changes that broke the aristocrats’
monopoly on power. He devised a new system of social
ranking, with four citizen classes based entirely on
income level. This new emphasis on income worked
against the traditional emphasis on noble birth. The
upper classes might still be full of rich aristocrats, but
now other men—commoners—could be admitted to
these classes. Since a man’s social rank determined his
eligibility for various political offices, this was a signifi-
cant democratic change.
Solon enfranchised the lowest income class, the
Athenian peasants, admitting them as citizens and allow-
ing them to vote in the ASSEMBLY. He created a new delib-
erative COUNCIL, of 400 members, open to the upper
three income classes; the council members served for one
year, after being chosen by lot. This new council, very
influential in that it helped prepare the agenda for the
assembly, served to counterbalance the old aristocratic
Areopagos. It was probably also Solon who set up the
Athenian “people’s court,” to which any citizen had the
right of appeal; this assured that a defendant could be
heard by a jury of his peers rather than by a court con-
sisting of nobles.
The principal beneficiaries of Solon’s reforms were the
rich commoners—nonaristocratic landowners, traders,
and manufacturers who could now take their place in
Athens’s upper classes and enjoy greater political voice.
Solon was not a complete democrat; he was more of a tim-
ocrat. As his poetry makes clear, he believed that the
populace should be governed by a worthy, fair-minded
ruling class.
Certain embittered verses by Solon indicate that his
reforms came as a disappointment to both extremes. The
nobles resented their losses, and the poorer classes were
angry that Solon had stopped short of redistributing the
land. Having made the Athenians promise to obey his
laws unchanged for 10 years, Solon left Athens to travel
(some say) to EGYPT and LYDIA. Returning home, he lived
long enough to see his kinsman PEISISTRATUS make him-
self tyrant in Athens (in about 561 B.C.E.)—the very out-
come that Solon had tried to prevent. But Solon’s laws
and political apparatus survived in Athens (the tyrants
did not) and set the stage for KLEISTHENES’ (1) reforms
(508 B.C.E.) and the radical democracy of the 400s B.C.E.
See also LAWS AND LAW COURTS.
Further reading: T. W. Gallant, “Agricultural Sys-
tems, Land Tenure, and the Reforms of Solon,” Annual
of the British School of Athens 77 (1982): 111–124; M. H.
Hansen, 
“Solonian 
Democracy 
in 
Fourth-century
Athens,” in Aspects of Athenian Democracy [Conference,
Boston, June 18–21 1987], edited by W. R. Connor
(Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press, 1990),
71–99; L. Foxhall, “A View from the Top. Evaluating the
Solonian Property Classes,” in The Development of the
Polis in Archaic Greece, edited by Lynette Mitchell and P.
J. Rhodes (London: Routledge, 1997), 113–136; Bernard
Randall, Solon: The Lawmaker of Athens (New York:
Rosen, 2004).
sophists
Sophistai (experts or professors) were itiner-
ant teachers who, in the latter 400s B.C.E., went from city
to city in the Greek world, tutoring young men in dispu-
tation and other intellectual skills. These lessons, for
which the sophists charged hefty fees, were designed to
help students achieve practical success as lawyers, politi-
cians, speechwriters and so on. The visiting sophists
caused a cultural sensation at the wealthy, intellectual
city of ATHENS, but they also earned a reputation for
amoral cleverness; the hallmark of a sophist was the abil-
ity to argue any question from two opposing sides. The
sophists
321

modern English word sophistry (meaning “clever but
false reasoning”) retains the negative associations of this
rationalistic movement.
Yet not all sophists were amoral. The best were gen-
uine thinkers, breaking new intellectual ground and
answering a need for “college-level” EDUCATION in their
day—the sophist Hippias of ELIS, for instance, taught a
method of memory training, among many offered courses
(ca. 430 B.C.E.).
The earliest and most famous sophist was PROTAGO-
RAS of ABDERA (ca. 445 B.C.E.); another prominent one
was Prodicus of Keos (ca. 430 B.C.E.). The orator GORGIAS
of Leontini (ca. 427 B.C.E.) was associated with the
sophists, due to the ingenuity of the arguments he used in
public speaking. And in the eyes of many Athenians, the
philosopher SOCRATES (469–399 B.C.E.) was a sophist, on
account of his question-and-answer method of inquiry.
Further reading: J. V. Muir, “Religion and the New
Education. The Challenge of the Sophists,” in Greek Reli-
gion and Society, edited by P. E. Easterling and J. V. Muir
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 1985), 191–218;
M. W. Gleason, Making Men. Sophists and Self-presentation
in Ancient Rome (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
Press, 1995); R. W. Wallace, “The Sophists in Athens,” in
Democracy, Empire, and the Arts in Fifth-century Athens,
edited by Deborah Boedeker and Kurt Raaflaub (Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1998); Jacque-
line de Romilly, The Great Sophists in Periclean Athens,
translated by Janet Lloyd (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1998); John Dillon and Tania Gergel, trans., The
Greek Sophists (London: Penguin, 2003).
Sophokles (ca. 496–406 B.C.E.) Athenian tragic play-
wright
Sophokles is reckoned among the three great classical
tragedians (the other two being AESCHYLUS and EURI-
PIDES). His work has been seen as Greek tragedy’s high
point, wherein the separate requirements of plot and
character are fused most successfully. He is said to have
written 123 plays, of which only seven survive today;
among these is the play that the philosopher and critic
ARISTOTLE admired more than any other Greek tragedy,
Oedipus the King.
Sophokles (“famed for wisdom”) was born the son of
a rich manufacturer at the Athenian DEME of Colonus—
the beauty of which he would commemorate in a famous
choral ode in his tragedy Oedipus at Colonus. His life
spanned the near century of Athenian greatness. Growing
up during the PERSIAN WARS, he partook of the spirit of
Athenian confidence following the miraculous victory
over the Persians. After the Greek sea victory at SALAMIS
(1) (480 B.C.E.), the teenage Sophokles was honored with
the assignment of dancing and singing, naked and
anointed, at the trophy monument. To win this commis-
sion he must have been a performer of considerable tal-
ent and beauty. Supposedly, in his earlier plays he occa-
sionally appeared in roles onstage, but gave that up due
to a weak voice.
At about age 28 Sophokles won his first tragedy-
competition, at the major annual drama festival known as
the City Dionysia (468 B.C.E.). We know that one of the
playwrights whom he defeated this year was the well-
established Aeschylus, but the centuries have not pre-
served the three Sophoklean tragedies (and one
satyr-play) that comprised this winning entry. Sophokles
went on to win a total of 24 victories in over 65 more
years of writing. Of the seven times (only) when he failed
to win first prize, he always took second prize, never
third. This remarkable record makes Sophokles the most
successful tragedian of his day; Euripides, by contrast,
won first place only five times. Relatedly, Sophokles was
highly popular as a social figure. Several ancient writings
testify to his charming personality and many friends—
who included the historian HERODOTUS and the Athenian
statesman KIMON.
In the development of Greek THEATER, Sophokles is
credited by ancient writers with making several changes
in the way tragedy was performed. Most important, he
raised the number of speaking actors from two to three—
which greatly increased the possible number of speaking
parts, since an actor could play multiple roles. Sophokles
supposedly ended the custom of presenting tragedies as
linked trilogies, in favor of presenting three tragedies on
unrelated topics. And he is said to have increased the size
of the chorus from 12 to 15 men and to have developed
the use of painted backdrops as scenery.
Outside the theater, Sophokles played a substantial
role in Athenian public life prior to and during the PELO-
PONNESIAN WAR (431–404 B.C.E.). He was devoted to
ATHENS, and—unlike Aeschylus, Euripides, and other
artists—he refused all lucrative invitations to visit other
cities of the Greek world. In 443 B.C.E. Sophokles was
elected to the office of treasurer of the DELIAN LEAGUE. In
441 B.C.E., reportedly in recognition of his play Antigone,
he was elected for the following year as a general of the
Athenian armed forces. Under PERIKLES’ senior command,
General Sophokles served in the campaign against the
rebellious island of SAMOS. Possibly (we do not know for
sure) Sophokles was later elected as general a second
time.
In 420 B.C.E. Sophokles was active in developing the
god ASCLEPIUS’s cult at Athens, which may mean that he
helped establish a public hospital. In 413 B.C.E., amid the
state emergency following the Athenian military disaster
at SYRACUSE, the Athenians appointed Sophokles, age 83,
to a special executive post.
Sophokles married twice and we hear of two sons.
One of them became a successful writer of tragedies, as
did one of Sophokles’ grandsons. Like other Greek men
of his era, Sophokles may have pursued a private life that
we would call bisexual. An anecdote in the memoirs of
322
Sophokles

the writer ION (2) describes Sophokles relaxing at a SYM-
POSIUM during the Samian military campaign; Sophokles
coaxed a kiss from a handsome slave boy, then com-
mented to the other guests, “So you see, I am not so bad
a strategist as Perikles believes.” Another famous quota-
tion is preserved in the philosopher PLATO’s treatise The
Republic; when Sophokles in old age was asked if he was
still able to have sex with a woman, he replied that he
had happily escaped from his sex urge, “as from a cruel
and insane master.”
In about 406 B.C.E., after Euripides died, the 90-year-
old Sophokles presented his chorus dressed in mourning,
to commemorate his dead rival. Soon afterward Sophok-
les himself died, and he was remembered in ARISTO-
PHANES’ comedy Frogs (405 B.C.E.), which is set in the
Underworld: “He was a good fellow up there and now
he’s a good fellow down here.”
The first performance dates for most of Sophokles’
seven existing tragedies are unknown. But the following
sequence is plausible: Ajax (performed perhaps in about
450–445 B.C.E.), Antigone (perhaps around 442 B.C.E.),
The Women of Trachis (perhaps around 429–420 B.C.E.),
Oedipus the King (perhaps around 429–420 B.C.E.), Elec-
tra (perhaps around 418–410 B.C.E.), Philoctetes (409
B.C.E.), and Oedipus at Colonus (performed in 401 B.C.E.,
after Sophokles’ death). These tragedies survived because
they were chosen in later antiquity to be taught in
schools. Of the lost plays, the titles of many are known
and there exist some fragments of text; apparently about
a third of them were drawn from legends of the TROJAN
WAR. All of Sophokles’ plays, in keeping with the custom
of the day, retold tales already familiar from EPIC POETRY
and other sources.
A brief description of a few of the plays must suffice
here. The Women of Trachis presents the horrible death of
the hero HERAKLES, poisoned by a venom-smeared robe
given to him by his innocent wife, Deineira (who
wrongly believes the robe to be a magic charm to reclaim
her husband’s love). The play is named for the characters
portrayed by the chorus, local women in the region of
central Greece where Herakles legendarily met his end.
The action emphasizes Herakles’ agony in death and the
tragic irony that the world’s mightiest hero, vanquisher of
monsters, should die at the unintending hands of his gen-
tle, loving, naive wife.
Oedipus the King and Antigone are today among the
most accessible and widely read of all existing Greek
tragedies. Oedipus is often misunderstood as the tragedy
of a man undone by arrogance, or hubris. But like much
of Sophokles’ work, the play is really about the limits of
human knowledge and power. The Theban king OEDIPUS,
at the play’s outset, seems as blessed as a human can be:
young, wise, powerful, just, beloved by his people. By the
play’s end he is blind, accursed, and homeless; his prior
happiness has been revealed as an illusion. Unlike certain
other Greek tragic heroes, Oedipus onstage does not do
anything evil or foolhardy to bring on the gods’ wrath.
Although he does show pride and anger early in the play,
these do not lead to bad action—rather, Oedipus’s
destructive actions lie buried, unbeknownst to him, in
the past. Oedipus the King presents his gradual discovery
of his own calamity; ironically, it is Oedipus’s intelligence
and perseverance that bring about this discovery.
The tightly plotted play opens with King Oedipus’s
city of THEBES ravaged by plague and famine; the oracle
at DELPHI has revealed that the land lies under a curse
because the murderer of the prior king, Laius, has not
been punished. Since the killer’s identity is unknown,
Oedipus vows to discover it. The blind seer TEIRESIAS is
summoned for questioning. The ensuing scene is perhaps
the finest in all extant Greek tragedy. As Oedipus grows
puzzled and enraged, Teiresias at first refuses to speak,
then angrily replies that Oedipus himself is the defiler of
the land; Oedipus himself is the murderer. Oedipus
ignores the stated message and shrewdly assumes that
Teiresias is trying to discredit him as king, perhaps in
league with the ambitious nobleman Kreon.
Teiresias, alone of all the characters, understands that
Oedipus slew King Laius years ago, in a quarrel at a
crossroads far from Thebes. Oedipus, traveling from
CORINTH (where he had grown up as the son of the king
and queen there), did not know the identity of the arro-
gant older man whom he killed. Worse, he did not know
that Laius was his own father. Worst of all, Oedipus has
since married Laius’s widow, Jocasta, and had children by
her—who is really Oedipus’s mother. He had been taken
from her at his birth, and she did not recognize him as a
young man.
The tragedy moves toward its climax as Oedipus, like
an ideal courtroom judge, gradually uncovers the truth
by interrogating witnesses, including Jocasta and a The-
ban shepherd who is the sole survivor of Laius’s fatal
fight. At one point Oedipus realizes that it was he who
killed Laius, but he holds onto the hope that at least
Laius was not his father (and Jocasta his mother). When
finally the whole truth is publicly revealed, Oedipus in
horror gouges out his own eyes and Jocasta hangs herself
(both offstage). The final scenes show the blind Oedipus
departing into self-imposed exile, cursed by his revealed
parricide and incest. The tragedy ends with the state-
ment—appearing in the writings of Sophokles’ friend
Herodotus—that no human being should be called happy
until he is safely dead. Sophokles’ Oedipus at Colonus pre-
sents the hero’s final days, when he finds sanctuary and
divine forgiveness under protection of the mythical Athe-
nian king THESEUS.
Antigone presents the classic conflict of public duty
versus private conscience. In the aftermath of the
destructive war of the SEVEN AGAINST THEBES, Oedipus’s
daughter ANTIGONE chooses to disobey an edict of Kreon
(who is now ruler of Thebes) in favor of her religious and
familial obligations. Kreon has forbidden anyone on pain
Sophokles
323

of death to grant funeral rites to the slain attacker Polyn-
ices, Antigone’s brother. In breaking this law, Antigone
discards all happiness, including her betrothal to Kreon’s
son, Haemon. But death comes as a triumph for her and a
curse for Kreon and his family. It is Antigone who has
upheld the higher, unwritten law of social obligation.
The Sophoklean hero or heroine tends to be a splen-
did individualist, set apart from other people by a refusal
to compromise. These protagonists are larger than life—
stronger, wiser, or more pious than others—yet they
inevitably succumb to circumstance or FATE. This two-
sided view is essential to Sophokles’ work; the hero may
be called “godlike,” but usually he fails due to his human
flaws, such as anger or ignorance. Ignorance in particular
interests Sophokles. He portrays both Oedipus and Her-
akles as violently undone by an imperfect, human under-
standing of the facts.
Above human beings stand the gods. Where Aeschy-
lus’s surviving tragedies convey a faith in divine wisdom
and Euripides’ show gods who are malicious and capri-
cious, Sophokles’ work falls somewhere in between. In
Sophokles, the great god ZEUS controls mortal destiny,
but Zeus’s purpose may be mysterious to the onstage
characters and to the audience. “All of these events are
Zeus,” the chorus announces at the end of The Women of
Trachis, amid Herakles’ gruesome death. Zeus’s purpose
seems needlessly cruel, except that Herakles will win
blessed immortality after his suffering. Sophokles refuses
to clarify or justify the workings of the gods. Rather, his
plays mirror the religious questions of real life.
See also AJAX [1]; DEMOCRACY; ELECTRA; HOMOSEXU-
ALITY; HUBRIS; MYTH; ORESTES; PHILOKTETES; RELIGION.
Further reading: Harold Bloom, ed., Sophokles (New
York: Chelsea House, 2003); Marianne McDonald, The
Living Art of Greek Tragedy (Bloomington: Indiana Uni-
versity Press, 2003); Josh Beer, Sophokles and the Tragedy
of Athenian Democracy (Westport, Conn.: Praeger, 2004).
Sounion (Sunium)
The site of Sounion is situated on
the coast of ATTICA, about 40 miles from ATHENS. It is
famous for its sanctuary dedicated to the god POSEIDON;
much of the marble temple constructed on the promon-
tory in the mid-400s B.C.E. remains standing today. It is
clearly visible to ships at sea and was a popular attraction
for European travelers in the 18th and 19th centuries C.E.
Among the many names carved as graffiti on one of the
temple’s columns is that of the British romantic poet Lord
Byron.
The classical temple of Poseidon replaced an earlier
cult building that was destroyed, unfinished, by the
invading Persians in 480 B.C.E. It was decorated with
architectural SCULPTURE: a relief frieze depicting the battle
of the CENTAURS and the Lapiths, the battle of the gods
and the GIANTS, and the deeds of THESEUS. There were
also sculptures in the pediments, but these do not sur-
vive. The sanctuary also contained two colonnaded stoas
and a monumental gateway.
Down the hill from the Poseidon sanctuary was
another cult site, dedicated to the goddess ATHENA. Two
small temples were built here in the mid-late 400s B.C.E.
A number of domestic buildings have been located at
Sounion, some of which have been excavated. They were
occupied continuously from the 400s B.C.E. into the
Roman era. The residents were protected by a fortifica-
tion wall, 300 feet long and punctuated with square
watchtowers.
The site of Sounion was first excavated by the Ger-
man archaeologist Dörpfeld in 1884, then by the Greek
Archaeological Society in 1899–1915. Some restoration
work has been done since 1958, including the re-erection
of two of the temple’s columns.
Further reading: William B. Dinsmoor, Sounion, 2d
ed. (Athens: Lycabettus, 1974); Costis Dararas, Sounion:
Archaeological Guide (Athens: General Direction of Antiq-
uities and Restoration, 1979); A. B. Tataki, Sounion: The
Temple of Poseidon (Athens: Ekdotike Athenon, 1984); G.
Behor, Ancient Greece: The Famous Monuments Past and
Present (Athens: Muses, 1997); Hans Goette, Athens,
Attica, and the Megarid: An Archaeological Guide (London:
Routledge, 2001); John Camp, The Archaeology of Athens
(New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2001).
Sparta
One of the greatest city-states of mainland
Greece, Sparta was often in rivalry with ATHENS. Located
in the southern Greek region known as the PELOPONNESE,
the city dominated southern Greece after 600 B.C.E. in
404 B.C.E. Sparta became the supreme Greek city, having
defeated Athens in the PELOPONNESIAN WAR. But a
declining birthrate among Sparta’s citizens, poor relations
with its subject cities, a constant fear of serf revolt, and a
resistance to change all made the failure of the Spartan
Empire inevitable. In 371–369 B.C.E. Sparta was unex-
pectedly defeated and crippled (although not captured)
by its erstwhile ally THEBES. Thereafter Sparta confined
itself mainly to intrigues in the Peloponnese, often in
defense against armies of the kingdom of MACEDON. In
222 B.C.E., amid internal political convulsions, Sparta was
defeated and captured by the Macedonian king Antigonus
III. Within the next 80 years, however, both Macedon
and Sparta surrendered to the armies of ROME.
Sparta was unique among Greek cities, because of its
program of patriotic indoctrination and full-time military
service for males. This program arose in the mid-600s
B.C.E., probably at the hands of a Spartan statesman
named LYKOURGOS (1), who was revered as a hero by
later generations of Spartans. Today nothing is known for
sure about Lykourgos’s life, but he evidently shaped
Sparta into an authoritarian state, devoted to maintaining
the bravest and most disciplined of all HOPLITE armies.
Between about 600 B.C.E. and 371 B.C.E. the Spartans
324
Sounion

could justifiably claim to be the best infantry in the
Greek world (also superior to the one foreign infantry
they encountered, the Persians). Eventually, however, the
Spartans’ reliance on traditional battle tactics left them
vulnerable to new tactics, developed by the Thebans and
Macedonians.
The grim world of Sparta was the “other” Greece, in
contrast to the exuberant life and literature of classical
Athens. The Spartans were secretive and anti-intellectual.
They rarely let in visitors and left behind few writings.
Most modern knowledge of Sparta comes from informa-
tion preserved by ancient Greek writers who were not
themselves Spartan—the historians HERODOTUS, THUCY-
DIDES (1), and XENOPHON, the philosopher ARISTOTLE,
and the biographer PLUTARCH. Still, much remains myste-
rious about the Spartans today.
Although militaristic and austere, Sparta was not
necessarily respulsive to all other Greeks. In a Greek
world where ideals of DEMOCRACY (rule by the many)
vied against those of OLIGARCHY (rule by the few), Sparta
was the model oligarchy. It maintained its dominance
over other Greek cities by supporting the ruling classes of
those cities. In so doing, Sparta counterbalanced the
appeal of Athens, which was trying to export democracy
to the lower-income classes everywhere. In southern
Greece, aristocrats and other wealthy people welcomed
Spartan protection and leadership. And many other
Greeks admired Sparta’s army and stable government.
Even Athens itself contained pro-Spartan individuals.
Typically these Athenians were aristocrats. The best
remembered of them is the gentleman-soldier-historian
Xenophon (ca. 428–354 B.C.E.). Similarly, Xenophon’s
contemporary, the Athenian philosopher PLATO, used
Spartan government as inspiration for the authoritarian
utopias imagined in his writings the Republic and the
Laws.
Sparta (“sown land,” or possibly “broom shrub”) was
located in the region called LACONIA, or Lacedaemon, in
the southeastern Peloponnese. Nestled between lofty
mountain ranges on the west and the east, the city sat at
the northern tip of the Laconian plain, which fans out tri-
angularly 25 miles southward to the sea. Just west of the
city, the River Eurotas flowed southward through the
widening plain. Nowadays a Greek provincial capital,
Sparti, stands near the ancient site.
Long before the city of Sparta arose, the fertile and
rain-nourished Laconian plain was home to pre-Greek
inhabitants in the third millennium B.C.E. and to Myce-
naean Greeks in the second millennium B.C.E. According
to legend, this was the kingdom ruled by MENELAUS at
the time of the TROJAN WAR (around 1220 B.C.E.).
Archaeological excavations reveal that the town of Amy-
clae, just south of the future site of Sparta, was a civic
center containing a sanctuary of a pre-Greek god named
HYAKINTHOS. Later Amyclae became an important shrine
of the Greek god APOLLO, one of the patron gods of the
Spartan region.
Sparta itself was founded by descendants of the
DORIAN GREEKS who overran most of the Peloponnese
around 1100–1000 B.C.E., after the collapse of MYCE-
NAEAN CIVILIZATION. Around 950 B.C.E. four local Dorian
villages became amalgamated around a shared civic cen-
ter. This multipart beginning probably explains the odd
Spartan institution of dual monarchy, whereby Sparta
always had two joint kings, drawn from two royal fami-
lies, the Agiads and Eurypontids. One reason the double
kingship survived for the next 700 years was that Spartan
kings were primarily military leaders, commanding
armies in the field. Certainly by the 600s B.C.E.—and
probably long before—the king’s power at home was
being curtailed by other governmental branches, specifi-
cally the EPHORS (Greek: ephorai, “overseers”) and the
COUNCIL.
In appearance Sparta remained a sprawling village,
interspersed with trees. Disdaining wealth and pomp, the
Spartans of later centuries continued to make their
houses out of wood and to build very few public stone
monuments. Sparta at its height of power had no perime-
ter wall; the Spartans preferred to trust in their army and
their protective mountains. Not until 318 B.C.E. did an
enclosing wall finally go up, against the threat of a Mace-
donian invasion. Similarly, the Spartan ACROPOLIS was a
puny, unwalled mound (very unlike the lofty citadels of
other Greek cities), whose main job was to hold the tem-
ple of the city’s patron deity, ATHENA. The building itself
was known as the temple of Athena Chalkioikos
(“Athena in Bronze”), so named because its walls were
covered in BRONZE plates showing mythical scenes.
This temple and that of ARTEMIS Orthia, which stood
to the west, by the Eurotas bank, were Sparta’s two main
monuments. Thucydides, writing during the Spartan hey-
day (around 400 B.C.E.), contrasted such physical sim-
plicity with the elaborate grandeur of Athens. In a famous
passage, Thucydides commented that if Sparta were to
become deserted and only its empty structures viewed by
future generations, people would never believe that the
city had been so great a power.
The earliest events of Spartan history saw Sparta still
governed as an old-style ARISTOCRACY, prior to Lykour-
gos’s reforms. By about 700 B.C.E. this aristocratic Sparta
had conquered Laconia (including the seaport of
Gytheum, about 25 miles south of Sparta, to serve as the
Spartans’ maritime link).
The capture of Laconia and its inhabitants created
three distinct social levels. At the top were the original
Spartans, called Spartiatai (or “Spartiates”). Below them
were the PERIOIKOI (“dwellers around”), second-class citi-
zens who were descendants of the earliest-subdued Laco-
nian villagers. As their name suggests, the perioikoi lived in
towns that roughly formed a circle around the Spartiates’
Sparta
325

prime land on the central plain. The perioikoi were obli-
gated to pay taxes and serve alongside the Spartiates in the
army; they enjoyed legal protections, rights of ownership,
and so on but were excluded from the political process.
Spartiates and perioikoi together comprised the people
known as the Lacedaomonians.
Below these was another group, far inferior in status.
They were the serfs, or HELOTS (Greek: helotai), suppos-
edly named for the Laconian coastal village of Helos
(“marsh”). It seems that the Spartans, at some point in
their expansion, changed their policy toward the villagers
they subdued: instead of admitting them as lesser citi-
zens, they began to subjugate them as serfs. This brutal
serf system existed elsewhere in the Greek world, but the
Spartans used it the most.
The helot population increased enormously after the
Spartan capture of the fertile Greek region called MESSE-
NIA, in the southwestern Peloponnese. Invading across
the high Tagytus mountain range that borders Sparta to
the west, Spartan armies descended into the Messenian
plain and fought a long war (735–715 B.C.E.) to seize the
farmlands and helotize the people. Sparta’s victory in this
First Messenian War is associated with a Eurypontid
king, Theopompus, the earliest reliably real figure in
Spartan history.
The annexation of Messenia made Sparta rich, with
control of two-fifths of the Peloponnese. In a land where
famine was a constant threat, Sparta alone had solved the
food problem, with supplies from Messenia abundant to
its needs: no other Greek state ever managed to subdue
an entire Greek region and population. Yet the helots in
Messenia and Laconia were also a source of fear. They
outnumbered their Spartan masters—by the mid-400s
B.C.E. the ratio would be seven to one. Fear of helot
uprisings, which occurred periodically, kept Spartan
armies close to home and created a mass neurosis in the
Spartan mentality. Every year the ephors would formally
declare war on the helots, thus allowing them to be killed
with impunity; Spartan youths were enrolled in the
Krypteia, or Secret Society, whose job it was to murder
subversive helots. Conversely, the helots became a mag-
net for intrigues by Sparta’s external enemies, such as
Athens in the 400s B.C.E. But helot freedom had to wait
until 369 B.C.E., when the triumphant Theban leader
EPAMINONDAS liberated the helots of Messenia (although
not those of Laconia), setting up an independent Messe-
nian state.
Meanwhile, Sparta came into conflict with the one
southern Greek power that could challenge Spartan
ambition—the city of ARGOS, in the northeastern Pelo-
ponnese. In 669 B.C.E. a Spartan army was defeated by an
Argive army at Hysiai, on the road to Argos. Modern
scholars believe that the battle involved the victory of
organized hoplite tactics, as perfected by the Argive king
PHEIDON, over the old-fashioned, individualistic fighting
of the aristocratic Spartan army. Scholars further believe
that the defeat fully discredited the aristocratic leadership
at Sparta and brought on drastic changes in government,
society, and military organization, through the reforms of
Lykourgos.
Lykourgos changed Sparta from a narrow aristocracy
to a broad-based oligarchy. That is, he brought middle-
class Spartan men into the government as voters and sol-
diers, creating an enlarged citizen body of about 9,000
adult males. Henceforth, perhaps once a month, all citizens
over age 30 gathered at the apella, or ASSEMBLY, to vote on
proposals framed by a 30-man council called the gerousia
(“the elders”), which included the two kings. The assem-
bly could vote only “yes” or “no” and not initiate any busi-
ness. But its voting included such duties as declaring war
or peace, ratifying the appointment of military leaders, and
electing ephors and council members aside from the kings.
Council members had to be 60 or more years old; they
held office for the rest of their lives. Although elected
annually, ephors had immense power as chief legal officials
and as monitors controlling the kings’ conduct.
In theory any citizen could be elected to the council
or ephorate, but in practice these offices probably tended
to be filled by members of a few rich and prestigious fam-
ilies. Both the council and the ephorate were probably
survivals of the old aristocratic government, now adapted
to the Lykourgan government.
Most significant, Lykourgos’s system created a large,
full-time hoplite army, supported by Sparta’s captured ter-
ritories. The 9,000 full-rank citizens—the Spartiates—
henceforth were barred from practicing any profession
aside from soldiering; crafts and TRADE became solely the
province of the perioikoi. Instead, every male Spartiate
(excepting perhaps the rich) received an allotment of
public land in Messenia or Laconia. Farmed by helots
overseen by state officers, the allotment produced food
that supported the citizen and his family; the citizen was
thus free to devote himself to lifelong military drill and
campaigning.
Of all Greek city-states, only Sparta had a permanent
soldiering class, free of the need to earn a livelihood as
farmers or craftsmen. Spartan armies, for example, could
campaign through late summer and autumn, when other
states’ farmer-soldiers might feel obliged to return home
for their various sowings and harvests.
The Spartiates—the full-rank male Spartan citizens—
sometimes called themselves homoioi, “equals.” They
were equal in that each man had a land allotment
(although rich families undoubtedly kept their traditional
estates in Laconia) and each had one vote in the assem-
bly. But homoioi also means “those who are all the same,”
and this nuance reveals the essence of Lykourgos’s
reforms. Sparta became a city where concepts of the indi-
vidual and the family were erased, in favor of a grim sys-
tem of conformity and state service.
An individual Spartiate reached full citizenship by
meeting three requirements: legitimate birth to Spartiate-
326
Sparta

rank parents, completion of a 13-year-long boyhood
training program called the agog¯e, and election at age 20
to one of the communal dining messes that were the cen-
ter of Spartan adult male life. The agog¯e process is
described in the writings of Plutarch and Xenophon. At
birth, boys (and girls) were examined for health and were
accepted or rejected by state officials—not by the family
father, as elsewhere in the Greek world. Those rejected
were killed. At age seven, boys were taken from their
mothers, to be brought up in “packs” under supervision
of older boys who reported to a state officer. By age 12,
boys lived in barracks, sleeping on mattresses of river
rushes that they gathered themselves. Year round they
went shoeless and were allowed only one outer garment,
a kind of cloak. Their staple diet was a kind of pork-
boiled porridge—the famous “Spartan broth”—which
they were encouraged to supplement by stealing food
from local storages and farms. If caught stealing, they
were beaten for their clumsiness.
Boys received schooling in traditional Spartan musi-
cal art forms, such as competitive choral singing and
dancing, but book-learning was minor. Their EDUCATION
was mainly physical—combat-type sports and games.
They exercised naked outdoors in all weather. They were
subjected to routine hazing and abuse by the older boys,
intended to toughen them. Homosexual pairings between
older and younger boys were officially encouraged, as
being helpful to patriotic esprit.
Foremost, boys were taught to obey orders and
endure hardship without complaint. Scrutinized and
judged by their elders, they grew up fearing disgrace
more than death. Plutarch recounts how a Spartan boy
somehow stole a fox cub and hid it under his cloak, only
to have the animal start biting out his insides. Rather
than cry out or otherwise reveal his theft, the child col-
lapsed and died without a whimper.
The training program was designed to prepare boys
for a soldiering life and to weed out anyone unsuitable
for full citizenship. For each young male the reckoning
came at age 20, when he sought admittance to one of the
Spartan dining messes (Greek: sussitia). Each sussition
probably consisted of about 15 men, who voted among
themselves whether to admit or reject a candidate. Once
selected, a new member remained part of the mess for
life, barring expulsion, and he contributed a portion of
his land’s produce to help feed the group. (Their diet
seems to have been far more ample and varied than the
boyhood fare.) A man’s mess-mates—not his family—
were the center of his life and identity.
Thus, at Sparta, a man’s most intense feelings were
normally directed at other males. Men were still expected
to marry citizen-rank WOMEN and breed children, but
MARRIAGE was not a deeply emotional affair. Probably
until age 30 a male Spartan continued to live with his
mess-mates, visiting his wife only in secret. And Spartan
law even allowed a husband to arrange for his wife to
sleep with another suitable man, possibly at her
request—a custom that other Greeks found outrageous.
The Spartan screening system inevitably created
classes of citizens in between the Spartiates and perioikoi.
Spartiates who failed to win admittance to a sussition—or
who were expelled because of cowardice or inability to
provide a share of food—ceased to be Spartiates and
descended to a rank known as Inferiors. Conversely, indi-
vidual perioikoi boys might be selected for the rugged
Spartiate training program, but it is unclear whether such
boys could ever attain full citizenship. A tendency to
exclude groups on grounds of inferior birth was a deeply
ingrained aspect of Spartan mentality: as early as 700
B.C.E. (probably before Lykourgos’s reforms) a rejected
group called “the sons of virgins” sailed off to found
Sparta’s only major colony, TARAS, in southern ITALY.
Sparta’s extreme social conditions created an unusual
life for women, as well. Sparta was unique among ancient
Greek cities in the freedom it granted to its female citi-
zens—this was partly due to reliance on women to man-
age estates while men were away at war. Somewhat
similarly to boys, Spartan girls received training in choral
singing, dancing, and gymnastics. Scandalously (as it
seemed to other Greeks), Spartan girls exercised in pub-
lic, naked or scantily clad. Like boys, Spartan girls appar-
ently might experience homosexual love affairs in the
course of their upbringing—as suggested in extant verses
by the poet ALCMAN (ca. 620 B.C.E.). Spartan women had
a unique reputation for heterosexual initiative and
promiscuity. At least some of these conditions were
intended to mold Spartan females into healthy and capa-
ble child-bearers, to supply future soldiers for the state.
Yet for reasons that are not clear, Sparta eventually
faced a dwindling of its Spartiate population (as opposed
to the perioikoi or helots). Perhaps Spartan marriages
were unproductive, with the problem worsened by the
brutal screening system. The shrinkage reached crisis
proportions after 464 B.C.E., when a catastrophic earth-
quake wiped out large numbers of Spartiates in the city
center. By 425 B.C.E. the Spartiates numbered no more
than 3,000—whereas Lykourgos in the mid-600s B.C.E.
had made arrangements based on a population of 9,000.
In theory, Sparta’s population problem could have
been eased by promoting large numbers of perioikoi up
to Spartiate status. Although this drastic measure was
proposed amid Sparta’s political turmoil of the 200s B.C.E.
it was never carried out. Spartiates viewed themselves as
an ethnically distinct elite, raised from birth to dominate
“lesser” peoples. Their mentality did not allow for mass
enrollments of new citizens.
Another long-term result of Lykourgos’s reforms was
loss of trade and arts. Although the late 600s B.C.E. saw
Sparta’s cultural heyday—with verses being written by
choral poets such as Alcman and TYRTAEUS, and Laconian
perioikoi bronzesmiths producing a valued metalwork for
export—in the 500s B.C.E. Sparta’s crafts declined, even as
Sparta
327

the city thrived. A major reason for this was Sparta’s deci-
sion not to adopt COINAGE, an invention that revolution-
ized Greek trade soon after 600 B.C.E. Instead of using
coins, Sparta retained a primitive, awkward currency of
IRON rods, thereby assuring itself, intentionally, of eco-
nomic and cultural isolation.
The 500s B.C.E. saw Sparta dominate the Pelopon-
nese, to become the foremost mainland Greek city. After
an attempt to conquer ARCADIA met with defeat (around
570 B.C.E.), Sparta changed its policy toward its Pelopon-
nesian neighbors: instead of seeking to crush and helotize
them (which was certain to inspire fierce resistance),
Sparta began offering them a place in a Spartan-led
alliance that modern scholars call the Peloponnesian
League. This “league policy” is sometimes associated
with the Spartan ephor CHILON, ca. 556 B.C.E. Eventually
the league embraced most Peloponnesian states except
Argos, which remained Sparta’s enemy but was badly
defeated in wars in 546 and 494 B.C.E. Sparta’s staunchest
allies in the league included TEGEA, CORINTH, and ELIS.
Sparta reached its peak under its most capable king,
the first KLEOMENES (1), who reigned ca. 520–490 B.C.E
and tried to organize all of Greece against the coming
Persian invasion. During the PERSIAN WARS (490–479
B.C.E.), Sparta led the land-army defense of mainland
Greece, alongside the Athenian-led defense at sea. The
final victory brought Sparta immense prestige—which it
soon lost to Athens.
The years 478–431 B.C.E. saw a steady worsening of
Sparta’s relations with Athens. Thucydides relates that the
Spartans feared the growth of Athenian power—specifi-
cally Athens’s naval empire organized through the DELIAN
LEAGUE. Sparta also feared the appeal and aggressive
export of Athenian democracy, so dangerous to Sparta’s
oligarchic friends in its allied cities. Spartan-Athenian
hostility culminated in the huge Peloponnesian War
(431–404 B.C.E.). A hard-fought victory left Sparta domi-
nant over an exhausted Greece.
Sparta had by now acquired a navy and an important
foreign ally, the empire of PERSIA, but Sparta’s turn as an
imperial power was destined to last barely a generation.
By harsh rule in Greece and adventuring in ASIA MINOR,
Sparta managed to unite several of its former allies and
enemies, including Persia, Corinth, Thebes, Athens, and
Argos, in a war against itself. This CORINTHIAN WAR
ended with Spartan hypocrisy exposed by the shameful
terms of the KING’S PEACE (386 B.C.E.); far from seeking
to liberate the Greek cities of Asia Minor from Persian
rule as they claimed, the Spartans just wanted to retain
power in Greece.
Growing anti-Spartan anger fueled the emergence of
a challenger state, Thebes. The Spartan king AGESILAUS,
despite personal virtues, proved blind to the danger
posed by the Theban leader Epaminondas. At the Battle
of LEUKTRA (371 B.C.E.) the age-old myth of Spartan
invincibility was shattered: A Spartan army was destroyed
and Sparta thrown forever on the defensive. Invading
Laconia for the first time in its history, Epaminondas
decided not to attack Sparta itself. But he proceeded to
dismantle the Spartan empire, by freeing Messenia and
Arcadia from Spartan domination (369–368 B.C.E.).
Messenia’s liberation in particular was devastating to
Sparta, since it removed the city’s source of surplus food.
With these events, the Peloponnesian League more or
less dissolved.
Sparta remained resistant to Thebes and then to the
Macedonians, who conquered Greece in 338 B.C.E. While
the Macedonian king ALEXANDER THE GREAT campaigned
through distant Persia, the Spartan king Agis III led a few
Peloponnesian states in revolt. But he was defeated and
killed at the Battle of Megalopolis, at the hands of the
Macedonian regent ANTIPATER (331 B.C.E.).
By the mid-200s B.C.E. Sparta was a relatively poor
state, its citizen body shrunken to a mere 700 Spartiates,
vastly outnumbered by perioikoi and helots. In foreign
policy, Sparta lay on the defensive against the Achaean
League, which was now the dominant Peloponnesian
power. This era saw the final significant moments of
Spartan history. Hoping to revive the city’s prior great-
ness, the young king Agis IV tried to abolish debts, redis-
tribute land, and enroll perioikoi as new citizens.
Opposed by conservative Spartiates, Agis died violently
(241 B.C.E.), but his revolutionary plan inspired a new
king, Kleomenes III.
After a few years on the throne, Kleomenes discarded
constitutional kingship and seized absolute power (226
B.C.E). He abolished the ephorate, redistributed the land
into 4,000 lots, and enrolled perioikoi as full citizens.
Next, seeking to recover Sparta’s military supremacy in
the Peloponnese, he waged war with the armies of the
Achaean League. But when the Achaean League leader
Aratus invited the powerful Macedonian king Antigonus
III to intervene, Sparta’s revival was doomed. At the Battle
of Sellasia, just north of Sparta, Antigonus destroyed a
Spartan army (222 B.C.E.). Kleomenes fled into exile,
soon to die, while Antigonus seized Sparta and canceled
Kleomenes’ reforms.
Of the Spartan kings who came later, Nabis was a
noteworthy adventurer during and after the Second
Macedonian War (220–197 B.C.E). By 146 B.C.E., how-
ever, Sparta and all of Greece had passed into Roman
hands. During the first century C.E., under the Roman
Empire, Sparta enjoyed a revival as a tourist attraction.
Spectators were regaled by the sight of such age-old
endurance contests as Spartan boys running the gauntlet
of whips at the altar of Artemis Orthia.
Excavation on the ACROPOLIS of Sparta was begun
by Greek and American archaeologists in the late 1800s
C.E. Since 1905, work at the site has been under the aus-
pices of the British Archaeological School at Athens.
This team investigated the sanctuary of Artemis Orthia
in 1906–1910. A new program of excavation (still by the
328
Sparta

British Archaeological School) was undertaken in the
1990s, concentrating on the area around the THEATER
and the shops.
See also ACHAEA; AGIAD CLAN; EURYPONTID CLAN;
HOMOSEXUALITY; KIMON; LYSANDER; MUSIC; TYRANTS; WAR-
FARE, LAND.
Further reading: L. F. Fitzhardinge, The Spartans
(London: Thames and Hudson, 1980); Richard J. A. Tal-
bert, trans., Plutarch on Sparta (New York: Penguin
Books, 1988); Anton Powell, ed., Classical Sparta: Tech-
niques Behind Her Success (Norman: University of Okla-
homa Press, 1989); Paul Cartledge, Hellenistic and Roman
Sparta: A Tale of Two Cities (London: Routledge, 1992);
Michael Whitby, ed., Sparta (Edinburgh: Edinburgh Uni-
versity Press, 2002).
Speusippus
See ACADEMY; PLATO.
sport
As early as the 700s B.C.E., the ancient Greeks
revered competitive sports, especially for men and boys.
Sport was seen as a character-building facet of a youth’s
EDUCATION and as a means of demonstrating the gods’
favor for certain contestants. Individual events were over-
whelmingly preferred to team sports. The most popular
events at public competitions included foot races (200
yards, 400 yards, long distance, and the race in armor),
field events (long jump, discus throw, and javelin throw),
combative events (WRESTLING, BOXING, and PANKRATION),
and the horse races and chariot races.
The Greeks’ love of sport was also closely related to
the glorification of male strength and beauty. In most
public competitions, males competed naked or nearly
so, their bodies anointed with oil. Most of the presti-
gious athletic festivals were restricted to men, since this
type of public physical display was considered inappro-
priate for Greek WOMEN. Women and girls, however,
were not completely barred from sports in ancient
Greece. SPARTA, for instance, maintained a vigorous pro-
gram of girls’ gymnastics, and the Olympic Games
included a foot race for girls (dedicated to the goddess
HERA and held outside the main sanctuary where the
other events took place). When they did compete, the
female athletes wore tunics.
The Greeks constantly associated sport with RELI-
GION. Their major competitions took place at festivals
held in the honor of the gods; the most famous of these
were the OLYMPIC GAMES, sacred to the great god ZEUS.
Every Greek city-state had its own schedule of local festi-
vals, where athletes might compete in honor of the city’s
patron gods. In every city, the GYMNASIUM was an impor-
tant public institution, where the wealthier men might
pass the day in socializing and political discussions, as
well as sports practice. The Greeks’ serious approach to
sports was an aspect of Greek culture that attracted many
non-Greek peoples—including ETRUSCANS, Romans, and
certain JEWS—who came into contact with the Greeks in
the Classical and Hellenistic eras.
See also CHARIOTS; HOMOSEXUALITY; ISTHMIAN GAMES;
NEMEAN GAMES; PENTATHLON; PINDAR; PYTHIAN GAMES.
Further reading: Wendy J. Raschke, ed., The Archae-
ology of the Olympics: The Olympics and Other Festivals in
Antiquity
(Madison: University of Wisconsin Press,
1988); David Sansone, Greek Athletics and the Genesis of
Sport (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988);
Stephen G. Miller, ed., Arete: Greek Sports from Ancient
Sources, 2d ed. (Berkeley: University of California Press,
1991); Thomas F. Scanlon, Eros and Greek Athletics (New
York: Oxford University Press, 2002); Stephen G. Miller,
Ancient Greek Athletics (New Haven, Conn.: Yale Univer-
sity Press, 2004); William Blake Tyrrell, The Smell of
Sweat: Greek Athletics, Olympics, and Culture (Wauconda,
Ill.: Bolchazy-Carducci Publishers, 2004).
statues
See SCULPTURE.
Stesichorus (632–552 
B.C.E.) Important Greek lyric
poet, usually associated with the Sicilian-Greek city of
HIMERA
Stesichoros, meaning “chorus master,” may have been a
title; according to one story, the man’s real name was
Tisias. Prolific and inventive, Stesichoras was the first
west Greek literary celebrity, and he strongly influenced
later generations of Greek poets. He was known for his
long narrative poems on mythological subjects, perhaps
26 in number. Of these, much has been lost; the rem-
nants survive mainly in quotations by later writers and in
some recovered ancient papyrus fragments, published in
1973 C.E., containing portions of Stesichorus’s poem
Geryoneis (about the mythical creature Geryon, who was
slain by HERAKLES).
Writing in the Doric Greek dialect, Stesichorus told
tales inspired by HOMER’s verses and by other poems of
the epic cycle. In the Wooden Horse, the Capture of Troy,
and Homecomings, he described the TROJAN WAR and its
aftermath. His Oresteia—about the murder of AGAMEM-
NON and the vengeance taken by his son, ORESTES—
almost certainly later influenced the Oresteia stage trilogy
by the Athenian playwright AESCHYLUS.
Stesichorus was both clever and verbose. The Gery-
oneis ran at least 1,300 lines (probably much longer) and
featured a sympathetic portrait of the three-bodied
Geryon, who traditionally had been presented as a fierce
monster.
It is not known how Stesichorus’s poems were per-
formed. He usually is called a choral poet, meaning that
his work typically would have been sung or chanted by a
trained chorus at a public event. However, his more
recently discovered verses seem to lack certain hallmarks
of choral song, leading certain scholars to believe that at
least some of Stesichorus’s poems were written for a solo
Stesichorus
329

singer accompanying himself on the lyre. Perhaps this
performer was the poet himself.
Stesichorus is traditionally credited with inventing
the “triad”—a three-stanza metrical grouping that
became an essential element in lyric verse and Athenian
stage drama. The triad consisted of the stroph¯e, or “turn,”
the antistroph¯e, “counterturn,” and the epodos, “after-
song.” This sequence was repeated throughout the poem.
The strophe and antistrophe had to be metrically identi-
cal; the epode was different. Supposedly the names
denote the chorus’ motions in singing the parts—dancing
rightward on the strophe, leftward on the antistrophe,
and standing still for the epode.
One well-known story claims that Stesichorus wrote
two different poems dealing with the mythical HELEN OF
TROY. The first was a conventional treatment of Helen’s
adulterous elopement with the Trojan prince PARIS. The
second poem, entitled the Palinodia (retraction), claimed
that the first version was untrue and that Helen had
never left her Spartan husband, MENELAUS. This version
instead said that the gods had sent a phantom-Helen to
TROY, so that the city’s doom might be fulfilled.
The daring contrivance of this palinode was much
admired in the ancient world and gave rise to a legend:
Supposedly, after writing the first Helen poem, Stesicho-
rus was struck blind. Only after publishing the retraction
did the poet regain his sight.
A recently rediscovered fragment of poetry by Stesi-
chorus has become the focus of a scholarly debate about
the foundation of the city of ROME. The poet describes a
woman named Roma fleeing Troy after the TROJAN WAR
with a fleet of ships and landed in Italy, where they
founded the new city. Most ancient authors claimed
instead that the city was named after the hero Romulus,
with its foundation traditionally dated to 753 B.C.E. Stesi-
chorus, having lived just about a century after this date,
is an older source and thus perhaps a more accurate one.
It is an interesting question about which more research is
needed, perhaps through the discovery of additional frag-
ments by Stesichorus and other ancient Greek and
Roman poets.
See also LYRIC POETRY; MUSIC.
Further reading: M. Davies, “Stesichorus’ ‘Geryoneis’
and Its Folk-tale Origins,” Classical Quarterly 38 (1988):
277–290; G. O. Hutchinson, Greek Lyric Poetry: A Com-
mentary on Selected Larger Pieces: Alcman, Stesichorus,
Sappho, Alcaeus, Ibycus, Anacreon, Simonides, Bacchylides,
Pindar, Sophokles, Euripides (New York: Oxford University
Press, 2001).
Stoicism
This school of Greek PHILOSOPHY was founded
at ATHENS around 300 B.C.E. by Zeno, a Cypriot of
Phoenician-Greek descent. With its ideal of a virtuous life
impervious to misfortune, and its assurance of an ordered
universe in which the individual person played a role, Sto-
icism addressed certain feelings of change and doubt that
accompanied the start of the HELLENISTIC AGE.
During Hellenistic times (around 300–150 B.C.E.),
Stoicism remained a modest influence, about equal to its
major rival philosophy, EPICUREANISM. But once intro-
duced at the non-Greek city of ROME in about 144 B.C.E.,
Stoicism captured the Roman mentality (more so than
the Greek) and grew into the major intellectual move-
ment of the early Roman Empire. Unlike Epicureanism,
Stoicism encouraged its followers to engage in the public
life of government, and many ruling-class Romans were
Stoics, such as the statesman Seneca the Younger (ca. 60
C.E.) and the emperor Marcus Aurelius (ca. 170 C.E.).
Stoicism’s long history is divided by scholars into
three phases, called the Early, Middle, and Late Stoa. The
Middle Stoa, around 144–30 B.C.E., saw Stoicism trans-
planted to Rome, where it flourished as the Late Stoa,
around 30 B.C.E.–mid-200s C.E. Although finally sub-
merged by the spread of Christianity, Stoicism helped to
shape the ethical outlook of early Christian thinkers.
Most modern knowledge of Stoicism comes from extant
Greek and Latin writings of the late period. The early
Stoic writings survive only in brief quotations or sum-
maries by later authors.
Zeno, the Stoic founder, immigrated to Athens as a
young man and probably studied the teachings of the
Athenian CYNICS. By about age 33 he had created his own
philosophy, borrowing Cynic ethical theories of self-suffi-
ciency along with select teachings of PLATO and others.
Zeno presented his new ideas in public lectures and dis-
putations in a part of the Athenian AGORA known as the
Stoa Poikil¯e, or Painted Colonnade. This locale gave the
new movement its name.
Zeno died around 261 B.C.E., bequeathing his school
to a disciple named Cleanthes. Cleanthes’ successor was
Chrysippus (president 232–207 B.C.E.), a highly impor-
tant thinker. His writings (not extant today) clarified
Zeno’s teachings and fused Stoic ethics, scientific theo-
ries, and theories of knowledge into a coherent, intercon-
nected system.
Although most ancient Greeks worshipped many
gods, the Stoics inclined toward belief in a single divinity.
They pictured a universe imbued with a divine purpose
or intelligence, variously referred to as reason (Greek:
logos), fire, breath, or FATE. Every human being, they
believed, contained a small version of the divine purpose,
which is demonstrated in the human ability to reason,
plan and give speech (logos).
This idea of a shared divine spark is background to
one of Stoicism’s most appealing teachings: the essential
brotherhood of all people. The Stoic was taught to ignore
distinctions of wealth and birth and to see all humans,
including WOMEN and SLAVES, as being spiritually the
same material.
Stoicism recognized only two classes of people: the
virtuous and the wicked. Like SOCRATES and Plato, the
330
Stoicism

Stoics described virtue (Greek: aret¯e) as a form of knowl-
edge or wisdom. Courage, moderation, and other virtues
were evidence of this wisdom; greed, fear, sensuality were
symptoms of ignorance. Wisdom produced virtue and
virtue produced happiness; the greedy or dishonest per-
son could not, by definition, be happy. In life, virtue was
to be exercised, not in the cloistered setting that Epicure-
anism favored, but in areas of social responsibility: earn-
ing a living, raising a family, holding public office.
Contrary to some popular belief, the Stoics did not
seek out pain. But they believed that pain, poverty, and
death were not to be feared, since those ills could not
harm a person’s virtue. The Stoic therefore, could find
consolation in adversity: Happiness dwelt within, unaf-
fected by external misfortune or external success. “Only
the wise man is rich,” a Stoic proverb ran. The Stoic tried
to emulate the calm and grandeur of the universe, by
accepting all events in life with a serene mind. This state
of mind the Stoics called apatheia, “absence of passion.”
Stoicism involved many other beliefs in fields such as
logic and SCIENCE, but it was its noble, reassuring ethical
system that made Stoicism so popular in later antiquity.
Today we still use the adjectives “stoic” and “stoical” to
denote an indifference to pain or misfortune.
Further reading: Brad Inwood, Ethics and Human
Action in Early Stoicism (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1987);
Andrew Erskine, The Hellenistic Stoa: Political Thought
and Action (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1990);
Julia Annas, Hellenistic Philosophy of Mind (Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press, 1992); Brad Inwood, ed., The
Cambridge Companion to the Stoics (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2003); John Sellars, The Art of Living:
The Stoics on the Nature and Function of Philosophy
(Burlington, Vt.: Ashgate, 2003).
Styx
See AFTERLIFE.
Sybaris
This affluent Greek city on the Gulf of Taranto
is located on the “instep” of the southern coast of ITALY.
Founded by colonists from ACHAEA in around 720 B.C.E.,
Sybaris grew rich from its fertile farmland and its TRADE
with the ETRUSCANS of the north. The city’s reputation for
luxury has produced the English word sybarite, meaning
“someone excessively devoted to pleasure.”
Sybaris enlarged its territory at the expense of local
non-Greeks and founded Italian colonies of its own,
including POSEIDONIA (Paestum). But rivalry with the
nearly Greek city of CROTON led to a war, in which
Sybaris was defeated and obliterated (510 B.C.E.). Nearly
70 years later, the Athenians established the colony
Thurii near the site of Sybaris.
Further reading: F. G. Rainey and C. M. Lerici, The
Search for Sybaris, 1960–1965 (Rome: Lerici Editori, 1967);
F. G. Rainey, “The Location of Archaic Greek Sybaris,”
American Journal of Archaeology 73 (1969): 261–173; O. H.
Bullitt, Search for Sybaris (Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1969);
N. K. Rutter, “Sybaris, Legend and Reality,” Greece and
Rome 17 (1970): 168–176; O. C. Colburn, “A Return to
Sybaris,” Expedition 18 (1975–1976): 2–13.
symposium
A type of all-male, after-dinner drinking
party, the symposium (Greek: symposion,
“drinking
together”, plural: symposia) played a vital role in ancient
Greek aristocratic life. Only the rich could afford to host
symposia; and the symposium’s expense, its male homo-
sexual or bisexual aspect, and its intellectual games were
all part of a separate aristocratic identity.
Symposia were frequent subjects on Greek vase
paintings, often decorating the very vessels that would be
used at the party, particularly the cups used for drinking
wine (kylikes, singular: kylix). These scenes show groups
of older men (usually bearded) reclining on couches and
attended by young male SLAVES. The parties seem to have
taken place in specially designated rooms of the host’s
house, with wine pitchers and cups often visible hanging
on hooks in the background. The occasional WOMEN who
appear are HETAIRAI, PROSTITUTES or courtesans. Such
women might be dancers or flute girls, but they would
also be obliged to give sexual favors.
The feasting of kings and their retainers goes back to
prehistoric times. The poems of HOMER, written down
around 750 B.C.E. describe aristocratic warriors sitting at
banquets. By the 600s B.C.E. the symposium had arisen,
probably through Phoenician influence, as a new form of
social gathering. Snacks such as sesame cakes might be
served, but the symposium’s central activity was the
semiritualistic drinking of WINE. All the drinkers were
men, of equal noble status. The servers and entertainers
were typically young female and male SLAVES chosen for
their beauty.
The symposium was the natural setting for hetairai
and extramarital heterosexual encounters. Similarly,
according to ancient Greek aristocratic taste, the sympo-
sium would be the scene of various homosexual attrac-
tions, whether between guests or involving a guest and
slave. One anecdote tells how the great Athenian play-
wright SOPHOKLES coaxed a kiss from a slave boy at a
symposium (around 440 B.C.E.). A surviving tomb paint-
ing from POSEIDONIA (around 480 B.C.E.) shows a youth-
ful guest warding off a caress from his couchmate, a
slightly older man.
The symposium was governed by rules. The typical
“symposiast” (reveler) did not sit but rather reclined on a
couch, propped up on his left elbow, Phoenician style.
There were usually between seven and 15 couches, with
two men to each. One of the drinkers was appointed
“king,” or master of ceremonies, to decide on the
sequence of activities.
Symposia had their own equipment, including many
of the forms of Greek POTTERY that are known from
symposium
331

ARCHAEOLOGY. The men drank from cups such as the
kylix—wide and shallow, for sipping on the recline.
According to Greek custom, the wine was diluted with
water, usually one part wine to two or three water. The
mixture was prepared in a large bowl, the krat¯er, and from
there distributed by slaves to the drinkers’ cups. During
the festivities the wine-to-water ratio might be altered
according to the wishes of the “king,” but drinking undi-
luted wine was considered very unhealthy. Games
included kottabos (in which wine dregs were flicked from
the cup at a target) and competitive singing by individual
symposiasts to flute accompaniment—the origin of the
Greek verse form known as the elegy.
Undoubtedly events could grow wild as men got
drunk—for example, more than one vase painting shows
hetairai climbing onto couches to embrace guests. The
party might end in a komos, a drunken torchlight proces-
sion in honor of DIONYSUS, the wine god.
But symposia were also the setting for philosophical
and, especially, political discussion. The symposiasts were
usually men of right-wing views, and the symposium was
designed to foster a sense of exclusivity in an atmosphere
of male bonding. At ATHENS and other democracies, such
a strong minority could be subversive. The right-wing
conspiracies that threatened democratic Athens in 457,
411, and 404 B.C.E. were surely hatched in gatherings
such as symposia.
The symposium’s dual intellectual-sexual nature is
conveyed in idealized terms by the philosopher PLATO, in
his dialogue titled the Symposium. In this fictional
account, SOCRATES, ARISTOPHANES, ALCIBIADES, and other
notable fifth-century-B.C.E. Athenians meet to drink and
discuss the nature of sexual love.
See also ALCAEUS; ANACREON; ARISTOCRACY; HOMO-
SEXUALITY; LYRIC POETRY; MUSIC; OLIGARCHY; PHOENICIA;
POTTERY; PROSTITUTES.
Further reading: Michael Vickers, Greek Symposia
(London: Joint Association of Classical Teachers, 1978);
O. Murray, ed., Sympotica. A Symposium on the Symposion
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990); William J.
Slater, Dining in a Classical Context (Ann Arbor: Univer-
sity of Michigan Press, 1991); Susan Rotroff and John
Oakley, Debris from a Public Dining Place in the Athenian
Agora (Princeton, N.J.: American School of Classical
Studies at Athens, 1992).
Syracuse
The preeminent Greek city of SICILY, Syra-
cuse was also one of the grandest and most violent cities
of Greek history. Under a series of military dictators in
the 400s–200s B.C.E., the city led the Sicilian Greeks in
their constant struggle against the Carthaginians, who
occupied Sicily’s western corner. Syracuse played a major
role in the downfall of ATHENS during the PELOPON-
NESIAN WAR, when the Syracusans totally destroyed an
Athenian invasion force (413 B.C.E.). By the first half of
the 300s B.C.E., Syracuse vied with North African
CARTHAGE for control of the western Mediterranean,
before falling to the expansionism of ROME (211 B.C.E.).
Syracuse (now the Sicilian city of Siracusa) was one
of the earliest Greek colonies. Located on the south part
of Sicily’s east coast, it was founded in about 733 B.C.E. by
shipborne Corinthian settlers who subdued the local
native Sicels. The site combined fertile coastal farmland
with the best harbor of eastern Sicily—a double harbor,
formed by the inshore island Ortygia (“quail island”).
The Greeks fortified Ortygia and the mainland opposite,
eventually linking them with a causeway and bridge.
The Syracuse colony was undoubtedly intended as a
breadbasket for its mother city, CORINTH. Syracuse’s sur-
plus harvest of barley and wheat was probably offered
first for sale to the Corinthians.
Like Corinth, Syracuse in the 700s–500s B.C.E. was
governed as an ARISTOCRACY. The descendants of the first
settlers became a ruling class known as the Gamoroi,
“landholders,” who lived in the city and whose farms
occupied the best land of the plain. Lower on the social
ladder were the descendants of later Greek arrivals, who
might be craftsmen in the city or have smallholdings in
the hills. Lowest of all were the Sicel-ethnic serfs, who
tilled the land for their Greek masters (and whose condi-
tion resembled that the Spartan HELOTS). These distinc-
tive social layers created class hatreds, which—when
added to the external menace of the Carthaginians and
native Sicilian tribes—were destined to have important
political consequences. By the 400s B.C.E. Syracuse saw
TYRANTS (tyrannoi, “dictators”) arising, as champions of
the common people and as promisers of military security.
The first tyrant was GELON; ruler of the nearby Greek
city of GELA, who seized Syracuse under pretext of aiding
the beleaguered Gamoroi (485 B.C.E.). Gelon transferred
his capital to Syracuse and from there ruled as the most
powerful individual in the Greek world. He led Greek
Sicily to victory against the Carthaginians at the Battle of
HIMERA (480 B.C.E.), and he extended the Syracusan
empire westward, subjugating Carthaginians, Greeks, and
natives across two-thirds of Sicily.
Gelon was succeeded by his brother HIERON (1), who
ruled 478–467 B.C.E. and extended Syracusan power to
Greek ITALY with his defeat of the Etruscans at the sea bat-
tle of CUMAE (474 B.C.E.). Under Hieron, Syracuse became
a cultural capital, attracting literary artists of old Greece,
such as AESCHYLUS, PINDAR, SIMONIDES, and BACCHYLIDES.
The Greek amphitheater, ancient Syracuse’s best-known
surviving remnant, was first built under Hieron, quite
possibly for the performance of Aeschylus’s play Women of
Etna (476 B.C.E.). A Sicilian Greek playwright Epichar-
mus, probably a Syracusan, is said to have pioneered the
writing of stage comedy in the early 400s B.C.E.
After Hieron’s death, the tyranny was overthrown
(466 B.C.E.). A Syracusan DEMOCRACY, based on the Athe-
nian model, lasted for about 60 years. During this time
332
Syracuse

Syracuse remained the foremost Dorian-Greek city of
Sicily, and was hostile to such local Ionian-Greek cities as
Leontini. Eventually Syracuse’s enemies appealed to the
great city of Athens for help. The ambitious Athenians
dreamed of capturing Syracuse’s wheatfields and other
riches, and in 415 B.C.E. they dispatched an ill-fated
armada that eventually totaled perhaps 50,000 troops and
173 warships. The attackers besieged Syracuse but, after
two years’ fighting, were annihilated. The architects of
this Syracusan triumph were the Spartan general Gylip-
pus and the Syracusan statesman-general Hermocrates.
In 410 B.C.E. a new threat emerged, as the Cartha-
ginians began a series of eastward campaigns in Sicily.
Following so close after the Athenian attack, this crisis
threw the Syracusan democracy into turmoil, and in
about 405 B.C.E. there emerged a new dictator, DIONYSIUS
(1), a military officer and former follower of Hermocrates
(since killed in civil war). Seizing power, Dionysius mar-
ried Hermocrates’ daughter and embarked on a war that
rolled the Carthaginians back from the very walls of Syra-
cuse to Sicily’s western corner. The ensuing peace (397
B.C.E.) left Greek Sicily securely under Syracusan protec-
tion and rule.
The prosperous years until Dionysius’s death (367
B.C.E.) saw Syracuse as the magnificent capital of the
western Greeks. Dionysius made Ortygia island his pri-
vate citadel and fortified Syracuse’s inland heights, called
the Epipolae (“above the city”); still standing are the
remains of one of his forts, now called the Castle of
Euryalus. Like Hieron, Dionysius sought to attract poets
and thinkers to his court. In 387 B.C.E. the Athenian
philosopher PLATO made the first of his ill-fated visits to
Syracuse. (The philosopher was unimpressed, complain-
ing that in Sicily everyone overate twice a day and never
slept alone.)
Dionysius’s son and successor, Dionysius II, lacked
his father’s ability to rule successfully, and was ousted
after 10 years. Greek Sicily relapsed into civil strife, and
Syracuse’s power declined.
The reorganization of Greek Sicily by the Corinthian
commander TIMOLEON (345–ca. 340 B.C.E.) left Syracuse
with a moderate OLIGARCHY on the Corinthian pattern.
Yet, once again, a dictator emerged: AGATHOKLES, who
ruled 317–287 B.C.E. The hectic events of his reign saw
Syracuse again besieged by the Carthaginians and again
leading the defense of Greek Sicily.
After Agathocles’ death, a new autocrat emerged from
the ranks of military officers: Hieron II, who in 269 B.C.E.
declared himself king and whose 54-year reign brought
Syracuse to its final peak of glory. Hieron wisely made an
alliance with the emerging power of Rome.
Under him, Syracuse was one of the three great
Greek cities of the HELLENISTIC AGE, along with ALEXAN-
DRIA (1) and ANTIOCH. Syracuse’s most famous citizen of
this era was the mathematician-scientist ARCHIMEDES.
Syracuse’s downfall came amid the conflict between
Rome and Carthage. After Hieron’s death (215 B.C.E.), his
successor made a foolhardy alliance with Carthage that
soon brought Syracuse under attack by Roman forces.
From 213 to 211 B.C.E. the city’s huge fortifications with-
stood the Roman siege: According to legend, the aged
Archimedes invented a giant glass lens, designed to focus
sun rays on Roman warships in the harbor and set them
afire. But eventually the city’s outer wall fell to night
assault and its inner wall to treason. The Romans cap-
tured Syracuse amid slaughter and looting. Among the
booty shipped back to Rome were statues and other art
objects that spurred the Romans’ fascination with Greek
culture. Later, Syracuse became the chief city of Roman
Sicily and eventually lost its Greek identity.
The main part of ancient Syracuse lies completely
underneath the modern city, making it difficult to conduct
extensive archaeological excavation. A few monuments
have been located and investigated, including the theater,
an altar of Gelon II, and a Roman amphitheater. The
island of Ortygia, by contrast, is sparsely occupied today
and preserves several buildings erected by the Greek
colonists. The most important of these is the temple dedi-
cated to the god APOLLO, built in the early 700s B.C.E.
with numerous later architectural phases. The temple was
discovered in 1862 C.E. and excavated in 1943. A second
temple, dedicated to the great god ZEUS, was probably also
built in the 700s B.C.E. Two other elaborate but unindenti-
fied temples sit on the highest point of the island. One,
begun around 550 B.C.E., was never finished and repre-
sents the only Ionic-style temple known in Sicily (all the
rest are constructed using the Doric order). The other
temple was erected in the early 400s B.C.E., probably after
Gelon’s victory at the Battle of Himera in 480 B.C.E.
See also THEATER.
Further reading: Rita Salerno Carusi, Syracuse and
Its Province (Syracuse, Italy: Istituto editoriale siciliano,
1985); Syracuse: Art, History, Landscape (Milan: Co. Graf.
Editrice, 1986); Bonna Daix Wescoat, ed., Syracuse, The
Fairest Greek City: Ancient Art from the Museo Archeologico
Regionale ‘Paolo Orsi’ (Rome: De Luca edizioni d’arte,
1989); Brian Caven, Dionysius I, War-lord of Sicily (New
Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1990).
Syracuse
333

T
334
talent
This large monetary unit was equivalent to a cer-
tain weight (Greek: talanton) of SILVER, usually about 58
pounds. The talent measure was in use well before the
beginnings of Greek COINAGE (around 595 B.C.E.), and no
talent coin existed. In ATHENS in the 400s to 300s B.C.E.,
a talent was considered equivalent to 6,000 of the silver
coins known as drachmae.
Further reading: A. S. Henry, “Polis, Acropolis, and the
Ten Talent Fund,” Chiron 12 (1982): 91–118; M. L. Cook,
“Timokrates’ 50 Talents and the Cost of Ancient Warfare,”
Eranos 88 (1990): 69–97; John Melville-Jones, Testimonia
numaria: Greek and Latin Texts Concerning Ancient Greek
Coinage (London: Spink, 1993); David Schaps, The Inven-
tion of Coinage and the Monetization of Ancient Greece (Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2004).
Tantalus
In HOMER’s epic poem the Odyssey, the hero
ODYSSEUS visits the Underworld (book 11), where he sees
three great sinners who are suffering eternal punishment
for having betrayed the friendship of the gods. The sin-
ners are the giant Tityus and the mortals SISYPHUS and
Tantalus. Described as an old man, Tantalus is tortured
by unrelieved thirst and hunger. He stands in a cool pond
up to his neck, with the boughs of fruit trees hanging
above his head; but when he lowers his head to drink, the
water drains away instantly, and when he reaches up for
fruit, the boughs are lifted away by the wind. Tantalus’s
fate has given rise to our English word tantalize, meaning
“to cause torment by showing but withholding something
desirable.” In Greek, the name Tantalus may have meant
“sufferer.”
Tantalus was described as a wealthy king in ASIA
MINOR and a son of the great god ZEUS, but his good for-
tune brought on insane arrogance (HUBRIS). To test the
omniscience of the gods, he invited them to a banquet,
then he killed his own young son, PELOPS, and cooked
him as the dish. Zeus and the other gods detected the
trick; only the goddess DEMETER—distracted by grief for
her lost daughter, PERSEPHONE—ate a few bites, from the
shoulder. The divinities brought Pelops back to life,
replacing the missing part of his shoulder with ivory. Tan-
talus was sent off to an eternal pain that mirrors his crime
somewhat. Through Pelops, Tantalus was the ancestor of
the mythical kings who eventually ruled MYCENAE, in
Greece. This family of the Pelopidae included ATREUS,
AGAMEMNON, and ORESTES; the misfortunes of this royal
house can be understood partly as originating with Tanta-
lus’s crime.
See also AFTERLIFE; MYTH.
Further reading: C. Sourvinou-Inwood, “Crime and
Punishment. Tityos, Tantalos, and Sisyphos in ‘Odyssey’
11,” Bulletin of the Institute of Classical Studies 33 (1986):
37–58.
Taras
This Greek city was founded by Spartan colonists
in the late 700s B.C.E. on the “instep” of the southern
coast of ITALY. Often known by its Latin name, Tarentum,
this city is now the Italian seaport of Taranto, located
beside the Gulf of Taranto.
As the only colony established by SPARTA, Taras
maintained a Spartan form of government until switching
to DEMOCRACY, around 475 B.C.E. Taras thrived from
FARMING, manufacturing (including POTTERY and jew-
elry), and Adriatic TRADE, despite the hostility of local
Italian tribes. By the mid-400s B.C.E. it was the foremost
Greek city of south Italy. The city’s peak came in the 300s

B.C.E., when it was producing such luminaries as the
philosopher-engineer Archytas and the philosopher-musi-
cal theorist Aristoxenus. But by midcentury Taras was
being threatened by its Italian enemies—the nearby
Lucanii and the more distant, expansionist city of ROME.
For help, Taras appealed to other Greek states. The
last and best known of these episodes came in 280 B.C.E.,
when the dynamic King PYRRHUS of EPIRUS arrived with
his army to fight the Romans. After early victories gave
way to defeat, Pyrrhus withdrew.
Taras was captured by the Romans and became a
Roman subject state (272 B.C.E.). Later it was an impor-
tant port city of Roman Italy. Ancient Taras lies under-
neath the modern town of Taranto, so the visible
archaeological remains are few and far between. There is
a Doric temple on the ACROPOLIS, built around 575 B.C.E.,
and remains of domestic buildings have been located
throughout the lower city, but these have not been sys-
tematically excavated or recorded. Another public build-
ing was discovered in 1880 C.E. on the grounds of the
Villa Peripato. Numerous tombs have also been exca-
vated, ranging in date from 800 to 100 B.C.E., many of
which contained fine grave goods such as decorated
Greek POTTERY. Neither of the two theaters known to
have been in the ancient city has been found.
Further reading: Joseph C. Carter, The Sculpture of
Taras
(Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society,
1975); M. Philippides, “The Partheniai and the Founda-
tion of Taras,” Ancient World 2 (1979): 79–82; George C.
Brauer Jr., Taras: Its History and Coinage (New Rochelle,
N.Y.: A. D. Caratzos, 1986); M. Nafissi, “From Sparta to
Taras. Nomina, Ktiseis, and Relationships between
Colony and Mother City,” in Sparta. New Perspectives,
edited by Stephen Hodkinson and Anton Powell (Lon-
don: Duckworth, 1999), 245–272.
Tarentum
See TARAS.
Tartarus
See AFTERLIFE.
Tegea
This city in the southeastern part of the plain of
ARCADIA was located along the main route between
SPARTA, to the south, and ARGOS, to the northeast. Tegea
was one of the two original Arcadian cities, the other
being MANTINEIA, Tegea’s rival.
Tegea arose around 600 B.C.E. from an amalgamation
of local villages, formed to resist Spartan aggression.
Renowned as fighters, the Tegeans defeated a Spartan
invasion around 585 B.C.E., but in the mid-500s B.C.E.
they made peace and became staunch Spartan allies.
Tegean troops had the traditional privilege of occupying
the left wing of the battle line in a Spartan-led army.
Tegean troops played a prominent role alongside the
Spartans in the PELOPONNESIAN WAR (431–404 B.C.E.).
But after Sparta’s defeat by THEBES in 371 B.C.E., Tegea
turned against the crippled Sparta and fought on the The-
ban side at the Battle of Mantinea (362 B.C.E.). Later,
however, enmity with Mantinea brought Tegea back to a
treaty with Sparta.
The glory of ancient Tegea was its temple of the god-
dess ATHENA. Destroyed by fire in 390 B.C.E., this shrine
was rebuilt as the largest and grandest temple in southern
Greece. The site lies three miles outside Tegea; the later
temple’s foundations and column fragments are visible
today.
Excavations at Tegea were begun by the French
Archaeological School in 1888–1889 C.E., under the
direction of archaeologists G. Fougères and V. Bérard. The
Temple of Athena Alea itself was first investigated by A.
Milchhofer in 1879 and by W. Dörpfeld in 1882, and it
was fully excavated by the French School between 1900
and 1910. Further excavations took place at Tegea in the
1960s, and the current program of work, begun in 1990,
is being conducted by the Norwegian Institute at Athens
under the leadership of E. Ostby.
Further reading: Andrew F. Stewart, Skopas of Paros
(Park Ridge, N.J.: Noyes Press, 1977); Naomi J. Norman,
“The Temple of Athena Alea at Tegea,” American Journal
of Archaeology 88 (1984): 169–194; E. Ostby, “The
Archaic Temple of Athena Alea at Tegea,” Opuscula Athe-
niensia 16 (1986): 75–102; Naomi J. Norman, “Asklepios
and Hygeia and the Cult Statue at Tegea,” American Jour-
nal of Archaeology 90 (1986): 425–430; Mary E. Voyatzis,
The Early Sanctuary of Athena Alea at Tegea and Other
Archaic Sanctuaries in Arcadia (Göteborg, Sweden: P.
Aströms, 1990); ———, “Current Fieldwork at the Sanc-
tuary of Athena Alea at Tegea,” Archaeological News 17
(1992): 19–25; G. C. Nordquist, J. M. Luce, and E. Ostby,
“The Sanctuary of Athena Alea at Tegea. First Preliminary
Report (1990–1992),” Opuscula Atheniensia 20 (1994):
89–141; E. Ostby, “Recent Excavations in the Sanctuary
of Athena Alea at Tegea, 1990–1993,” in Archaeology in
the Peloponnese. New Excavations and Research, edited by
Kenneth Sheedy (Oxford: Oxbow Books, 1994), 39–63;
G. C. Nordquist, “Evidence for Metalworking in Late
Geometric Tegea,” in Trade and Production in Premonetary
Greece. Production and the Craftsman. Proceedings of the
4th and 5th International Workshops, Athens 1994 and
1995, edited by Carole Gillis, Christina Risberg, and Bir-
gitta Sjöberg (Jonsered, Sweden: P. Aströms, 1997),
197–207; Jari Pakkanen, The Temple of Athena Alea at
Tegea. A Reconstruction of the Peristyle Column (Helsinki,
Finland: Department of Art History at the University of
Helsinki, 1998); G. C. Nordquist, “Early Cult in the
Sanctuary of Athena Alea at Tegea, Arcadia,” in Classical
Archaeology towards the Third Millennium. Reflexions and
Perspectives. Proceedings of the XVth International Congress
of Classical Archaeology, Amsterdam, July 12–17, 1998
(Amsterdam: 1999), 282–284; Robin Hägg, ed., Pelopon-
nesian Sanctuaries and Cults: Proceedings of the Ninth
International Symposium at the Swedish Institute at Athens,
Tegea
335

11–13 June 1994 (Stockholm: Svenska Institutet i Athen,
2002).
Teiresias
In MYTH,
this blind Theban seer was
renowned for his wisdom and longevity; he was said to
have lived for seven generations. In HOMER’s epic poem
the Odyssey (book II), the hero ODYSSEUS visits the
Underworld to consult the ghost of Teiresias, who
prophesies as to what FATE awaits the hero at home and
mentions certain precautions to observe on the return
voyage.
Teiresias was not born blind; the best-known story
about him tells how he lost his sight. Out walking one
day, he encountered two snakes mating and hit them with
his walking stick, killing the female. Immediately he was
transformed into a woman, and remained so until, some
time later, he again encountered two snakes mating. This
time he killed the male and so regained his prior gender.
Because Teiresias had had this unique experience, the god
ZEUS and his wife, HERA, asked Teiresias to settle their
argument as to who gets more pleasure from sexual inter-
course, men or WOMEN. Zeus claimed it was women, but
Hera insisted it was men. When Teiresias declared that
women get nine times more pleasure than men, Hera
angrily blinded him. But Zeus, to compensate, gave him
long life and the inner sight of prophecy.
See also PROPHECY AND DIVINATION; SOPHOKLES.
Further reading: M. J. Alden, “Tiresias. A Boiotian
Prophet in the ‘Odyssey’,” EpetBoiotMel 1 (1988): 183–193.
Telemachos
In MYTH, this character was the son of King
ODYSSEUS and PENELOPE. Telemachos’s name, “distant bat-
tle,” refers to his father’s part in the TROJAN WAR, which
began just when the boy was born. A subplot in HOMER’s
epic poem the Odyssey traces Telemachos’s passage to matu-
rity. At the Odyssey’s opening, Telemachos, about 20 years
old, is a dutiful but timid prince, overawed by the confident
nobles who crowd his absent father’s palace at ITHACA and
compete for Penelope’s hand in MARRIAGE. Unable to make
them leave, Telemachos voyages by ship to the Pelopon-
nesian courts of NESTOR and MENELAUS, to ask about the
whereabouts of the father he has not seen since he was a
baby. With the goddess ATHENA’s help, Telemachos sails
back to Ithaca (evading an ambush by the suitors en route
and encounters his father, who has returned in disguise. By
now the boy is showing considerable confidence and initia-
tive. In the climactic scene, where Odysseus slaughters the
suitors (book 22), Telemachos fights bravely alongside his
father, sustaining a wrist wound.
Other legends add a few details about his life. Sup-
posedly Telemachos later married his father’s former
paramour, CIRCE.
Further reading: Eva Brann, Homeric Moments: Clues
to Delight in Reading the Odyssey and the Iliad (Philadel-
phia: Paul Dry Books, 2002).
Teos
See IONIA.
Terpander (mid-600s B.C.E.) Lyric poet
Terpander came from the island of LESBOS but composed
and performed at SPARTA. His name means “delight of
man,” and legend claims that his poetry soothed the
Spartans at a time of civil crisis. Only a few lines ascribed
to Terpander survive, and even these were probably not
really written by him. He was apparently an important
early figure in creating choral poetry as an art form and
in making Sparta a center for that art. Almost certainly, he
influenced the younger Spartan choral poet ALCMAN.
Terpander may have pioneered certain techniques in
playing the lyre. However, the story crediting him with
inventing the seven-stringed lyre (in place of four strings)
is not true, as the seven-stringed type dates back to the
second millenium B.C.E.
See also LYRIC POETRY; MUSIC.
Further reading: M. L. West, trans., Greek Lyric Poetry:
The Poems and Fragments of the Greek Iambic, Elegiac, and
Melic Poets (excluding Pindar and Bacchylides) down to 450
B.C. (New York: Oxford University Press, 1994).
Thales (ca. 634–546 B.C.E.) Greek scientist and philosopher
The first Greek thinker to try to explain the universe in
nonreligious, rationalistic terms. Thales can be consid-
ered both the first scientist and the first philosopher in
the West. He lived in MILETUS, in the flourishing Greek
region called IONIA, in ASIA MINOR. Although he left no
writings, he is best remembered for his theory that water
is the fundamental constituent of all matter.
Thales and two of his followers, ANAXIMANDER and
ANAXIMENES, comprise the first known philosophical
movement: the Milesian School of natural philosophers.
These men used physical observations to inquire about a
primary substance in the universe. The significance of
such thinkers is that they were the first to look for
answers without reference to the traditional myths of the
gods. Later generations considered Thales to be one of
the SEVEN SAGES of Greece. He was famous in his lifetime,
and took part in great events. In around 545 B.C.E., when
Ionia was under attack by the Persian king CYRUS (1),
Thales proposed the creation of a federated union of
Ionian cities.
He established—probably on the basis of Babylonian
or Egyptian learning—the studies of ASTRONOMY and
geometry among the Greeks; he was believed to be the
first Greek to accurately predict the year of a solar eclipse
(probably in 585 B.C.E.). Like other Greek wise men, he is
said to have traveled to EGYPT, where he supposedly cal-
culated a pyramid’s height by measuring its shadow
simultaneously with that of his walking stick and calcu-
lating the ratios.
Thales was of partial Phoenician descent, and Near
Eastern influences may lurk behind his emphasis on
336
Teiresias

water and his theory that the earth floats like a log in a
cosmic watery expanse. (This resembles the Semitic myth
of watery creation in the biblical book of Genesis.) In
Thales’ mind however such ideas became scientific.
See also MATHEMATICS; PHILOSOPHY; PHOENICIA; SCI-
ENCE.
Further reading:
A. A. Mosshammer, “Thales’
Eclipse,” Transactions of the American Philological Associa-
tion 111 (1981): 145–155; Patricia O’Grady, Thales of
Miletus: The Beginnings of Western Science and Philosophy
(Aldershot, U.K.: Ashgate, 2002).
Thasos
This wealthy island of the northern AEGEAN
SEA, lies six miles offshore of the non-Greek mainland of
THRACE. Thasos is a round island, about 13 miles in
diameter and rises to a central peak. The Greek poet
ARCHILOCHUS sourly described it as sticking up like a
donkey’s back, topped with forests (ca. 670 B.C.E.). The
main city was a seaport, also named Thasos (site of the
modern Greek town of Limen); it lay at the north of the
island, opposite the mainland.
As one of the very few Aegean sites to offer mineral
deposits of GOLD, Thasos attracted Greek colonists at an
early date, around 700 B.C.E. These colonists—of whom
Archilochus eventually was one—came from the island of
Paros in the CYCLADES. Although Thasos’s mines were
soon exhausted, the island served as a base from which to
pursue mining and panning on the nearby Thracian
mainland. The most important mainland prospecting area
lay on the eastern slopes of Mt. Pangaeus, at a site called
Skapt¯e Hul¯e (“dug-out wood”), about 25 miles due
northwest of Thasos.
But the Pangaeus fields existed amid a hostile native
people—the warlike Thracians. Much of Archilochus’s
surviving poetry describes fierce fighting against the
“mop-haired men of Thrace,” and what these verses seem
to portray is Greek military protection for miners and for
convoys of raw gold and SILVER, moving from the slopes
of Pangaeus to the safe anchorage at Thasos.
The island grew rich from its exports of precious ore,
TIMBER, local marble, and, probably, SLAVES acquired as
Thracian war captives.
Thasos had a renowned school of SCULPTURE in the
600s and 500s B.C.E. and was the birthplace of the painter
Polygnotus (ca. 475 B.C.E.).
The island surrendered to the advancing Persians
under King DARIUS (1) in 491 B.C.E. After the Persian
defeat in 479 B.C.E., Thasos joined the Athenian-con-
trolled DELIAN LEAGUE, and, like most other Delian allies,
reorganized its government as a DEMOCRACY.
In 465 B.C.E. however, Thasos revolted from the
Delian League, over Athenian interference in its crucial
mining operations on the mainland. An Athenian war
fleet defeated the Thasians in a sea battle, and besieged
and captured the capital city (465–463 B.C.E.). Relatedly,
the Athenians began colonizing the west foot of Mt. Pan-
gaeus, at the site later known as AMPHIPOLIS.
The Athenians apparently now took over Thasos’s
mainland mines, at least temporarily. We know that in 454
B.C.E. Thasos was paying only three TALENTS of Delian
tribute a year—a tiny assessment for that rich state, unless
it was no longer rich. But by 446 B.C.E. the Thasian tribute
had jumped to 30 talents a year, which may signify the
Thasians’ recovery of their mainland possessions.
In 411 B.C.E., amid the widespread Delian revolt
against a beleaguered ATHENS in the PELOPONNESIAN
WAR, Thasos rebelled again and went over to the Spartan
side. But the common people resisted this defection, and
the next years saw civil war on Thasos, followed by
recapture by the Athenians (407 B.C.E.). In 404 B.C.E., at
the war’s end, the exhausted island’s Athenian loyalists
were massacred by the Spartan general LYSANDER.
In 389 B.C.E. the island joined the SECOND ATHENIAN
LEAGUE, of which it remained a faithful member. Thasos
was seized by the Macedonian king PHILIP II in 340
B.C.E., by about 300 B.C.E. he and his successors had
depleted the Pangaeus mines. Thasos remained a part of
the Macedonian kingdom until 196 B.C.E., when it was
freed by the Romans in their liberation of Greece.
As befits a rich capital, Thasos city boasted a number
of grand buildings. Among the remnants visible today are
parts of the AGORA and of a temple of HERAKLES (400s
B.C.E.). Most impressive is the partly surviving ancient
city wall, dating back to the Thasians’ preparation for
revolt in 411 B.C.E.
See also PAINTING; PERSIAN WARS; ROME.
Further reading: R. J. L. Wynne-Thomas, Legacy of
Thasos
(London: Springwood Books, 1978); Robin
Osborne, “Island Towers. The Case of Thasos,” Annual
of the British School at Athens 81 (1986): 167–178; J. Des
Courtils and A. Pariente, “Excavations in the Herakles
Sanctuary at Thasos,” in Early Greek Cult Practice. Pro-
ceedings of the Fifth International Symposium at the
Swedish Institute at Athens, 26 –29 June 1986, edited by
Robin Hägg, Nanno Marinatos, and G. C. Nordquist
(Stockholm: Svenska Institutet i Athen, 1988), 121; N.
Herz, “Classical Marble Quarries of Thasos,” in Antike
Edel- und Buntmetallgewinnung auf Thasos (Bochum,
Germany: Selbstverlag des Bergbau-Museens, 1988),
232–240; Stergios Stephanou, Thasos, translated by
Philip Ramp (Athens: Melissa Publishing House, 1991);
A. J. Graham, “Thasos: The Topography of the Ancient
City,” Annual of the British School at Athens 95 (2000):
301–327; S. Owen, “New Light on Thracian Thasos. A
Reinterpretation of the Cave of Pan,” Journal of Hellenic
Studies 120 (2000): 139–143.
theater
Many cultures have produced some original
form of public performance that might be called drama
or theater. It was the ancient Greeks, specifically the
theater
337

Athenians of the 400s B.C.E., who perfected the two gen-
res known as tragedy and comedy, which defined Euro-
pean theater for centuries following. Shakespeare (ca.
1600 C.E.) wrote tragedies and comedies because those
were playwriting’s two principal forms, inherited from
the Greeks.
Greek tragedy drew on tales from MYTH. This meant
that in most cases the entire audience would be familiar
with the story’s plot beforehand (similar to an audience at
a modern Easter pageant). The playwright’s skill would
lie in shaping the material so as to communicate a partic-
ular world view or character portrait.
Most Greek tragedy presents the downfall of a hero
or other lofty protagonist. In the more sophisticated
tragedies, this downfall is shown to be due to HUBRIS
(arrogance): Having attracted the anger of the gods, the
hero is destroyed by a disastrously arrogant decision of
his own. The clearest example of this pattern is in
AESCHYLUS’s Agamemnon, where the hero displays his
hubris by walking atop a priceless tapestry.
The philosopher ARISTOTLE, in a famous passage in
his literary-critical Poetics, explains that tragedy’s artistic
goal is to arouse the audience’s emotions of pity and fear
in a way that purges these feelings and provides relief;
this purging is called katharsis. Greek tragedy also strives
to examine the nature—or absence—of divine justice,
and the role of humankind in the universe.
Comedy, on the other hand, was always meant to be
funny and riotous, with characters less noble and compli-
cated than those in tragedy or even real life. ARISTO-
PHANES’ 11 surviving comedies, dating between 425 and
388 B.C.E., are farcical, fantastical works that celebrate the
city’s political life, while mocking specific individuals and
institutions.
Ancient Greek theater was a form of poetry, with all
dialogue being spoken or sung in verse. Theater was also
338
theater
The theater at Epidaurus dates from the mid-300s B.C.E. and has excellent acoustics. Its 55 rows of limestone benches could seat
12,000. Actors performed on the 66-foot-wide beaten circle of earth. (Alison Frantz Photographic Collection, American School of
Classical Studies at Athens)

mass culture, intended for an audience that included sev-
eral social classes, and it thrived in democracies such as
ATHENS (although it is unclear whether WOMEN, even
female citizens, were allowed to attend). Because the the-
ater audiences comprised much the same constituency as
the democratic ASSEMBLY, Greek drama often conveyed
strong political messages.
Tragedy apparently was invented at Athens in the 500s
B.C.E. (although the city of SIKYON claimed this honor,
too). Comedy was developed at various Greek states,
including SYRACUSE and other cities of SICILY, before being
instituted most grandly at Athens. Both genres probably
emerged from the public performances of choral singers at
religious festivals in honor of DIONYSUS, the god of WINE
and fertility, who was a favorite deity of the masses. Greek
comedy, with its farce and obscenity, seems clearly derived
from the riotous Dionysian procession known as the
komos, held at many Greek states; komoidia means “song of
the komos.” Vase paintings show the komos as a parade of
masked men costumed as SATYRS and carrying a log carved
as a huge penis. The komos was probably an occasion for
rude jokes exchanged with onlookers; out of this interplay
there may have developed the parabasis (a direct choral
address to the audience that was a hallmark of Athenian
stage comedy). The belief that Dionysus could spiritually
possess his worshippers probably led to individual speak-
ing or singing roles in the god’s character.
The origins of tragedy are less clear than those of
comedy. According to Aristotle’s Poetics, tragedy emerged
from the narrative choral song known as the dithyramb.
Like the komos, the dithyramb was performed at certain
festivals of Dionysus, but was more solemn and rehearsed
than the komos. The meaning of the word dithyramb is
unclear now, but it is known, from extant dithyrambs
written by the poet BACCHYLIDES (mid-400s B.C.E.), that
these songs told tales from Greek myth, not necessarily
relating to Dionysus. The chorus would sing or chant the
story and probably dance interpretively.
Assuming that what Aristotle said was accurate, there
must have come a time at Athens when certain types of
performance broke away from the rules governing the
dithyramb’s poetic meter, size of chorus, and so on. Most
significantly, individual performers began stepping out of
the chorus, to sing or speak roles in the character of a
mythical figure in the story. This step is traditionally
credited to a shadowy genius named Thespis (ca. 535
B.C.E.), who also may have introduced the single actor’s
wearing of a mask to signify character. Thespis’s actor
apparently delivered set speeches in between the chorus’
presentations; the actor may have changed masks to
assume multiple roles.
This new Athenian art form was called tragoidia,
“goat song,” perhaps referring to its presentation of festi-
vals of Dionysus. (The sacrifice of goats was part of the
god’s cult.) By about 534 B.C.E., under the enlightened
tyrant PEISISTRATUS, tragedy performance was installed
officially at the important Athenian early springtime festi-
val called the City Dionysia. By 500 B.C.E. this festival
had developed into the annual, publicly funded, three-
way competition that was the famous occasion for all per-
formances of new tragedy. Performances were held in a
theater—first of wood or earth, later of marble—at the
south base of the Athenian ACROPOLIS.
The Dionysia contest typically presented three
authors’ new work—in each case, a tragic trilogy and a
satyr play (satyrikon), for comic relief. The satyr play, an
offshoot of comedy, featured a clownish chorus always
represented as satyrs. In a typical plot, this gang would
“wander into” one of the great myths, such as that of
PERSEUS (1). Today only one complete satyr play survives:
the Cyclops of EURIPIDES (ca. 410 B.C.E.).
The three groups of plays performed at the Dionysia
would have been selected previously, in written form, by
an official who judged the applicants. Qualifying entrants
were assigned a paying sponsor (chor¯egos), who paid part
of the cost out of pocket as a form of state service; the
balance came directly out of state funds. At the festival a
panel of judges, consisting of ordinary citizens chosen by
lottery, awarded first, second, and third prize to the three
playwrights. SOPHOKLES is said to have won first prize 24
times, second prize seven times, and never third.
Comedy, less esteemed than tragedy, was installed as
a competition at the City Dionysia only around 488 B.C.E.
The entries were single plays, one by each playwright. By
440 B.C.E. a second contest had been introduced, at the
Lenaea (a Dionysian festival in midwinter). Normally five
comedies competed. The two earliest comedy-writers
about whom any information exists are KRATINUS and
KRATES (mid-400s B.C.E.).
Comedy employed a chorus of 24 members; tragedy
used 12 at first, later 15. Comic choruses tended to be
more important to the play’s action and message than
were their tragic counterparts—at least by the time of
Aeschylus (525–456 B.C.E.), who was remembered for
having reduced the tragic chorus’ speaking role. All Athe-
nian actors and stage choruses were male, although the
roles might be female.
The first Athenian tragedian about whom any infor-
mation exists is PHRYNICHUS (ca. 540–475 B.C.E.). His
tragedies may have been a form of costumed oratorio,
with a simple narrative. The story would unfold around a
single speaking actor (the protagonist¯es), who might
assume multiple roles by changing masks and who would
deliver his speeches in alternation with the chorus.
Stagecraft, plotting, and characterization were
improved by Aeschylus, whose Persians (472 B.C.E.) is the
earliest extant tragedy. Emphasizing individual roles over
the chorus, Aeschylus introduced a second speaking
actor, which allowed for better-developed conflicts
onstage and which greatly increased the number of avail-
able roles. Sophockles (ca. 496–406 B.C.E.) introduced a
third speaking actor, and he emphasized characterizations
theater
339

of his protagonists that tended to remove the chorus from
the plot. His younger rival Euripides (ca. 485–406 B.C.E.)
produced innovations in plotting and in characterization
of mythical characters that often seem intended to dis-
turb the audience. These three tragedians—along with a
fourth, AGATHON (late 400s B.C.E.)—were recognized in
their own day as being the greatest practitioners of the
art.
With the deaths of Euripides and Sophokles (both in
406 B.C.E.) and Athens’s defeat in the PELOPONNESIAN
WAR (404 B.C.E.), the great age of Athenian theater had
passed. New tragedies were still performed—the Syracu-
san tyrant DIONYSIUS (1) wrote one that won a single-play
prize at Athens in 367B.C.E.—but in the absence of steady
new talent, a tradition arose of restaging the plays of the
three classic tragedians.
Comedy at Athens enjoyed a resurgence with
MENANDER, Philemon, and other writers of “New Com-
edy,” in the late 300s B.C.E. This socially satirical comedy
of manners—so different from the directly political invec-
tive of Aristophanes of EUPOLIS—went on to influence
the work of the Roman comedy-writers Plautus and Ter-
ence (100s B.C.E.).
Outside Athens, monumental theater buildings had
arisen before about 470 B.C.E., when the Syracusan tyrant
HIERON (1) constructed a theater for the production of a
tragedy by the visiting Aeschylus. By the HELLENISTIC
AGE (300–150 B.C.E.), every major Greek city had a mar-
ble theater, seating as many as 24,000, where perfor-
mances might consist largely of restaged plays of the
three great Athenian tragedians. Today admirable ancient
theaters have been reconstructed at EPIDAURUS, DODONA,
PERGAMON, and EPHESOS, among other sites.
Further reading: J. Herington, Poetry into Drama.
Early Tragedy and the Greek Poetic Tradition (Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press, 1985); L. Rodley, ed., Papers
Given at a Colloquium on Greek Drama in Honour of R. P.
Winnington-Ingram (London: Society for the Promotion of
Hellenic Studies, 1987); Arthur Pickard-Cambridge, The
Dramatic Festivals of Athens (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1988); D. J. Mastronarde, “Actors on High. The
Skene Roof, the Crane, and the Gods in Attic Drama,”
Classical Antiquity 9 (1990); 247–294; J. J. Winkler and F.
I. Zeitlin, eds., Nothing to Do with Dionysus? Athenian
Drama in Its Social Context (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 1990); J. Henderson, “Women and the Athe-
nian Dramatic Festivals,” Transactions of the American
Philological Association 121 (1991): 331–147; J. Aronen,
“Notes on Athenian Drama as Ritual Myth-telling within
the Cult of Dionysus,” Arctos 26 (1992): 19–37; A. H.
Somerstein, S. Halliwell, and J. Henderson, eds., Tragedy,
Comedy, and the Polis. Papers for the Greek Drama Confer-
ence, Nottingham, 18–20 July 1990 (Bari, Italy: Levante Edi-
tori, 1993); A. Griffiths, ed., Stage Directions. Essays in
Ancient Drama in Honour of E. W. Handley (London: Insti-
tute of Classical Studies, 1995); David Wiles, Tragedy in
Athens: Performance Space and Theatrical Meaning (New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1997); Jennifer Wise,
Dionysus Writes: The Invention of Theatre in Ancient Greece
(Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1998); David Tay-
lor, The Greek and Roman Stage (Bristol, U.K.: Bristol Clas-
sical Press, 1999); Clifford Ashby, Classical Greek Theatre:
New Views of an Old Subject (Iowa City: University of Iowa
Press, 1999).
Thebes (Greek: Th¯ebai)
This major city of central
Greece is situated in the eastern plain of BOEOTIA. Seven-
gated Thebes enjoyed wide farmlands and control of
overland routes both north and south. Today the ancient
city’s central fortress, the Cadmea (named for Thebes’s
legendary founder, King CADMUS) lies buried directly
under the modern Greek town of Thivai.
Thebes was known for its first-rate army, which
included a strong CAVALRY arm, and throughout its his-
tory the city usually dominated all of Boeotia. In the 300s
B.C.E. Thebes became the foremost Greek power for a
brief time, after defeating and displacing its former ally
SPARTA.
Along with its neighbor and rival ORCHOMENOS,
Thebes seems to have been preeminent in the earlier cen-
turies of MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION, around 1600–1350
B.C.E. Archaeological excavations at Thebes, hampered by
the site’s modern town, have yielded portions of a Myce-
naean palace as well as LINEAR B tablets and Near Eastern
seal stones (which may add credence to the legend that
King Cadmus originally came from the Levant). Thebes’s
importance in this era is reflected in the city’s large role in
Greek MYTH. The ruling caste’s fortunes and misfortunes
are recounted in the tales of HERACKLES, OEDIPUS, and the
SEVEN AGAINST THEBES. The legend of the Seven—with
its sequel, the tale of the Epigoni—possibly commemo-
rates Thebes’s downfall at the hands of the rival Greek
kingdom of MYCENAE, around 1350 B.C.E.
By the 500s B.C.E. the tales of Thebes had been orga-
nized into three epic poems, the Oedipodia, the Thebaïd,
and the Epigoni, collectively known as the Theban Cycle.
These stories later became favorite material for the Athe-
nian tragic playwrights.
In historical times Thebes’s hegemony over the other
Boeotian cities took the form of a federation—the Boeo-
tian League, wherein Thebes supplied two or more of the
11 delegates, and every other represented state supplied
one. Thebes shared an ill-defined, mountainous frontier
with ATHENS, which lay about 40 miles southeast. The
two cities were enemies in the late 500s–early 300s B.C.E.,
due largely to Athens’s alliance with Thebes’s neighbor
PLATAEA. The creation of the Athenian DEMOCRACY (508
B.C.E.) further alarmed the Thebans, whose government
was an OLIGARCHY.
During the Persian king XERXES invasion of Greece
(480–479 B.C.E.), Thebes was the major Greek city to
340
Thebes

submit to the Persians, and it contributed soldiers and a
base of operations for the Persian war effort. After the
Persian defeat, Thebes fell into deep discredit. Stripped of
its Boeotian hegemony by the vindictive Spartans, the city
remained a minor power until the mid-400s B.C.E., when
the Spartans revived it as an ally against their common
enemy, Athens. As a staunch Spartan ally, Thebes again
became the chief city of Boeotia. The Thebans’ attack on
Plataea precipitated the PELOPONNESIAN WAR (431–404
B.C.E.). In 424 B.C.E. the Thebans defeated an Athenian
invasion at the Battle of Delium.
Victory in the war added to Thebes’s prestige and ter-
ritory, gained at the expense of its small Boeotian neigh-
bors. But alienated by Spartan arrogance, Thebes soon
made alliance with Athens, ARGOS, and CORINTH against
Sparta, in the CORINTHIAN WAR (394–386 B.C.E.).
The following decades saw the acme of Theban
power, under the city’s greatest statesman and general,
EPAMINONDAS. He led his countrymen against the Spar-
tans—supposing the greatest soldiers in Greece—and
defeated them at the Battle of LEUKTRA (371 B.C.E.). The
Thebans then dismantled Sparta’s empire, marching into
the PELOPONNESE and freeing MESSENIA and ARCADIA
from Spartan control. The Theban army of these years
was distinguished by the Sacred Band (Hieros Lochos),
an elite corps of 300 HOPLITES consisting of paired male
lovers. Classical Thebes in general was known for its mil-
itary male homosexual society.
In the mid-300s B.C.E. Thebes was confronted with
the emerging power of MACEDON. Initially siding with the
Macedonian king PHILIP II, Thebes switched sides to join
the Athenian-led alliance that opposed Philip. After tak-
ing part in the disastrous Greek defeat at CHAIRONEIA
(338 B.C.E.), Thebes was stripped of power and gar-
risoned by Philip’s vengeful troops. A Theban revolt after
Philip’s death brought the city to complete destruction at
the hands of Philip’s successor, ALEXANDER THE GREAT;
6,000 Thebans were supposedly killed and 30,000 sold as
SLAVES (335 B.C.E.). Thebes was rebuilt in 316 B.C.E. by
the Macedonian ruler KASSANDER but was never again a
great power. By the first century B.C.E. it was little more
than a village.
Greek Thebes had nothing to do with the magnifi-
cent ancient Egyptian city called Thebes (modern Luxor
and Karnak). Th¯ebai was a hellenized name, given to the
Egyptian site by Greek visitors. One ancient Egyptian
name for the city was Apet; to the Greek ear, this appar-
ently sounded enough like Th¯ebai for the two names to
become assimilated.
See also ANTIGONE; DIONYSUS; EPIC POETRY; HOMOSEX-
UALITY; PERSIAN WARS; WARFARE, LAND.
Further reading: S. Symeonoglou, “Thebes, Greece.
An Archaeological and Sociological Problem,” Architec-
tura 2 (1972): 81–91; N. H. Demand, Thebes in the Fifth
Century. Herakles Resurgent (London: Routledge, 1982);
S. Symeonoglou, The Topography of Thebes from the
Bronze Age to Modern Times (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 1985); R. M. Kallet-Marx, “Athens,
Thebes, and the Foundation of the Second Athenian
League,” Classical Antiquity 4 (1985): 127–151; N. G. L.
Hammond, “Plataea’s Relations with Thebes, Sparta, and
Athens,” Journal of Hellenic Studies 112 (1992): 143–150;
S. C. Bakhuizen, “Thebes and Boeotia in the Fourth Cen-
tury B.C.,” Phoenix 48, (1994): 307–330; J. C. Trevett,
“Demosthenes and Thebes,” Historia 48 (1999): 184–202;
P. J. Rhodes, “Thebes, Sparta, and Autonomia,” Eirene 35
(1999): 33–40.
Themistokles (524–459 B.C.E.) Athenian statesman and
general
In the history of ATHENS, Themistokles is second in
importance only to PERIKLES (who was his political suc-
cessor). By urging the Athenians to create a powerful
navy in the early 480s B.C.E., Themistokles provided his
city and all of Greece with an effective defense against
invasion in the PERSIAN WARS (480 B.C.E.). This Athenian
navy then became the means by which Athens acquired
and held its sea empire of 479–404 B.C.E. In domestic
politics, Themistokles was a radical left-winger who
helped broaden the base of the Athenian DEMOCRACY, in
opposition to the rich and noble-born. He was also an
inveterate enemy of SPARTA, foreseeing, as few Athenians
did in the 470s B.C.E., that Sparta would be Athens’s next
great foe.
Themistokles remained a controversial figure long
after his death. His deeds are described by the historical
HERODOTUS (ca. 435 B.C.E.), by the biographer PLUTARCH
(ca. 100 C.E.), and briefly by the historian THUCYDIDES
(1) (ca. 410 B.C.E.). Herodotus and Plutarch show signs
of having used anti-Themistoklean source material,
which condemns the man for his greed and flawed patrio-
tism. But Thucydides praises Themistokles’ foresight and
decisiveness, summarizing him with these words: “With
his inborn genius and speed of action, he was the best for
doing at a moment’s notice exactly what the emergency
called for” (book 1, 103).
Themistokles’ father Neocles was of an aristocratic
Athenian family. Themistokles’ mother is sometimes
described as a non-Athenian—which, if true, would
have placed the future statesman in a relatively humble
social category. Themistokles rose quickly as a left-wing
politician in the newly created democracy, being elected
chief ARCHON at about age 35 and organizing the devel-
opment of PIRAEUS as Athens’s harbor and naval base
(493 B.C.E.).
The years after the Battle of MARATHON (490 B.C.E.)
saw political turmoil at Athens, with at least five promi-
nent politicians banished by 
OSTRACISM—but not
Themistokles, who emerged as the city’s leading states-
man. It was then he made his great contribution to
Athens’s future. In 483 B.C.E. the publicly owned SILVER
Themistokles
341

mines at Laurion, outside Athens, produced a bonanza
yield. Although it was customary for such surpluses to be
distributed as cash to each citizen, Themistokles con-
vinced the Athenian ASSEMBLY to use the revenue to build
new warships. His ostensible reason was Athens’s current
war against the nearby Greek state of AEGINA, but his real
reason seems to have been his expectation of the Persian
invasion. Within three years Athens had acquired the
biggest navy in the Greek world—going from 70 war-
ships to 200—and all its new vessels were the superior
type of warship known as the trireme.
When the Greek states allied against the attack of the
Persian king XERXES (480 B.C.E.), Themistokles served as
a fleet commander and as one of the strategy-planning
chiefs of staff. (He was not, however, the top-ranking
Greek admiral; that honor went to a Spartan.) To Themis-
tokles can be ascribed the strategy of confronting the
southward-sailing Persian fleet inside certain narrow
channels, where the invaders’ superior numbers and sea-
manship would be canceled out. After moderate success
at the sea battle of ARTEMISION, this strategy resulted in a
total Greek victory at SALAMIS (1), inside a mile-wide
channel not far from Athens, specially chosen by Themis-
tokles long before the event.
Even before the war was over, Themistokles foresaw
that Sparta would be Athens’s next enemy. Although the
Spartans respected him, Themistokles began to steer his
city against them. The walls of Athens, destroyed by the
Persians, were rebuilt despite Spartan disapproval (479
B.C.E.), and alliances were formed with ARGOS and THES-
SALY, two enemies of Sparta.
But Themistokles’ downfall soon followed. The cre-
ation of the DELIAN LEAGUE and the naval counteroffen-
sive against the Persians brought new Athenian
soldier-politicians to the fore, particularly the young,
conservative, pro-Spartan KIMON. In about 471 B.C.E. the
Athenians voted to ostracize Themistokles, who was by
then nearly 60. He spent the next years traveling around
the PELOPONNESE, where his activities seem connected
with the establishment of anti-Spartan democracies at
Argos, at MANTINEIA, and elsewhere. The alarmed Spar-
tans appealed to Athens, claiming to have proof that
Themistokles was conducting treasonous intrigues with
the Persian king. Indicted by the Athenians for treason,
Themistokles fled Greece for ASIA MINOR (467 B.C.E.).
Eventually making his way to the Persian court at Susa,
he became a valued adviser to King Artaxerxes I (464
B.C.E.). For about the last year of his life, the hero of
Salamis served as a local Persian governor at the city of
Magnesia-on-the-Maeander, in Asia Minor. He died, prob-
ably of natural causes, at age 65.
Themistokles was married twice, to Athenian women;
his second wife, Archippe, accompanied or followed him
to Asia with the youngest of their children. Two of
Themistokles’ daughters had the unusual names Italia and
Sybaris, which may indicate yet another of his foreign-pol-
icy visions—namely, the extension of Athenian influence
westward to the Greek cities of southern ITALY.
See also AESCHYLUS; ARISTIDES; ATTICA; SYBARIS; WAR-
FARE, NAVAL; XANTHIPPUS.
Further reading: A. J. Podecki, The Life of Themistoc-
les. A Critical Survey of Literary and Archaelogical Evi-
dence (Montreal: McGill-Queens University Press, 1975);
Frank J. Frost, Plutarch’s Themistocles: A Historical Com-
mentary (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press,
1980); A. J. Holladay, “The Forethought of Themistoc-
les,” Journal of Hellenic Studies 107 (1987): 182–187; B.
Jordan, “The Honours for Themistocles after Salamis,”
American Journal of Philology 109 (1988): 547–571; E. M.
Carawan, “Thucydides and Stesimbrotus on the Exile of
Themistocles,” Historia 38 (1989): 144–161; J. Marr,
“The Death of Themistocles,” Greece and Rome (1995):
159–167; Arthur Keaveney, The Life and Journey of Athe-
nian Statesman Themistocles (524–460 B.C.?) as a Refugee
in Persia (Lewiston: E. Mellen Press, 2003).
Theocritus (ca. 300–260 B.C.E.) One of the best-known
poets of the HELLENISTIC AGE
Theocritus was born in the Sicilian Greek city of SYRA-
CUSE but spent most of his career at Egyptian ALEXANDRIA
(1), in the wealthy and literary court of King PTOLEMY
(2) II Philadelphus. Theocritus seems to have had a close
friendship with another famous Alexandrian poet, CALLI-
MACHUS, but otherwise little is known of his life.
Theocritus composed poems in several different gen-
res, but his most significant works were his innovative
pastoral poems. These influenced generations of later
poets, from the Roman period through the European
Renaissance. Of his poems, 31 survive today, including
several of the bucolic poems, set in the countryside.
Other extant pieces of Theocritus’s work include mimes
(Greek: mimoi, realistic or satirical scenes rendered into
hexameters) and epyllia (“little epics,” hexameter poems
of several hundred lines presenting a heroic MYTH or
romance).
Further reading: Heather White, Studies in Theocri-
tus and Other Hellenistic Poets (Amsterdam: Gieben,
1979); Steven Walker, Theocritus
(Boston: Twayne,
1980); M. A. Rossi, “Theocritus. A Select Bibliography,”
L’Antiquité classique 56 (1987): 290–295; P. Bing, “The-
ocritus’ Epigrams on the Statues of Ancient Poets,”
Antike und Abendland
34 (1988): 117–123; G. O.
Hutchinson, Hellenistic Poetry (New York: Clarendon
Press, 1990); Judith Haber, Pastoral and the Poetics of
Self-contradiction
(New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1994); M. A. Harder, R. F. Regtuit, and G. C.
Wakker, eds., Theocritus
(Groningen, Netherlands:
Egbert Forsten, 1996); R. L. Hunter, Theocritus and the
Archaeology of Greek Poetry (New York: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1996).
342
Theocritus

Theognis (ca. 570–485 B.C.E.) Lyric poet of the Greek
city of MEGARA (1)
Little is known of Theognis’s life other than that he was
born in Megara to a noble family; much of his poetry is
strongly political and reflects his aristocratic sympathies.
He was exiled for a time, along with the leaders of his
city’s oligarchical party, and most of his poems were writ-
ten during this period.
Theognis’s work survives as a collection of nearly
700 elegiac couplets, many of which apparently were
actually written by later anonymous poets in imitation of
Theognis’s poems. Within this collection (known as the
Theognidia), modern scholars have tentatively identified
a core of about 300 poems that seem to reflect a consis-
tent poetic personality (supposedly that of Theognis him-
self) and a composition date in the mid-500s B.C.E.
Further reading:
S. I. Dost, “The Megara of
Theagenes and Theognis,” Classical Philology 68 (1973):
186–196; T. J. Figueira, ed., Theognis of Megara. Poetry
and the Polis (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,
1985).
Theophrastus (ca. 372–287 B.C.E.) Greek philosopher
and essayist from the islands of LESBOS
Theophrastus was first introduced to philosophy at Les-
bos and then went to ATHENS, where he studied first
under PLATO and, later, ARISTOTLE. When Aristotle died,
his will made Theophrastus the guardian of his children
and bequeathed his library to him. He also designated
Theophrastus as his successor as the head of Aristotle’s
philosophical school, known as the LYCEUM. As the
leader of the Lyceum, Theophrastus maintained the
school’s broad range of study and caused it to flourish. He
eventually moved the location to a larger building com-
plex, called the Peripatos; by the time he died, Theophra-
tus had presided over the Lyceum for about 35 years. He
had thousands of students, including the comic poet
MENANDER, and was highly regarded by the Athenian
people, as well as by several Hellenistic kings.
Theophrastus wrote on a variety of scientific and
philosophical subjects, but he is best known today for his
extant work entitled Characters, a collection of 30
sketches of eccentric or abnormal personality types. His
surviving texts also include works on botany and geology.
Further reading: J. Scarborough, Pharmacy’s Ancient
Heritage. Theophrastus, Nicander, and Dioscorides (Lexing-
ton, Ky.: College of Pharmacy, 1985); William Forten-
baugh and Dimitri Gutas, eds., Theophrastus: His
Psychological Doxographical, and Scientific Writings (New
Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction, 1992); R. W. Sharples,
Theophrastus of Eresus. Sources for His Life, Writings,
Thought, and Influence (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J. Brill,
1995); P. G. Maxwell-Stuart, “Theophrastus the Trav-
eller,” La Parola del Passato 51 (1996): 241–267; P. G.
Maxwell-Stuart, “Theophrastus and the Peloponnese,” La
Parola del Passato 53 (1998): 81–114; Johannes M. van
Ophuijsen and Marlein van Raalte, eds., Theophrastus:
Reappraising the Sources (New Brunswick, N.J.: Transac-
tion, 1998).
Thera
This Greek island of the mid AEGEAN SEA, is sit-
uated at the southern edge of the island group known as
the CYCLADES. The island’s alternative, Italian-derived
name, Santorini, commemorates St. Irene of Salonika.
Covering only 29 square miles, Thera consists of an
irregular, westward-opening crescent that rises dramati-
cally from the sea. This odd shape marks the remnant of
an ancient volcanic cone, which—as geology and
ARCHAEOLOGY show—erupted in about 1628 B.C.E.,
blasting itself in half.
Before the eruption, Thera was home to a branch of
the pre-Greek MINOAN CIVILIZATION. Modern excavations
at Akrotiri, in southern Thera, have uncovered the most
important Minoan site known to us outside of CRETE,
with remnants of streets and villas, and some fine fres-
coes. This settlement was preserved for millennia by
being buried in lava after its inhabitants had fled.
Thera’s cataclysmic eruption probably resembled that
of the Indonesian island Krakatoa in 1883 C.E. The resul-
tant tidal waves must have battered other Aegean islands,
including Crete, 70 miles to the south. It used to be
thought that the Theran eruption occurred in about 1480
B.C.E. and that it was perhaps the direct cause of a sharp
social decline observable in Crete at that time, including
the depopulation of Crete’s coastlines. Now, however, due
to modern scientific dating techniques such as den-
drochronology (tree-ring dating), archaeologists have
realized that the volcano erupted about 150 years earlier
and are studying the evidence to reconcile the dates and
relationships of the Theran and Cretan destructions. It is
thought by some that Thera’s destruction might lie
behind the later Greek legend of ATLANTIS.
Around 1000 B.C.E., Thera was occupied by DORIAN
GREEKS from the mainland, who founded Thera city, in
the south mid-island. An impressive temple of Carnean
APOLLO, datable to the 500s B.C.E., is among the city’s
early monuments revealed by excavation. Scratched onto
rocks nearby are ancient Greek graffiti, many with jocular
homosexual messages, which represent some of the earli-
est surviving examples of Greek alphabetic WRITING
(600s B.C.E.).
Despite prosperity, early Dorian Thera was badly
enough afflicted by drought to send out large numbers of
its young men to found a colony in North Africa, around
630 B.C.E. This colony was CYRENE (1), which became
one of the foremost cities of the Greek world within just
a few decades.
Although Dorian-Greek and not Ionian, Thera was a
subject ally of ATHENS in the DELIAN LEAGUE (400s
B.C.E.). In the 200s B.C.E. the island became a naval base
Thera
343

for Ptolemaic EGYPT, before being annexed by the
Romans in the first century B.C.E. Most of Thera city’s
physical remains, including the AGORA, colonnades, and
temple of the god DIONYSUS, date from the Ptolemaic and
Roman occupations.
Exploration of the island of Thera began in 1845,
and the first systematic archaeological excavation took
place in 1895–1903. After World War II, work was
resumed under Greek archaeologist S. Marinatos, and the
current program of excavations on the site are being con-
ducted by a Greek team under the direction of C.
Doumas.
See also COLONIZATION; HOMOSEXUALITY.
Further reading: Lyvia Morgan, The Miniature Wall
Paintings of Thera: A Study of Aegean Culture and Icon-
ography
(New York: Cambridge University Press,
1988); Christos Doumas, The Wall-Paintings of Thera,
translated by Alex Doumas (Athens: Thera Foundation,
1992); ———, Santorini: A Guide to the Island and Its
Archaeological Treasures (Athens: Ekdotike Athenon,
1996); Phyllis Young Forsyth, Thera in the Bronze Age
(New York: P. Lang, 1999); Spyridon Marinatos, Excava-
tions at Thera, 2d ed. (Athens: Archaeological Society at
Athens, 1999); C. Palyvou, “Theran Architecture
through the Minoan Looking Glass,” Aegaeum
20
(1999): 609–615; S. W. Manning, A Test of Time: The
Volcano of Thera and the Chronology and History of the
Aegean and East Mediterranean in the Mid Second Millen-
nium B.C. (Oxford: Oxbow Books, 1999); S. W. Man-
ning, C. B. Ramsey, and C. Doumas, “New Evidence for
an Early Date for the Aegean Late Bronze Age and Thera
Eruption,” Antiquity 76 (2002): 733–744.
Theramenes (d. 404 B.C.E.) Athenian commander and
right-wing politician of the late PELOPONNESIAN WAR and its
aftermath
Theramenes was instrumental in arranging the Athenian
surrender to SPARTA at the war’s end (404 B.C.E.). More
important, he was involved in both of the oligarchic
coups at ATHENS in these years—that of the FOUR HUN-
DRED (411 B.C.E.) and that of the THIRTY TYRANTS
(404–403 B.C.E.). As leader of the moderate faction
within the Thirty, Theramenes lost his life for opposing
the extremist leader, KRITIAS.
The contemporary Athenian historian XENOPHON,
who knew Theramenes, portrays him as a cynical oppor-
tunist. But later writers (including ARISTOTLE in his Consti-
tution of Athens) have seen Theramenes as a true moderate
and patriot, trying to steer his city through disaster.
See also OLIGARCHY.
Further reading: M. L. Lang, “Theramenes and
Arginousai,” Hermes 120 (1992): 267–279; R. J. Buck,
“The Character of Theramenes,” Ancient History Bulletin
9 (1995): 14–24; C. Ehrhardt, “Lysias on Theramenes,”
Ancient History Bulletin 9 (1995): 125–126; E. David,
“Thermenes’ Speech at Colonus,” L’Antiquité classique 64
(1995): 15–25; W. J. McCoy, “The Political Debut of
Theramenes,” in Polis and Polemos: Essays on Politics,
War, and History in Ancient Greece in Honor of Donald
Kagen, edited by Charles D. Hamilton and Peter Krentz
(Claremont, Calif.: Regina Books, 1997), 171–192.
Thermopylae
This seaside mountain pass connects
the frontiers of THESSALY and East LOCRIS, at the eastern
edge of the Mt. Oeta range, in northeast-central Greece.
In 480 B.C.E., during the PERSIAN WARS, Thermopylae
was the site of a famous three-day battle in which 5,000
Greek HOPLITES, led by the Spartan king Leonidas,
blocked a Persian army of perhaps 200,000, marching
south under the command of King XERXES.
Long before the battle, Thermopylae was recognized
as the strategic weak point on the main route into central
Greece. Just under four miles long and less than 50 feet
wide at its narrowest point, the pass was hemmed (to the
west) by a wall of cliffs and (to the east) by the waters of
the Gulf of Malis. Around 600 B.C.E. the pass was further
closed by a wall, built by inhabitants of the central Greek
region of PHOCIS to block the southward incursions of
their enemies, the Thessalians.
North of the pass, the river Spercheios flows into the
gulf. The river’s alluvial deposits have changed the coast-
line since ancient times, resulting in a seaward widening
of the pass. No longer is Thermopylae the grim “catwalk”
it once was. The name Thermopulai, “hot gates,” refers to
local sulfur springs. Ancient Thermopylae also served as
a sanctified meeting place for the local peoples of the
AMPHICTYONIC LEAGUE.
The Battle of Thermopylae was fought in the late
summer of 480 B.C.E., simultaneous with the sea battle of
ARTEMISION, 40 miles away. On the Greek side, the object
of both battles was to stop the enemy at narrow points on
land and sea, north of the Greek heartland. Unfortu-
nately, the Thermopylae effort was undermined by the
indecision of leaders at SPARTA, who sent an advance
guard under Leonidas, but then declined to send the
main army—in part because their religious festival of the
Carneia officially forbade the dispatching of troops dur-
ing that time. So Leonidas was left to hold Thermopylae
with his small force.
The Persian infantry entered the northern mouth of
the pass and charged against the Greek hoplites, who had
formed up alongside and behind the stone wall. The
Greek historian HERODOTUS, the main source for infor-
mation on the Persian Wars, describes how the Persians
and their countrymen, the Medes—unable to use their
superior numbers in the narrow space—fell back repeat-
edly with heavy losses. Even Xerxes’ elite legion of
Immortals failed to push through. The invaders were dis-
advantaged by having shorter thrusting spears and lighter
armor than the Greeks, and perhaps by having inferior
morale and discipline. But, after two days, with the help
344
Theramenes

of a traitorous local Greek named Ephialtes, the Persians
found a mountain footpath that brought their troops
down behind the Greek lines.
Leonidas, learning that he was being outflanked, sent
most of the army south to safety. The battle’s climax, on
the third day, was the heroic last stand of Leonidas with
his royal guard of 300 Spartans and 1,100 other Greek
troops, from BOEOTIA. The Persian troops, lashed on by
the whips of their commanders, attacked from both ends
of the pass; in the crush, some fell into the sea or were
trampled underfoot. The Greeks fought until their spears
were broken, then fought on with their swords. Leonidas
was killed, as were all his 300 Spartans—except for one
man, who had been sent home ill. The Boeotians died,
too, or surrendered. On the Persian side, the dead
included two of Xerxes’ brothers. But the invading hordes
marched through, into central Greece.
Although in military terms Thermopylae was a Greek
failure—with more men and better organization they
might have seriously stalled the Persian land invasion—
the battle became very significant in emotional and patri-
otic terms. Like other suicidal exploits, the Spartan
defense at Thermopylae inspired strong reverence in the
Greek mind. Monuments to the slain were erected at
Sparta and in the pass itself, where the defenders were
buried. The poet SIMONIDES wrote one of the epitaphs:
Here is the tomb of that famous Megistias
Whom the Mede slew crossing the River Spercheios.
A seer, he clearly saw the goddesses of death approach,
Yet could not desert his Spartan king.
But the most enduring Thermopylae epitaph is an
anonymous elegiac couplet, from a commemorative col-
umn in the pass:
Go tell the Spartans, O passerby,
That here we lie, complying with their orders.
The Thermopylae pass remained a strategic bone of
contention throughout Greek history. In 352 B.C.E. it was
occupied by the Macedonian king PHILIP II, in a military-
diplomatic maneuver against ATHENS. In 279 B.C.E. a
united Greek army defended the pass—again unsuccess-
fully—against the southward invasion of the CELTS.
See also LYRIC POETRY; PROPHECY AND DIVINATION.
Further reading: Konstantinos Kontorlis, The Battle
of Thermopylae (Athens: K. Kontorlis, 1972); Ernle Brad-
ford, The Year of Thermopylae (London: Macmillan,
1980); Ernle Bradford, The Battle for the West: Thermopy-
lae (New York: Da Capo, 1993); Philip Steele, Thermopy-
lae (New York: New Discovery Books, 1993); L. A.
Curchin, “The Unburied Dead at Thermopylae (279
B.C.),” Ancient History Bulletin 9 (1995): 68–71; G. J.
Szemler, Thermopylai: Myth and Reality in 480 B.C.
(Chicago: Ares, 1996); N. G. L. Hammond, “Sparta at
Thermopylae,” Historia 45 (1996): 1–20.
Theron
See ACRAGAS.
Theseus
Theseus was a mythical Athenian hero and
king. Whereas many Greek legendary heroes were con-
nected with the cities of THEBES or MYCENAE, relatively
few figures were attached to ATHENS. Theseus therefore
came to be viewed as an Athenian national hero—not
only a great warrior and lover, but a civilizer, who rid the
countryside of brigands and who unified the villages of
ATTICA into a single federation, centered at Athens. In
historical times, he was honored at an annual festival, the
Theseia, held in the fall.
Being an Athenian cultural treasure, the Theseus MYTH
was reworked by generations of poets and storytellers. Sev-
eral of Theseus’s adventures seems specifically modeled on
those of HERAKLES, in an attempt to make Theseus as
important as that greatest Greek hero. Some of this nation-
alistic myth-making perhaps occurred in the 500s B.C.E.,
under the Athenian tyrants PEISISTRATUS and HIPPIAS (1).
The mythical Theseus probably commemorates some
actual Athenian king of the Mycenaean era, perhaps circa
Theseus
345
Bust of the warrior Leonidas, hero of the Battle of Thermopylae.
The Greeks died holding off an invading Persian force. (Alison
Frantz Photographic Collection, American School of Classical
Studies at Athens)

1300 B.C.E., whose lasting achievement was to consoli-
date the 1,000-square-mile region of Attica under his
rule. Possibly this king’s name really was Theseus (“Set-
tler”). Alternatively, the king’s accomplishments were
eventually ascribed to an existing legendary hero. The
historical essence of the Theseus legend appealed to
PLUTARCH (ca. 100 C.E.), who wrote a biography of The-
seus among his biographies of more strictly historical
Greeks and Romans.
According to the myth, the Athenian king Aegeus,
being childless, consulted the god APOLLO’s oracle at DEL-
PHI. He received the advice to return home but that, until
arriving, he should not “loosen the wineskin’s jutting
foot.” In fact this was a warning, not against alcohol, but
against sexual intercourse; however, Aegeus, failing to
understand, dallied with King Pittheus’s daughter, Aethra,
at the city of Troizen (in the northeastern PELOPONNESE).
Departing from Troizen, Aegeus left behind a sword and a
pair of sandals underneath a huge boulder; he secretly
instructed Aethra that when their future son—whom
Aethra was confident she had conceived—was strong
enough to shift the boulder and recover the items of
proof, he should go to Athens.
The son was born at Troizen and named Theseus.
King Pittheus, to protect his daughter’s reputation,
claimed that Theseus’s father was the god POSEIDON, who
supposedly had seduced Aethra. On reaching manhood,
Theseus easily pushed the boulder away from the sandals
and sword. Taking these tokens of identity, he went to
find his father at Athens. Rather than use the quick sea
route across the Saronic Gulf, Theseus chose to travel by
land, around the top of the gulf, for adventure’s sake.
On the journey, he encountered a series of sadistic
brigands and slew them all. Reaching Athens, Theseus
was acknowledged by his father, King Aegeus. Soon,
however, Theseus came into danger from Aegaeus’s
paramour, the Colchian princess MEDEA, who feared The-
seus’s influence and right of succession. At Medea’s
prompting, Aegeus sent Theseus against the Bull of
MARATHON, which was ravaging the countryside. (This
adventure is clearly based on Herakles’ Seventh Labor,
against the Cretan Bull.) Theseus captured the animal
and sacrificed it to Apollo.
Next came the hero’s most famous adventure. Athens
(according to the myth) was at this time a subject city of
Crete, having been subdued by the Cretan king MINOS.
The Athenians were compelled to pay a yearly tribute of
seven youths and seven maidens, who were sent by Athe-
nian ship to Crete to be locked up inside the maze of the
LABYRINTH. There the young people would be devoured
by the ferocious Minotaur (bull of Minos), who was the
monstrous half-man, half-bull offspring of Minos’s wife,
Queen Pasiphaë. Theseus, deciding to put a stop to this
oppression, volunteered to sail to Crete amid the next
batch of young people.
Reaching Crete, he met the princess Ariadne, daugh-
ter of Minos and Pasiphaë. She fell in love with him and,
to guide him through the dark Labyrinth, gave him a
thread, one end of which he fastened near the entrance.
Then he slew the Minotaur, escaped from the Labyrinth,
and fled from Crete with Ariadne aboard the waiting
Athenian tribute ship. But Theseus callously abandoned
Ariadne on the island of Naxos, where she was later
found and wed by the god DIONYSUS.
Theseus’s ship sailed on toward Athens. The hero
had arranged with his father that, if he were successful on
Crete, he would substitute the tribute ship’s black sail for
another one, colored white. In the excitement of the
return Theseus forgot this agreement, and Aegeus, seeing
the ship approach under a black sail, assumed that his
son had been killed. The remorseful Aegeus immediately
threw himself into the sea and drowned. Supposedly,
from this, the AEGEAN SEA was named.
Succeeding his father as king, Theseus brought about
the unification of Attica. He then departed on a campaign
against the distant-dwelling AMAZONS, the tribe of fierce
female warriors. One version says that Theseus accompa-
346
Theseus
The Greek hero Theseus battles the Minotaur. The hero has
just stabbed the beast and blood streams from the wound. 
A youth and a girl—representative of those saved from 
sacrifice by Theseus’s victory—stand at each side watching.
(The J. Paul Getty Museum)

nied Herakles’ Amazon expedition, another that Theseus
went on his own, but in either case he brought back to
Athens, as his captive, the Amazon queen, Hippolyta. In
pursuit, the mass of Amazons marched to Athens and
besieged the city, but were repulsed. (In classical times, the
Amazonomachy, or Battle with the Amazons, was a favorite
subject of monumental Athenian SCULPTURE and PAINTING.)
Hippolyta died after bearing Theseus a son, HIPPOLYTUS.
Later Theseus married Phaedra, the younger sister of Ari-
adne, and this young wife conceived an illicit passion for
her stepson, resulting in the tragic deaths of both.
One of Theseus’s last adventures was his visit to the
Underworld with his friend Peirithoos, king of the Lap-
iths. Their ambitious goal was to carry off the goddess
PERSEPHONE, to be Peirithoos’s wife. However, Perse-
phone’s husband, HADES, captured the two heroes by
tricking them into sitting on an enchanted bench, which
held them fast. Theseus eventually was rescued by Herak-
les, who managed to rip him out of his chair, but
Peirithoos remained in the nether world.
The end of Theseus’s life was unhappy. Ousted from
Athens by a rebellion, he voyaged to the island of Skyros,
where he was murdered by the king, Lykomedes, who
disputed Theseus’s claim to a local estate.
The myth has a historical aftermath. In about 476
B.C.E. the Athenian commander KIMON brought back
from Skyros a skeleton and relics said to be those of The-
seus. The hero was reburied in a monumental tomb in
the middle of Athens. The writer Plutarch mentions that
the tomb became a sanctuary for runaway SLAVES and the
needy, because, in his lifetime, Theseus was the cham-
pion of the oppressed.
See also MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION; PROCRUSTES.
Further reading: J. N. Davie, “Theseus the King in
Fifth-century Athens,” Greece and Rome 29 (1982):
25–34; Jenifer Neils, The Youthful Deeds of Theseus
(Rome: Bretschneider, 1987); H. Alan Shapiro, “The Mar-
riage of Theseus and Helen,” in Kotinos. Festschrift für
Erika Simon, edited by Heide Froning, Tonio Hölscher,
and Harald Mielsch (Mainz am Rhein, Germany: P. von
Zabern, 1992), 232–236; Henry J. Walker, Theseus and
Athens (New York: Oxford University Press, 1995); L.
Press, “The Victory of Theseus over Minotaur. Durability
and Significance of That Myth,” in Studia in Honorem
Georgii Mihailov (Sofia, Bulgaria: 1995), 385–393; E.
Simon, “Theseus and Athenian Festivals,” in Worshipping
Athena. Panathenaia and Parthenon, edited by Jenifer Neils
(Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1996), 9–26;
Sophie Mills, Theseus, Tragedy, and the Athenian Empire
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1997).
Thespis
See THEATER.
Thessaly
A large, northeasternly region of Greece,
Thessaly’s best-known landmark is Mt. OLYMPUS. The
region consists of two wide and fertile plains, enclosed on
four sides by mountains. To the south rises the range of
Mt. Oeta, which—in ancient Greek geographical terms—
separated Thessaly from PHOCIS and the rest of central
Greece; the principal route through this barrier was the
pass of THERMOPYLAE. On Thessaly’s western and south-
western frontiers stood the Pindus mountain range,
beyond which lay the Greek states of EPIRUS and AETO-
LIA. On the north, more mountains divided Thessaly from
the kingdom of MACEDON. And, in the east, the north-to-
south line of Mt. Olympus, Mt. Ossa, and Mt. Pelion
occupied the Aegean coast and rendered the shoreline
harborless and unusable for shipping.
The only suitable harbor in all Thessaly was located
at the top of the Gulf of Pagasae (the modern Gulf of
Volos), nestled behind the southward-jutting peninsula
called Magnesia. There two seaports emerged in different
phases of history: First was Iolcus (modern Volos), a
major city of the MYCENAEAN
CIVILIZATION (around
1600–1200 B.C.E.), fabled as the home of the hero JASON
(1). Later came nearby Pagasae, which flourished in the
400s and 300s B.C.E.
The name Thessaly commemorates the Thessaloi, a
Greek people of the Aeolian ethnic group who subjugated
the area around 1100 B.C.E., soon after the Mycenaean
collapse. The inhabitants retained an Aeolic dialect in
ancient times. Thessaly’s wealth lay in its wide plains,
which provided grain, cattle, and—the region’s hall-
mark—horses. The Thessalians were famous horsemen;
their armies, unlike most Greek forces, consisted mainly
of CAVALRY.
Isolated by its mountain perimeter, Thessaly devel-
oped as a self-contained, horse-ranching ARISTOCRACY.
During the great centuries of Greek history (800–300
B.C.E.) it remained politically and culturally backward,
with power and ownership concentrated in the hands of a
few immensely rich families. One such family was the
Aleudae, based at the city of Larissa, in the northern
plain. These aristocrats resisted both kingship and
DEMOCRACY, and it was not until about 374 B.C.E. that
Thessaly became united under one leader, the tyrant
JASON (2) of the city of Pherae.
In the 350s B.C.E. Thessaly fell under the sway of the
Macedonian king PHILIP II, and Thessalian cavalry did
important service in the army of Philip and of his son
ALEXANDER THE GREAT. Valuable as a doorway into cen-
tral Greece, Thessaly received a Macedonian garrison,
which was housed (293 B.C.E.) in a newly built fortress
called Demetrias, adjoining Pagasae. The region remained
under Macedonian control until the Romans broke Mace-
don’s power, in 168 B.C.E.
Several archaeological sites in Thessaly have been
excavated. At Larissa, the remains of two theaters have
been discovered and are visible today. Pelinna, the main
city of western Thessaly, is another place that has been
partially investigated; archaeologists have located the
Thessaly
347

remains of two city walls and numerous traces of roads
and buildings. Just outside Pelinna are several tombs, a
monumental tumulus excavated in 1906 and two Hel-
lenistic cist graves found in 1969.
See also AEOLIAN GREEKS; GREECE, GEOGRAPHY OF;
GREEK LANGUAGE; ROME; TYRANTS.
Further reading: Bryan Feuer, The Northern Myce-
naean Border in Thessaly (Oxford: B.A.R., 1983); Marija
Gimbutas, Shan Winn, and Daniel Shimabuku, Achilleion:
A Neolithic Settlement in Thessaly, Greece, 6400–5600 B.C.
(Los Angeles: Institute of Archaeology, UCLA, 1989);
Kostas Gallis and Laia Orphanidis, Figurines of Neolithic
Thessaly (Athens: Academy of Athens, 1996); I. Geor-
ganas, “Early Iron Age Tholos Tombs in Thessaly, c.
1100–700 B.C.,” Mediterranean Archaeology 13 (2000):
47–54; Nicholas Konsolas, Regional Development in
Greece (New York: Springer, 2001).
Thetis
See ACHILLES; PELEUS.
Thirty Tyrants, the
This name is commonly given to
the 30-man committee that ruled in ATHENS as a dictato-
rial puppet government for the Spartans immediately
after Athens’s surrender in the PELOPONNESIAN WAR (404
B.C.E.). The Thirty ruled for over a year, from spring of
404 until early autumn of 403 B.C.E., in a reign of terror.
The 30 men were right-wing Athenians, elected by
the Athenians at a rigged meeting of the ASSEMBLY under
the watchful eye of the occupying Spartan general,
LYSANDER. Elected ostensibly to draft a new law code, they
seized the government, with Lysander’s approval, and dis-
mantled the Athenian DEMOCRACY. They disbanded the
democratic COUNCIL, abolished the people’s law courts,
and convinced Lysander to install a Spartan garrison on
the ACROPOLIS. With their private police force of 300
“whip-bearers,” the Thirty conducted arrests and execu-
tions to eradicate opposition and raise funds by confisca-
tion. As many as 1,500 citizens and METICS (resident
aliens) are said to have lost their lives; many others fled.
Eventually division arose within the Thirty, between
the extremist KRITIAS and the more moderate THER-
AMENES. At length, KRITIAS had Theramenes put to death.
When a resistance band under the exiled Athenian
soldier Thrasybulus seized a fortress in the Attic country-
side, the Thirty began preparing a refuge for themselves
at the town of Eleusis, outside Athens. This led to their
worst atrocity—the execution of 300 men of Eleusis—
perhaps the town’s entire adult male population.
But the despots’ days were numbered. When Thrasy-
bulus’s rebels seized Athens’s harbor town of PIRAEUS, the
Thirty brought out an army against them and were
defeated (winter of 404–403 B.C.E.). Kritias was killed in
the fighting, as was his nephew and lieutenant
Charmides. The remnants of the Thirty were deposed,
and full democracy was restored by the autumn of 403
B.C.E. Individual members of the Thirty were executed
thereafter.
Remarkably, the Spartans made little effort to save
their puppet government. This inactivity owed much to a
political rift at Sparta, where King Pausanias was repudi-
ating Lysander’s policies. Pausanias soon came to terms
with the new Athenian government.
The Thirty represent the worst of three different oli-
garchic attempts to subvert the Athenian democracy dur-
ing the 400s B.C.E. The first of these was the plot to hand
over the LONG WALLS to the Spartans in 457 B.C.E.; the
second was the coup d’état of the FOUR HUNDRED in 411
B.C.E. All three attempts were inspired by an upper-class
desire to rid the government of its lowest-income class of
citizens, the th¯etes. Such plots failed because they
inevitably did harm to the middle class—the HOPLITE
class—as well as causing patriotic outrage.
See also OLIGARCHY; PLATO; SOCRATES; SYMPOSIUM.
Further reading: D. Whitehead, “The Tribes of the
Thirty Tyrants,” Journal of Hellenic Studies 100 (1980):
208–213; Peter Krentz, The Thirty at Athens (Ithaca, N.Y.:
Cornell University Press, 1982); D. Whitehead, “Sparta and
the Thirty Tyrants,” Ancient Society 13–14 (1982–1983):
105–130; Andrew Wolpert, Remembering Defeat: Civil War
and Civic Memory in Ancient Athens (Baltimore: Johns Hop-
kins University Press, 2002); Nicole Loraux, The Divided
City: On Memory and Forgetting in Ancient Athens (New
York: Zone Books, 2002).
Thrace
This non-Greek land extends for about 300
miles across the top of the AEGEAN SEA and the Sea of
MARMARA, with a further coastline on the southwestern
BLACK SEA, south of the Danube River. The region is now
divided among the modern nations of Greece, Turkey,
and Bulgaria. Relevant geographical features include
three large rivers that empty southward into the Aegean;
these are (from west to east) the Strymon, Nestus, and
Hebrus. The largely mountainous interior rises to the
Rhodope chain, which runs east-west along southern Bul-
garia and the modern Greek border.
The ancient Greek name Thraik¯e probably renders
the sound of some native name for the homeland. The
Thracians spoke a non-Greek language and possessed
northern European physical features, such as red hair.
They brewed beer but for WINE they depended on Greek
imports; they craved many Greek goods. The Thracians
were renowned for their ferocity in battle (they used
heavy slashing swords) and for their drunken devotions
to the god DIONYSUS (a deity who may have originally
been a Thracian beer god).
Throughout most of their history the Thracians
remained grouped into various warlike tribes, chief of
which were the Odrysae, in the east. Only in the mid-
400s B.C.E. did a united Thracian kingdom emerge,
briefly, under the Odrysian king Sitalces and his succes-
348
Thetis

sors. The Thracians lived in villages, with no cities until
Roman times (after the mid-100s B.C.E.).
Although Greece and Thrace had no common bor-
der—being buffered by the kingdom of MACEDON, north-
east of Greece—Greek traders and settlers gravitated to
Thrace’s Aegean coast early on, to acquire the land’s pre-
cious resources. GOLD and SILVER deposits at Mt. Pan-
gaeus brought the Greek colonists to nearby THASOS
(around 700 B.C.E.) and Maroneia (mid-600s B.C.E.), in
defiance of hostile local tribes. Other Greek colonies in
Thrace included BYZANTIUM (mid-600s B.C.E.), AENUS
(around 600 B.C.E.), Perinthus (around 600 B.C.E.), the
CHERSONESE region (mid-500s B.C.E.), ABDERA (545
B.C.E.), and AMPHIPOLIS (437 B.C.E.).
Besides resources for mining, Thrace offered wheat,
TIMBER, and SLAVES to the Greeks. The slaves were often
freeborn Thracian war captives, acquired in internal
Thracian feuds and then sold to local Greek traders.
Thracians might even sell their own children (according
to the Greek historian HERODOTUS). Thracian slaves, par-
ticularly females, are mentioned periodically in writings
from ancient Greece.
The internal history of Thrace consists mainly of the
rise of the Odrysian state in the 400s B.C.E., followed by
its collapse in the 300s B.C.E. The Macedonian kings
PHILIP II and ALEXANDER THE GREAT invaded Thrace
repeatedly (340s–330s B.C.E.), annexing the Strymon val-
ley and other locales and subjugating the entire land.
After Alexander’s death, Thrace briefly became a
sovereign power under the Macedonian dynast LYSI-
MACHUS (reigned 323–281 B.C.E.), before returning to
Macedonian control. After the Roman conquest of Mace-
don in 167 B.C.E., Thrace became an uneasy section of
the Roman province of Macedonia.
The primary city of ancient Thrace was Abdera, and
it has been excavated by Greek archaeologists since the
1950s C.E. Remains have been discovered of the city
walls, the roads (revealing an orthogonal urban plan),
and several buildings of the HELLENISTIC AGE. The
region’s smaller towns have been the subject of very little
archaeological exploration.
See also COLONIZATION; ORPHEUS.
Further reading: Gerda von Bülow, Treasures of
Thrace (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1987); Manolis
Andronikos, Thessalonike Museum (Athens: Ekdotike
Athenon, 1993); General Secretariat of the Region of East
Macedonia-Thrace, Thrace (Athens: Idea Advertising-
Marketing SA, 1994); Zofia Archibald, The Odrysian King-
dom of Thrace: Orpheus Unmasked (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1998); J. P. Stronk, “Crossing the Straits.
The Persians in Thrace,” Talanta 30–31 (1998–1999):
55–72; Nikola Theodossiev, North-western Thrace from the
Fifth to First Centuries B.C. (Oxford: Archaeopress, 2000);
M. Tonkova, “Classical Jewellery in Thrace. Origins and
Development, Archaeological Context,” Talanta 32–33
(2000–2001): 277–288; N. Theodossiev, “Mountain God-
desses in Ancient Thrace. The Broader Context,” Kernos
15 (2002): 325–329.
Thucydides (1) (ca. 460–400 B.C.E.) Athenian historian
Thucydides is best known for his detailed but unfinished
account of the PELOPONNESIAN WAR (431–404 B.C.E.),
which he had lived through. This work is one of the most
valuable and impressive writings surviving from ancient
Greece.
Although he was not the first Greek to write his-
tory—his main predecessor was HERODOTUS—Thucy-
dides was in many ways the first real historian, the first
author to apply rationalistic standards in inquiring about
the past. Unlike Herodotus, Thucydides keeps strict
chronology and avoids fables, biographical anecdotes,
and (usually) digressions, instead focusing austerely on
the most important events. In Herodotus’s work, war and
politics can result from the gods, FATE, or sexual passion.
In Thucydides there are no such fairy-tale causes of
action; Thucydides, like a modern political scientist,
explains events in terms of a fundamental human drive
for power and self-advantage.
In modern terms, Thucydides was as much a journal-
ist as a historian, because much of what he reported was
current or very recent as he was writing. He was no mere
library scholar; already an adult when the Peloponnesian
War began, he served (briefly and unsuccessfully) as an
Athenian general. He states in his opening sentence that
he began writing as soon as fighting broke out, since he
believed that the war would be bigger and more worth
recording than any prior conflict. He says that, for all
events described, he either witnessed them firsthand or
carefully interviewed participants afterward. Also (implic-
itly 
contrasting 
himself 
with 
the 
crowd-pleasing
Herodotus), Thucydides announces that his opus will be
the last word on the subject, and that it contains only
strictly relevant information: “My work is written not as a
display piece for an immediate audience, but as a prize to
last forever” (book 1).
Thucydides belonged to a very distinguished Athe-
nian family with wealth from GOLD- and SILVER-mining
privileges in the Mt. Pangaeus region of THRACE. His
father, although Athenian, bore the Thracian royal name
Olorus. According to a plausible reconstruction of
Thucydides’ family tree, the eminent Athenian soldier
and statesman KIMON was Thucydides’ granduncle, while
Thucydides’s maternal grandfather was the right-wing
politician THUCYDIDES (2), in whose honor the future his-
torian was named. Yet the younger Thucydides at some
point deserted his family’s politics and followed the radi-
cal democrat PERIKLES, the bitter enemy of both Kimon
and the elder Thucydides. In his writing, Thucydides the
historian (normally sparing of praise) extolls Perikles’
intelligence and leadership.
The young Thucydides probably heard the historian
Herodotus give public readings in ATHENS, around
Thucydides
349

445–425 B.C.E. The earliest episode in Thucydides’ life
that is known today comes from a rare autobiographical
mention in his history. Early in the Peloponnesian War,
probably in 430 B.C.E., Thucydides caught the deadly
plague that was sweeping through Athens. Unlike many
Athenians, he survived, and in one passage he describes
with scientific detachment the bodily symptoms of the
disease and its devastation of the city (book 2).
By 424 B.C.E. he had been elected as one of Athens’s
10 annual generals. He was assigned to the strategically
vital coast of Thrace, where he already wielded influence
as a mining mogul, but there (as he coolly relates in his
history) he failed to prevent the Spartan commander
BRASIDAS
from capturing the Athenian colony of
AMPHIPOLIS. For this failure, Thucydides was banished by
the Athenians and lived away for 20 years, returning only
when the exiles were recalled in 404 B.C.E., after Athens’s
final defeat.
Ironically, it was exile that allowed him to produce so
fine a history. As an independently wealthy member of
the international ARISTOCRACY in the days before general
suspicion of espionage, Thucydides was able to travel
through the theaters of war. “Because of my exile, I saw
what was happening on both sides, particularly on the
Peloponnesian side,” he relates (book 5). He may have
made the Thracian mining region his base, but he jour-
neyed to SPARTA, whose paltry physical monuments he
comments on (book 1), and to SYRACUSE, which looms
large in his written work. He must have been a relentless
seeker of truth—observing battles, interviewing soldiers
and politicians, consulting archives, collating notes, and
rejecting items in a drive for accuracy. Much of his infor-
mation is amazing in its detail, but he rarely allows the
details to submerge his story.
According to a later writer, Thucydides was married
and had children. Apparently he died only a few years
after his return to Athens. He never completed his his-
tory, which breaks off in midsentence describing events
of 411 B.C.E. (The last seven years of the war are
recounted by the historian XENOPHON, in his Hellenica.)
Thucydides’ history was organized by later scholars
into eight “books,” but in content it can be broken down
into four unequal sections: (1) books 1–5 (partial), on the
Archidamian War and Peace of NIKIAS, 431–421 B.C.E., (2)
book 5 (remainder), on the troubled years of temporary
peace, 421–415 B.C.E., (3) books 6 and 7, a beautifully
polished section describing the calamitous Athenian inva-
sion of Syracuse, 415–413 B.C.E., and (4) book 8, describ-
ing naval events in the eastern Aegean and the right-wing
coup of the FOUR HUNDRED in Athens, 412–411 B.C.E.
Both book 5 and the unfinished book 8 are clearly unre-
vised drafts. The work’s well-known set pieces include
Perikles’ funeral oration over the Athenian dead (book 2),
the description of civil war and moral breakdown at the
city of CORCYRA (book 3), and the Melian Dialogue, in
which notions of Might versus Right are debated prior to
the Athenians’ devastation of the helpless island of MELOS
(book 5). Writing in his native Attic prose, Thucydides
uses a uniquely clipped and condensed style that is some-
times difficult to understand. He seems to want to fit as
much meaning into as few words as possible.
The writer’s intelligence and mastery of his material
tend to disguise certain flaws or quirks. It may be that
Thucydides overrates Perikles as a soldier and glosses
over a major Periklean military setback, the failed siege of
the Peloponnesian city of EPIDAURUS in 430 B.C.E. Con-
versely, Thucydides surely underrates the motives and
abilities of the Athenian politician KLEON; Thucydides
seems to have disliked him personally—perhaps Kleon
proposed the edict banishing General Thucydides in 424
B.C.E. Also, Thucydides shows himself totally uninterested
in finance, despite its importance for the Athenian empire
and war effort. His treatment of Greek-Persian affairs is
skimpy, insofar as it was PERSIA’s funding of the Spartan
navy, 413–404 B.C.E., that enabled Sparta to defeat Athens.
But some of these shortcomings might have been cor-
rected had the historian lived to complete his work.
Another idiosyncracy is Thucydides’ way of ignoring
questions of emotional motive, such as patriotism or reli-
gious piety, as not being true causes of events. Modern
historians believe that emotional issues were important in
such gatherings as the Athenian democratic ASSEMBLY,
where demagogues might whip up the citizens to get
them to vote a certain way. But in Thucydides’ world it is
only the victims, such as the doomed Melians in the
Melian Dialogue, who make emotional appeals to the
gods or to justice; the winners always speak in rational
terms of selfadvantage and expediency.
Nevertheless, Thucydides stands as a monumental
early figure in history writing. The personal impression
he creates is that of an Olympian intellectual, patterned
after his hero, Perikles. An atheist and a loner, enamored
of intelligence and power, Thucydides could combine icy
objectivity with a fascination for human affairs. He was a
cynical genius, well suited to recording the suicidal event
that toppled the classical Greek world.
Further reading: Michael Palmer, Love of Glory and the
Common Good: Aspects of the Political Thought of Thucy-
dides (Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield, 1992); Karl
Maurer, Interpolation in Thucydides (Leiden, Netherlands:
E. J. Brill, 1995); June W. Allison, Word and Concept in
Thucydides (Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1997); Mary Frances
Williams, Ethics in Thucydides: The Ancient Simplicity (Lan-
ham, Md.: University Press of America, 1998); Gregory
Crane, Thucydides and the Ancient Simplicity: The Limits of
Political Realism (Berkeley: University of California Press,
1998); Tim Rood, Thucydides: Narrative and Explanation
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1998); Robert Lugin-
bill, Thucydides on War and National Character (Boulder,
Colo.: Westview Press, 1999); Lowell S. Gustafson, ed.,
Thucydides’ Theory of International Relations: A Lasting Pos-
session (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press,
350
Thucydides

2000); Jonathan Price, Thucydides and Internal War (New
York: Cambridge University Press, 2001).
Thucydides (2) (b. ca. 500 B.C.E.) Athenian politician
in the 440s B.C.E.
Thucydides led the rightwing opposition to the radical
democrat PERIKLES and was ostracized by Perikles’ efforts.
Thucydides’ defeat brought on a 14-year period of Perik-
lean supremacy in the Athenian DEMOCRACY. This Thucy-
dides probably was the maternal grandfather and
namesake of the historian THUCYDIDES (1).
The future politician’s father, Melesias, an Athenian
nobleman and celebrated wrestler, was a friend of the
poet PINDAR. Thucydides grew up in the cosmopolitan
world of Greek aristocrats and married a sister of the
great Athenian soldier KIMON. After Kimon’s death (ca.
450 B.C.E.), Thucydides succeeded him as leader of the
conservative opposition. He organized a system whereby
all his followers sat together in the ASSEMBLY, in order to
create more noise and effect during public debate.
An able orator, in around 448 B.C.E. Thucydides
attacked Perikles’ public-building policy, whereby allied
DELIAN LEAGUE funds, contributed for defense against
PERSIA, were to be used instead to erect grand monu-
ments in ATHENS (such as the PARTHENON). Thucydides
may have been sincerely offended by Athens’s domination
of other Greek states, as well as by Periklean domestic
policies that opened up political opportunities to the
Athenian lower-income classes.
But Perikles’ support was overwhelming, and the
Athenians voted to ostracize Thucydides (in about 443
B.C.E.). He seems to have returned to Athens after his
term of exile ended, around 433 B.C.E., but we hear of no
more political activity.
See also OSTRACISM; WRESTLING.
Thurii
See SYBARIS.
timber
In ancient mainland Greece, thick forests flour-
ished in the foothills and mountains, which were cooler
and far less heavily farmed than the arable plains. Trees
carpeted mountainous regions such as ARCADIA and the
Ossa-Pelion massif of southern THESSALY. The wood of
these trees was a crucial construction material for public
buildings, private homes, furnishings, machinery, and
ships.
Foothills and lower mountain slopes supported a
natural growth of deciduous trees; the most common was
the oak, in several varieties. The oak’s strong, heavy wood
was an important source of timber for building beams
and furniture. A tall, majestic tree, the “king” of the
Greek forests, the oak was from an early period associ-
ated with ZEUS, king of the gods.
Other timber-producing trees of the middle-altitude
region might include cypress, elm, and ash. Ash provides
a tough, flexible wood that early on was used for military
purposes. In HOMER’s poems, the warriors’ spears are
described as being of ash.
Above 4,000 feet over sea level, the mountain regions
produced the tallest conifers—fir, juniper, and cedar—
which as a group supplied much of the best building tim-
ber in the ancient Mediterranean. Cedars produce large,
durable beams, prized for big constructions such as a
temple’s roof supports. The fir tree, which grew in several
varieties, was the seagoing tree; its lengthy, flexible,
lightweight wood was well suited to the building of war-
ships. Alternatively, the shipwright could use pine or
cypress, which grew at lower altitudes than fir and were
more accessible throughout the Greek world, but which
gave the disadvantage of somewhat heavier planking.
Merchant ships usually were made of pine.
Like grain, timber was a crucial import for the popu-
lous, powerful cities of central and southern Greece in
the classical period. For the imperial ATHENS of the 400s
B.C.E., with its need to maintain a large war fleet, foreign
policy was partly a matter of ensuring friendship with—
or else conquering—those states that had access to valu-
able forests of fir trees (such as MACEDON or the
CHALCIDIC ¯E region).
In RELIGION, the Greeks associated certain trees with
the Olympian gods. As mentioned above, the oak was
linked to Zeus; similarly, the olive “belonged” to ATHENA,
the laurel to APOLLO, the cedar and nut trees to ARTEMIS,
and the myrtle to APHRODITE. DIONYSUS, the god of WINE
and vegetation in general, was associated with the pine,
the plane tree, and most fruit-bearing trees as well as with
the grape and ivy vines. Despite these divine associations,
such trees generally were not immune from being cut
down. In most Greek communities, however, there
existed sacred groves dedicated to a god or local hero,
where the trees were sacrosanct.
See also DODONA; FARMING; SHIPS AND SEAFARING.
Further reading: Russell Meiggs, Trees and Timber
in the Ancient Mediterranean World (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1982); E. Raptou, “Contribution to the Study of
the Economy of Ancient Cyprus. Copper, Timber,” in
The Development of the Cypriot Economy. From the Pre-
historic Period to the Present Day, edited by V. Kara-
georghis 
and 
D. 
Michaelides 
(Nicosia, 
Cyprus:
Lithographica, 1996), 249–259; Oliver Rackham, Trees,
Wood, and Timber in Greek History (Oxford: Leopard’s
Head Press, 2001); K. Bringmann, “Grain, Timber, and
Money. Hellenistic Kings, Finance, Buildings, and
Foundations in Greek Cities,” in Hellenistic Economies,
edited by Zofia H. Archibald (London: Routledge,
2001), 205–214.
Timoleon (ca. 411–337 B.C.E.) Corinthian-born com-
mander and statesman who in the 340s B.C.E. became the
political savior of Greek Sicily
Timoleon
351

Liberating the various cities from their dictatorial
TYRANTS, Timoleon led the Greeks in resistance to
Carthaginian invaders.
Timoleon was a soldier and aristocrat of middle age,
living in CORINTH in 345 B.C.E., when the Corinthians
sent him with a small mercenary force to Sicily, in
response to a request for help from the aristocrats of
SYRACUSE. (Syracuse was the foremost Sicilian Greek city,
and a Corinthian colony and ally.) The Syracusans were
seeking aid against the tyrant Dionysius II, who, after a
period of exile, had reinstated himself as master of the
city. By combining military strategy with diplomacy, Tim-
oleon ousted Dionysius. Then he reorganized the Syracu-
san government, creating a liberal OLIGARCHY on the
Corinthian model. Thereafter he began a campaign to
oust the tyrants of the other Sicilian-Greek cities and
reorganize those governments.
Amid these events, in 341 B.C.E.,
a seaborne
Carthaginian invasion force landed in Sicily. Timoleon
won an initial victory over the invaders at the Crimisus
River, in northwestern Sicily, but he was forced to sue for
peace with the Carthaginians, after the Greek tyrants
joined the war against him. Having made this peace, he
was then free to defeat the tyrants separately (around
340–337 B.C.E.) and to complete his reorganization of the
cities’ governments. He spent his final few years as a
revered private citizen at Syracuse and died there.
Timoleon’s political significance and success are
attested by the fact that Sicily continued to flourish for
several years after his death. Unfortunately, however,
within a generation chaos returned to the island, and a
new Syracusan tyrant, AGATHOKLES, arose.
See also CARTHAGE.
Further reading: Richard Talbert, Timoleon and the
Revival of Greek Sicily, 344–317 B.C. (New York: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1974); R. R. Holloway, “Syracu-
san Coinage between Dion and Timoleon,” Numismatica e
antichità classiche 20 (1991): 57–62; Lars Karlsson, “The
Symbols of Freedom and Democracy on the Bronze
Coinage of Timoleon,” in Ancient Sicily, edited by Tobias
Fischer-Hansen (Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum
Press, 1995), 149–170.
tin
See BRONZE.
Tiryns
This ancient Greek city is located in the
Argolid region of the northeastern PELOPONNESE, near
modern Nauplion. With its spectacular fortifications,
first excavated by archaeologist Heinrich Schliemann in
1884 C.E., Tiryns provides the best surviving example of
a fortress city of the MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION (around
1300 B.C.E.).
Tiryns was ideally located, atop a rocky hill in the
southeast Argive plain, beside the sea (which now lies a
mile away, due to coastal changes since ancient times).
The site was inhabited long before the Greek era; the
name Tiryns was not originally Greek for its ending
resembles the distinctive nth sound found in such other
pre-Greek names as CORINTH and OLYNTHOS. Archaeo-
logical evidence suggests that Tiryns was among the
first sites in Greece to be taken over by Greek-speaking
invaders. The Greeks’ arrival probably is indicated in
the destruction of the pre-Greek palace known as the
House of the Tiles, at nearby Lerna (around 2100
B.C.E.).
In the Mycenaean age (1600–1200 B.C.E.) Tiryns
served as the port for the overlord city of MYCENAE, nine
miles to the north. Tiryns received its famous encircling
walls, at two separate levels of its terraced hill, after 1400
B.C.E. These fortifications, made of huge limestone blocks
weighing as much as 14 tons each, rose about 65 feet,
with a typical thickness of 20–30 feet. In the east there
stood a tall gateway, protected by an enfilading wall, simi-
lar to the Lion Gate at Mycenae. Greeks of later centuries
ascribed these works to the mythical giant creatures
known as Cyclopes, and they coined the adjective Cyclo-
pean, which still is used today to denote Mycenaean grand
masonry.
Within the walls stood a city complex, ascending to
the summit’s two royal halls (east and west), built in dif-
ferent eras. These two palaces were made of limestone
and wood; a bathhouse and remnants of frescoes
throughout suggest a primitive luxury. Tiryns’s promi-
nence in this epoch is reflected in Greek MYTH, which
claimed that the hero HERAKLES was born there or that
his family came from there.
Like Mycenae and other cities, Tiryns shows clear
signs of having been destroyed by fire around 1200 B.C.E.,
amid the collapse of Mycenaean society. Reinhabited on a
reduced scale, the town survived into historical times.
But by then the nearby city of ARGOS was the dominant
power of the plain, and in around 470 B.C.E. the Argives
destroyed Tiryns.
See also ARCHAEOLOGY; CYCLOPS; GREEK LANGUAGE.
Further reading: Heinrich Schliemann, Tiryns: The
Prehistoric Palace of the Kings of Tiryns (New York: Arno
Press, 1976, reprint of the 1885 edition); E. Zangger,
“Landscape Changes around Tiryns during the Bronze
Age,” American Journal of Archaeology
98 (1994):
189–212; N. Claire Loader, Building in Cyclopean
Masonry: With Special Reference to the Mycenaean Fortifi-
cations on Mainland Greece (Jonsered: P. Aström, 1998);
Alkestis Papademetriou, Tiryns: A Guide to the History and
Archaeology, translated by Alexandra Doumas (Athens:
Hesperos Editions, 2001).
Titans
In MYTH, the Titans were a race of primeval gods
who preceded the Olympian gods. They were the off-
spring of the goddess GAEA (Mother Earth) and the god
Uranus (Greek: Ouranos, Sky); the most important of
their number was CRONUS, who ruled the universe prior
to his son ZEUS.
352
tin

The Titans represent the brutal era before Zeus’s civi-
lizing reign. As recounted in HESIOD’s epic poem the
Theogony (around 700 B.C.E.), Zeus became king after
leading his fellow gods in a 10-year war against Cronus
and the other Titans. (But two Titans, PROMETHEUS and
Themis, fought beside the gods, as did other supernatural
beings—the Cyclopes and the Hekatoncheires, or “hun-
dred-handed ones.”) Defeated, the enemy Titans now lie
shackled forever in the lowest level of the Underworld—
all except ATLAS, whose immense strength is employed in
holding up the sky.
If the name Titan (plural: Titanes) is actually a Greek
word, it may mean “honored one.” More probably it is
not Greek, but derives from the lost language of the pre-
Greek inhabitants of Greece. The legend of the defeated
Titans may distortedly commemorate the Greeks’ con-
quest of a native people, around 2100 B.C.E.
See also AFTERLIFE; CYCLOPS; GIANTS; OLYMPUS, MT.;
ORPHISM; RELIGION.
Further reading: N. Leipen, “Atlas, the Titan Who
Supported the Sky,” in Tranquillitas. Mélanges en l’honneur
de Tran tam Tinh, edited by Marie-Odile Jentel and Gisèle
Deschênes-Wagner (Quebec: Université Laval, 1994),
333–342; A. Annus, “Are There Greek Rephaim? On the
Etymology of Greek Meropes and Titanes,” Ugarit-
Forschungen 31 (1999): 13–30.
trade
The Greeks (along with their neighbors, the
Phoenicians) were the greatest traders and seafarers of
the ancient Mediterranean world. They sailed far and
wide, constantly searching for new commercial markets
and trade opportunities; through these excursions Greek
civilization made its tremendous impact on other ancient
cultures, including the ETRUSCANS,
the CELTS,
the
Romans, and the Scythians.
Greek trade routes can be reconstructed using
archaeological evidence such as Greek POTTERY and
metalwork found in non-Greek lands. Written refer-
ences by such authors as the Greek historian
HERODOTUS or the Roman geographer Strabo also help
complete the picture. It is known that as early as about
1300 B.C.E., long before the invention of COINAGE,
Mycenaean-Greek merchants were spanning the Med-
iterranean and trading by barter. Archaeologists have
discovered that these early Greeks had trade depots in
the Lipari Islands (near SICILY) as well as on CYPRUS, in
western ASIA MINOR, and in the northern Levant. Dur-
ing the Greek trading and colonizing expansion around
800–500 B.C.E.,
Greek merchants visited southern
France and Spain and the farthest corners of the BLACK
SEA. In about 308 B.C.E., a Greek skipper named Pyth-
eas of MASSALIA explored the Atlantic seaboard, sailing
around Britain and perhaps reaching Norway in his
search for new trade routes.
In many cases, Greek traders were inspired to travel
these amazing distances by the need to acquire certain
valuable resources unavailable in Greece. Southern
Spain, for example, offered raw tin, a necessary compo-
nent of the alloy BRONZE, a metal essential to many
aspects of ancient Greek society for centuries. In the
elaborate trade network of the ancient Mediterranean,
tin was quarried by Celtic peoples in British Cornwall
and (possibly) in northwest Spain, and it was brought to
the Greek market, overland to the Mediterranean, by
Celtic middlemen. Other prized resources of the western
Mediterranean included 
SILVER
ore and lead. In
exchange, the Greeks offered metalwork, textiles, and
WINE, brought from mainland Greece or from the Greek
cities of Asia Minor.
In other instances, Greek exchange networks were
forged because of the desire for exotic luxury goods. To
acquire the carved ivories, metalwork, and textiles of
EGYPT, for example, the ancient Greeks would have to
offer SLAVES, silver ore, or other basic resources that the
wealthy Egyptians lacked. Perhaps most desirable of all
Egyptian goods was the grain surplus of the Nile valley,
which Greek merchants could ship to hungry Greece for
lucrative resale. Grain, along with TIMBER, was also a
major attraction of Sicily, ITALY, THRACE, and the northern
Black Sea coast. Among valuable Greek exports were the
painted pottery of CORINTH (600s B.C.E.) and ATHENS
(500s B.C.E.), and the woolen textiles of MILETUS and
other cities of IONIA.
The conquests of the Macedonian king ALEXANDER
THE GREAT (334–323 B.C.E.) flooded the Greek market
with luxury goods and changed the trading map of the
ancient world. For instance, the greater availability of
metalwork greatly reduced the demand for ceramic ves-
sels. During the HELLENISTIC ERA, travel increased even
further, as did international commerce (particularly east-
ward, to central Asia). Improved harbors, as well as
roads, bridges, and canals, all contributed to the growth
of trade in the 200s and 100s B.C.E., and this trend con-
tinued after the Roman conquest of the eastern Mediter-
ranean.
See also AEGINA; AL MINA; CARTHAGE; CHALCIDIC¯E;
CHALCIS; CHIOS; COLONIZATION; CRETE; GOLD; ILLYRIS;
PITHECUSAE; PHOENICIA; RHODES; SAMOS; SHIPS AND SEA-
FARING; TROY.
Further reading: Fik Meijer, Trade, Transport, and
Society in the Ancient World. A Sourcebook (London:
Routledge, 1992); Helen Parkins and Christopher Smith,
eds., Trade, Traders, and the Ancient City (London: Rout-
ledge, 1998); Jane Shuter, Builders, Craftsmen, and
Traders (Des Plaines, Ill.: Heinemann Library, 1999); C.
M. Reed, Maritime Traders in the Ancient Greek World
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 2003); Sitta von
Reden, Exchange in Ancient Greece (London: Duckworth,
2003).
trade
353

354
trade

tragedy
See THEATER.
trees
See TIMBER.
tribes
See KINSHIP.
trireme
See WARFARE, NAVAL.
Troilus
The son of the mythical Trojan king PRIAM and
his wife, HECUBA, Troilus was slain by the Greek cham-
pion ACHILLES in the early days of the TROJAN WAR.
Although Troilus had only a small role in Greek
MYTH, he became important later, in the medieval Euro-
pean legend of Troilus and Cressida.
Further reading: A. Cambitoglou and J. Wade,
“Achilles and Troilos,” Antike Kunst 15 (1972): 90–94;
Martin Robertson, “Troilos and Polyxene. Notes on a
Changing Legend,” in Eumousia: Ceramic and Icono-
graphic Studies in Honour of Alexander Cambitoglou, edited
by Jean-Paul Descoeudres (Sydney: Meditarch, 1990),
63–70.
Trojan War
The legend of the Trojan War is today the
best-known story from Greek MYTH. Amazingly rich in its
many characters and events, the Trojan War legend
describes how the allied Greeks—under the command of
King AGAMEMNON of MYCENAE—sailed from Greece and
laid siege to the non-Greek city of TROY (also called Ilion
or Ilium), located outside the mouth of the HELLESPONT
sea channel, in northwest ASIA MINOR. The Greeks had
come at Agamemnon’s behest to avenge the abduction of
the beautiful Helen—wife of Agamemnon’s brother
MENELAUS—by the Trojan prince PARIS. The Trojans, then
sheltering Paris and the compliant Helen within their
walls, had refused the Greeks’ demand for Helen’s return.
This was the official reason for the war, although the
Greeks also craved Troy’s wealth.
The siege, consisting mainly of battlefield fighting
on the plains outside the city, lasted for 10 years and saw
the death of many heroes on both sides, including the
Trojan prince HECTOR
and the Greek champion
ACHILLES. Finally Troy fell to a stratagem devised by the
wily Greek hero ODYSSEUS. Pretending to abandon the
siege, the Greeks sailed away, leaving behind a huge
wooden horse they had constructed—the so-called Tro-
jan Horse. Hidden within this hollow monument was a
picked force of Greek soldiers, but the unsuspecting Tro-
jans believed the horse to be a Greek offering to the gods
and brought it into the city. After nightfall, the Greeks
emerged from the horse and opened Troy’s gates to the
waiting Greek army (which had hurried back under
cover of darkness).
Destruction of the rich and proud city followed, with
the inhabitants all massacred or captured as SLAVES. The
Greeks’ arrogant and impious behavior at the sack of Troy
however, angered the gods, who decreed that many of the
surviving Greek heroes would be killed on the voyage
home.
The immense saga—of which HOMER’s Iliad and
Odyssey present only a portion—was the product of
Greek oral poetic tradition over several centuries,
approximately 1200–550 B.C.E. The legend produced a
body of EPIC POETRY, describing major episodes of the
war. The earliest and greatest of the heroic epics were the
two poems written down around 750 B.C.E. and ascribed
to the poet Homer—namely, the Iliad, or Tale of Ilium,
recounting the “passion” of the Greek hero Achilles dur-
ing the war’s 10th year; and the Odyssey, describing the
homecoming of the Greek hero Odysseus, with several
back references to the last days of the war.
These two Homeric poems, however, were not the
only epic poems dealing with the Trojan War. The classi-
cal Greeks (400s B.C.E.) knew at least six other Trojan-
related epics, not ascribed to Homer. These poems did
not survive antiquity, but their story plots are summa-
rized by later writers. The lost Trojan War epics were: (1)
the Cypria (“Tales from CYPRUS”), describing the war’s
causes and outset; (2) the Aethiopis, recounting Achilles’
slaying of the Ethiopian king MEMNON (a Trojan ally) and
Achilles’ own death in battle; (3) The Little Iliad, describ-
ing the madness of the Greek hero AJAX (1) and the
episode of the Wooden Horse; (4) the Capture of Troy
(Iliou Persis), recording the Greeks’ bloody capture of the
city; (5) the Homecomings, recording the calamitous
homeward voyages of the surviving Greek heroes other
than Odysseus; and (6) the Telegonia,
describing
Odysseus’s last days and the related adventures of Tele-
gonus, who was his son by the witch CIRCE.
In 1870–1890 C.E. the pioneering German archaeolo-
gist Heinrich Schliemann discovered and excavated the
ancient site of Troy, which—amid its various ancient
strata—showed clear signs of having been destroyed by a
great fire around 1220 B.C.E. Since this epoch-making dis-
covery, scholars have universally come to agree that the
Trojan War of legend was based on some genuine event
of the late Mycenaean age. Certainly the Mycenaean
Greeks possessed the wealth, manpower, and organiza-
tion to launch such an expedition, and they probably had
sufficient cause; even if we dismiss the abduction of Spar-
tan Helen as a fiction, there remains that fact that ancient
Troy must have controlled the Hellespont waterway and
was probably preying on the Mycenaeans’ vital imports of
raw metals.
See also AJAX (2); ARCHAEOLOGY; ANDROMACHE;
BRONZE; CASSANDRA; DIOMEDES; HECUBA; HELEN OF TROY;
LAOCOÖN; NEOPTOLEMUS; NESTOR; PHILOKTETES; PRIAM;
TRADE; WARFARE, LAND; WARFARE, SIEGE.
Further reading: S. Woodford, The Trojan War in
Ancient Art
(London: Duckworth, 1993); Jonathan
Burgess, The Tradition of the Trojan War in Homer and the
Epic Cycle (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,
Trojan War
355

2001); Donna Wilson, Ransom, Revenge, and Heroic Iden-
tity in the Iliad (New York: Cambridge University Press,
2002); Diane Thompson, The Trojan War: Literature and
Legends from the Bronze Age to the Present (Jefferson,
N.C.: McFarland, 2004); M. S. Silk, Homer: The Iliad, 2d
ed. (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2004); Barry
Powell, Homer (Malden, Mass.: Blackwell, 2004).
Troy
This ancient city of ASIA MINOR is usually
described as being inhabited by a non-Greek people. In
the late BRONZE AGE (around 1300 B.C.E.), Troy was evi-
dently one of the most powerful cities of the eastern
Mediterranean. The site of ancient Troy—at the village of
Hissarlik, in modern-day Turkey—was discovered by the
German archaeologist Heinrich Schliemann in 1870 C.E.
But Troy had been famous for 3,000 years prior, immor-
talized in the ancient Greek epic cycle of the TROJAN
WAR, of which the two greatest poems are HOMER’s Iliad
and Odyssey.
Schliemann’s epoch-making discovery
revealed that the historical Troy had achieved affluence in
the early second millennium 
B.C.E.,
before being
destroyed in an immense fire, at the archaeological level
known as Troy VIIa (around 1220 B.C.E.). Modern schol-
ars tend to believe that this destruction marks the real
event commemorated in the mythical Trojan War.
The name Troy comes to us from the poet Homer and
other Greek writers who called the city Troia and Ilion.
These names seem to have no meaning in the Greek lan-
guage, and may simply preserve the ancient Trojans’
names for their city. Greek MYTH mentions two Trojan
founding fathers—Tros and his son Ilus—who gave the
city its two names; but this sounds like a later rationaliza-
tion. The first founder of Troy, according to Greek myth,
was Tros’s grandfather Dardanus.
Troy is situated at the very northwestern corner of
Asia Minor, about four miles south of the western mouth
of the HELLESPONT waterway and about four miles inland
of the AEGEAN SEA. Set on a height commanding the sea-
side plain, ancient Troy could raid or toll the merchant
shipping in the Hellespont without itself being blockaded
inside the strait; its inland site left it safe from surprise
raids by sea. Troy’s control of the Hellespont must have
been a crucial factor in the city’s prosperity and was prob-
ably the reason why the real Trojan War was fought; the
Mycenaean Greeks of the mid-1200s B.C.E. may have
decided to destroy Troy because it was blocking their
badly needed imports of metals from Asia Minor.
Schliemann’s excavations uncovered no fewer than
nine levels of habitation at Troy, dating from around 2500
B.C.E. to the early first century C.E. The significant levels
for our purpose begin with Troy VI (about 1900–1300
B.C.E.), which marks the arrival of certain invaders—an
accomplished people, with horses and superior building
techniques, who enlarged and refortified the city. These
Trojans may have been Luwians, displaced from interior
Asia Minor by the Hittites. Or these Trojans may have
been kinfolk of the first Greeks, who in the same cen-
turies were descending through the Greek peninsula,
overrunning or assimilating the prior inhabitants there.
This impressive Troy VI was devastated by an earth-
quake around 1300 B.C.E. Troy VIIa represents the sur-
vivors’ rebuilding in the wreckage, along the plan of the
preceding city. This Troy was destroyed by fire around
1220 B.C.E., in what may have been the Trojan War.
Scholars have always noted that the small size of
Schliemann’s Troy VIIa seems at odds with Homer’s pic-
ture of a mighty and defiant fortress city. Until archaeolo-
gists can find convincing evidence of wider ancient city
limits, it must be assumed that the Trojan War legends
greatly exaggerate the grandeur of the real Troy of the
1200s B.C.E.
Schliemann excavated at the site of Troy from 1871
to 1891, followed by Carl Blegen (University of Cincin-
nati, Ohio) from 1932 to 1938. The current program of
work began in 1988, under the direction of the German
archaeologist Manfred Korfmann, with the cooperation of
the American archaeologist Brian Rose from the Univer-
sity of Cincinnati. This project is using modern tech-
niques to review the findings of the early excavations, as
well as exploring new areas of the site and the greater
Troad region. Documentation, conservation, and restora-
tion of the archaeological remains are also essential com-
ponents of the fieldwork program.
See also ARCHAEOLOGY.
Further reading: Robert Payne, The Gold of Troy: The
Story of Heinrich Schliemann and the Buried Cities of
Ancient Greece (New York: Dorset Press, 1990); Caroline
Moorhead, The Lost Treasures of Troy (London: Weiden-
feld and Nicolson, 1994); Michael Wood, In Search of the
Trojan War (London: Penguin Books, 1996); Susan Heuck
Allen, Finding the Walls of Troy: Frank Calvert and Hein-
rich Schliemann at Hisarlik (Berkeley: University of Cali-
fornia Press, 1999); Andrew Erskine, Troy between Greece
and Rome: Local Tradition and Imperial Power (New York:
Oxford University Press, 2001); Manfred Korfmann and
Dietrich Mannsperger, A Guide to Troia (Istanbul: Ege
Yayinlari, 2001); D. F. Easton, Schliemann’s Excavations at
Troia, 1870–1873 (Mainz am Rhein, Germany: von
Zabern, 2002).
Tydeus
See SEVEN AGAINST THEBES.
Typhon
One of several mythical monsters that arose to
challenge the might of ZEUS soon after the beginning of
the world. Typhon (or Typhoeus) was a son of the earth
goddess, GAEA. The epic poet HESIOD, in his Theogony
(around 700 B.C.E.), vividly describes Typhon as having a
vaguely human form with 100 serpents’ heads that
sparked fire and made the deafening noise of many differ-
ent beasts. This grotesque creature tried to take over the
356
Troy

world but was incinerated by Zeus’s thunderbolts. Being
immortal, Typhon could not die and was imprisoned for
eternity in Tartarus (the lowest abyss of the Underworld).
Like other hybrid creatures described in Hesiod,
Typhon probably represents a mythological borrowing
from the Near East. Greek legend often associated
Typhon with the southeastern ASIA MINOR region called
Cilicia, and perhaps Typhon was originally a spirit of Cili-
cian volcanoes.
As Greek exploration opened up SICILY and southern
ITALY in about 800–600 B.C.E., Typhon became “reas-
signed” to that new frontier (as did other Greek mythical
figures). At that time he was said to be imprisoned under
Mt. Etna, in Sicily, where his fire and rage were the cause
of that volcano’s eruptions.
In surviving artwork, Typhon is sometimes shown as
a snake-footed man in combat with Zeus. For the Greeks,
the battle provided a picturesque emblem of savagery ver-
sus civilization.
See also GIANTS; PINDAR.
Further reading: J. G. Griffiths, “The Flight of the
Gods before Typhon. An Unrecognized Myth,” Hermes 88
(1960): 374–376; Anne Rockwell, The One-eyed Giant and
Other Monsters from the Greek Myths (New York: Green-
willow Books, 1996).
tyrants
The Greek tyrants were dictators who first
arose at various Greek cities on a wave of middle-class
anger in the mid 60Os B.C.E. and seized the government
from the aristocrats who had hitherto ruled. The Greek
title tyrant (tyrannos) did not at first denote the cruel
abuse of power, as it does now; rather, it had a neutral
meaning—“usurper with supreme power.” The word
tyrannos apparently was imported to Greece from the
Near East, where it had been used to describe the usurp-
ing Lydian king Gyges (ca. 670 B.C.E.). The point of this
newly minted Greek word was that, for the first time in
Greek memory, these despots were coming from outside
the narrow ruling circles.
What brought the first tyrants to power was a grow-
ing Greek middle class that was ready for political and
social privileges that the aristocrats had denied them. By
the mid-600s B.C.E. CORINTH and other cities had been
active in seaborne TRADE for probably 200 years. This
trade had created a class of merchants and manufacturers
with wealth but no prestige or political voice. When a
revolution in military tactics brought these middle-class
men into the army to serve as HOPLITES, their potential
power increased greatly. There followed, throughout the
greater Greek cities, a wave of tyrants’ revolutions.
The first Greek tyrannos now known is PHEIDON of
ARGOS (ca. 670 B.C.E.). Other famous tyrants include
KYPSELOS of Corinth (and his son PERIANDER), KLEIS-
THENES (2) of SIKYON, PEISISTRATUS OF ATHENS (and his
son HIPPIAS (1)), and POLYCRATES of SAMOS. Tyrants also
held power at MEGARA (1), MILETUS, and many other
Greek cities. These rulers spanned the period from about
670–510 B.C.E. Their dynasties rarely lasted for more than
two generations, since it was impossible to maintain or
repeat constructively the popular discontent that had
raised the tyrant to power in the first place.
Like other popular dictators throughout history, the
tyrants sought to bring amenities to the poor and to
relieve unemployment with public works. Tyrants such as
Polycrates were known for improving local water sup-
plies as well as for their monumental building programs,
which glorified themselves and their cities. Tyrants might
also be known for their unbridled passions and sexuality.
The enemy of the tyrants was the Panhellenic class of
the ARISTOCRACY, who had most to fear from revolution.
But the tyrants also had an enemy in the Greek city of
SPARTA, which by the 500s B.C.E. had developed into a
kind of Greek police force, sending out troops in
response to appeals from displaced aristocrats of Samos,
Athens, and elsewhere. In 510 B.C.E. the Spartans ejected
the last important tyrant of mainland Greece, Hippias of
Athens; in his place, the Athenians soon established the
first Greek DEMOCRACY.
The great supporter of the tyrants was the Eastern
kingdom of PERSIA, which used Greek tyrants as puppet
rulers in its conquest of Greek ASIA MINOR. The Persians
also negotiated in secret with independent tyrants in
mainland Greece, in hopes of winning collaborators.
Tyrants played a major role in the history of Greek
SICILY, particularly at the preeminent city of SYRACUSE.
This was due in part to bitter class divisions within Sicil-
ian-Greek society. But another factor was the abiding
external menace of the Carthaginians, who inhabited the
western corner of Sicily and who periodically launched
massive campaigns to subjugate the island’s Greek cities.
There thus arose a demand for capable Greek military
dictators who could organize defense. The early 400s
B.C.E. saw a series of grand Sicilian tyrants, culminating
in GELON of Syracuse (ca. 480 B.C.E.), his brother HIERON
(1) (ca. 470 B.C.E.), and Theron of ACRAGAS (ca. 480
B.C.E.), all of whom were known for their wealth and
magnificent court.
Although Syracuse saw periods of democracy, condi-
tions there remained ripe for tyrants down through the
200s B.C.E., long after tyranny had faded away elsewhere
in the Greek world. The most famous or notorious of the
later Syracusan tyrants were DIONYSIUS (1) (ca. 390
B.C.E.) and AGATHOKLES (ca. 300 B.C.E.); Agathokles was
the first tyrant to assume the title king.
See also PERSIAN WARS.
Further reading: Brian Lavelle, The Sorrow and the
Pity: A Prolegomenon to a History of Athens under the Pei-
sistratids, c. 560–510 B.C. (Stuttgart, Germany: F. Steiner,
1993); J. A. Smith, Athens under the Tyrants (Bristol, U.K.:
Bristol Classical Press, 1989); H. Alan Shapiro, Art and
tyrants
357

Cult under the Tyrants in Athens (Mainz am Rhein, Ger-
many: von Zabern, 1989); M. M. Austin, “Greek Tyrants
and the Persians, 546–479 B.C.,” Classical Quarterly 40
(1990): 289–306; J. Salmon, “Lopping Off the Heads?
Tyrants, Politics, and the Polis,” in The Development of the
Polis in Archaic Greece, edited by L. G. Mitchell and P. J.
Rhodes (London: Routledge, 1997), 60–73; Heleen San-
cisi-Weerdenburg, ed., Peisistratos and the Tyranny: A
Reappraisal of the Evidence (Amsterdam: J. C. Gieben,
2000); H. van Wees, “Tyrants, Oligarchs, and Citizen
Militia,” in Army and Power in the Ancient World, edited
by A. Chaniotis and P. Ducrey (Stuttgart, Germany:
Steiner, 2002), 61–82; S. E. Harrell, “King or Private Citi-
zen. Fifth-century Sicilian Tyrants at Olympia and Del-
phi,” Mnemosyne 55 (2002): 439–464.
Tyre
See PHOENICIA.
Tyrtaeus (mid-600s B.C.E.) Spartan lyric poet
Tyrtaeus was born in the region of Attica but spent most
of his life and career in Sparta. According to legend, he
was sent to Sparta at the instruction of the oracle at DEL-
PHI to assist the Spartans in the Second Messenian War. A
later tale also claims that Tyrtaeus was originally a lame
Athenian schoolmaster. The Athenians supposedly chose
to send him to Sparta as someone they thought would
never assist the Spartans in their conquest of the PELO-
PONNESE, but his poetry turned out to be the most inspir-
ing aid possible, and his poems encouraged the Spartans
in their difficult fight during the Second Messenian War.
Tyrtaeus wrote elegiac verse, a form of poetry
intended for recital to flute accompaniment, but only frag-
ments of his work survive today. His poems were patriotic
and instructional—reminding his listeners, for example,
how beautiful it is to die for one’s country and urging
them to adhere to the specific tactics of HOPLITE warfare.
His propagandistic poetry belonged to a larger program by
which SPARTA transformed itself in those years into a mili-
taristic society, with the best army in Greece.
Tyrtaeus is said to have composed military marching
songs (now lost) in the Spartan Doric dialect, but he
wrote his elegies in Ionic Greek, following the literary
convention of his day. His verses contain epic-style lan-
guage with many echoes of HOMER. He lived at least
through the end of the Second Messenian War (668
B.C.E.), but the exact date and circumstances of his death
are uncertain. Depending on how late in the century Tyr-
taeus lived, he may have been influenced by the Ionian
poet KALLINUS of EPHESOS, who also developed the elegy
for patriotic themes.
See also GREEK LANGUAGE; LYRIC POETRY; MESSENIA.
Further reading: Douglas Gerber, A Companion to the
Greek Lyric Poets (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 1997);
Hans van Wees, “Tyrtaeus’ Eunomia: Nothing to Do with
the Great Rhetra,” in Sparta: New Perspectives, edited by
Stephen Hodkinson and Anton Powell (London: Duck-
worth, 1999), 1–42; Douglas Gerber, ed., Greek Elegiac
Poetry: From the Seventh to the Fifth Centuries B.C. (Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1999); Peter J.
Steinberger, ed., Readings in Classical Political Thought
(Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett, 2000).
358
Tyre

U–W
359
Ulysses
See ODYSSEUS.
Underworld
See AFTERLIFE; HADES.
Uranus
See CRONUS; GAEA.
vase-painting
See POTTERY.
vines and viticulture
See FARMING; WINE.
voting
See DEMOCRACY.
warfare, land
The famous land battles of ancient
Greece were primarily collisions of heavy infantry, who
met on open ground by mutual consent. CAVALRY
remained secondary, partly due to the mountainous
Greek terrain and partly due to technical matters, such as
the small size of Greek horses and the absence of stir-
rups. It took the tactical genius of the Macedonian king
PHILIP II and his son ALEXANDER THE GREAT (mid-300s
B.C.E.) to make cavalry at least partly effective against
infantry.
It is less obvious why light-armed foot soldiers were
underemployed until the 400s B.C.E. Commanders in
mountainous Greece might have been expected to
develop guerrilla tactics using projectile troops—javelin
men, archers, and slingers. However, for social and psy-
chological reasons, such tactics did not arise among the
major Greek states until the PELOPONNESIAN
WAR
(431–404 B.C.E.). Instead, the Greeks (a sporting people)
tended to think of war as a manly and consensual contest
of strength. “Whenever the Greeks declare war on one
another, they go find the most smooth and level piece of
ground and fight their battle there,” states an observer
cited by the historian HERODOTUS (ca. 435 B.C.E.). In clas-
sical Greece, as in Europe of the 18th century C.E., brutal
warfare was conducted along certain gentlemanly guide-
lines.
Greek military history falls into three major phases:
(1) Mycenaean and post-Mycenaean warfare, around
1600–750 B.C.E., (2) the age of the HOPLITE, or heavily
armed infantryman, around 650–320 B.C.E.; and (3) the
era of the Macedonian-developed PHALANX, perfected by
Alexander the Great and employed by his successors. The
HELLENISTIC AGE (around 300–150 B.C.E.) saw larger
armies, commanded by absolute monarchs, battling for
vast tracts of land in the eastern Mediterranean and using
such innovative war “machines” as elephants. In the end,
phalanx and elephant fell to the superior maneuverability
of the legions of Republican ROME (100s B.C.E.).
To understand Mycenaean warfare, modern scholars
rely on such archaeological evidence as arms and armor
from burial sites and artistic depictions of soldiering on
surviving artwork. Also helpful if approached cautiously
are the battle descriptions in HOMER’s Iliad (written down
around 750 B.C.E. but purporting to describe the TROJAN
WAR, fought around 1220 B.C.E.).
Mycenaean warfare (somewhat like medieval Euro-
pean warfare) revolved around armored noblemen who
would take the field at the head of their kinsmen and
retainers. These warlords are commemorated in such
Homeric heroes as ACHILLES and DIOMEDES. In battle,
such champions would seek out their social equals on the
enemy side, to duel it out with javelins, jabbing spears,
and stabbing swords. As IRON was yet unknown, the

choice metal for war was BRONZE. The most dramatic
Mycenaean armament—the body-covering shield of
oxhide, stretched on a wooden frame, such as AJAX (1)
carries in the Iliad—was obsolete by about 1450 B.C.E.,
replaced by wooden shields faced with bronze. CHARIOTS
were used for war—perhaps to convey champions across
the plain to the fighting, or perhaps for chariot battles, on
the model of contemporary Egyptian and Hittite warfare.
The rough terrain of Greece does not generally lend itself
to chariots, but the plains of ARGOS and BOEOTIA would
have sufficed.
The depressed years of the DARK AGE (1100–900
B.C.E.) continued the Mycenaean pattern on an impover-
ished scale. War was still a job for aristocrats and their
followers. Bronze armor became scarcer then, but iron—
more plentiful than bronze—made its first appearance, in
swords and spear points.
The emergence of the hoplite (after 700 B.C.E.) elimi-
nated the old, individualistic approach to war. Henceforth
battles were decided not by dueling champions but by
large concentrations of armored hoplites, arrayed in tight
rows, who fought by pushing with their spears and
shields in an organized effort to break the enemy forma-
tion. The hoplite era includes the most famous conflicts
of mainland Greece: the PERSIAN WARS and Pelopon-
nesian Wars (400s B.C.E.), and the wars of SPARTA and
THEBES (300s B.C.E.).
The precise origins of hoplite warfare are unclear. It
is known that in 669 B.C.E. the army of ARGOS decisively
defeated a Spartan force at Hysiae in the eastern PELO-
PONESE; evidence suggests that the Argives at this battle
were the first Greeks to use large-scale hoplite tactics,
against Spartans who were still fighting in the disorga-
nized old manner.
The hoplite’s name came from his new-style shield,
the hoplon, made of bronze-faced wood. The hoplon was
round, wide (about three feet in diameter), heavy (about
16 pounds), and deeply concave; in battle it enclosed the
soldier’s torso while extending toward his neighbor on
the left. Other hoplite armament included a bronze hel-
met and breastplate, a six- to eight-foot-long jabbing
spear, and a stabbing or slashing sword of forged iron, for
use after the spear had broken. A hoplite’s armor, weigh-
ing about 60 pounds, would not be worn on the march,
but would be carried in wagons or by personal SLAVES or
servants.
One difference between the hoplite and previous
Greek warriors was that the hoplite was nearly helpless
on his own. He remained an effective fighter so long as he
stayed grouped with his fellows. Should soldiers leave the
battle formation—whether by turning and fleeing from
the rear ranks or by breaking ranks in front to chase an
enemy—the whole structure was endangered. This obli-
gation to stand fast in battle shaped the classical Greek
values of steadfastness, calmness in danger, and the abil-
ity to endure fatigue and pain.
Another difference between the hoplite and the
armored warrior of prior centuries was that the hoplite
was probably not an aristocrat. (Aristocrats comprised
the cavalry at this time.) The hoplite was a middle-class
citizen, levied in defense of his city-state and fighting
against analogous citizens in the enemy army. Cities
henceforth relied for their defense on large numbers of
uniformly equipped citizens, not on a few noble heroes;
the coming of the hoplite thus saw the democratization
of warfare.
Ancient writers use the word othismos, the “push,” to
describe hoplite battle. Down to the 300s B.C.E., the battle
line typically was formed six to eight rows deep, with a
front of several hundred men. The men in the first three
rows advanced with spears leveled; behind them, the sol-
diers held their spears pointing upward. As the two
armies collided, sometimes at a full run, the front ranks
of both sides met the enemy spear points while thrusting
overhand with their own spears. But at the same time, the
rear ranks kept pushing forward—each man actually
leaning his shield into the back of his countryman ahead
and shoving him toward the enemy. The armies tried to
push each other apart.
For the front hoplites, battle must have been hellish
and exhausting. There are tales of soldiers dying of suffo-
cation, pinned upright by the press of men. More usually,
of course, soldiers died of wounds—possibly to the neck
or genitals (areas not always protected by shield or breast
plate), or possibly to the head or chest (the armor split-
ting under the spear point). When a hoplite fell, the man
behind him took his place with leveled spear, and most
360
warfare, land
This warrior vase from Mycenae shows soldiers carrying the
jabbing spears and body-covering oxhide shields that were
obsolete by 1450 B.C.E. (Alison Frantz Photographic 
Collection, American School of Classical Studies at Athens)

men who went down alive would be very lucky not to be
trampled to death.
The heart of the battle, the excruciating othismos,
lasted probably less than an hour. As one army started to
get the worst of it, soldiers on that side would begin flee-
ing (rear rows first), and suddenly the entire losing army
might be reduced to a chaotic rout as every man dropped
his shield and spear, running in panic. Then the cavalry
might come into play, either in slaughtering a fleeing
enemy or in covering its own side’s retreat.
Unlike modern armies, the Greeks did not usually
make war all year long. The campaign season lasted from
March until October, when weather conditions were right
for encamping and moving large numbers of men. Fur-
thermore, since most Greek soldiers were farmers by
trade, the end of summer usually saw a consensus to stop
campaigning and go home for the autumn sowings and
vintage. One reason for the military superiority of SPARTA
in the 500s to 400s B.C.E. was that its citizens were pro-
fessional soldiers; they had no job but war. (Their fields
at home were worked by a society of serfs, the HELOTS.)
In strategy, hoplite warfare was very simple, and
relied on an element of cooperation between antagonists.
The aggressor army would march into enemy territory,
and the defending army would march out to meet it.
Defenders did not like to stay confined behind their city
walls—the Athenian statesman PERIKLES’ strategy for the
Peloponnesian War was unique in its passive defense.
Rather, defending armies would come out to protect the
farms of the countryside, upon which the city’s food sup-
ply might depend.
The size of hoplite armies could vary greatly. At the
Battle of PLATAEA, against the Persians (479 B.C.E.), the
allied Greek force was said to number over 38,000
hoplites. At the Battle of MANTINEIA (418 B.C.E.), the
opposing armies had about 3,600 hoplites each, plus
light-armed troops. Other armies, fielded in local dis-
putes, might be much smaller.
By the late 400s B.C.E. military minds had begun
adjusting hoplite tactics. It had long been observed that an
army’s right wing tended to outperform its left wing—partly
because the better troops were stationed on the right, but
partly because the battle line itself would drift rightward on
the approach to battle, as each man leaned right to gain the
protection of his neighbor’s shield; this rightward drift
meant that each army advantageously outflanked the other
on the right. To increase this advantage, the Boeotians at
the Battle of Delium used a fortified right wing, 25 rows
deep, and defeated an Athenian army (424 B.C.E.).
In the Classical period, the city of SPARTA developed a
military force that was superior in many ways to the
armies of other Greek city-states. Every Spartan boy
received extensive military training, and boys’ upraising
included the teaching that dying in battle, protecting
one’s city, was the most honorable fate possible. The Spar-
tan army also had excellent equipment and supplies. The
Spartans’ superior tactics involved speedily gaining the
upper hand on their right wing and then wheeling the
right wing leftward, rolling up the enemy from the side.
However, at the Battle of LEUKTRA (371 B.C.E.), the The-
ban general EPAMINONDAS beat the “invincible” Spartans
by stacking his left wing 50 men deep and crushing the
12-man-deep Spartan right wing before it could destroy
him.
Theban triumphs partly inspired the innovations of
King Philip II of MACEDON (reigned 359–336 B.C.E.) who
brought land warfare into its third stage with his develop-
ment of the formation that modern scholars call the pha-
lanx. To make his Macedonian peasantry effective against
Greek hoplites, Philip forged a new-style heavy
infantry—lighter-armored than hoplites and equipped
with an innovative, 13- to 14-foot-long pike, the sarissa.
The phalanx formation consisted of about 9,000 such
infantry, arrayed 16 rows deep, with the first five rows
presenting their pikes forward. On the model of Spartan
organization, Philip’s phalanx was articulated into 1,500-
man battalions, for maneuverability. A well-trained pha-
lanx enjoyed advantages over a hoplite army in terms of
its weapons’ reach and probably its level of fatigue. (The
phalanx men were not crowded together as closely as the
hoplites, nor were they so heavily armored.)
In battle Philip employed the phalanx mainly for
defense—to halt and punish an enemy attack—while
using his cavalry to charge against any gap that opened in
the enemy formation. The phalanx was the anvil; the cav-
alry was the hammer. The superiority of Philip’s tactics
was proven at the Battle of CHAIRONEIA (338 B.C.E.),
where his troops totally defeated a hoplite army of allied
Greeks. The hoplite age was passing, 330 years after the
Battle of Hysiae.
Philip’s innovations helped produce the spectacular
victories won by his royal son, Alexander the Great
(reigned 336–323 B.C.E.). In military history, Alexander
opened the door to further development of cavalry, under
Persian influence and using larger Persian horse breeds.
More important, Alexander’s conquests changed the
social-political basis of ancient warfare, by creating sev-
eral large and wealthy Greco-Macedonian kingdoms
around the eastern Mediterranean. The incessant warfare
of these Hellenistic kingdoms—particularly Ptolemaic
EGYPT against the Levantine SELEUCID EMPIRE (274–168
B.C.E.)—saw the use of huge, unwieldy phalanxes,
upward of 20,000 men. These kingdoms were constantly
trying to perpetuate a Greco-Macedonian soldiering class,
so as to reduce reliance on mercenaries.
When the armies of ROME began to invade the Greek
world, various features of the Roman military made it
immediately superior to the Greek forces. The Romans
fought the Greek phalanxes with their more flexible
legions, with their built-in reserves. Such advances in
warfare, land
361

land warfare organization and tactics led to Rome’s even-
tual conquest of the Mediterranean and other lands.
See also CRETE; DEMOSTHENES (2); LELANTINE WAR;
PHEIDON; PHILIP V; PYRRHUS.
Further reading: Victor Davis Hanson, Hoplites: The
Classical Greek Battle Experience (London: Routledge,
1993); M. M. Sage, Warfare in Ancient Greece. A Source-
book (London: Routledge, 1996); H. van Wees, “Homeric
Warfare,” in A New Companion to Homer, edited by Ian
Morris and Barry Powell (Leiden, Netherlands, E. J. Brill,
1997), 668–693; R. Osgood, S. Monks, and J. Toms,
Bronze Age Warfare (Stroud, U.K.: Sutton, 2000); H. van
Wees, ed., War and Violence in Ancient Greece (London:
Duckworth, 2000); J. A. Thorne, “Warfare and Agricul-
ture. The Economic Impact of Devastation in Classical
Greece,” Greek, Roman, and Byzantine Studies 42 (2001):
225–253; T. Bekker-Nielsen and L. Hannestad, eds., War
as a Cultural and Social Force. Essays on Warfare in Antiq-
uity (Copenhagen: Reitzels, 2001); A. B. Bosworth, The
Legacy of Alexander: Politics, Warfare, and Propaganda
under the Successors (New York: Oxford University Press,
2002); I. G. Spence, Historical Dictionary of Ancient Greek
Warfare (Lanham, Md.: Scarecrow Press, 2002); H. van
Wees, Greek Warfare: Myths and Realities (London: Duck-
worth, 2004).
warfare, naval
In the earliest centuries of Greek his-
tory (ca. 1600–700 B.C.E.), warships served primarily as
troop transports—the troops in question were the oars-
men, who would leave their benches to go ashore as
infantry. Eventually the sea itself became the scene of
fighting, as defending states learned to send out ships to
oppose an oncoming enemy fleet on the water. The histo-
rian THUCYDIDES (1) writes that the earliest remembered
sea battle was fought in about 664 B.C.E. between the
navies of two Greek states, CORINTH and CORCYRA.
Thucydides mentions another early naval battle, around
600 B.C.E., between Phocaean Greeks and Carthaginians
in the western Mediterranean.
Such early sea fights, tactically crude, were probably
conducted as infantry battles on water—that is, the
opposing fleets would crowd together, allowing boarding
parties of spearmen to fight it out hand to hand. But
naval warfare was changed by two developments around
700–430 B.C.E.: the invention and gradual spread of the
superior Greek warship type known as the trireme; and
the acceptance of ramming tactics over boarding tactics,
as a more effective way to destroy the enemy without sus-
taining harm oneself. The famous Greek sea battles of the
400s B.C.E.—such as the Battle of SALAMIS (1) (480
B.C.E.)—featured trireme warships maneuvering to ram
and sink the enemy.
The trireme was invented in response to a specific
challenge: how to fit as many oarsmen as possible into a
vessel that would still be seaworthy. Throughout Greek
history, the oar was the main power source for any war-
ship. Most war vessels carried one midship mast, capable
of hoisting a single square sail; but the mast was not
always used and typically could be removed. The oars-
men powered the ship through battle and in passage
through contrary winds or calms.
The more oarsmen, the greater the power—up to a
point. The practical limit in length for an undecked
wooden ship is about 100 feet; beyond that, the hull is
liable to break apart. In a simple ship design, this 100-
foot limit confined the total number of rowers to about
50—whence the Greek term pentekontoros, or pentecon-
ter, meaning a 50-oared, single-leveled vessel. Images in
vase paintings and other surviving art show penteconters
as resembling Viking longboats, with the oarsmen seated
along one level in the open air. There was no deck—that
is, no layer of planking across the hull’s top. The rowers
sat in double file—two men side by side on each bench,
each man handling his own oar, which projected out (left
or right) through thole-pins above the gunwale.
Around 900–700 B.C.E., Greek shipwrights—proba-
bly copying Phoenician designs—learned to fit more
oarsmen into a 100-foot hull. They did so by laying the
benches at two different levels (still without any deck)
and providing oarports below the gunwales for the lower
row of oars.
This two-leveled type of Greek warship is known by
modern scholars as the bireme. But the real breakthrough
came around 700 B.C.E., with the Greeks’ development of
a three-leveled warship (again, probably based on a
Phoenician model). This was the ship that the Greeks
called the tri¯er¯es (three-rowing or three-fitted) and that is
now called the trireme—the ancient Greek warship par
excellence.
However, the trireme caught on slowly. Penteconters,
cheaper and easier to build, were still being used by some
Greek states as late as the PERSIAN WARS (490–479
B.C.E.). The universal change to trireme navies came after
479 B.C.E.
A trireme typically carried 160 to 170 oarsmen, far
more than prior designs could hold. The oars emerged in
three rows on each side—one above the gunwale and two
below. The added power meant greater speed, hence
greater maneuverability in battle. The ample power also
meant that triremes could take on more weight; therefore,
they carried such array as partial decking fore and aft,
vertical defensive screens, and an overhead central cat-
walk running the length of the vessel. These structures
created room for a contingent of archers and HOPLITES,
who did not row but served purely as ship’s soldiers, to
aim projectiles in battle and fend off enemy boarding
attempts. By the time of the Peloponnesian War, the
number of shipboard hoplites had settled at 10. Including
crew, officers, and soldiers, the trireme might carry 215
men in all.
362
warfare, naval

With its partial decking, the trireme hull could be
built to about 120 feet long. The design was narrow, with
a width at the gunwales of only 12 to 16 feet. There was
scant room for passengers or any cargo aside from drink-
ing water—most food supplies had to come from shore or
from supply ships. A trireme had no accommodations for
eating or resting. Confined to their crowded benches, the
crew could not easily spend a night at sea; to cook and
sleep, they had to camp ashore every night.
This basic restriction applied to all ancient warships
and influenced all Greek naval strategy. A navy could
conduct operations only within range of a friendly har-
bor or beaching place. To fight an offensive naval war, a
state would have to create and maintain forward naval
bases (as SPARTA did against Athenian interests in west-
ern ASIA MINOR in the later PELOPONNESIAN WAR,
413–404 B.C.E.). Relatedly, naval blockades of enemy
harbors tended to be faulty, since fleets could not ride off
the coast day and night.
Ramming tactics favored the faster and more skillful
ship or fleet. The Greek ship’s ram was a wooden post—
sheathed in BRONZE, often styled as a boar’s head—jutting
forward of the prow at water level. The challenge in ram-
ming was to avoid a head-on collision (which could sink
both ships) and instead strike the enemy vessel abeam or
astern. The classic ramming maneuver was called diek-
plous, “going through and out.” When two opposing
fleets moved to battle, each side would typically deploy
in rows abreast. In diekplous, a fleet would suddenly shift
from row-abreast to single-file formation, with ships
prow to stern, and then veer inward, perhaps by
squadrons, to penetrate the enemy’s row-abreast forma-
tion. Proceeding through the enemy line, the attackers
would come around to ram from behind.
Because the diekplous required sea room, a comman-
der wishing to defend against this tactic could seek to
offer battle inside a confined area—as the Greeks did at
Salamis, against a superior Persian fleet. A way to equal-
ize terms further was to try to compel a battle of boarding
tactics—as the Syracusans did in their three victories over
the Athenians inside SYRACUSE’s harbor (414–413 B.C.E.).
A commander intent on boarding tactics might outfit his
ships beforehand with raised platforms to hold more sol-
diers. Generally, the superior-skilled fleets in Greek naval
history sought to force battle on the open sea, where
there was room for ramming by diekplous.
A fleet’s skill and speed depended on crews’ training
and ships’ maintenance (since wooden hulls need peri-
odic drying out, caulking, etc.). The top Greek naval
power of the 400s–early 300s B.C.E. was the city of
ATHENS, with its standing fleet of 200 triremes (ca. 431
B.C.E.) and its elaborate shipbuilding and drydocking
facilities at PIRAEUS. The creator of this navy was the
Athenian statesman THEMISTOKLES, ca. 488 B.C.E. The
heir to Themistokles’ program was the statesman PERIK-
LES (active around 462–429 B.C.E.). Unlike many Greek
states that employed foreign mercenary oarsmen, Athens
employed its lower-income citizens as rowers. This mili-
tary reliance on large number of poorer citizens effec-
tively increased their political power in the DEMOCRACY.
Athens aside, the important navies in Greek history
down to the late 300s B.C.E. belonged to Corinth, Corcyra,
SAMOS, PHOCAEA, AEGINA, CHIOS, LESBOS, and Syracuse.
Sparta, not originally a sea power, developed a navy with
Persian funding in order to defeat Athens in the Pelopon-
nesian War. Among non-Greek peoples, the Phoenicians
(ruled by PERSIA by the mid-500s B.C.E.) were the Greeks’
most dangerous enemies at sea. Farther west, the Greeks’
naval opponents included the ETRUSCANS and those
Phoenician colonists, the Carthaginians.
New navies and naval tactics arose in the later 300s
B.C.E. Partly as a result of ALEXANDER THE GREAT’s stu-
dious contact with powerful Phoenician fleets (332
B.C.E.), Greek shipwrights began building warships larger
than the trireme. There are types called “four-rowing”
(tetr¯er¯es), “five-rowing” (pent¯er¯es), and others, eventually
up to “16,” and even “30” and “40.” Modern scholars
believe that these names describe three-leveled ships con-
taining multiple oarsmen per oar at one or more levels.
The “five” type, usually called the quinquereme, may
have employed two men per oar on the upper two rows,
with one man per oar on the lowest row. The quin-
quereme was favored by Greek and Roman navies of the
HELLENISTIC AGE (300–150 B.C.E.).
The late 300s–200s B.C.E.
saw two Hellenistic
empires battling for control of the eastern Mediter-
ranean—Ptolemaic EGYPT and the dynasty of ANTIGONUS
(1) (based first in Asia Minor, then in MACEDON). The
best-known sea battle of this era is also called the Battle
of Salamis, fought near a different Salamis, on the island
of CYPRUS, in 306 B.C.E. There a fleet of 108 warships
under Antigonus’s son DEMETRIUS POLIORKETES destroyed
140 ships of PTOLEMY (1). This era also saw the rise of
RHODES as a naval and mercantile power.
Ramming remained the primary battle tactic, but a
more remote means of attack emerged in the form of
shipborne catapults, shooting arrows. Too bulky for a
trireme or quinquereme, a catapult might be fitted onto a
merchant ship or onto two warships lashed together. His-
torians report the first use of such naval artillery at
Alexander the Great’s siege of Tyre. Demetrius Poliorketes
used naval arrow-catapults in his Battle of Cyprian
Salamis and at his siege of Rhodes (305–304 B.C.E.). Later
navies of the Hellenistic era probably also employed rock-
throwing catapults.
The deadly use of fire against wooden ships is at
least as old as the Peloponnesian War, when the Syracu-
sans sent out a fire-ship against Athenian vessels in Syra-
cuse harbor (413 B.C.E.). Later, around 190 B.C.E.,
Rhodian warships carried fire-pots—containers of pitch,
set ablaze and then slung by long poles onto nearby
enemy ships. But the more fiendish tactic of shooting
warfare, naval
363

burning naphtha (“Greek fire”) across the water at
enemy vessels was not invented until the late 600s C.E.,
by the medieval Byzantines.
In the second half of the 200s B.C.E., naval control of
the Mediterranean was won by the Romans, who had
copied and adapted the designs and tactics of Hellenistic
and Carthaginian navies.
See also AEGEAN SEA; AEGOSPOTAMI; ARTEMISIUM;
BOSPORUS; CARTHAGE; CORINTHIAN WAR; CYZICUS; DELIAN
LEAGUE; HELLESPONT; HIERON (1); IONIAN REVOLT; KIMON;
KONON; LYSANDER; PHOENICIA; POLYCRATES; ROME; SHIPS
AND SEAFARING; TIMBER; WARFARE, SIEGE.
Further reading: William L. Rodgers, Greek and
Roman Naval Warfare; A Study of Strategy, Tactics, and Ship
Design from Salamis (480 B.C.) to Actium (31 B.C.)
(Annapolis, Md.: United States Naval Institute, 1964); B.
S. Strauss, “Democracy, Kimon, and the Evolution of
Athenian Naval Tactics in the Fifth Century B.C.,” in
Polis and Politics. Studies in Ancient Greek History Pre-
sented to Mogens Herman Hansen on his Sixtieth Birthday,
August 20, 2000, edited by P. Flensted-Jensen, T. H.
Nielsen, and L. Rubinstein (Copenhagen: Museum Tus-
culanum Press, 2000), 315–326; V. Gabrielsen, “Naval
Warfare. Its Economic and Social Impact on Ancient
Greek Cities,” in War as a Cultural and Social Force.
Essays on Warfare in Antiquity, edited by Tønnes Bekker-
Nielsen and Lise Hannestad (Copenhagen: Det Kongelige
Danske Videnskabernes Selskab, 2001), 72–89.
warfare, siege
Siege warfare entails the capture of
forts and fortified cities. For much of Greek history, this
process remained crude. An attacking army might try to
take a site by storm—that is, by massed assault using
scaling ladders. Alternatively, there was siege—the attack-
ers would encircle the enemy walls with earthworks (a
procedure known as circumvallation) and wait to starve
out the defenders or to win treasonous help from within.
The legend of a 10-year-long siege of TROY surely reflects
the frustrations of primitive siege warfare.
By the late 700s B.C.E. the armies of Near Eastern
empires (well in advance of the Greeks) were using
machines and scientific methods to reduce enemy fortifi-
cations. The Greeks, impressed by Persian siegecraft in
the era 546–479 B.C.E., began copying these tactics. These
included use of battering rams to tear open an enemy
wall, siege mounds to bring attackers to the top of a wall,
and miners tunneling under walls. Yet the PELOPON-
NESIAN WAR (431–404 B.C.E.) saw only a few successful
sieges, such as at PLATAEA or BYZANTIUM. Siege was still
largely a waiting game, and a fortress city with a harbor
(such as ATHENS) could almost never be captured with-
out being completely blockaded, by both warships at sea
and troops on land.
A breakthrough came in about 399 B.C.E. with the
Greeks’ development of the catapult. Credit goes to the
engineers of the Syracusan dictator DIONYSIUS (1), who
probably were copying the machines used by their ene-
mies, the Carthaginians. The earliest type of Greek cata-
pult resembled a giant medieval crossbow, set atop a
stand. This wooden device shot a single, six-foot-long
arrow and was typically aimed at troops visible at the
parapet of the enemy wall. Although unable to knock
down walls, the arrow could easily pierce a man’s armor,
hence the Greek name katapelt¯es, “shield-piercer.”
Volleys from multiple catapults provided valuable
“covering fire” for troops conducting siege operations.
Typically the besiegers’ catapults would be perched inside
of siege towers. The siege tower was a wooden structure,
built as tall as the enemy wall and used as a kind of mul-
tistory armored car, with catapults set on internal para-
pets and sighted through portholes. Pushed forward on
wheels, the tower approached the enemy wall gradually,
while engineers prepared a roadbed ahead. Some towers
were apparently designed to be pushed right up to the
city wall, in order to bring up attacking troops on inter-
nal ladders or to employ a ground-level battering ram.
The first recorded use of Greek catapults and siege
towers was at Dionysius’s capture of the Carthaginian
stronghold of Moyta, in western SICILY (397 B.C.E.).
Dionysius’s dramatic successes brought swift imitation
and improvement by other Greek commanders. A more
powerful type of arrow-shooting catapult arose, perhaps
under the Thessalian dictator Jason of Pherae (reigned ca.
385–370 B.C.E.). This new design used the principle of
torsion. Instead of a horizontal, bending wooden bow, the
torsion catapult featured two vertical cylinders of taut
skeining (composed of human hair or animal sinew), set
on either side of the front of a long wooden stock. Into
each skein was slotted one wooden arm, extending out-
ward; the arms’ outer ends were attached to a bowstring.
Winched back, the bowstring brought great tension from
the twisting skeins to the arrow waiting in the groove of
the stock.
Siegecraft in the Greek world reached its mature
stage under the Macedonian king PHILIP II (reigned
359–336 B.C.E.), who successfully coordinated the use of
tower, catapult, and battering ram. Philip’s catapults were
torsion-powered arrow-shooters. It was Philip’s son
ALEXANDER THE GREAT who (among other achievements)
pioneered the use of rock-firing catapults. Alexander’s
“stone-throwers” (lithoboloi or petroboloi) could hurl 170-
pound boulders more than 190 yards, to batter apart
enemy walls. Mounted aboard ships, these deadly
machines helped Alexander to capture the island fortress
of Tyre, in one of history’s monumental sieges, conducted
simultaneously by land and sea (332 B.C.E.).
Stone-throwing catapults were made of wood and
were torsion-powered, looking much like the foregoing
arrow-shooting type. This design remained the basic form
for Greek catapults. (A different design, with one vertical
364
warfare, siege

arm, has been popularized by medieval European artwork
and now represents what most people think of as a cata-
pult. Although probably invented by the Greeks, this type
was used later, by Roman armies.)
Alexander and his successors of the HELLENISTIC AGE
(around 300–150 B.C.E.) were the most ambitious
besiegers the world had yet seen. The Macedonian prince
DEMETRIUS POLIORKETES won his surname (Poliork¯et¯es
means “city besieger”) from his huge—but unsuccess-
ful—siege of RHODEA in 305–304 B.C.E. Demetrius’s
armament included two massive battering rams (iron-
clad treetrunks, perhaps 130 feet long, hung inside
mobile sheds and worked by hundreds of men) and an
armor-plated siege tower called the H¯el¯epolis, or “taker of
cities,” containing nine levels of stone-throwers and
arrow-catapults.
Tactics of defense also improved in this era—with
catapults on city walls shooting flaming projectiles
against wooden siege machines—but generally the advan-
tage had now swung to the besiegers. The Romans of the
late 200s B.C.E. adopted Hellenistic siege tactics and
brought them to new technical heights in conquering the
Mediterranean. In 213–211 B.C.E. the Romans besieged
and captured the Greek fortress city of SYRACUSE, which
200 years before had defied and destroyed a besieging
Athenian army.
See also ROME; SCIENCE; THESSALY; WARFARE, LAND;
WARFARE, NAVAL.
Further reading: J. P. Romane, “Alexander’s Sieges of
Miletus and Halicarnassus,” Ancient World 25 (1994):
61–76; P. B. Kern, Ancient Siege Warfare (Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1999); Duncan B. Campbell,
Greek and Roman Siege Machinery, 399 B.C.–A.D. 363
(Oxford: Osprey, 2003).
wine
An alcoholic beverage produced by controlled
fermentation of grapes, wine remains an important agri-
cultural commodity in the Mediterranean today. The
Greeks’ development of wine-making skills may be
reflected in legends describing the arrival of a newcomer
god, DIONYSUS, lord of viticulture and wine.
The earliest surviving archaeological evidence for
winemaking in ancient Greece is a stone press from a
Minoan villa on the island of CRETE, dating to about 1600
B.C.E., but it appears that the Minoans had been produc-
ing wine for some time already by this date. During the
time of the Minoan and Mycenaean civilizations, wine
played an important role in the economy and recreation
of the Greeks. Archaeologists are uncertain about the ini-
tial introduction of winemaking to ancient Greece; it may
have been brought to CRETE by traders from PHOENICIA,
or it may have arrived over land from the north.
By the 500s B.C.E., the Greeks had perfected their
wine production to the point where Greek wines were an
important trade item, prized throughout the Mediter-
ranean. The Greeks exported wine to such advanced
Eastern kingdoms as EGYPT, while Greek traders in
THRACE, southern Gaul, and elsewhere used wine to
exploit the local populations and to acquire goods
cheaply (much as European fur traders used brandy to
affect the northeast American Indians in the 1600s C.E.).
The hilly terrain of Greece was (and is) well suited to
vine growing, and renowned wines were produced in par-
ticular by some of the islands, including THASOS, CHIOS,
LESBOS,
RHODES,
Lemnos, and Kos. Certain Greek
colonies, such as MASSALIA (modern Marseilles, in south-
ern France), also proved to have ideal conditions for
growing grapes. Wine was made throughout the Greek
world, however, and was cherished by both the peasantry
(as a mode of riotous release, on festival days sacred to
Dionysus) and by the upper classes (as an object of ritu-
alized consumption, at the type of male drinking party
known as the SYMPOSIUM).
In Greece, grapes were harvested in September. Juice
was produced by workers first treading the grapes in vats
and then crushing the remaining pulp in wine presses.
The juice was stored indoors in tubs and allowed to fer-
ment for six months; then it was filtered through cloth
and sealed inside storage jars (amphorai). Unlike modern
winemakers, the Greeks could not halt the natural fer-
mentation process. Greek wines therefore had to be con-
sumed within three or four years. These wines had more
natural sugar than modern wines, and thus more alcohol,
perhaps 18 percent (versus 12.5 percent for most modern
consumer wines).
Not surprisingly, the ancient Greeks customarily
mixed water into their sweet, potent wine just before
drinking—the typical ratio was two or three parts water
to one part wine. Several distinctive Greek POTTERY
forms, including the psychter (cooler) and krater (mixing
bowl), were developed expressly for the chilling and
diluting of wine. Once cooled in a psychter, the straight
wine would be poured into a krater, mixed with water,
and ladled out into drinking cups (kylikes; singular:
kylix). Undiluted wine was considered unhealthy, but
water wine, if imbibed moderately, was viewed as medici-
nal—as wine is still viewed today in some Mediterranean
countries.
See also CELTS; FARMING.
Further reading: Virginia Grace, Amphoras and the
Ancient Wine Trade, rev. ed. (Princeton, N.J.: American
School of Classical Studies at Athens, 1979); Ruth
Palmer, Wine in the Mycenaean Palace Economy (Austin:
University of Texas at Austin, Program in Aegean Scripts
and Prehistory, 1994); Patrick McGovern, Stuart Fleming,
and Solomon Katz, eds., The Origins and Ancient History
of Wine (Philadelphia: Gordon and Breach, 1995); Peter
Franke and Irini Marathaki, Wine and Coins in Ancient
Greece (Athens: Hatzimichalis Estate, 1999); Clementina
Panella and Andre Tchernia, “Agricultural Products
wine
365

Transported in Amphorae: Oil and Wine,” in The Ancient
Economy, edited by Walter Scheidel and Sitta von Reden
(New York: Routledge, 2002), 173–189; Patrick E.
McGovern, Ancient Wine: The Search for the Origins of
Viniculture (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press,
2003).
women
The inferior role of women in ancient Greek
society reminds us that the Greeks remained in some
ways a primitive people. Even in classical ATHENS, at its
height of democratic enlightenment (mid-400 B.C.E.),
women were considered second-class citizens at best. A
female Athenian citizen, protected by law, was far better
off than a slave or a metic (resident alien); but the citizen
woman also was forbidden to own much property, to
inherit in her own name, to vote, or to attend political
debate in the ASSEMBLY. Women might practice humble
trades such as street-cleaning, but this was a sign of hard-
ship, and very few skilled or lucrative trades were open to
women. Instead, a woman was considered to be the ward
of a man—her husband, her father, or her guardian (such
as a brother).
Female SLAVES might run errands in public, but a
respectable woman’s place was in the home—specifically,
in the house’s interior and secluded “women’s chambers.”
There the wife or mature daughter was expected to per-
form—or, if the household was wealthy, to oversee—such
domestic duties as child care, cleaning, and spinning and
weaving. The only crucial public role of citizen women
was to give birth to young citizens for the state.
Of all the major Greek city-states, only warlike
SPARTA granted its citizen women any degree of freedom,
allowing them to own quantities of property and encour-
aging such male-imitative pastimes as girls’ gymnastics.
The unusual freedom of Spartan women probably arose
from their roles as estate managers during the absences of
their soldiering husbands and kinsmen. Spartan women
also had a unique reputation for promiscuity. The
philosopher ARISTOTLE (mid-300s B.C.E.) criticized Spar-
tan society for allowing its women too much freedom and
influence. Of all Greek thinkers, only PLATO, in his dia-
logue The Republic (ca. 360 B.C.E.), could imagine a
utopian society where women and men would be equally
eligible for roles in government.
As with all other social topics from ancient Greece,
the existing evidence for women’s lives comes overwhelm-
ingly from Athens in the 400s–300s B.C.E. This evidence
includes extant stage drama, courtroom speeches, and
archaeological remains such as tombstone inscriptions.
Nothing is known for certain about the role of
women during the era of MYCENAEAN
CIVILIZATION
(around 1600–1200 B.C.E.). But a cautious reading of
Greek MYTH and particularly HOMER’s poems suggests
that Mycenaean baronial society did allow considerable
power to a few highborn ladies. For example, the
queens PENELOPE and KLYTEMNESTRA in the Odyssey are
each shown as managing a kingdom in her husband’s
absence.
The segregation and devaluation of women in Greece
began sometime in the era 1100–700 B.C.E. and may be
connected to two related changes: the emergence of the
Greek city-state, with its wide, citizen-based military
organization, and the idealization of male strength and
beauty, as expressed most fully in institutionalized male
HOMOSEXUALITY. The misogyny expressed by the poets
HESIOD (ca. 700 B.C.E.) and SEMONIDES (late 600s
B.C.E.)—in contrast with Homer’s often charming por-
trayal of women—surely indicates this social shift.
In archaic and classical Greece, around 800–300
B.C.E., women were seen as the opposites or subjugated
366
women
Woman as ideal beauty. This statue of an aristocratic maiden
(kore) was carved in marble ca. 515 B.C.E. and set up as an
offering on the Athenian acropolis. (Alison Frantz Photo-
graphic Collection, American School of Classical Studies 
at Athens)

opponents of men. Male Greek society valued rational
discourse, military courage, and physical endurance and
self-restraint. Women were believed to be irrational, fear-
ful, and ruled by physical desires. One reason why
women were kept secluded at home is that they were
thought liable to sexual seduction (or other mischief) if
they ventured out unescorted. “The highest honor for a
woman is to be least talked about by men, whether in
praise or criticism,” declared the Athenian statesman
PERIKLES in his famous funeral oration of 431 B.C.E.
Only in RELIGION were Greek women allowed to par-
ticipate in public life to any degree. Holy days, such as
the autumn sowing festival of the Thesmophoria, pro-
vided occasions when women were expected to leave the
house and congregate for religious ceremonies. Also, cer-
tain priesthoods were reserved for women, such as the
office of Pythia or priestess of APOLLO at DELPHI. These
religious duties probably date back to a prehistoric belief
in the magical properties of female fertility. Similarly, the
large role played in Greek mythology by such goddesses
as ATHENA or HERA may represent vestiges of a non-
Greek religion, adopted by the first arriving Greek tribes
around 2100 B.C.E.
There is some evidence that female infanticide was
regularly practiced at classical Athens and elsewhere. A
father could choose whether to officially accept a child or
not, and many men might prefer to raise sons, who could
help with the farmwork, inherit the estate, and so on.
Girls had a narrow upbringing. A girl of the middle
and upper classes grew up in the women’s chambers of
the house, perhaps rarely seen by her father. At age seven,
she might start attending a girls’ school, but only long
enough to acquire literacy and numeracy. In various
Greek cities, she might be considered ready for MARRIAGE
by age 14 or even 12. The poet SAPPHO (ca. 580 B.C.E.)
has some poignant verses on the plight of an aristocratic
girl who must go from the beautiful security of childhood
to the strangeness and anxiety of marriage.
Marrying young, women bore children young and
died young. Medical examination of extant skeletons
from ancient Greece suggest that women typically died
around age 36, having borne an average of four children.
The estimated life expectancy for men was 45, but (since
husbands might be 20 years older than their wives) many
wives must have survived their husbands and remarried.
At Classical Athens and elsewhere, a woman’s inheritance
would legally pass to her new husband’s hands at her
remarriage, and so heiresses and widows were in great
demand.
The oppression of women seems to have lightened
somewhat in the changed world of the HELLENISTIC AGE
(around 300–150 B.C.E.). The royal court of ALEXANDRIA
(1), ANTIOCH, and PELLA created a breed of rich, ruling-
class women who were able to influence public and cul-
tural life. These royal examples probably created new
opportunities for other women—at least for wealthy citi-
zen women. A surviving public inscription from CYM¯E
honors a certain Archippe for her public donations (100
B.C.E.), while papyrus documents from Ptolemaic EGYPT
show women to have been active as lessors, creditors, and
debtors much more so than at Athens in prior centuries.
Relatedly, Hellenistic culture placed a new, greater
value on female intelligence and sexuality. The Athenian
philosopher Epicurus (ca. 300 B.C.E.) is said to have
admitted women to his school on equal terms with men.
Female beauty reemerged as an ideal for painters and
sculptors—most famously in the Athenian sculptor PRAX-
ITELES’ celebrated nude statue of the goddess APHRODITE
(mid-300s B.C.E.). In literature, poets such as APOLLONIUS
(ca. 270 B.C.E.) showed a new interest in female psychol-
ogy and male-female romance.
See also ALCMAN; AMAZONS; EPICUREANISM; ERINNA;
EURIPIDES; FUNERAL CUSTOMS; MAENADS; METICS; POLIS;
PROSTITUTES; SCULPTURE.
Further reading: Mary Lefkowitz and Maureen Fant,
eds., Women’s Life in Greece and Rome: A Source Book in
Translation, 2d ed. (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1992); Elaine Fantham et al., Women in the Classi-
cal World: Image and Text (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1994); Riet van Bremen, The Limits of Participa-
tion: Women and Civic Life in the Greek East in the Hel-
lenistic and Roman Periods (Amsterdam: J. C. Gieben,
1996); M. Lightman and B. Lightman, Biographical Dic-
tionary of Ancient Greek and Roman Women. Notable
Women from Sappho to Helena (New York: Facts On File,
2000); D. Miron, “Transmitters and Representatives of
Power. Royal Women in Ancient Macedonia,” Ancient
Society 30 (2000): 35–52; A. Kosmopoulou, “Working
Women. Female Professionals on Classical Attic Grave-
stones,” Annual of the British School at Athens 96 (2001):
281–319; Lloyd Llewellyn-Jones, ed., Women’s Dress in
the Ancient Greek World (London: Duckworth, 2002);
Sian Lewis, The Athenian Woman: An Iconographic Hand-
book (London: Routledge, 2002); S. B. Pomeroy, Spartan
Women (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002); M. Dil-
lon, Girls and Women in Classical Greek Religion (Lon-
don: Routledge, 2002); Diane Bolger and Nancy Serwint,
eds., Engendering Aphrodite: Women and Society in Ancient
Cyprus (Boston: American Schools of Oriental Research,
2002).
wrestling
Among the sports-loving Greeks, wrestling
was a highly popular and well-organized event. Less bru-
tal than BOXING and PANKRATION, the other two major
Greek combat sports, wrestling was considered a valuable
element in a boy’s EDUCATION and military training as
well as an appropriate exercise for well-bred adult men.
Most sizable Greek towns of the classical age contained at
least one palaistra (enclosed wrestling court).
Wrestling was among the most prestigious events at
great athletic festivals such as the OLYMPIC or PYTHIAN
GAMES. In addition to separate competitions for men and
wrestling
367

boys, there were wrestling contests that served as the
final round in the five-event PENTATHLON.
The patron deity of wrestlers was the god HERMES,
who was said to have invented the sport. In fact,
wrestling predates the Greek world, having been prac-
ticed in the ancient Near East. The Greeks adopted the
sport early in their history, maybe in the Mycenaean era
(1600–1200 B.C.E.). Wrestling is described in HOMER’s
poems—in the Iliad, for example, the heroes ODYSSEUS
and AJAX (1) engage in a friendly match (book 23). Other
mythical wrestlers included the hero HERAKLES, who in
the course of his 12th Labor had to grapple the giant
Antaeus to death.
In its rules, the classical Greek sport was much like
modern collegiate free-style wrestling, only tougher.
There were no weight classes for the ancient Greeks—
advantage favored size and weight. Punching was forbid-
den, but other harmful moves, such as strangleholds,
shoulder-throws, or breaking an opponent’s finger, were
allowed.
Like other Greek athletes, wrestlers competed naked
and were typically slicked down with olive oil (which
prevented abrasions but also had a ritualistic signifi-
cance). They competed atop soft ground; practice ses-
sions were generally held in a mud pit, and formal
matches took place on the skamma, a special bed of fine
sand. At grand events, the matches might be held in a sta-
dium full of spectators.
The bout began with the two competitors standing,
facing each other, and ended with a “fall,” when one man
was forced down in such a way that his back, his shoul-
ders, or his chest and stomach touched the ground.
(Alternatively, a man could lose by being thrown off the
wrestling ground.) To win in an official contest, a man
had to gain three falls against his adversary; therefore, a
single match could run to as many as five bouts.
See also SPORT.
Further reading: R. Katzoff, “Where Did the Greeks
of the Roman Period Practice Wrestling?” American Jour-
nal of Archaeology 90 (1986): 437–440; Michael Poliakoff,
Combat Sports in the Ancient World: Competition, Violence,
and Culture (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press,
1987).
writing
The use of written symbols to convey words or
ideas predates the Greeks by many centuries. In the third
millennium B.C.E., well before the start of Greek civiliza-
tion, the Sumerians and other Mesopotamian peoples had
developed a script called cuneiform. The Egyptians of
this era had several forms of writing, including the
famous hieroglyphic pictograms that can still be seen on
inner pyramid walls and other Egyptian artifacts.
The earliest form of writing known from ancient
Greece is one developed in the second millennium B.C.E.
by the MINOAN CIVILIZATION on CRETE; this was a pic-
togram script that modern scholars call Linear A, and it
has not yet been deciphered. By 1400 B.C.E., the Myce-
naean Greeks on the mainland had adapted the Minoan
script and developed their own form of writing, which
scholars refer to as LINEAR B. This was deciphered in
1952 C.E. and recognized as an early form of the Greek
language.
The use of Linear B ended with the collapse of the
MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION around 1200 B.C.E. The inven-
368
writing
Two wrestlers from a statue base, ca. 510 B.C.E. Note the two men’s difference in size; the Greeks observed no weight classes, and
size could be a distinct advantage. (Alison Frantz Photographic Collection, American School of Classical Studies at Athens)

tion of the versatile Greek ALPHABET around 775 B.C.E.
brought new, widespread literacy to the Greek world
and allowed the Greeks to produce a great literary cul-
ture. The emergence of the first Greek literature in the
eighth century B.C.E. is clearly a result of the invention
of this alphabet, allowing scribes to write down stories
that had been composed through a long oral tradition.
The earliest and best-known examples of such stories
are HOMER’s epic poems Iliad and Odyssey, written down
around 750 B.C.E.
The earliest surviving example of Greek alphabetic
script is a verse inscription scratched onto a ceramic cup,
found in a grave at the Greek colony of PITHECUSAE, in
western ITALY, and dated to about 725 B.C.E.: I am the cup
of Nestor and this I say: whoever drinks from me will
instantly be smitten by lovely Aphrodite. This inscription,
coming from what was then the western frontier of the
Greek world, is striking evidence of the spread of the
alphabet among the Greeks within only one or two gen-
erations. General literacy is also indicated by extant graf-
fiti and public inscriptions of the latter 600s B.C.E. from
THERA, CHIOS, and elsewhere. One of the most dramatic
specimens of early Greek writing is the graffito scratched
onto the left leg of a colossal statue of the Egyptian
pharaoh Ramses II at Abu Simbel, 700 miles up the Nile.
Written in about 591 B.C.E. by Greek mercenary soldiers
in the service of Pharaoh Psamtik II, the message (still
visible today) records the names of the expedition’s lead-
ers. It is the earliest known announcement that “Kilroy
was here.”
More typical early Greek writing materials included
clay tablets, wax-coated wooden tablets, or animal skins
that could be pumiced smooth and stitched together to
form a roll. For scratching in clay or wax, a stylus was
used, but animal skins took pen and ink. The pen was
usually a feather quill, and the ink often was a vegetable
mixture. By the 600s B.C.E., papyrus—cheaper and plenti-
ful—had replaced animal skins for Greek writing. The
papyrus plant, which grew only in the Egyptian Nile
delta, had a pith that, when cut into strips, could be
arranged and pressed so as to create a page of paperlike
material. These pages would then be glued together to
form a continuous sheet, normally 30–35 feet in length.
When two wooden pins were fastened to the ends of the
sheet, the result was a scroll, which could be rolled back
and forth around the pins. The papyrus scroll was the
ancient Greeks’ “book” (biblion), the primary tool for
reading and writing. Long works were produced in multi-
ple scrolls, or “books.” Most lengthy writings from the
Greco-Roman world—such as those of Homer or Virgil—
are still divided by modern editors into different books,
even if the whole work is now contained in a single vol-
ume.
The drawback of papyrus as a Greek writing material
was that it came exclusively from Egypt. Around 200
B.C.E., the Greek-Egyptian king Ptolemy V discontinued
papyrus exports, supposedly to hamper the rival book-
collecting of King Eumenes II of PERGAMON. In response,
the Pergamenes invented parchment (Greek: pergamene).
Parchment (or vellum, as it is now known) was made
from cattle, goat, or sheep skin processed in an improved
way so as to smooth it down to papyruslike quality.
Today, important documents such as college diplomas are
still printed on vellum, hence the nickname “sheepskin.”
See also BYBLOS; EPIC POETRY.
Further reading: Deborah Steiner, The Tyrant’s Wit:
Myths and Images of Writing in Ancient Greece (Princeton,
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1994); Roger Woodard,
Greek Writing from Knossos to Homer: A Linguistic Inter-
pretation of the Origin of the Greek Alphabet and the Conti-
nuity of Ancient Greek Literacy (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1997); Barry Powell, Writing and the
Origins of Greek Literature (New York: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 2002); Harvey Yunis, ed., Written Texts and the
Rise of Literate Culture in Ancient Greece (New York: Cam-
bridge University Press, 2003).
writing
369

X
370
Xanthippus (ca. 525–475 B.C.E.) Athenian soldier and
politician who was active in the PERSIAN WARS
Xanthippus (“Yellow Horse”) was born to an aristocratic
family at ATHENS. In the days after KLEISTHENES’ (1)
democratic reforms (508 B.C.E.), Xanthippus began his
political career by marrying Kleisthenes’ niece Agariste.
Uncle and niece both belonged to the noble and ambi-
tious Alcmaeonid clan. Agariste and Xanthippus had
three children, the youngest of whom was the future left-
wing leader PERIKLES, born in 494 B.C.E.
With family wealth and connections, Xanthippus
rose to political prominence in 489 B.C.E., when he prose-
cuted the soldier-statesman MILTIADES on a charge of
deceiving the people. With Miltiades’ downfall, Xanthip-
pus briefly became the foremost politician in Athens, but
was himself soon on the defensive, probably at the hands
of the left-wing leader THEMISTOKLES. In 484 B.C.E. Xan-
thippus was ostracized by the Athenians—one of five
important OSTRACISMs in the 480s B.C.E.
Although the normal term of banishment in an
ostracism was 10 years, Xanthippus was recalled early, in
the state emergency created by the Persian king XERXES’
invasion of Greece (480 B.C.E.). Elected as a general for
the year 479 B.C.E., Xanthippus commanded the Athe-
nian contingent at the land battle of MYCAL¯E, where the
Greeks liberated IONIA. Elected general again, for 478
B.C.E., he led a Greek fleet against the Persian-held
fortress of SESTOS, on the HELLESPONT; after a grueling
siege, Xanthippus captured the city and crucified the
hated Persian governor. Xanthippus returned to great
acclaim at Athens but died within a few years, perhaps
from injuries received at Sestos. By 472 B.C.E. the young
Perikles had inherited his father’s estate (the other son
had died) and was embarked on his own political career.
See also ALCMAEONIDS.
Further reading: T. J. Figueira, “Xanthippos, Father
of Perikles, and the Prutaineis of the Naukraroi,” Historia
35 (1986): 257–279; B. S. Ridgway, “An Issue of Method-
ology. Anakreon, Perikles, Xanthippos,” American Journal
of Archaeology 102 (1998): 717–738; Anthony Podlecki,
Perikles and His Circle (London: Routledge, 1998).
Xenophanes (570–478 B.C.E.) Greek poet and philosopher
Xenophanes was born at Colophon, in ASIA MINOR but
was active in Greek SICILY and southern ITALY. There he
traveled from city to city, presenting his PHILOSOPHY in
verses (some of which have survived as quotations in
later writers’ work). Xenophanes apparently lived into his
90s. He is said to have founded the philosophical school
at the Italian-Greek city of Elea and to have tutored there
the student destined to be the most famous Eleatic
philosopher, PARMENIDES.
It is known that Xenophanes left Colophon at age
25—probably to escape the invading Persians under King
CYRUS (1). Like his contemporary PYTHAGORAS, Xeno-
phanes brought to the western Greeks the rationalism
and sophistication of his native IONIA, and he seems to
have caused an intellectual sensation with his attack on
traditional Homeric theology. “HOMER and HESIOD,”
Xenophanes wrote, “have attributed to the gods every-
thing that is shameful and disgraceful among human
beings—theft and adultery and deceiving each other.”
Xenophanes also expressed the enlightened theory that
humans have created gods in their own image: The
Ethiopians say that their gods are black and snub-nosed;
the Thracians make their gods blue-eyed and red-haired.
“But if cattle or horses or lions had hands,” Xenophanes
wrote, “then horses would portray their gods as horses,

and cattle as cattle.” Rather, said Xenophanes, there is
one god, who is in no way like humans, either in form or
thought. Xenophanes’ concept of God—as a single,
unmoved mover—may have inspired Parmenides’ more
elaborate concept of a unified, motionless Reality.
Remarkably, Xenophanes’ also intuited the nature of
fossils. Observing the impressions of fish and seaweed in
rock quarries near SYRACUSE, Xenophanes supposedly
guessed that that area had once been under water and
that the earth’s land in general is created from, and
returns to, the sea.
A brilliant, dilettantish observer rather than a deep
thinker, Xenophanes stands as an embodiment of Ionian
rationalism and as an intellectual “pollenizer” for Greek
Sicily and Italy. His lifetime saw the violent end of the
Ionian Enlightenment and the emergence of new intellec-
tual centers, among the mainland and western Greeks.
One poignant fragment by Xenophanes gives a brief self-
portrait of a wanderer, dispossessed by the Persians’ con-
quest of his native land: “In winter, as you lie by your fire
after dinner, drinking wine and cracking nuts, speak thus
to the wayfarer at your door: ‘What is your name, my
friend? Where do you live? What is your age? How old
were you when the Persians came?’”
See also PERSIAN WARS; RELIGION.
Further reading: P. J. Bicknell, “Xenophanes’ Account
of Solar Eclipses,” Eranos 65 (1967): 73–77; J. H. Lesher,
trans., Xenophanes of Colophon: Fragments (Toronto: Uni-
versity of Toronto Press, 1992); Jonathan Barnes, ed.,
Early Greek Philosophy, 2d ed. (London: Penguin, 2001).
Xenophon (431–354 B.C.E.) Athenian historian, soldier,
and gentleman
Xenophon wrote several histories and treatises, but he is
best remembered for producing the most exciting memoir
from the ancient world—the Anabasis (“expedition to the
interior”), describing his adventures in leading 10,000
beleaguered Greek mercenary soldiers out of the heart of
the Persian Empire (401–400 B.C.E.). Among Xenophon’s
other surviving work is his valuable but biased history
titled Hellenica (“Greek history”). Beginning at the point
where THUCYDIDES’ (1) history of the PELOPONNESIAN WAR
abruptly breaks off, with the events of 411 B.C.E., Hellenica
recounts the turbulent events of his own lifetime, from the
later years of the war to the rise of THEBES and the destruc-
tion of Spartan hegemony in Greece (411–362 B.C.E.). In
terms of breadth, objectivity, and analysis, Xenophon as a
historian is far inferior to his predecessor Thucydides.
Like other Athenian aristocrats, he showed strong
pro-Spartan sympathies during his life, and these are
reflected constantly in his writings. Nevertheless, his
work remains invaluable because it provides modern
scholars with their primary source of evidence for the
period from the final years of the Peloponnesian War to
the rise of MACEDON in the late fourth century B.C.E.
Born into a rich, aristocratic family at ATHENS,
Xenophon was a contemporary of the philosopher PLATO.
Like Plato, the young Xenophon, although not a deep
thinker, became a disciple of the Athenian philosopher
SOCRATES. Today our most important source of information
about the real-life Socrates (as opposed to the Socrates of
Plato’s scheme) is Xenophon’s memoir titled Memorabilia.
The Peloponnesian War was being waged throughout
Xenophon’s childhood and youth, and—like other Athe-
nian aristocrats—Xenophon was to show strong pro-
Spartan sympathies during his life. He probably
participated in the war’s last years—perhaps in the naval
battle at Arginusae (406 B.C.E.), which looms large in his
Hellenica, and perhaps in CAVALRY patrols outside the city.
Also in these years, he married an Athenian woman,
Philesia, and had two sons, Gryllus (named for
Xenophon’s father) and Diodorus.
In 401 B.C.E., after Athens’s defeat in the war and the
disastrous reign of the THIRTY TYRANTS, Xenophon left his
native city for what was fated to be an absence of 35 years.
As a member of the discredited Socratic circle, he probably
felt uncomfortable in the restored DEMOCRACY. (And, in
fact, within two years the Athenians would condemn and
execute Socrates.) Xenophon went to ASIA MINOR as one of
about 10,000 Greek mercenary HOPLITE soldiers in the ser-
vice of the Persian prince Cyrus but, as it turned out, Cyrus
used this force in his attempt to seize the Persian throne
from his brother, Artaxerxes II. After Cyrus was killed and
his army defeated at the Battle of Cunaxa, near Babylon
(401 B.C.E.), the frightened and demoralized surviving
Greek troops elected Xenophon to lead them the 1,500
miles out of hostile territory. Four months later, the Greeks
finally emerged from the Persian interior, at the Greek
colony of Trapezus, on the southeast coast of the BLACK
SEA. These exploits are recounted in the Anabasis.
In about 399 B.C.E., during Xenophon’s absence, the
Athenians declared him exiled forever; the probable
causes were Xenophon’s pro-Spartanism and prior friend-
ship with Socrates. The following years saw Xenophon
doing military service under the Spartan king AGESILAUS.
During the CORINTHIAN WAR (in which Sparta and
Athens were enemies, 395–386 B.C.E.), Xenophon proba-
bly served against his fellow Athenians. Xenophon
remained a close associate of Agesilaus, whose deeds are
recounted in the Hellenica and in Xenophon’s laudatory
biography Agesilaus.
In around 388 B.C.E. Xenophon and his family were
settled by their Spartan friends at an estate near OLYMPIA.
There Xenophon devoted himself to writing and to the
pursuits addressed in his treatise On Household Manage-
ment. In a spirit of gratitude toward Sparta, he wrote a
laudatory account of the Spartan governmental system,
the Lakedaimonion politeia. Other works of the 380s and
370s B.C.E. include the treatise On Horsemanship (our
only surviving full account from ancient Greece on this
subject) and the Cyropaedia (“Education of Cyrus”), a
Xenophon
371

historical novel that imagines the ideal tutoring received
by the old-time Persian ruler CYRUS (1) (not the Cyrus of
the Anabasis). Some of these works seem to have devel-
oped out of Xenophon’s notes toward the EDUCATION of
his two sons. Another treatise, On Hunting, was previ-
ously attributed to Xenophon but is now considered to
have been written by someone else.
In 371 B.C.E., after Sparta’s defeat at Theban hands at
the Battle of LEUKTRA, the people of ELIS (near Olympia)
rose in defiance of Sparta and reclaimed local lands,
including Xenophon’s estate. Xenophon, then nearly 60,
was eventually allowed by the Athenians to return.
At Athens he lived his last decade or so, finishing the
Hellenica (which ends with a description of the Theban
victory over the Spartans at the second Battle of MAN-
TINEIA in 362 B.C.E.). Xenophon’s own son Gryllus was
killed at this battle, fighting on the Spartan side. On
receiving the tragic news, Xenophon is said to have
replied, “I knew my son was mortal.”
Xenophon rewards modern study because he is the
complete Athenian gentleman. He embodied many of the
values and interests of his social class—soldiering, horse-
manship, estate management, pro-Spartanism (exagger-
ated, in Xenophon’s case), respect for education, and so
on. He had verbal skill (his prose is plain and workman-
like) and a strong interest in right and wrong. However,
his youthful dabbling in PHILOSOPHY clearly had more to
do with Socrates’ dynamic personality and the intellectual
milieu of late-fifth-century B.C.E. Athens than with any
genius of Xenophon’s.
His flaws as a historian are apparent in his failure to
present a full, unbiased account in his magnum opus, the
Hellenica.
Further reading: J. K. Anderson, Xenophon (New
York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1974); Vivienne Gray, The
Character of Xenophon’s Hellenica (Baltimore: Johns Hop-
kins University Press, 1989); P. Georges, Barbarian Asia
and the Greek Experience. From the Archaic Period to the
Age of Xenophon (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1994); J. P. Stronk, The Ten Thousand in Thrace. An
Archaeological and Historical Commentary on Xenophon’s
‘Anabasis,’ books 6, 3–6 and 7 (Amsterdam: Gieben, 1995);
J. Dillery, Xenophon and the History of His Times (London:
Routledge, 1995); G. Hutchinson, Xenophon and the Art of
Command (London: Greenhill Books, 2000); R. Seager,
“Xenophon and Athenian Democratic Ideology,” Classical
Quarterly 51 (2001): 385–397; V. Parker, “Ephorus and
Xenophon on Greece in the Years 375–372 B.C.,” Klio 83
(2001): 353–368; Christopher Nadon, Xenophon’s Prince:
Republic and Empire in the ‘Cyropaedia’ (Berkeley: Univer-
sity of California Press, 2001).
Xerxes (ca. 518–465 B.C.E.) Persian king who led the
failed invasion of Greece in 480 B.C.E.
Our knowledge of Xerxes comes mainly from the ancient
Greek historian HERODOTUS, whose viewpoint is hostile;
he portrays the king as sometimes reflective and aes-
thetic-minded, but also intoxicated by power and capable
of great lust, cruelty, anger, and cowardice. “Xerxes” is
the Greek form of the name, which in Persian sounded
like Khshah-yar-shan and meant “king of kings.” In the
biblical book of Esther, Xerxes is called King Ahasuerus
and is pictured favorably.
As son and heir of the brilliant king DARIUS (1),
Xerxes was about 32 years old when he came to the
throne in late 486 B.C.E. Soon he turned his attention
westward, to resume his father’s conflict with the main-
land Greeks. Various Persian inscriptions of Xerxes’
reign make it clear that he was a pious worshipper of
Ahura Mazda, the Zoroastrian supreme god, and he may
have thought he was on a divine mission to conquer
Greece.
After four years’ preparation, including the spanning
of the HELLESPONT with elaborate twin bridges of boats,
Xerxes led a mighty host—perhaps 200,000 troops and
600 warships—to Europe. Descending through THRACE
and MACEDON, he subdued northern and central Greece,
but his navy was first eroded due to storms and a sea bat-
tle, and then destroyed when Xerxes overconfidently
decided to attack the Greek fleet inside SALAMIS (1) chan-
nel. After the Salamis defeat in late summer of 480 B.C.E.,
Xerxes hurried back to Asia with most of his force, leav-
ing behind a Persian army, which the Greeks smashed at
PLATAEA the following summer.
Little is known of Xerxes’ life afterward. He appar-
ently devoted himself to construction of royal buildings
at Persepolis, the empire’s summer capital, and was assas-
sinated in a palace intrigue. He was succeeded by his son
Artaxerxes I.
To the Greeks, Xerxes supplied the prime living
example of the sin of HUBRIS—insane pride that leads to
divinely prompted self-destruction. The abiding picture
of him in Western tradition (whether true or false) is a
vainglorious emperor who, after a Hellespont storm had
wrecked his boat bridges, ordered his men to punish the
channel by lashing its waters with whips.
See also PERSIA; PERSIAN WARS.
Further reading: H. Sancisi-Weerdenburg, “The Per-
sonality of Xerxes, King of Kings,” in Archaeologia iranica
et orientalis. Miscellanea in honorem Louis Vanden Berghe,
edited by L. de Meyer and E. Haerinck (Ghent, Belgium:
Peeters Presse, 1989), 549–561; B. S. J. Isserlin, “The
Canal of Xerxes. Facts and Problems,” Annual of the
British School at Athens 86 (1991): 83–91; P. R. Bark-
worth, “The Organization of Xerxes’ Army,” Iranica Anti-
qua 27 (1992): 149–167; N. G. L. Hammond and L. J.
Roseman, “The Construction of Xerxes’ Bridge over the
Hellespont,” Journal of Hellenic Studies 116 (1996):
88–107; Pierre Briant, From Cyrus to Alexander: A History
of the Persian Empire (Winona Lake, Ind.: Eisenbrauns,
2002); Philip De Souza, The Greek and Persian Wars,
499–386 B.C. (New York: Routledge, 2003).
372
Xerxes

Z
373
Zancl¯e
This Greek city of northeast SICILY is located
beside the three-mile-wide Strait of Messina, which sepa-
rates Sicily from the “toe” of ITALY. Located on a crescent-
shaped peninsula enclosing a fine harbor, Zancl¯e (now
the modern Sicilian city of Messina), was founded around
725 B.C.E. by Greek settlers from CUMAE and CHALCIS. Its
sister city was RHEGIUM, across the strait.
Zancl¯e’s original settlers were of the Ionian-Greek
ethnic group, but around 490 B.C.E., Zancl¯e was repopu-
lated by settlers of Dorian-Greek identity, commanded by
the powerful tyrant Anaxilas of Rhegium. Chief among
these newcomers were refugees from the Peloponnesian
region of Messenia, which was suffering under Spartan
domination. Anaxilas, whose ancestral home was Messe-
nia, then renamed Zancl¯e as Messana (in the Doric
dialect) or Messene (in Ionic form).
Zancl¯e-Messana eventually became an ally of Syra-
cuse against ATHENS and the Carthaginians in the latter
400s and early 300s B.C.E. In 264 B.C.E. the city was cap-
tured by the Carthaginians—an episode that eventually
brought on the titanic First Punic War between
CARTHAGE and ROME (264–241 B.C.E.). After the Roman
victory, Messana thrived as a Roman ally.
The ancient town of Zancl¯e lies underneath modern
Messina; its location makes archaeological excavation of
the site somewhat difficult. Two Roman cemeteries, one
to the north and one to the southwest, seem to mark the
settlement’s boundaries. A monumental tomb dated to
the late 300s and 200s B.C.E. has been excavated and
restored and is now open to visitors. Remains of the
Greek city plan have also been located, with the streets
arranged in an orthological grid pattern.
See also DORIAN GREEKS, IONIAN GREEKS.
Further reading: D. Ridgway, The First Western
Greeks (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1992);
Gocha Tsetskhladze and Franco De Angelis, eds., The
Archaeology of Greek Colonisation: Essays Dedicated to Sir
John Boardman (Oxford: Oxford University Committee
for Archaeology, distributed by Oxbow Books, 1994); G.
Pugliese Carratelli, ed., The Western Greeks: Classical Civ-
ilization in the Western Mediterranean (London: Thames
and Hudson, 1996); ———, ed., The Greek World: Art
and Civilization in Magna Graecia and Sicily (New York:
Rizzoli, 1996).
Zeno (1)
See STOICISM.
Zeno (2)
See PARMENIDES.
Zeus
The king of all the Olympian gods, Zeus was the
dispenser of divine justice in the universe, according to
Greek RELIGION and MYTH. Zeus was worshipped at least
as early as the Mycenaean era, since the name appears on
LINEAR B tablets dated to 1400 B.C.E., but his cult is prob-
ably even older than that. Unlike many of the Classical
Greek gods, Zeus was truly Greek in origin. He was prob-
ably a Sky Father originally—a weather god and chief
deity—worshipped by the Greek tribes who came south-
ward from the Balkans into the Greek mainland around
2100 B.C.E. In name and function, this primitive Zeus
seems related to celestial father gods of other ancient
Indo-European peoples, such as the Roman Jupiter (Zeu-
pater) and the Germanic Tiu. The name Zeus is also
related to the Greek word dios, “bright.”

Throughout antiquity, Zeus never lost his identity as
a weather god. He is portrayed as sending thunderstorms
against his enemies in HOMER’s epic poem the Iliad (writ-
ten down around 750 B.C.E.), and in art he is often shown
hurling a thunderbolt.
Zeus’s most important function in Greek civilization
was his role as the orderer of the universe. During the
Mycenaean period (1600–1200 B.C.E.), Zeus was the
supreme king over a human society organized around
kings. From his cloud-shrouded palace on top of Mt.
OLYMPUS in THESSALY, Zeus ruled the subordinate gods
and oversaw human events in the mortal world below.
As the age of Greek kings dissolved during the
1100s–900s B.C.E.,
Zeus retained his preeminence,
developing into a kind of chief judge, peacemaker, and
civic god. The poet HESIOD (ca. 700 B.C.E.) involves
Zeus as the lord of justice, and the god’s epithets include
Kosmetas (orderer), Polieos (overseer of the polis—the
city), Soter (savior), and Eleutherios (guarantor of politi-
cal freedom). He maintained the laws, protected suppli-
ants, instituted festivals, gave prophecies (such as at his
important oracle at DODONA), and generally oversaw
most aspects of civilized life. This high moral concep-
tion of Zeus reaches its epitome in the tragedies of the
great Athenian playwright AESCHYLUS—for instance, in
The Suppliants (performed 472 B.C.E.) and in The
Eumenides (458 B.C.E.). By the 200s B.C.E., the Stoic
philosophers tended to consider Zeus the single, univer-
sal deity.
Zeus’s central myths—as recorded primarily by Hes-
iod in his epic poem Theogony—tell how the young Zeus
usurped the heavenly kingdom from his father, CRONUS,
then reorganized this kingdom and defended it against
attacks by monstrous demigods. In the myth, Cronus,
king of the race of TITANS, always ate each of his new-
born children, but baby Zeus was spirited away by his
mother, Rhea, and brought up on the island of CRETE.
Returning, Zeus led a revolt against his father, banished
him, and installed himself as king of a new race of
immortals, many of whom were his own children. As
king of the gods, Zeus ruled the sky; his brothers, POSEI-
DON and HADES, ruled the sea and the Underworld,
respectively.
Zeus and the other gods defended their kingdom
from three separate assaults by the violent offspring of
GAEA (Mother Earth), including the GIANTS, the serpent-
headed TYPHON, and the twin brothers called the
Aloadae, who stacked two other mountains on top of Mt.
Olympus in their attempt to storm the heavens. Such
mythical battles originally may have commemorated the
first Greeks’ conquest of mainland Greece and the subju-
gation of the prior inhabitants’ religion by the invaders’
cult of Zeus.
During the TROJAN WAR (as described in Homer’s
Iliad), Zeus sided with the aggrieved Greek hero ACHILLES
and brought misfortune to the Greeks until Achilles’ quar-
rel with King AGAMEMNON was resolved. Even Zeus had
to yield to FATE, however, and so was unable to save his
mortal son Sarpedon from his preordained death in the
fighting at TROY (Iliad, book 16).
Zeus also had another, more grotesque mythological
dimension, which certain Greek thinkers found puz-
zling or repugnant. For “the father of gods and men” (as
the poet Homer calls him) was quite literally that, inso-
far as his numerous love affairs produced many off-
spring, both human and immortal. With his wife and
sister, the goddess HERA, Zeus fathered the gods ARES,
HEPHAISTOS, and Hebe. His other children included the
deities ATHENA, APOLLO, ARTEMIS, HERMES, and DIONY-
SUS, the hero HERAKLES, produced through extramarital
liaisons with other goddesses and mortal women (often
involving rape or deception). Zeus raped or seduced
several humans, including the Spartan queen Leda
(whom he approached in the form of a swan and who
gave birth to two pairs of twins—CASTOR AND POLY-
DEUCES and HELEN OF TROY and KLYTEMNESTRA), the
Argive princess Danae (whom he visited as a shower of
gold and who bore him the hero PERSEUS [1]), the
Phoenician princess EUROPA (whom he abducted in the
form of a bull and who bore him MINOS and Rhadaman-
thys), and the Trojan prince GANYMEDE (who was
abducted by an eagle, perhaps Zeus in disguise, to
become Zeus’s lover and cupbearer on Mt. Olympus).
The legends of Zeus’s sexual exploits with human
women probably arose during the Mycenaean age, in an
attempt to connect the great god with some noble family’s
genealogy. These myths, however, contained an unsavory
discrepancy, with the god of justice descending to earth
to commit rape and adultery. This incongruity was com-
mented on by intellectuals such as the Ionian philoso-
pher XENOPHANES (latter 500s B.C.E.) and was exploited
in the tragedies of the innovative Athenian playwright
EURIPIDES (latter 400s B.C.E.).
In Greek art, Zeus was often represented as a
bearded, kingly figure in vigorous middle age, frequently
holding a scepter. His weapons were the thunderbolt and
the aegis (a magic cloak or shield, originally imagined as
a storm cloud), and his sacred bird was the eagle. Of the
innumerable shrines throughout the Greek world dedi-
cated to Zeus, probably the most magnificent was the
Doric-style temple built in the mid-400s B.C.E.
at
OLYMPIA. Inside the temple was an immense GOLD-and-
ivory statue of the enthroned god, sculpted by PHEIDIAS
and considered one of the SEVEN WONDERS OF THE World
for its size and grandeur. Olympia was the site of the
greatest athletic festival in antiquity: the OLYMPIC GAMES,
held in honor of Olympian Zeus.
See also PROMETHEUS; STOICISM.
Further reading: Arthur B. Cook, Zeus: A Study in
Ancient Religion (New York: Biblio and Tannen, 1964–1965);
374
Zeus

H. W. Parke, The Oracles of Zeus: Dodona, Olympia, Ammon
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1967); Karl
Kerényi, Zeus and Hera: Archetypal Image of Father, Hus-
band, and Wife, translated by Christopher Holme (London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1976); Hugh Lloyd-Jones, The
Justice of Zeus, 2d ed. (Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1983); K. W. Arafat, Classical Zeus: A Study in Art and
Literature (New York: Oxford University Press, 1990).
Zeuxis
See PAINTING.
Zeuxis
375

Aird, Hamish. Pericles: The Rise and Fall of Athenian
Democracy. New York: Rosen Publishing Group, 2004.
Atchity, Kenneth, ed. The Classical Greek Reader. New York:
Henry Holt and Co., 1996.
Austin, M. M., ed. The Hellenistic World from Alexander to the
Roman Conquest: A Selection of Ancient Sources in
Translation. New York: Cambridge University Press,
1981.
Avery, Catherine B., ed. The New Century Classical Hand-
book. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1962.
Barber, Robin. Blue Guide: Greece. 6th ed. New York: W. W.
Norton, 1996.
Barnes, Jonathan. Aristotle: A Very Short Introduction. Rev. ed.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.
———. Early Greek Philosophy. 2d rev. ed. London: Penguin
Books, 2001.
Beer, Josh. Sophocles and the Tragedy of Athenian Democracy.
Westport, Conn.: Praeger, 2004.
Belozerskaya, Marina, and Kenneth Lapatin. Ancient Greece:
Art, Architecture, and History. Los Angeles: J. Paul Getty
Museum, 2004.
Bérard, Claude, et al. A City of Images. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press, 1989.
Biers, William R. The Archaeology of Ancient Greece: An
Introduction. 2d ed. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press,
1996.
Blanchard, Paul. Blue Guide: Southern Italy: From Rome to
Calabria. 10th ed. New York: W. W. Norton, 2004.
Bloom, Harold, ed. Euripides: Comprehensive Research and
Study Guide. Philadelphia: Chelsea House, 2003.
———. Greek Drama. Philadelphia: Chelsea House, 2004.
Blundell, S. Women in Ancient Greece. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1995.
———. Women in Classical Athens. London: Bristol Classical
Press, 1998.
Boardman, John. Athenian Black Figure Vases. A Handbook.
New York: Thames and Hudson, 1974.
———. Athenian Red Figure Vases: The Archaic Period. A
Handbook. New York: Thames and Hudson, 1975.
———. Greek Sculpture: The Archaic Period. A Handbook.
New York: Thames and Hudson, 1978.
———. Greek Sculpture: The Classical Period. A Handbook.
New York: Thames and Hudson, 1985.
———. Greek Art. New York: Thames and Hudson, 1987.
———. Athenian Red Figure Vases: The Classical Period. A
Handbook. New York: Thames and Hudson, 1989.
———. Greek Sculpture: The Late Classical Period and
Sculpture in Colonies and Overseas. New York: Thames
and Hudson, 1995.
———. The Greeks Overseas: The Early Colonies and Trade.
4th ed. London: Thames and Hudson, 1999.
———. The Archaeology of Nostalgia: How the Greeks Re-
created Their Mythical Past. London: Thames and Hud-
son, 2002.
Boardman, John, and N. G. L. Hammond, eds. The Cambridge
Ancient History: The Expansion of the Greek World, Eighth
to Sixth Centuries B.C., vol. 3, part 3. 2d ed. New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1982.
Boardman, John, et al., eds. The Cambridge Ancient History:
Persia, Greece, and the Western Mediterranean c. 525–479
B.C., vol. 4. 2d ed. New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1988.
Boardman, John, Jasper Griffin, and Oswyn Murray, eds. The
Oxford Illustrated History of Greece and the Hellenistic
World. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001.
Bowra, C. M. Greek Lyric Poetry from Alcman to Simonides.
2d rev. ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 2000.
Bremmer, Jan. Greek Religion. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1994.
Brulé, Pierre. Women of Ancient Greece. Translated by
Antonia Nevill. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press,
2003.
Buckley, Terry. Aspects of Greek History, 750–323 BC: A
Source-Based Approach. London: Routledge, 1996.
Burkert, Walter. Ancient Mystery Cults. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1987.
———. Greek Religion. Translated by John Raffan. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1985.
Burn, Andrew Robert. The Lyric Age of Greece. New York: St.
Martin’s Press, 1960.
———. The Penguin History of Greece. 2d ed. New York:
Penguin Books, 1990.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
376

Bibliography
377
Bibliography
377
Bury, J. B., S. A. Cook, and F. E. Adcock, eds. The Cambridge
Ancient History: Athens 478–401 B.C., vol. 5. New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1964.
———. The Cambridge Ancient History: Macedon: 401–301
B.C., vol. 6. New York: Cambridge University Press,
1964.
Bury, J. B., and Russell Meiggs. A History of Greece to the
Death of Alexander the Great. 4th ed. London: Macmillan,
1975.
Cameron, Pat. Blue Guide: Crete. 5th ed. New York: W. W.
Norton, 1988.
Camp, John M. The Archaeology of Athens. New Haven,
Conn.: Yale University Press, 2001.
Carpenter, Thomas. Art and Myth in Ancient Greece. London:
Thames and Hudson, 1991.
Cartledge, Paul, ed. The Cambridge Illustrated History of
Ancient 
Greece.
Rev. 
ed. 
Cambridge: 
Cambridge
University Press, 2002.
Casson, Lionel. Ships and Seamanship in the Ancient World.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1971.
Cawkwell, George. Philip of Macedon. Boston: Faber &
Faber, 1978.
Ceram, C. W. Gods, Graves, and Scholars: The Story of
Archaeology. Translated by E. B. Garside. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf, 1952.
Childe, Gordon. What Happened in History. 2d ed. Foreword
and footnotes by Grahame Clarke. Baltimore: Penguin
Books, 1964.
Cook, R. M. Greek Painted Pottery. London: Methuen, 1960.
Cotterell, 
Arthur, 
ed. 
The 
Encyclopedia 
of 
Ancient
Civilizations. New York: Mayflower Books, 1980.
Csapo, Eric, and William J. Slater. The Context of Ancient
Drama. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1995.
Dalby, Andrew. Siren Feasts: A History of Food and
Gastronomy in Greece. London: Routledge, 1996.
Davies, J. K. Democracy and Classical Greece. Atlantic
Highlands, N.J.: Humanities Press, 1978.
Demand, Nancy. Birth, Death, and Motherhood in Classical
Greece. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1994.
Detienne, M. Masters of Truth in Archaic Greece. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press, 1996.
Dover, K. J. Aristophanic Comedy. Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1972.
———. Greek Homosexuality. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1978.
———, ed. Ancient Greek Literature. 2d ed. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1997.
Easterling, P. E. Greek and Roman Actors. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2002.
Easterling, P. E., et al., eds. The Cambridge History of Classical
Literature. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1989.
Edwards, I. E. S., et al., eds. The Cambridge Ancient History:
The Middle East and the Aegean Region, circa 1380–1000
B.C., vol. 2, part 2. 3d ed. New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1975.
Edwards, Paul, ed. The Encyclopedia of Philosophy, vols. 1–8.
New York: Macmillan, 1967.
Eisner, Robert. Travelers to an Antique Land: The History and
Literature of Travel to Greece. Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press, 1991.
Ellis, Walter M. Alcibiades. New York: Routledge, 1989.
Errington, R. M. A History of Macedonia.
Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1990.
Evans, J. A. S. Herodotus. Boston: Twayne, 1982.
Fantham, Elaine, et al. Women in the Classical World: Image
and Text. New York: Oxford University Press, 1994.
Ferrari, Gloria. Figures of Speech: Men and Maidens in Ancient
Greece. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002.
Finley, M. I. Early Greece: The Bronze and Archaic Ages. 2d
ed. London: Chatto and Windus, 1981.
———. The Ancient Economy. Rev. ed. Berkeley: University
of California Press, 1999.
Fomara, Charles W., ed. and trans. Archaic Times to the End
of the Peloponnesian War. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1977.
Fomara, Charles W., and Loren J. Samons. Athens from
Cleisthenes to Pericles. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1991.
Fox, Robin Lane. The Search for Alexander. Boston: Little,
Brown, 1980.
Fullerton, Mark D. Greek Art. New York: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2000.
Gagarin, Michael. Early Greek Law. Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1986.
Gantz, Timothy. Early Greek Myth: A Guide to Literary and
Artistic Sources. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1993.
Grady, Ellen. Blue Guide: Sicily. 6th ed. New York: W. W.
Norton, 2003.
Graf, Fritz. Greek Mythology: An Introduction. Translated by
Thomas Marier. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1993.
Graves, Robert. The Greek Myths, vols. 1 and 2. Baltimore:
Penguin, 1955.
Green, J. R. Theatre in Ancient Greek Society. London:
Routledge, 1994.
Green, Peter. Alexander of Macedon, 356–323 B.C. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1991.
———. A Concise History of Ancient Greece. London: Thames
and Hudson, 1979.
Griffin, Jasper. Homer on Life and Death. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1980.
Guthrie, W. K. C. Socrates. New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1971.
Habicht, Christian. Athens from Alexander to Antony.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1999.
Hale, William H. Ancient Greece. New York: American Heri-
tage, 2001.
Halperin, David. One Hundred Years of Homosexuality. New
York: Routledge, 1990.
Hammond, N. G. L. Alexander the Great: King, Commander,
and Statesman. 2d ed. Bristol, U.K.: Bristol Press, 1989.
———. Philip of Macedon.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1994.

———. The Genius of Alexander the Great. Chapel Hill: Uni-
versity of North Carolina Press, 1997.
Hammond, N. G. L., and H. H. Scullard, eds. The Oxford
Classical Dictionary. New York: Oxford University Press,
1970.
Hansen, M. H., ed. The Ancient Greek City-State. Copen-
hagen: Royal Danish Academy, 1993.
———. Studies in the Ancient Greek Polis. Stuttgart, Ger-
many: Franz Steiner Verlag, 1995.
Hanson, Victor Davis. The Western Way of War: Infantry
Battle in Classical Greece. 2d ed. Berkeley: University of
California Press, 2000.
Hare, R. M. Plato. New York: Oxford University Press, 1982.
Harris, Edward, and Lene Rubinstein. The Law and the
Courts in Ancient Greece. London: Duckworth, 2004.
Hignett, C. A History of the Athenian Constitution. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1952.
Holliday, Peter, ed. Narrative and Event in Ancient Art. New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1993.
Hornblower, Simon. Thucydides. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1987.
How, W. W., and J. Wells. A Commentary on Herodotus, vols.
1 and 2. New York: Oxford University Press, 1975.
Hurwit, Jeffrey. The Art and Culture of Early Greece. Ithaca,
N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1985.
Hussey, Edward. The Presocratics. London: Duckworth, 1972.
James, Vanessa. The Genealogy of Greek Mythology: An
Illustrated Family Tree of Greek Myth from the First Gods
to the Founders of Rome. New York: Gotham Books, 2003.
Janson, H. W. History of Art. 6th ed. New York: Harry N.
Abrams, 2001.
Jones, A. H. M. Athenian Democracy. 2d ed. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1986.
———. Sparta. 2d ed. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univer-
sity Press, 1993.
Kagan, Donald. Pericles of Athens and the Birth of Democracy.
New York: Simon & Schuster, 1991.
———. The Peloponnesian War. New York: Viking, 2003.
Kirk, G. S. Homer and the Oral Tradition. New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1976.
———. The Songs of Homer. New York: Cambridge Unive-
rsity Press, 1962.
Knox, Bernard. The Oldest Dead White European Males and
Other Reflections on the Classics. New York: W. W. Norton,
1993.
Konstam, Angus. Historical Atlas of Ancient Greece. New
York: Checkmark Books, 2003.
Konstan, David, and Keith Rutter. Envy, Spite, and Jealousy:
The Rivalrous Emotions in Ancient Greece. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press, 2003.
Lawrence, A. W. Greek Architecture. 5th ed. Revised by R. A.
Tomlinson. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press,
1996.
Lefkowitz, Mary R. The Lives of the Greek Poets. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1981.
Levi, Peter. Atlas of the Greek World. New York: Facts On
File, 1984.
Lewis, David, et al., eds. The Cambridge Ancient History: The
Fifth Century, vol. 5. 2d ed. New York: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1992.
Liddell, H. G., ed. An Intermediate Greek-English Lexicon
(abridgement of the 7th edition of Liddell and Scott’s
Greek-English Lexicon). New York: Oxford University
Press, 1889.
Llewellyn-Jones, Lloyd. Aphrodite’s Tortoise. The Veiled
Women of Ancient Greece. Swansea, U.K.: Classical Press
of Wales, 2003.
Lloyd, G. E. R. Aristotle: The Growth and Structure of His
Thought. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1968.
———. Early Greek Science: Thales to Aristotle. London:
Chatto and Windus, 1970.
———. Greek Science after Aristotle. London: Chatto and
Windus, 1973.
Long, A. A. Hellenistic Philosophy: Stoics, Epicureans, Sceptics.
London: Duckworth, 1974.
Longrigg, James. Greek Medicine: From the Heroic to the
Hellenistic Age: A Source Book. New York: Routledge, 1998.
Luce, J. V. An Introduction to Greek Philosophy. New York:
Thames and Hudson, 1992.
MacDowell, Douglas M. The Law in Classical Athens. Ithaca,
N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1978.
MacKendrick, Paul. The Greek Stones Speak: The Story of
Archaeology in Greek Lands. New York: W. W. Norton,
1962.
Mackie, Hilary. Graceful Errors: Pindar and the Performance of
Praise. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2003.
Martin, Roland. Greek Architecture. Milan, Italy: Electa-
architecture, 2003.
Mattusch, Carol. Classical Bronzes. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell
University Press, 1996.
McCarthy, George E. Classical Horizons: The Origins of
Sociology in Ancient Greece. Albany: State University of
New York Press, 2003.
McDonagh, Bernard. Blue Guide: Turkey: The Aegean and
Mediterranean Coasts. 3d ed. New York: W. W. Norton,
2001.
McGlew, James. Tyranny and Political Culture in Ancient
Greece. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1993.
McLeish, Kenneth. The Theatre of Aristophanes. New York:
Taplinger, 1980.
Meiggs, Russell. The Athenian Empire. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1972.
Meiggs, Russell, and David Lewis, eds. A Selection of Greek
Historical Inscriptions. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1969.
Michelakis, Pantelis. Achilles in Greek Tragedy. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2002.
Miller, Stephen G. Ancient Greek Athletics. New Haven,
Conn.: Yale University Press, 2004.
Morgan, Kathryn, ed. Popular Tyranny: Sovereignty and Its
Discontents in Ancient Greece. Austin: University of Texas
Press, 2003.
Morris, Ian Macgregor. Themistocles: Defender of Greece. New
York: Rosen Publishing Group, 2004.
378
Bibliography

———. Leonidas: Hero of Thermopylae. New York: Rosen
Publishing Group, 2004.
Murray, Oswyn. Early Greece. 2d ed. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1993.
Murray, Oswyn, and Simon Price, eds. The Greek City from
Homer to Alexander. New York: Oxford University Press,
1990.
Nardo, Don. Ancient Greece. San Diego: Kidhaven Press, 2002.
Neils, Jenifer. The Parthenon Frieze. New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2001.
Neils, Jenifer, and John H. Oakley. Coming of Age in Ancient
Greece: Images of Childhood from the Classical Past. New
Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2003.
The New York Times Atlas of the World. New York: Time-Life
Books, 1993.
Ogden, Daniel, ed. The Hellenistic World: New Perspectives.
London: Classical Press of Wales and Duckworth, 2002.
Oldfield, Adrian. Ordered Cities, Ordered Souls: An Introduction
to Greek Political Thought. London: Routledge, 2003.
Ostwald, Martin. From Popular Sovereignty to the Sovereignty
of Law: Law, Society, and Politics in Fifth-Century Athens.
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986.
Paine, Mike. The Pocket Essential Ancient Greece. Harpenden,
U.K.: Pocket Essentials, 2002.
Parton, Sarah. Cleisthenes: Founder of Athenian Democracy.
New York: Rosen Publishing Group, 2004.
Pedley, John. Greek Art and Archaeology. 3d ed. Englewood
Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 2002.
Picard-Cambridge, A. W. Dithyramb, Tragedy, and Comedy.
New York: Oxford University Press, 1962.
Podlecki, A. J. The Life of Themistocles. Montreal: McGill-
Queen’s University Press, 1975.
Poliakoff, Michael B. Combat Sports in the Ancient World.
New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1987.
Pollitt, J. J. Art and Experience in Classical Greece.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1972.
———. Art in the Hellenistic Age. New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1986.
———. Art and Ancient Greece: Sources and Documents. New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1990.
Pomeroy, Sarah B. Goddesses, Whores, Wives, and Slaves: Women
in Classical Antiquity. New York: Schocken Books, 1975.
———. A Brief History of Ancient Greece: Politics, Society, and
Culture. New York: Oxford University Press, 2004.
Powell, Barry. Homer. Malden, Mass.: Blackwell, 2004.
Race, William H. Pindar. Boston: Twayne, 1986.
Randall, Bernard. Solon: The Lawmaker of Athens. New York:
Rosen Publishing Group, 2004.
———. Alexander the Great: Macedonian King and Conqueror.
New York: Rosen Publishing Group, 2004.
Reden, Sitta von. Exchange in Ancient Greece. London:
Duckworth, 2003.
Reeder, Ellen. Pandora: Women in Classical Greece. Baltimore:
Trustees of the Walters Art Gallery, in association with
Princeton University Press, 1995.
Renault, Mary. The Nature of Alexander. New York: Pantheon
Books, 1975.
Rhodes, P. J. A Commentary on the Aristotelian Athenaion
Politeia. New York: Oxford University Press, 1981.
Richter, Gisela M. A. A Handbook of Greek Art. London:
Phaidon Press, 1959.
Ridgway, Brunilde Sismondo. Prayers in Stone: Greek
Architectural Sculpture ca. 600–100 B.C.E. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1999.
Roberts, Jennifer, and Tracy Barrett. The Ancient Greek World.
New York: Oxford University Press, 2004.
Robertson, Alec, and Denis Stevens, eds. The Pelican History
of Music, vol. 1. Baltimore: Penguin Books, 1960.
Robertson, Martin. A History of Greek Art. London: Cambridge
University Press, 1975.
———. The Art of Vase-Painting in Classical Athens.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
Robinson, Eric, ed. Ancient Greek Democracy: Readings and
Sources. Malden, Mass.: Blackwell, 2004.
Roebuck, Derek. Ancient Greek Arbitration. Oxford: Arbitration
Press, 2001.
Rose, H. J. A Handbook of Greek Literature. New York: E. P.
Dutton, 1934, 1961.
———. A Handbook of Greek Mythology. New York: E. P.
Dutton, 1959.
———. Religion in Greece and Rome. New York: Harper and
Row, 1959.
Rose, Martha. The Staff of Oedipus: Transforming Disability in
Ancient Greece. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press,
2003.
de Ste. Croix, G. E. M. The Origins of the Peloponnesian War.
London: Duckworth, 1972.
Salmon, J. B. Wealthy Corinth: A History of the City to 338
B.C. New York: Oxford University Press, 1984.
Samuel, Alan. Greek and Roman Chronology: Calendars and
Years in Classical Antiquity. Munich, Germany: C. H. Beck,
1972.
Scanlon, Thomas. Eros and Greek Athletics. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2002.
Scodel, Ruth. Sophocles. Boston: Twayne, 1984.
Sealey, R. A. A History of the Greek City States, ca. 700–338
B.C. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1976.
Senker, Cath. Everyday Life in Ancient Greece.
North
Mankato, Minn.: Smart Apple Media, 2004.
Sherratt, Andrew, ed. The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Archaeo-
logy. New York: Crown Cambridge University Press, 1980.
Simon, Erika. Festivals of Attica: An Archaeological Com-
mentary. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 2002.
Smith, R. R. R. Hellenistic Sculpture. London: Thames and
Hudson, 1991.
Snodgrass, A. M. Arms and Armour of the Greeks. Ithaca,
N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1967.
Snowden, Frank M., Jr. Blacks in Antiquity: Ethiopians in the
Greco-Roman Experience. Cambridge: Belknap Press/
Harvard University Press, 1970.
Sommerstein, Alan H. Greek Drama and Dramatists. New
York: Routledge, 2002.
Sourvinou-Inwood, Christianne. Tragedy and Athenian
Religion. Lanham, Md.: Lexington Books, 2003.
Bibliography
379

Sparkes, Brian A. Greek Pottery: An Introduction. New York:
Manchester University Press, 1991.
Spence, Iain. Historical Dictionary of Ancient Greek Warfare.
Lanham, Md.: Scarecrow Press, 2002.
Stewart, Andrew. Greek Sculpture: An Exploration, vols. 1 and
2. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1990.
———. Faces of Power: Alexander’s Image and Hellenistic
Politics. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993.
Stillwell, Richard, ed. The Princeton Encyclopedia of Classi-
cal Sites. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press,
1976.
Stockton, David. The Classical Athenian Democracy. New
York: Oxford University Press, 1990.
Stone, I. F. The Trial of Socrates. Boston: Little, Brown, 1988.
Taylour, Lord William. The Mycenaeans. 2d ed. New York:
Thames and Hudson, 1983.
Thomas, Carol G. Citadel to City-state: The Transformation of
Greece, 1200–700 B.C. Bloomington: Indiana University
Press, 1999.
Tsigakou, Fani-Maria. The Rediscovery of Greece: Travellers
and Painters of the Romantic Era. London: Thames and
Hudson, 1981.
Tyrrell, William Blake. The Smell of Sweat: Greek Athletics,
Olympics, and Culture. Wauconda, Ill.: Bolchazy-Carducci,
2004.
Vivante, Bella. Events That Changed Ancient Greece.
Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 2002.
Walbank, F. W., et al., eds. The Cambridge Ancient History:
The Hellenistic World, vol. 7, part 1. 2d ed. New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1984.
———. The Cambridge Ancient History: The Rise of Rome to
220 B.C., vol. 7, part 2. 2d ed. New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1989.
———. The Cambridge Ancient History: Rome and the
Mediterranean to 133 B.C., vol. 8. 2d ed. New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1989.
Walker, Steven F. Theocritus. Boston: Twayne, 1980.
Weidman, Thomas. Greek and Roman Slavery. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1981.
West, M. L. Ancient Greek Music. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1994.
Whitby, Michael, ed. Sparta. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
Press, 2002.
Whitley, James. The Archaeology of Ancient Greece. New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2001.
Wiles, David. Greek Theatre Performance: An Introduction.
New York: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Winnington-Ingram, R. P. Sophocles: An Interpretation. New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1980.
Wood, Michael. In Search of the Trojan War. New York: Facts
On File, 1985.
Zaidman, L. B., and P. S. Pantel. Religion in the Ancient
Greek City. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1992.
Zimmerman, Bernhard. Greek Tragedy: An Introduction.
Translated by Thomas Marier. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1991.
ANCIENT AUTHORS IN GREEK 
AND IN TRANSLATION
Aeschylus. Septem quae supersunt tragoediae. Greek text. 2d
ed. Edited by Denys Page. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1972.
———. The Complete Plays. Translated by Carl R. Mueller.
Hanover, N.H.: Smith and Kraus, 2002.
———. Prometheus Bound. Edited and translated by A. J.
Podlecki. Warminster, U.K.: Aris & Phillips, 2003.
———. Agamemnon. Translated by Philip de May. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2003.
———. The Oresteia. 2d ed. Translated by Simon Goldhill.
New York: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Archilochus et al. Greek Lyric Poetry. Edited and translated
by Willis Barnstone. New York: Schocken Books, 1967.
———. The Penguin Book of Greek Verse. Greek text.
Translated and edited by Constantine A. Trypanis. New
York: Penguin Books, 1971.
———. Greek Lyrics. Edited and translated by Richmond
Lattimore. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981.
———. Greek Iambic Poetry: From the Seventh to the Fifth
Centuries BC. Edited and translated by Douglas E. Gerber.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1999.
Aristophanes. Frogs, Assemblywomen, Wealth. Edited and
translated by Jeffrey Henderson. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 2002.
———. Lysistrata. Translated by Sarah Ruden. Indianapolis:
Hackett Publishers, 2003.
———. Peace. Greek Text. Edited by S. Douglas Olson. New
York: Oxford University Press, 2003.
———. Acharnians. Edited by Charles Platter. Bryn Mawr,
Pa.: Bryn Mawr College, 2003.
Aristotle. Politics. Edited and translated by Ernest Baker.
New York: Oxford University Press, 1946.
———. On the Art of Poetry. Edited and translated by Lane
Cooper. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1947.
———. The Athenian Constitution, The Eudemian Ethics, On
Virtues and Vices. 1952. Greek text. Reprint, translated
by H. Rackham. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press (Loeb Classical Library), 1992.
———. The Nicomachean Ethics. Rev. ed. Translated by J. A.
K. Thomson. Introduction and further reading by
Jonathan Barnes. London: Penguin, 2004.
Arrian. The Campaigns of Alexander. Translated by Aubrey de
Sélincourt. Introduced and notes written by J. R.
Hamilton. New York: Penguin Book, 1971.
Demosthenes. On the Crown. Edited and translated by S.
Usher. Classical Texts Series: Greek Orators, vol. 5.
Warminster, U.K.: Aris & Phillips, 1993.
Euripides. Hippolytus. Bryn Mawr, Pa.: Department of Greek,
Bryn Mawr College, 1980.
———. Hecuba. Translated by Timberlake Wertenbaker.
Woodstock, Ill.: Dramatic, 1996.
———. Euripides’ Medea. Greek text. Commentary in
English by Michelle Kwinter. Bryn Mawr Greek
Commentaries. Bryn Mawr, Pa.: Thomas Library, Bryn
Mawr College, 1999.
380
Bibliography

———. Bacchae. Translated by David Franklin. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2000.
———. Alcestis, Heracles, Children of Heracles, Cyclops.
Translated by Robin Waterfield. New York: Oxford
University Press, 2003.
———. Medea and Other Plays. Translated by John Davie.
London: Penguin Books, 2003.
———. Euripides’ Alcestis. Greek text. Notes and commen-
tary by C. A. E. Luschnig and H. M. Roisman. Norman:
University of Oklahoma Press, 2003.
Herodotus. Herodotus. Greek text. Translated by A. D.
Godley. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press
(Loeb Classical Library), 1981–1982.
———. Histories, Book 1. Greek text. Edited with introduc-
tion and notes by J. H. Sleeman. Bristol, U.K.: Bristol
Classical Press, 2002.
———. Histories. Book IX. Edited by Michael Flower and
John Marincola. New York: Cambridge University Press,
2002.
Hesiod. Theogony and Works and Days. Translated with intro-
duction and notes by M. L. West. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1999.
Homer. The Iliad, vols. 1 and 2. Greek text. Edited and trans-
lated by A. T. Murray. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press (Loeb Classical Library), 1939, 1942.
———. The Iliad. Translated by Robert Fagles. New York:
Penguin Books 1991.
———. The Odyssey, vols. 1 and 2. Greek text. Edited by
W. B. Stanford. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1965.
———. The Odyssey. Translated by Robert Fitzgerald. New
York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1998.
Menander. The Dyskolos. Edited with translation, introduc-
tion, and commentary by Stanley Ireland. Warminster,
U.K.: Aris & Philips, 1995.
Pausanias. Guide to Greece, vols. 1 and 2. Translated with intro-
duction by Peter Levi. New York: Penguin Books, 1979.
Pindar. The Odes of Pindar. Translated by Geoffrey S. Conway.
London: Dent, 1972.
———. New Selected Odes of Pindar. Greek text. Commentary
by Eleanor Dickey and Richard Hamilton. Bryn Mawr,
Pa.: Bryn Mawr College, 1991.
Plato. Gorgias. Translated with introduction by Walter
Hamilton. Harmondsworth, U.K.: Penguin, 1971.
———. Plato’s Crito. Greek text. Commentary and notes by
Gilbert P. Rose. Bryn Mawr, Pa.: Bryn Mawr College, 1981.
———. Plato’s Republic. Translated by B. Jowett. New York:
Modern Library, 1982.
———. Plato’s Symposium. Greek text. Commentary and
notes by Gilbert P. Rose. 2d ed. Bryn Mawr, Pa.: Bryn
Mawr College, 1985.
———. Plato’s Republic.
Greek text. Edited by Lewis
Campbell and Benjamin Jowett. New York: Garland Press,
1987.
———. Plato’s Apology. Greek text. Commentary and notes by
Gilbert P. Rose. Bryn Mawr, Pa.: Bryn Mawr College, 1989.
———. Gorgias: A Revised Text. 2d ed. Greek text. Intro-
duction and commentary by E. R. Dodds. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1990.
———. Euthyphro. Greek text. Introduction and commen-
tary by Chrys Emlyn-Jones. London: Bristol Classical
Press, 1991.
———. Ion; Hippias Minor, Laches; Protagoras. Translated
with commentary by R. E. Allen. New Haven, Conn.:
Yale University Press, 1996.
———. Plato’s Symposium. Translated with introduction
and notes by Avi Sharon. Newburyport, Mass.: Focus/
R. Pullins, 1998.
Plutarch. The Rise and Fall of Athens. Translated and intro-
duced by Ian Scott-Kilvert. New York: Penguin Books,
1960.
———. Plutarch’s Lives, vols. 1–7, 9. Greek text. Translated
by Bernadotte Perrin. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press (Loeb Classical Library), 1968.
———. The Age of Alexander. Translated by Ian Scott-Kilvert.
Introduced by G. T. Griffith. New York: Penguin Books,
1973.
———. Plutarch on Sparta. Translated, introduced, and notes
written by Richard J. A. Talbert. New York: Penguin
Books, 1988.
Sappho et al. Greek Lyric, vol. 1. Greek text. Edited and
translated by David Campbell. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press (Loeb Classical Library),
1982.
Sophocles. The Complete Plays of Sophocles. Translated by
Richard Claverhouse Jebb. Introduced by Moses Hadas.
New York: Bantam Books, 1971.
———. Oedipus Rex. Greek text. Edited by R. D. Dawe. New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1982.
———. Ajax. Translated by H. Golder. New York: 1999.
Stesichorus et al. Greek Lyric, vol. 3. Greek text. Edited and
translated by David Campbell. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press (Loeb Classical Library),
1991.
Thucydides. Historiae, vols. 1 and 2. Greek text. Edited by
Henry Stuart Jones and Enoch Powell. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1960, 1963.
———. The Peloponnesian War. Translated and introduced
by Rex Warner. Baltimore: Penguin Books, 1954.
Xenophon. Conversations of Socrates: Socrates’ Defense,
Memoirs of Socrates, The Dinner Party, The Estate-manag-
er. Translated by Hugh Tredennick and Robin Waterfield.
Edited by Robin Waterfield. New York: Penguin Books,
1990.
———. A History of My Times (Hellenica). Translated by Rex
Warner. Introduced and notes written by George
Cawkwell. New York: Penguin Books, 1979.
———. The Persian Expedition. Translated by Rex Warner.
Introduced and notes written by George Cawkwell. New
York: Penguin Books, 1972.                            
Bibliography
381

Page numbers in boldface indicate
main entries.  Page numbers in italic
indicate photographs.  Page numbers
followed by m indicate maps.  Page
numbers followed by c indicate
chronology entries.
A
abacus 41
Abdera  1
Aenus  8
Anacreon  28
colonization  89
Delian League  105
Demokritos  110
education  117
Protagoras  285
silver  314
slaves  318
Socrates  319
sophists  322
Thrace  349
abortion  66
Academy  xixc, 2
astronomy  55
Athens  60
education  117–118
gymnasium  142
Lyceum  193
mathematics  203
Plato  271, 272
Skepticism  316
Acarnania  2
Aetolia  11
Agesilaos  15
Alcmaeon (1)  20
Ambracia  27
Peloponnesian War  246
Achaea  2–3
Achaeans  3
coinage  88
colonization  88
Corinth  92
Croton  96
Hellën  147
Naupactos  222
Peloponnese  244
Rome  296
Sybaris  331
Achaeans  3
Acharnians (Aristophanes)  xixc,
46
Achilles (Achilleus)  3–4, 160
Aeneas  8
afterlife  12
Agamemnon  13
Ajax (1)  16
Alexander the Great  22
Amazons  27
Andromache  31
Apollo  36
Athena  57
black peoples  66
chariots  83
Diomedes  113
fate  132
Hector  146
Hecuba  146
Hephaistos  151
Homer  159
homosexuality  163
Iphigeneia  169
Jason (1)  174
laws and law courts  188
Memnon  207
Neoptolemos  224
Nereus  224
Odysseus  227
Paris  239
Patroklos  241, 242
Peleus  242
Philoktetes  263
Priam  282
Troilus  355
Trojan War  355
warfare, land  359
Zeus  374
Acragas
Empedokles  121
Gela  137
Gelon  137
Hieron (1)  156
Himera  157
Pindar  267
Sicily  312
Simonides  314
tyrants  357
acropolis  xii, xviiic, xixc, 4, 5, 5. See
also Parthenon
Anacreon  28
architecture  42
assembly  54
Athena  56
Athens  58
Corinth  91
Delian League  105
Dodona  115
Furies  135
Hippias (1)  157
Kleisthenes (1)  180
Kleomenes (1)  181
Kylon  186
Mycenae  215
Pan  237
Panathenaia  238
Parthenon  240
Peisistratus  243
Pergamon  252
Perikles  253
Pheidias  260
Poseidon  277
religion  293
Samos  299
Selinus  308
Sikyon  313
Sparta  325, 328
Taras  335
theater  339
Thirty Tyrants, the  348
Actium  xxc
Adonis  5, 6, 6, 34, 44, 99
adultery  201
Aegean Sea  6
Aeolian Greeks  8
Artemis  49
Asia Minor  52
Athens  60
Attica  61
Black Sea  67
Bosporus  68
Chalcidicë  82
Crete  93
Cyclades  96
Cyrus (1)  101
Daedalus  103
Delian League  105
Delos  105
Dorian Greeks  116
Europe and Asia  130
Greek language  141
Halicarnassus  143
Hellespont  149
Ionian Greeks  168
Lesbos  190
Melos  206–207
Minoan civilization  211
Minos  212
Peloponnese  244
Peloponnesian War  244
Persian Wars  257
Ptolemy (1)  286
Samothrace  300
ships and seafaring  311
Thasos  337
Thera  343
Theseus  346
Thrace  348–349
Troy  356
Aegina  xii, xviiic, 6–7
Abdera  1
Aristophanes  46
Athens  60
Attica  61
coinage  87
colonization  89
geography of Greece  140
Kleomenes (1)  181
Naukratis  222
Peleus  242
Peloponnesian War  245
Periander  252
Perikles  253
Pindar  268
Salamis (1)  298
sculpture  305
Themistokles  342
warfare, naval  363
aegis  57
Aegospotami  xixc, 7–8, 149, 184,
195, 244, 250
Aeneas (Aineias)  8, 8, 34, 113, 188
Aeneid (Vergil)  8
Aenus (Ainos)  8, 89, 105, 314, 349
Aeolian Greeks  8. See also Dorian
Greeks; Ionian Greeks
Aenus  8
Aeolis  8
Dorian Greeks  115
Greek language  141
Hellën  147
Ionian Greeks  168
kinship  179
Kymë  186
Lesbos  190
lyric poetry  194
Mytilene  219
Aeolic capital  42
Aeolis  8–9
Aeolian Greeks  8
Asia Minor  53
Kymë  186
Odysseus  228
Pergamon  251
Aeschines  9, 111, 162, 284
Aeschylus  xvi, xviiic, 9–10
Agamemnon  14
Agathon  14
Apollo  35
Areopagos  43
Aristides  45
Aristophanes  47
Athens  60
Cassandra  77
Catana  78
INDEX
382

Danaus  104
Dionysius (1)  114
Electra  119
Eleusinian Mysteries  120
Euripides  128, 129
Furies  135
Herodotus  155
Hieron (1)  156
Homer  159
hubris  164
Klytemnestra  182
Marathon  200
myth  219
Niobë  226
Orestes  233
Orpheus  234
Perikles  253
Phrynichus  266
Prometheus  283
Salamis (1)  298
Seven against Thebes, the  309
Simonides  314
Sophokles  322
Stesichorus  329
Syracuse  332
theater  338, 339
Zeus  374
Aesop  11
Aetolia  11
Acarnania  2
Calydonian Boar Hunt  75
coinage  88
Demosthenes (2)  112
Diomedes  113
Naupactos  222
Peloponnese  244
Philip V  262
Rome  296
Thessaly  347
Africa. See black peoples; Egypt
afterlife  11–13, 12, 12
Achilles  4
Dionysus  115
Eleusinian Mysteries  120
Epicureanism  124
Etruscans  127
Hades. See Hades
Kerberos  12, 152, 177–178
Orphism  234
Pythagoras  289
religion  293
Tantalus  334
Agamemnon  13, 13–14
Achilles  3
Athena  57
Atreus  61
Cassandra  77
Electra  119
Homer  159
hubris  164
Iphigeneia  169
kinship  179
Klytemnestra  182
Menelaus  208
Mycenae  216
Mycenaean civilization  217
Odysseus  227
Orestes  233
Pelops  250
Stesichorus  329
Tantalus  334
Trojan War  355
Zeus  374
Agamemnon (Aeschylus)  xviiic, 10,
77, 182
Agathokles  14
Gela  137
Pyrrhus  288
Sicily  313
Syracuse  333
Timoleon  352
tyrants  357
Agathon  14–15, 139, 197, 340
Agesilaos  15
Corinthian War  92
Epaminondas  121
Lysander  195
Mantineia  199
Sparta  328
Xenophon  371
Agiad clan  15
agora  15–16, 16
assembly  54
Athens  59
council  93
Hephaistos  151
Hermes  153
laws and law courts  188
Mantineia  199
Marathon  199
Medusa  205
ostracism  235
painting  236
Pella  243
Rhegium  293
Stoicism  330
Thera  344
Agronauts  77
Aineias. See Aeneas
Ainos. See Aenus
Ajax (1) (legendary king of Salamis)
16, 17
Diomedes  113
Hector  146
Jason (1)  174
Odysseus  227
Salamis (1)  298
Trojan War  355
warfare, land  360
wrestling  368
Ajax (2) (warrior)  16, 17, 77
Akragas  17
Alcaeus  17–18
Aeolian Greeks  8
Arion  44
Mytilene  219
Pittacus  269
Sappho  301
Alcestis  18
Alcibiades  18–20
Alcmaeonids  20
chariots  84
Cyzicus  101, 102
Eleusinian Mysteries  120
homosexuality  161
marriage  201
Nikias  225
Olympic Games  231
Peloponnesian War  248, 249
Plutarch  273
Socrates  319
symposium  332
Alcmaeon (1) (mythical hero)  2, 20,
310
Alcmaeon (2). See Croton
Alcmaeonids  20
Herodotus  154
Kleisthenes (1)  179
Kleisthenes (2)  180
Kylon  186
names  221
Perikles  253
Alcman  xviiic, 20–21, 160, 302, 327,
336
Alexander I “the Philhellene”  197
Alexander the Great  xii, xv, xvi, xxc,
21, 21–24, 32
Agathokles  14
Agesilaos  15
Alexandria (1)  25
Alexandria (2)  25
Amazons  27
Antigonus (1)  31
Antipater  33
Aristotle  48
Asia Minor  53
Athens  60
Bactria  64
black peoples  66
cavalry  78, 79
Chaironeia  81
coinage  88
colonization  88, 89
Corcyra  90
Cyprus  99
Cyrene (1)  100
Cyzicus  102
Darius (1)  104
Demetrius Poliorketes  108
Demosthenes (1)  111
Diadochoi. See Diadochoi
Diogenes  113
education  117
Egypt  118
elephants  119
Ephesos  122
Europe and Asia  130
gold  139
Halicarnassus  144
Hellenistic Age  148
Ionia  168
Isokrates  171
Jews  176
Kassander  177
Kimon  178
King’s Peace  178
Knidos  183
Kymë  186
Lydia  194
Lysimachus  196
Macedon  197
Miletus  209
Mytilene  219
Naukratis  222
painting  237
Pella  242
Persia  256–257
Persian Wars  259
phalanx  259
Philip II  261
Phocaea  264
Phoenicia  266
Pindar  268
Plutarch  273
polis  273
Ptolemy (1)  286
Pyrrhus  288
Rhodes  295
Salamis (1)  298
Salamis (2)  299
Samos  300
sculpture  304
Seleucid Empire  306, 307
Seleucus (1)  307
Sestos  309
silver  314
Sinope  315
Skepticism  316
Sparta  328
Thebes  341
Thessaly  347
Thrace  349
trade  353
warfare, land  359, 361
warfare, naval  363
warfare, siege   364
Alexandra. See Cassandra
Alexandria (1) (city in Egypt)  xii, 25
Antioch  32
astronomy  54
Athens  60
Callimachus  74
colonization  89
education  118
Egypt  118
Ephesos  122
Hellenistic Age  148
Homer  159
Jews  176
lighthouse at  xxc
mathematics  203
medicine  204
Mimnermus  210
Naukratis  222
Pergamon  251
Priapus  282
Ptolemy (1)  286
Ptolemy (2) II  286
science  303
the Seven Wonders of the World
310
Syracuse  333
Theocritus  342
women  367
Index
383

Alexandria (2) (cities founded by
Alexander the Great)  24, 25, 64,
89
Almagest (Ptolemy)  55–56
Al Mina  xviic, 25–26, 26, 71
alphabet  xv, xviic, 26
Al Mina  26
Byblos  71
education  117
epic poetry  123
laws and law courts  188
Massalia  202
mathematics  202
myth  219
Phoenicia  265
Rome  295
writing  369
Amazons  26–27
Achilles  4
Artemis  50
Atalanta  56
Bassae  65
Bellerophon  65
Halicarnassus  144
Herakles  152
Parthenon  240
Pheidias  260
Theseus  346–347
Ambracia  27
Acarnania  2
colonization  89
Corinth  91
Demosthenes (2)  112
Epirus  125
Etruscans  127
Peloponnesian War  247
Amphictyonic League  27
Delphi  106
Philip II  261
Phocis  265
Pythian Games  290
Thermopylae  344
Amphipolis  28
Brasidas  69
colonization  89
Demosthenes (1)  111
gold  138
Kleon  182
Peloponnesian War  247–248
Philip II  261
silver  314
slaves  318
Socrates  319–320
Thasos  337
Thrace  349
Amphiraeus  2
amphora (storage jar)  238, 279, 279,
365
amulets  198
Anacreon  28–29
Abdera  1
Eros  126
Hippias (1)  157
lyric poetry  195
Polycrates  274
prostitutes  285
Sappho  302
Simonides  314
Anaxagoras  29, 54, 129, 254, 319
Anaximander  29–30
Anaximenes  30
astronomy  55
Heraclitus  151
Ionia  167
Miletus  209
science  303
Thales  336
Anaximenes  30
Anaxagoras  29
Anaximander  29
Heraclitus  151
Ionia  167
Miletus  209
Parmenides  240
science  303
Thales  336
Andokides  30
Andromache  31, 129, 146
antefix  198
Antichos (1). See Antioch
Antigone  31, 134, 229, 323, 324
Antigone (Sophokles)  xixc, 31, 323
Antigonus (1) (Macedonian general
and dynast)  31–32
Antipater  33
Asia Minor  53
Delos  106
Demetrius Poliorketes  108
Diadochi  112
elephants  119
Kassander  177
Lysimachus  196
names  221
Ptolemy (1)  286
Seleucus (1)  307
warfare, naval  363
Antigonus (2) II (king of Macedon)
197
Antigonus (3) III (king of Macedon)
197
Antioch  xxc, 32
Al Mina  26
Byblos  71
colonization  89
Ephesos  122
Euphorion  128
Hellenistic Age  148
Jews  176
Seleucid Empire  307
Seleucus (1)  308
Syracuse  333
women  367
Antiochos (1) (king of Seleucid
Empire)  32
Antiochos (2) (king of Seleucid
Empire)  32, 33
Aetolia  11
Jews  176
Rome  296
Seleucid Empire  307
Antipater  33
Alexander the Great  22
Antigonus (1)  31
Demetrius Poliorketes  108
Demosthenes (1)  112
Diadochi  112
Kassander  177
Sparta  328
Antiphon  33, 133
The Antiquities of Athens (James Stuart
and Nicolas Revett)  xii
Antony, Mark  xii, xxc
apeiron 29–30
Aphaia, Temple of  xii
Aphrodite  6, 33–34, 34
acropolis  5
Adonis  5, 6
Aeneas  8
Apollo  36
Ares  43, 44
Atalanta  56
Cadmus  73
Corinth  91
Cyclades  96
Cyprus  99
Danaus  104
Diomedes  113
Dionysus  115
Eros  126
Helen of Troy  146
Hephaistos  151
Hermes  153
Hippolytus  158
Jason (1)  175
Knidos  xxc, 183
magic  198
Melos  207
Mt. Olympus  232
Paris  239
Praxiteles  281
prostitutes  285
Pygmalion  287
religion  291, 292
Sappho  301
Selinus  308
ships and seafaring  311
timber  351
women  367
Apollo  35, 35, 36, 276. See also
Delphi
Achilles  3
Aeschylus  10
Aesop  11
Alcaeus  18
Alcestis  18
Amphictyonic League  27
Aphrodite  33
Apollonia  36
Arion  45
Artemis  49
Asklepios  51
Bacchylides  64
boxing  69
Cadmus  73
Cassandra  77
colonization  89
Croesus  95
Cumae  97
Cyrene (1)  100
Cyrene (2)  100, 101
Darius (1)  104
Delos  105, 106
Dionysus  115
Dodona  115
Euripides  129
Helios  147
Hera  151
Heraclitus  151–152
Herakles  152
Hermes  153
Hyacinthos  164
Ion (1)  167
Laocoön  188
Lyceum  193
Lydia  194
medicine  204
Midas  209
Miletus  209
music  213
Neoptolemos  224
Niobë  225
nymphs  226
Oedipus  229
Mt. Olympus  232
Orestes  233
Paris  239
Persian Wars  257
Phocis  264, 265
Pindar  267, 268
Plutarch  273
prayer  282
prophecy and divination  283
Pythagoras  289
Pythian Games  290
religion  291, 292
sacrifice  297
Selinus  308
Sikyon  313
Sparta  325
Thera  343
Theseus  346
timber  351
women  367
Zeus  374
Apollo, Temple of  42, 64
architecture  42
Corinth  91
Syracuse  333
Apollodorus of Athens  36, 77
Apollo Epikourios  xii, 64
Apollonia  36, 89, 91, 166, 252
Apollonius  36–37
Alexandria (1)  25
Aratus (2)  37
Callimachus  74
Circe  86
epic poetry  124
harpies  145
Jason (1)  174
mathematics  202, 203
Medea  203
myth  219
Ptolemy (2) II  286
women  367
384
Index

Apollonius of Pergë  55
Aratus (1) (ruler of Achaea)  2
Aratus (2) (Greek poet and philoso-
pher)  37
Arcadia  37–38
afterlife  12
Artemis  50
Bassae  64, 65
centaurs  80
Elis  120
Epaminondas  121
Greek language  141
Hermes  153
Kleomenes (1)  181
Laconia  187
Mantineia  199
Messenia  208
Orchomenos  232
Pan  237
Peloponnese  244
Seven against Thebes, the  309
Sparta  328
Tegea  335
Thebes  341
timber  351
archaeology  xii, xiv, xvi, 38–39. See
also specific headings, e.g.:
Schliemann, Heinrich
acropolis  4
Al Mina  26
Argos  44
Artemision  51
Athens  58
Atlantis  61
bronze  69
Carthage  76
Corinth  92
Crete  94
Cyprus  99
Delos  105
Delphi  106
Etruscans  127
funeral customs  134
Greek language  141
Knossos  183
Lefkandi  190
Lesbos  190
Lydia  194
Massalia  202
Minoan civilization  211
Mycenae  215, 216
Mycenaean civilization  
216–218
Nemean Games  223
Olympia  230
Olynthos  232
Pella  243
Phoenicia  265
Pithecusae  269
pottery  279
Pylos  287, 288
religion  292
Rhodes  294
ships and seafaring  311
slaves  318
symposium  332
Thebes  340
Thera  343, 344
Archaic Period  xi, xviic–xviiic
Archelaus I  197
Archidamus  15, 39–40, 130, 246
Archilochos  40
Aesop  11
Alcaeus  17
homosexuality  161
lyric poetry  195
Thasos  337
Archimedes  40, 203, 303, 333
architecture  xi, xii, xv, 41–43
Akragas  17
Asia Minor  53
Athena  56
Athens  58
Corinth  91
Corinthian order  41–43, 65, 149
Doric order  16, 17, 41, 42, 42, 64,
65
Ionia  168
Ionic order  41, 41, 42
Parthenon  240
Peisistratus  243
Periander  252
Persian Wars  257
Poseidonia  277
religion  292
Rome  295
sculpture  304
archon  xviiic, 43
Areopagos  43
calendars  74
democracy  110
Solon  320
Themistokles  341
Areopagos  43
Aeschylus  10
archon  43
council  93
Ephialtes  123
Orestes  233
Solon  321
Ares  43–44
Adonis  5
Amazons  27
Aphrodite  34
Areopagos  43
Athena  56
Cadmus  73
Diomedes  113
Eros  126
Hephaistos  151
Hera  151
Mt. Olympus  232
religion  291
Zeus  374
Aretimis, Temple of  xviiic
Argonautica (Apollonius)  145
Argos  xiv, 44
Agamemnon  13
Alcmaeon (1)  20
Arcadia  37
aristocracy  45
Athena  56
Bellerophon  65
chariots  83
Corinth  91
Corinthian War  92
Danaus  103, 104
Diomedes  113
Dorian Greeks  116
Elis  120
geography of Greece  140
helots  150
Hera  151
Io  167
King’s Peace  178
Kleomenes (1)  181
Laconia  187
Lykourgos (1)  194
Mantineia  199
Mycenaean civilization  217
Nemean Games  223
Olympic Games  231
Peloponnese  244
Peloponnesian War  248
perioikoi  254
Perseus (1)  255
Pheidon  260–261
Polykleitos  274
Pyrrhus  288
religion  292
Seven against Thebes, the  309
Sparta  326
Tegea  335
Themistokles  342
Tiryns  352
tyrants  357
warfare, land  360
Ariadne  187
Arion  44–45, 252, 301
Aristarchus of Samous  55
Aristides (Aristeides)  45, 235, 270,
298
Aristion  133
aristocracy  45
Alcaeus  17
Athens  58
Chalis  83
Corinth  91
council  93
democracy  109
Gela  137
Knossos  183
Kylon  186
Mytilene  219
oligarchy  229
Peisistratus  242, 243
Pittacus  269
Samos  299
Solon  321
Sparta  325
Syracuse  332
Thessaly  347
Thucydides (1)  350
tyrants  357
Aristophanes  xixc, 46–47
Aeschylus  10
Agathon  15
Alcibiades  20
Athens  60
Athenspasia  54
democracy  109
Eupolis  128
Euripides  129
Herodotus  154
Kleon  182
Menander  207
Peloponnesian War  245
prostitutes  284
Socrates  319
Sophokles  323
symposium  332
theater  338
Aristotle  xvi, xxc, 47–49. See also
Lyceum
Academy  2
Agathon  14
Alexander the Great  22
astronomy  55
Athens  60
Carthage  76
democracy  109
education  118
Empedokles  121
Epicureanism  124
gymnasium  142
Hippodamus  158
laws and law courts  188
magic  198
medicine  204, 205
metics  209
music  214
oligarchy  229
ostracism  235
Pheidon  259
philosophy  263
Plato  272
religion  293
rhetoric  294
science  303
slaves  317
Solon  320
Sophokles  322
Sparta  325
theater  338, 339
Theophrastus  343
Theramenes  344
women  366
armor  164
Arsinoe II  138
art  xv. See also architecture; theater
fresco  184
frieze  41, 42, 65, 79, 240, 241,
276
Minoan civilization  211
mosaics  242
Muses  212
painting  236–237.  See also
painting
sculpture  304–306.  See also
sculpture
Artemis  49, 50, 276
Aegina  7
Agamemnon  13
Alcman  21
Index
385

Artemis (continued)
Alexander the Great  24
Amazons  27
Anacreon  29
Apollo  35
Artemision  50
Asklepios  51
Atalanta  56
Athena  56, 57
Cadmus  73
Calydonian Boar Hunt  75
Corcyra  90
Delos  105
Ephesos  122
Hera  151
Hippolytus  158
Iphigeneia  169
Klytemnestra  182
Medusa  205
Minoan civilization  211
Niobë  225
Mt. Olympus  232
Orion  234
religion  291, 292
Selinus  308
Sparta  325
statute of  49
Temple of  310
timber  351
Zeus  374
Artemision  xviiic, 50–51
Euboea  127–128
Persian Wars  258
Poseidon  277
Salamis (1)  298
Simonides  314
Themistokles  342
Thermopylae  344
artifacts  xii
Asclepius  322
Asia Minor  xiv, xv, xviic, xxc, 51–53,
52m
Abdera  1
Achaeans  3
acropolis  4
Aegean Sea  6
Aegina  7
Aenus  8
Aeolian Greeks  8
Agesilaos  15
Alcaeus  17
Alcman  20
Alexander the Great  22, 23
Alexandria (2)  25
Amazons  26
Anacreon  28
Anaxagoras  29
Anaximander  29
Anaximenes  30
Andromache  31
Antigonus (1)  31
Antioch  32
Antiochos (2)  33
Apollo  35, 36
Aratus (2)  37
architecture  42
Aristotle  47
Artemis  49
astronomy  55
Bellerophon  65
Black Sea  67
Bosporus  68
bronze  69
Callinus  75
Celts  80
chariots  83
Chersonese  84
Chios  84
coinage  87
colonization  88
Corinthian War  92
Crete  93
Croesus  95
Cumae  97
Cyprus  99
Cyrus (1)  101
Cyzicus  101
Delphi  107
Demetrius Poliorketes  108
Diadochi  112
Dionysus  114
Dorian Greeks  116
Ephesos  122
Eretria  126
Erinna  126
Etruscans  127
Europe and Asia  130
gold  138, 139
Greek language  141
Halicarnassus  xxc, 23, 53, 116,
143–144, 154, 182, 310
Hecataeus  145
Hector  146
Hellenistic Age  148, 149
Hellespont  149
Heraclitus  151
Herodotus  154
Hesiod  155
Hippocrates (1)  157
Homer  159
homosexuality  161
Ionia. See Ionia
Ionian Revolt. See Ionian Revolt
Ionian Sea  169
iron  170
Isokrates  171
Jews  175
Kallias  177
Kimon  178
King’s Peace  178
Knidos. See Knidos
Kymë  186
Lesbos  190
Leukippos  191
Lydia. See Lydia
Lysimachus  196
Sea of Marmara  200
Massalia  201
mathematics  203
Midas  209
Miletus. See Miletus
Mimnermus  210
Mycalë  xviiic, 167, 214–215,
259, 275, 370
Mycenaean civilization  216–218
Niobë  225
Pausanias (2)  242
Peloponnesian War  244, 249
Pelops  250
Pergamon. See Pergamon
Periander  252
Persia  256
Persian Wars  257
Philip II  262
Phocaea  264
Pithecusae  269
Pittacus  269
Polycrates  274
Poseidon  275
Praxiteles  281
Priapus  282
Ptolemy (1)  286
Ptolemy (2) II  287
religion  292
Rhodes  294
Rome  296
Samos  299
Samothrace  300
sculpture  306
Seleucid Empire  307
Seleucus (1)  307, 308
Sinope  314
slaves  318
Sparta  328
Tantalus  334
Thales  336
Themistokles  342
trade  353
Trojan War  355
Troy. See Troy
Typhon  357
tyrants  357
Xenophanes  370
Xenophon  371
Asklepios  51
acropolis  5
architecture  43
Epidaurus  125
Hippolytus  158
medicine  204
Philoktetes  263
Aspasia  53–54, 185, 254
assembly  54
Aeschines  9
Aetolia  11
Alcibiades  19
Antiphon  33
Areopagos  43
Athens  58
Chios  85
council  93
democracy  109–110
Demosthenes (1)  111
Four Hundred, the  133
Isokrates  171
Kimon  178
Kleisthenes (1)  180
Kleon  182
Long Walls, the  193
metics  209
Miltiades  210
Mytilene  219
ostracism  235
Peisistratus  243
Peloponnesian War  246
Perikles  253
Persian Wars  258
rhetoric  294
Socrates  320
Solon  321
Sparta  326
theater  339
Themistokles  342
Thucydides (1)  350
Thucydides (2)  351
women  366
astrolabe  56
astronomy  54–56
Anaxagoras  29
Aratus (2)  37
mathematics  202
Pythagoras  289–290
science  303
Thales  336
Atalanta  56, 75, 174, 309
Athena, Temple of  xii
acropolis  4
architecture  43
Athena  56
Athena (Athene)  56–57
Aegina  7
Aeschylus  10
Ajax (2)  16
Aphrodite  33
archaeology  39
Artemis  50
Athens  58
Bellerophon  65
Cadmus  73
calendars  74
Cassandra  77
Diomedes  113
farming  131
food and meals  132–133
Greek language  141
Hephaistos  151
Herakles  152
Homer  160
Laocoön  188
Medusa  205
Nausicaa  222
Nikë  224
Odysseus  228
Mt. Olympus  232
Orestes  233
Panathenaia  238
Paris  239
Parthenon  240
Perseus (1)  255
Pheidias  260
Poseidon  277
Prometheus  283
religion  291, 292
sculpture  306
386
Index

Selinus  308
ships and seafaring  311
Sounion  324
Sparta  325
statue of  57
Tegea  335
Telemachos  336
timber  351
women  367
Zeus  374
Athena Nikë, Temple of  5
architecture  42
Athens  60
Nikë  224
Athena Parthenos  xixc, 27
Athens  xi, xii, xiv, xvi, xviiic, xixc,
58–60
Academy  2
acropolis  4
Adonis  5
Aegina  7
Aegospotami  7, 8
Aeschines  9, 111, 162, 284
Aeschylus  10
agora  15, 16
Alcibiades. See Alcibiades
Alexander the Great  24
Alexandria (1)  25
alphabet  26
Anacreon  28
Andokides  30
Antipater  33
Antiphon  33
archon  43
Areopagos  43
Argos  44
Aristides  45, 235, 270, 298
Aristophanes  46
Artemision  50
Asklepios  51
astronomy  55
Athena  56
Athenspasia  53
Attica. See Attica
Bacchylides  63
Black Sea  67
Boeotia  68
Bosporus  68
Brasidas  69
Byzantium  71
Chaironeia  81
Chersonese  84
Chios  85
coinage  87
colonization  89
Corcyra  90
Corinth  91
Corinthian War  92
council  93
Cronus  96
Cyclades  98
Cyprus  99
Daedalus  103
Darius (1)  104
Delian League  105
Delos  105, 106
Delphi  106
deme  107
Demeter  108
Demetrius Poliorketes  108–109
democracy  109
Demosthenes (1). See
Demosthenes (1)
Demosthenes (2). See
Demosthenes (2)
Diogenes  113
Dionysus  115
Draco  xviiic, 58, 116, 188, 321
education  117
Eleusinian Mysteries  119
Elis  120
Ephialtes  43, 93, 122–123, 178,
180, 253
Epicureanism  124
Eretria  126
Eros  126
Euboea  127
Euripides  129
farming  131
Four Hundred, the. See Four
Hundred, The
funeral customs  134
Gaea  136
gold  138
Gorgias  139
geography of Greece  140
Harmodius and Aristogeiton  144
Hellenistic Age  148
Hellespont  149
Hephaistos  150
Hermes  153
Herodotus  154
Hippias (1). See Hippias (1)
Hippodamus  158
Hippolytus  158
Homer  159
homosexuality  160, 162
hoplite  164
Ion (1)  167
Ion (2)  167
Ionia  167
Ionian Greeks  168
Ionian Revolt  169
iron  170
Isaeus  170
Isokrates. See Isokrates
Jason (1)  175
Kallias  xixc, 105, 177
Kimon. See Kimon
King’s Peace  178
kinship  179
Kleisthenes (1). See Kleisthenes
(1)
Kleomenes (1)  181
Kleon  181, 182
Knidos  183
Konon  184
Kritias. See Kritias
Kylon  20, 58, 185–186, 206, 321
laws and law courts  188
Lelantine War  190
Long Walls, the  193
Lyceum  193
lyric poetry  195
Mantineia  199
Marathon  199, 200
Megara (1)  206
Melos  206
Menander  207
metics  209
Miltiades  178, 200, 210, 257,
370
monuments in  59m
music  214
Mycenaean civilization  216
Mytilene  219
names  221
Naupactos  222
Naxos (2)  223
Nikias. See Nikias
oligarchy  229
Olynthos  232
Orchomenos  233
Orestes  233
Orphism  234
ostracism  235
Pan  237
Panticapaeum  239
Parmenides  239
Pausanias (2)  242
Peisistratus. See Peisistratus
Peloponnese  244
Peloponnesian War. See
Peloponnesian War
Periander  252
Perikles. See Perikles
Persian Wars  257
Philip II  261
philosophy  263
Phocis  264
Pindar  267
Piraeus. See Piraeus
Pittacus  269
Plataea  269
Plataea, Battle of   270
Plato  271
polis  273
pottery  280
prostitutes  284
Protagoras  285
Ptolemy (2) II  286
Rhegium  293
rhetoric  294
Rhodes  294
Salamis (1)  298
Samos  299
Samothrace  301
Second Athenian League. See
Second Athenian League
Selinus  308
Sestos  309
Seven Sages, the  310
ships and seafaring  311
Sicily  313
silver  314
Simonides  314
Sinope  315
Skepticism  316
slaves  317
Socrates  319
Solon  320, 321
sophists  321
Sophokles  322
Sounion  324
Sparta  324
Stoicism  330
symposium  332
Syracuse  332, 333
talent  334
Thasos  337
theater  339
Themistokles. See Themistokles
Theophrastus  343
Theramenes  344
Thermopylae  345
Theseus  345
Thirty Tyrants, the. See Thirty
Tyrants, the
Thucydides (1). See Thucydides
(1)
Thucydides (2)  221, 254, 267,
349, 351
timber  351
trade  353
tyrants  357
warfare, naval  363
warfare, siege   364
women  366
Xanthippus. See Xanthippus
Xenophon. See Xenophon
Zanclë  373
Atlantis  61, 343
Atlas  61, 75, 77, 153, 353
atomoi (atoms)  111, 191, 303
Atreus  13, 44, 61, 216, 250, 334
Atropos  132
Attica  xviiic, xixc, 61–62
Athens  58
deme  107
Euboea  127
Greek language  141
Kleisthenes (1)  180
Marathon  199
Poseidon  275
Procrustes  282
Salamis (1)  297
sculpture  305
Solon  320
Sounion  324
Theseus  345
ax, two-headed  187
B
The Baccae (Euripides)  128, 129
Bacchylides  63–64
Egypt  118
Hieron (1)  156
Pindar  267
Simonides  314
Syracuse  332
theater  339
Bactria  21, 64, 88, 307, 308
Bassae (Bassai)  42, 64, 65
Bellerophon  27, 65, 65
Index
387

Bible (Hebrew)  xvi
Bibliotheca (Apollodorus of Athens)
36
biblos 71
birth control  66
bisexuality  331
black-figure pottery  xviiic, 280
black peoples  66–67, 207. See also
Egypt; Memnon; Nubia
Black Sea  xviic, 67
Amazons  26
Apollonia  36
Apollonius  37
Asia Minor  52
Bosporus  68
Byzantium  71
Chersonese  84
colonization  88
Cyzicus  101
Diogenes  113
Europe and Asia  130
Hecataeus  145
Hellespont  149
Herodotus  154
Ionia  167
Ionian Greeks  168
Iphigeneia  169
Jason (1)  174
Lelantine War  190
Sea of Marmara  200
Megara (1)  206
Miletus  209
Panticapaeum  239
Peisistratus  243
Peloponnesian War  249
Perikles  253
Sestos  309
Sinope  314, 315
trade  353
Blegen, Carl  288, 356
Boeotia  xiv, xixc, 67, 68
Aeolian Greeks  8
Aetolia  11
Agesilaos  15
Amphictyonic League  27
artwork of  67
Athens  60
Attica  61
cavalry  78
Chaironeia  81, 82
chariots  83
clay figure from  304
Corinthian War  92
Demosthenes (1)  111
Dorian Greeks  116
Epaminondas  121
Eros  126
Euboea  127
farming  131
Greek language  141
Hesiod  155
Iphigeneia  169
Jason (1)  174
Kimon  178
King’s Peace  178
Lesbos  190
Leuktra  191
Locris  192
Lysander  195
Minyans  212
Muses  212
Mycenaean civilization  217
Orchomenos  232–233
Peloponnesian War  246
Persian Wars  258
Phocis  264
Plataea  269–270
Plutarch  273
Thebes  340–341
Thermopylae  345
warfare, land  360
Bosporus  68
Asia Minor  52
Black Sea  67
Byzantium  71
Darius (1)  104
Jason (1)  175
Sea of Marmara  200
Peloponnesian War  249
Persian Wars  257
boxing  68–69
education  117
Olympic Games  231
pankration  238
pentathlon  251
sport  329
wrestling  367
boys
education  117
gymnasium  142
homosexuality  161, 162
Sparta  327
warfare, land  361
Brasidas  28, 69, 182, 206, 247
bronze  69, 70
Antioch  32
Argos  44
Artemision  51
Bronze Age  70
cavalry  78
Chalis  82
chariots  83
coinage  87
Corcyra  90
Crete  94
Cumae  97
Cyprus  99
Dorian Greeks  116
Etruscans  127
farming  131
gold  139
hoplite  163
Ionia  167
iron  170
Jason (1)  175
Jews  175
jockey  231
Marathon  200
Minoan civilization  211
Mycenaean civilization  218
phalanx  259
Pheidias  260
Pithecusae  269
Polykleitos  274
Praxiteles  281
religion  292
Rhodes  295
sculpture  304–306
Sinope  314
Sparta  325
statute  70
trade  353
warfare, land  360
warfare, naval  363
Bronze Age  xv, xviic, 70–71
Al Mina  26
Crete  94
kinship  179
marriage  201
Mycenaean civilization  216
myth  218
Pylos  288
Troy  356
Bull of Marathon  346
Busiris  67
Byblos  6, 71, 265
Byzantium  71–72
Abdera  1
Alcibiades  19
Aristides  45
Bosporus  68
Callimachus  74
colonization  89
Darius (1)  104
Delian League  105
Demosthenes (1)  111
Ionian Revolt  169
Sea of Marmara  200
Peloponnesian War  244, 249
Perikles  254
Persian Wars  259
Philip II  262
Second Athenian League  306
Thrace  349
warfare, siege   364
C
Cadmus (Kadmos)  73
Ares  44
Dionysus  114
Europa  130
Jason (1)  175
Seven against Thebes, the  309
Thebes  340
Caesar, Julius  92
calendars  73–74
Callias. See Kallias
Callimachus (Kallimachos)  74–75
Alexandria (1)  25
Apollonius  37
Aratus (2)  37
myth  219
Ptolemy (2) II  286
Theocritus  342
Callinus (Kallinos)  75, 122, 195,
213, 358
Calydonian Boar Hunt  56, 75, 242
Calypso  75, 85, 226, 228
Canaanites  265
Candace  xv
Carrey, Jacques  xii
cart  280
Carthage  76
Agathokles  14
Akragas  17
Alcibiades  19
Gelon  137
Himera  157
Massalia  202
Philip V  262
Phoenicia  265
Rome  296
Selinus  308
Sicily  312, 313
Syracuse  332, 333
Zanclë  373
caryatid  76, 76–77
Cassander. See Kassander
Cassandra (Kassandra, Alexandra)
13, 16, 77, 129, 182
castanets  198
Castor and Polydeuces  77–78
afterlife  12
Akragas  17
Jason (1)  174
Klytemnestra  182
Leda  189
Locri  192
Pindar  267
Samothrace  300
ships and seafaring  311
Zeus  374
Catana  78, 156, 223, 312
catapult  364–365
cattle  131
cavalry  78–80
Alexander the Great  21, 23
Aristophanes  46
Boeotia  68
Chaironeia  81
Demetrius Poliorketes  109
hoplite  164
Lydia  194
Marathon  200
Peloponnesian War  249
phalanx  259
Philip II  261
Plataea, Battle of   270
Plato  271
Socrates  320
Thebes  340
Thessaly  347
warfare, land  359, 360
Xenophon  371
Celts  xv, 80
Byzantium  71
Massalia  202
Pergamon  251
Phocaea  264
Thermopylae  345
trade  353
centaurs  80–81
Bassae  65
Giants  138
388
Index

Halicarnassus  144
Herakles  153
Ixion  173
Olympia  230
Parthenon  240
Sounion  324
Cerberus. See Kerberos
Chaironeia (Chaeronea)  xxc, 81, 82
Alexander the Great  22
Boeotia  68
cavalry  79
Demosthenes (1)  111
Isokrates  171
Philip II  262
Thebes  341
warfare, land  361
Chalcidicë  82
Aristotle  47
Chalis  83
colonization  89
Demosthenes (1)  111
Ionian Greeks  168
Macedon  197
Olynthos  232
Periander  252
Philip II  261
Potidaea  277
timber  351
Chalcis  xv, xviic, 82, 83
alphabet  26
Aristotle  48
Athens  58
bronze  70
colonization  88
Eretria  125
Euboea  127
Euphorion  128
geography of Greece  140
Hesiod  155
homosexuality  161
iron  170
Lefkandi  190
Lelantine War  190
Naxos (2)  223
Pithecusae  269
Rhegium  293
Zanclë  373
chariots  83–84
Alcibiades  19
Bacchylides  63–64
farming  131
Lelantine War  190
Olympic Games  231
Chersonese  84
Athens  58
colonization  89
Lysimachus  196
Peisistratus  243
Thrace  349
chicken  132
child birth  50
children  201, 204, 221, 367
Chilon  84, 310, 328
Chimera  65
Chios  84–85
Asia Minor  52
Darius (1)  104
Delian League  105
education  117
Homer  159
Ion (2)  167
Ionia  167
Ionian Revolt  169
Isokrates  171
Lelantine War  190
medicine  204
Naukratis  222
warfare, naval  363
Peloponnesian War  246
Second Athenian League  306
slaves  318
wine  365
writing  369
Chiron  81
chiton 86
choral poetry  266
chorus  339
Christianity  xvi, 124, 152, 176
Cimon. See Kimon
Circe (Kirke)  85–86
Calypso  75
magic  198
Medea  203
Odysseus  228
Penelope  251
Skylla  317
Trojan War  355
cities, origins of names for  xv
citizenship  xviiic
birth control  66
marriage  201
ostracism  235
prostitutes  284
Sparta  326–327
classical archaeology  xii–xiii
classical period  xi–xii, xvi, xviiic–xxc
clay  xiv
clay figure (from Boeotia)  304
clay tablets  192, 216
Cleisthense. See Kleisthenes
Cleomenes. See Kleomenes
Cleon. See Kleon
Cleopatra (Kleopatra) (dynastic
female name)  86
Cleopatra (of Egypt)  xii, xxc, 86
cleruchies  89
cloak  86
clothing  86, 87
Clotho  132
Clytaemnestra. See Klytemnestra
Cnidus. See Knidos
coinage  xi, xv, xviiic, 87–88
Aegina  7
Bactria  64
Bellerophon  65
Cyprus  99
four-drachma  21
iron  170
Sea of Marmara  200
Minoan civilization  211
Rome  295
silver  314
Sparta  328
talent  334
trade  353
colonization  88–89
Aeneas  8
Alexandria (2)  25
Apollonia  36
Asia Minor  53
Athens  58
Chalis  82
Cumae  97
Delphi  107
Eretria  125
Euboea  127
Europe and Asia  130
geography of Greece  140
Italy  171
Lelantine War  190
Sea of Marmara  200
Megara (1)  206
Miletus  209
Naxos (2)  223
Panticapaeum  239
Phocaea  264
Phoenicia  265
Pithecusae  269
Samos  299
ships and seafaring  311
Sinope  314, 315
Colossus of Rhodes  xxc, 295, 310
columns
architecture  41–43
Bassae  65
caryatid  76, 76, 77
Corinthian order  149
Doric order  16, 42
Ionic order  41
comedy  xv, 338, 339
Constantinople  72
contraception. See birth control
Copernicus  55
copper  33
Corcyra (Kerkyra)  xviic, 89–90
Agathokles  14
Apollonia  36
colonization  89
Corinth  91
Epidamnos  124
Etruscans  127
Ionian Sea  169
Medusa  205
Peloponnesian War  246
Periander  252
Perikles  254
Potidaea  278
Pyrrhus  288
ships and seafaring  311
Thucydides (1)  350
warfare, naval  362
Corfu  xiv
Corinna (Korinna)  68, 90
Corinthian order  41–43, 65, 149
Corinthian War  xixc, 92–93
Aegina  7
Agesilaos  15
Andokides  30
Corinth  92
King’s Peace  178
Knidos  183
Konon  184
Lysander  195
Orchomenos  233
Persian Wars  259
Sparta  328
Thebes  341
Xenophon  371
Corinth (Korinthos)  xiii, xviiic, xxc,
91–92
Achaea  3
Aegina  7
Agesilaos  15
Ambracia  27
Aphrodite  33
Apollonia  36
Argos  44
Arion  44
aristocracy  45
Athens  58, 60
Chalis  82
Chilon  84
coinage  87
colonization  88
Corcyra  89
Corinthian War  92
Diogenes  113
Dorian Greeks  116
Epidamnos  124
Eretria  126
Etruscans  127
geography of Greece  140
Greek language  141
iron  170
Isthmian Games  171
King’s Peace  178
Kleomenes (1)  181
Kypselos  186
Labyrinth  187
Medea  203
Medusa  205
Megara (1)  206
Oedipus  229
oligarchy  229
painting  236
Peisistratus  243
Peloponnese  244
Peloponnesian War  246, 248
Periander  252
Perikles  254
Persian Wars  258
Pheidon  261
Plataea, Battle of   270
Poseidon  275
prostitutes  285
rhetoric  294
Seven Sages, the  310
Sicily  312
Sisyphus  315
slaves  318
Solon  321
Sophokles  323
Sparta  328
Syracuse  332
Index
389

Corinth (continued)
Timoleon  352
Tiryns  352
trade  353
tyrants  357
warfare, naval  362
council  93
agora  15
Areopagos  43
aristocracy  45
assembly  54
Athena  56
Athens  59
calendars  74
deme  107
democracy  110
Four Hundred, the  133
Kleisthenes (1)  180
laws and law courts  188
Solon  321
Sparta  325, 326
Thirty Tyrants, the  348
Cratinus. See Kratinus
Crete  xi, xiv, 93–95, 94m
Aegean Sea  6
archaeology  39
Artemis  50
Atlantis  61
bronze  69
Bronze Age  70
Cronus  96
Cyclades  96
Cyrene (1)  100
Daedalus  103
Dorian Greeks  116
Europa  130
Gela  137
Gortyn  139
climate and landscape of Greece
140
Greek language  141
helots  150
Herakles  152
Knossos  183, 184
Labyrinth  187
Linear B  192
Melos  206
Minoan civilization  210–211
Minos  212
Mycenaean civilization  216, 217
perioikoi  254
pottery  279
ships and seafaring  311
Thera  343
Theseus  346
wine  365
writing  368
Zeus  374
crimes  188
Critias. See Kritias
Croesus (Kroisos)  95, 95
Bacchylides  63–64
Cyrus (1)  101
Delphi  107
Ephesos  122
gold  139
Ionia  168
Lydia  194
Midas  209
Miletus  209
Cronus (Kronos)  96
Aphrodite  34
Crete  95
Furies  135
Gaea  136
Giants  138
Hera  151
Hesiod  155
Phoenicia  265
Titans  352
Zeus  374
Croton (Kroton)  96–97
Achaea  2
Castor and Polydeuces  78
colonization  88
Darius (1)  104
Italy  171
Locri  192
Polycrates  274
Sybaris  331
Cumae (Kume)  97
Apollo  35
Chalis  82
colonization  88
Etruscans  126
Hieron (1)  156
Italy  171
Pindar  268
Pithecusae  269
Rome  295
Syracuse  332
Zanclë  373
Cupid  126
curse tablets  199
Cyclades  97–98
Delos  105
gold  139
climate and landscape of Greece
140
Greek language  141
Ionian Greeks  168
Melos  206–207
Minoan civilization  211
Perseus (1)  255
pottery  279
Semonides  308
Simonides  314
Thasos  337
Thera  343
Cyclops  98, 228, 275
Cylon. See Kylon
Cyme. See Kymë
Cynics  98–99, 113
Cyprus  99
Adonis  6
Aphrodite  33
Apollo  36
Aristides  45
bronze  69
Byblos  71
colonization  88
Corinthian War  92
Demetrius Poliorketes  109
Greek language  141
Ionian Revolt  169
iron  170
Kimon  178
King’s Peace  178
Mycalë  215
Mycenaean civilization  218
Persian Wars  259
pottery  279
Ptolemy (1)  286
Pygmalion  287
religion  292
Salamis (2)  299
trade  353
Trojan War  355
Cypselus. See Kypselos
Cyrene (1) (Kyrene) (Greek city in
North Africa)  100
Apollonia  36
Callimachus  74
colonization  89
Cyrene (2)  100
Dorian Greeks  116
mathematics  203
myth  218
Pindar  267
Thera  343
Cyrene (2) (Kyrene) (mythical
nymph)  100–101
myth  218
nymphs  226
Pindar  267
Cyriac of Ancona  xii
Cyrus (1)  101
Abdera  1
Anaximander  30
Asia Minor  53
Chios  85
Ionia  168
Jews  175
Knidos  183
Kypselos  186
Lesbos  191
Lydia  193
Miletus  209
Persia  256
Persian Wars  257
Phocaea  264
Xenophon  372
Cyrus (2) (prince of Persia)  371
Cyzicus (Kyzikos)  101–102
Alcibiades  19
Asia Minor  53
astronomy  55
colonization  89
Sea of Marmara  200
Peloponnesian War  249
D
Daedalus (Daidalos)  103, 184, 187,
212
dagger  217
Daidalos. See Daedalus
Damokles  103
Danaids  12, 167
Danaus  103–104, 118, 145
dance  212
Darius (1) I (king of Persia)  104
Aegina  7
Aeschylus  10
Bosporus  68
Cyzicus  101
Herodotus  155
Hippias (1)  157
Ionian Revolt  168
King’s Peace  178
Kleisthenes (1)  180
Kleomenes (1)  181
Marathon  199
medicine  204
Miltiades  210
Persia  256
Persian Wars  257
Polycrates  274
Sestos  309
Thasos  337
Xerxes  372
Darius (2) III (king of Persia)  xxc,
22–24, 119, 249
Dark Age  xi, xviic, 104–105
Athens  58
chariots  84
Euboea  127
farming  131
funeral customs  133
Lefkandi  189, 190
religion  292
warfare, land  360
death penalty  188
decoration  67
Delian League  xviiic, 105
Abdera  1
acropolis  4
Aegina  7
Aenus  8
Alcibiades  19
Aristides  45
Asia Minor  53
Athens  60
Byzantium  71
Chalcidicë  82
Chalis  83
Chersonese  84
Chios  85
Cyclades  98
Cyzicus  101
Delos  105
democracy  110
Egypt  118
Ephesos  122
Eretria  126
Euboea  128
Halicarnassus  143
Ionia  168
Kimon  178
Kleon  182
Knidos  183
Kymë  186
Melos  206
Miletus  209
Mycalë  215
390
Index

Mytilene  219
Olynthos  232
Peloponnesian War  244
Perikles  253
Phocaea  264
Potidaea  277
Rhodes  294
Samos  299
Samothrace  301
Second Athenian League  306
Sestos  309
Sinope  315
Sophokles  322
Sparta  328
Thasos  337
Themistokles  342
Thera  343
Thucydides (2)  351
Delos  xviiic, 105–106
Apollo  35, 36
Artemis  49
Cyclades  96
Delian League  105
Rhodes  295
Delphi  xiii, 106–107
Aesop  11
Amphictyonic League  27
Apollo  35
Cadmus  73
Celts  80
colonization  89
Croesus  95
Cyrene (1)  100
Delos  105
Demosthenes (1)  111
Dionysus  115
Dodona  115
Gelon  137
gold  139
Herakles  152
Hippias (1)  157
Kleisthenes (2)  180
Kleomenes (1)  181
Locris  192
Lydia  194
Massalia  202
Midas  209
Oedipus  229
Olympia  230
Orestes  233
painting  236
Pausanias (2)  242
Persian Wars  257
Philip II  261, 262
Phocis  264
Pindar  267
Plutarch  273
Potidaea  278
prophecy and divination  283
Pythian Games  290
religion  293
sculpture  306
Sikyon  313
Socrates  319
Sophokles  323
Theseus  346
Tyrtaeus  358
women  367
deme  103, 107, 180, 209
Demeter  107–108, 108, 120
Adonis  5
afterlife  13
Amphictyonic League  27
Attica  62
Cronus  96
Dionysus  114
Eleusinian Mysteries  119–120
Gaea  136
names  221
Mt. Olympus  232
Persephone  255
Plataea, Battle of  270
religion  291
Tantalus  334
Demetrius Poliorketes  xvi, 108–109
Agathokles  14
Antigonus (1)  31, 32
Athens  60
Cyprus  99
Diadochi  112
Lysimachus  196
Ptolemy (1)  286
Pyrrhus  288
Rhodes  295
Salamis (2)  299
Seleucus (1)  308
warfare, naval  363
warfare, siege   365
democracy  xv, xvi, xixc, 109–110
Aeschylus  9
Akragas  17
Alcibiades  19
Alcmaeonids  20
Areopagos  43
Argos  44
Aristophanes  46
Aristotle  48
Asia Minor  53
assembly  54
Athens  58
Corcyra  90
Cyrene (1)  100
Delian League  105
deme  107
Empedokles  121
Epidamnos  124
Eupolis  128
Euripides  129
Four Hundred, the  133
funeral customs  134
Halicarnassus  143
Harmodius and Aristogeiton  144
Hieron (1)  156
Hippias (1)  157
hoplite  164
Ionia  168
Ionian Revolt  169
Kleisthenes (1)  179, 180
Kleomenes (1)  181
Kritias  185
laws and law courts  188
Lysander  195
Lysias  195
Mantineia  199
Marathon  199
Megara (1)  206
Miletus  209
Miltiades  210
oligarchy  229
ostracism  235
Peisistratus  243
Peloponnesian War  245
Perikles  253
Persian Wars  257
Pindar  267
Plato  271
polis  273
rhetoric  294
Rhodes  295
Samos  299
silver  314
Sinope  315
Socrates  319, 320
Solon  320
Sparta  325, 328
Syracuse  332
Taras  334
Thasos  337
Thebes  340
Themistokles  341
Thessaly  347
Thirty Tyrants, the  348
Thucydides (2)  351
tyrants  357
warfare, naval  363
Xenophon  371
Demokritos (Democritus)  110–111
Abdera  1
Anaxagoras  29
Anaximenes  30
Empedokles  121
Epicureanism  124
Leukippos  191
science  303
Demosthenes (1) (Athenian orator)
xvi, xxc, 111–112
Aeschines  9
Athens  60
Chaironeia  82
democracy  109
Isaeus  170
marriage  201
Olynthos  232
Philip II  261
Potidaea  278
prostitutes  285
rhetoric  294
Demosthenes (2) (Athenian general)
112
Acarnania  2
Aetolia  11
Ambracia  27
Euripides  129
Kleon  182
Megara (1)  206
Peloponnesian War  247, 249
Pylos  287
Diadochoi  112
Alexander the Great  24
Antigonus (1)  31
Byzantium  71
coinage  88
Demetrius Poliorketes  108
Diodorus Siculus  112
Kassander  177
Lysimachus  196
Ptolemy (1)  286
Rhodes  295
Salamis (2)  299
Samos  300
Seleucid Empire  307
Seleucus (1)  307
dialectic method  272
diekplous 363
Diodorus Siculus  22, 112, 261
Diogenes  98, 113, 315
Diomedes  113
Aeneas  8
Aphrodite  34
Athena  57
Odysseus  227
Philoktetes  263
Seven against Thebes, the  
309
warfare, land  359
Dionysius (1) (dictator of Syracuse)
xixc, xxc, 113–114
Catana  78
Croton  96
Damokles  103
Isokrates  171
Locri  192
Naxos (2)  223
Plato  272
Rhegium  293
Sicily  313
Syracuse  333
theater  340
tyrants  357
warfare, siege   364
Dionysius (2) II (ruler of Syracuse)
xxc, 333
Dionysus (god)  114–115
afterlife  13
Alexander the Great  22
Anacreon  29
Arion  45
Aristophanes  47
Athens  59
Cadmus  73
coinage  88
Cyclades  96
Delphi  106
Euripides  129
Hephaistos  150
Kratinus  185
lyric poetry  195
maenads  198
mask of  114
Midas  209
names  221
nymphs  226
Mt. Olympus  232
Orpheus  234
Orphism  234
Index
391

Dionysus (continued)
Pan  237
Pella  242
Praxiteles  281
religion  291, 292
satyrs  302
Silenus  313
symposium  332
theater  339
Thera  344
Thrace  348
timber  351
wine  365
Zeus  374
Dionysus, Theater of  5, 314
Distaff, The 126
dithyramb (choral song)  339
Dodona  115, 125, 283, 340, 374
dolphin  45
Dorian Greeks  115–116. See also
Aeolian Greeks; Ionian Greeks
Aeolian Greeks  8
Akragas  17
Apollo  36
Arcadia  38
Athens  58
bronze  69
Catana  78
Corinth  91
Crete  94
Cyclades  98
Cyrene (1)  100
Gela  137
Gortyn  139
Greek language  141
Halicarnassus  143
Hellën  147
helots  150
Herakles  153
Ionian Greeks  168
iron  170
kinship  179
Knidos  182
Knossos  183
Laconia  187
Locris  193
lyric poetry  194
Megara (1)  206
Melos  206
Messenia  208
Mycenae  216
Mycenaean civilization  218
myth  218
Naxos (2)  223
Peloponnese  244
Peloponnesian War  248
Rhodes  294
Sicily  312
Sparta  325
Thera  343
Doric order  16
Akragas  17
architecture  41, 42
Bassae  65
columns  42
temple  64
dowry  14, 201
drachm  87
Draco  xviiic, 58, 116, 188, 321
drinking party. See symposium
E
earthworks  364
education  117–118
Academy. See Academy
Athens  60
homosexuality  162
Lyceum. See Lyceum
music  214
Perikles  253
sophists  322
Sparta  327
sport  329
wrestling  367
Xenophon  372
Egypt  xi, xv, xxc, 118
Aegina  7
Alcaeus  18
Alexander the Great  21
Alexandria (1). See Alexandria
(1)
Antigonus (1)  31
Antiochos (2)  33
black peoples  66, 67
Byblos  71
Callimachus  74
Cleopatra  xii, xxc, 86
climate and landscape of Greece
140
coinage  88
colonization  88, 89
Cyclades  98
Cyprus  99
Danaus  103
Darius (1)  104
Demokritos  110
Diadochi  112
Europe and Asia  130
farming  131
gold  138
Halicarnassus  144
Hecataeus  145
Hellenistic Age  148, 149
Herodotus  154
Homer  159
Ibycus  166
Io  167
Ionia  167
Jews  176
Knossos  183
Lesbos  190
Macedon  197
mathematics  203
Memnon  207
Menander  207
Minoan civilization  211
Mycenaean civilization  216, 217
Naukratis  118, 222, 285, 301
Periander  252
Persia  256
Persian Wars  258
Pithecusae  269
Ptolemy (1). See Ptolemy (1)
Ptolemy (2) II. See Ptolemy (2) II
Pyrrhus  288
Samos  299
Samothrace  301
Sappho  301
sculpture  305
Seleucid Empire  307
Seleucus (1)  307
the Seven Wonders of the World
310
silver  314
Solon  321
Thales  336
Thera  344
trade  353
warfare, land  361
wine  365
women  367
ekstasis 114
Electra (Elektra)  14, 119, 182, 233
Electra (Sophokles)  xixc
Elements (Euclid)  203
elements, theory of  121
elephants  24, 119, 288, 307, 359
Eleusinian Mysteries  119–120, 120
afterlife  13
Alcibiades  19
Attica  62
Demeter  108
Orphism  234
Samothrace  300
Elgin, Lord (Thomas Bruce)  xii, 241
“Elgin marbles”  xii
Elis  120–121
Herakles  152
homosexuality  162
Mantineia  199
Messenia  208
Olympia  230
Olympic Games  231
Peloponnese  244
Peloponnesian War  248
Skepticism  316
sophists  322
Sparta  328
Empedokles  xixc, 121
afterlife  13
Akragas  17
Olympic Games  231
Orphism  234
Pythagoras  289
science  303
Epaminondas  121
Agesilaos  15
Arcadia  37
Boeotia  68
Leuktra  191
Mantineia  199
Messenia  208
Philip II  261
Thebes  341
warfare, land  361
Ephesos  122
Alcibiades  19
architecture  42
Artemis  49
Asia Minor  53
Callinus  75
coinage  87
Delian League  105
Demetrius Poliorketes  109
Heraclitus  151
Hipponax  158
Ionia  167
Ionian Revolt  169
Peloponnesian War  249
the Seven Wonders of the World
310
slaves  318
theater  340
Tyrtaeus  358
Ephialtes  122–123
Areopagos  43
council  93
Kimon  178
Kleisthenes (1)  180
Perikles  253
ephor  84, 123, 310, 325, 326
epic poetry  xv, 123–124
Apollonius  37
Callimachus  74
Herodotus  154
Hesiod. See Hesiod
lyric poetry  194
music  213
Mycenaean civilization  216
myth  218
Sophokles  323
Trojan War  355
Epicureanism  124
afterlife  11
Athens  60
Cynics  98
Demokritos  111
education  118
Lyceum  193
philosophy  263
religion  293
science  303
Skepticism  316
Stoicism  330
Epidamnos  90, 124, 166, 252
Epidaurus  125
architecture  43
Asklepios  51
Peloponnese  244
Peloponnesian War  246
Periander  252
Perikles  254
theater at  338, 340
Thucydides (1)  350
Epidemics (Hipporates (1))  204
Epirus  125
afterlife  12
Ambracia  27
Andromache  31
Corcyra  89
Dodona  115
Dorian Greeks  116
Epidamnos  124
Illyris  166
392
Index

Neoptolemos  224
Philip II  261
Pyrrhus  288–289
Taras  335
Thessaly  347
epitaphs  134
Eratosthenes  203
Erechtheion (Athens)  76, 76
Eretria  xviic, 125–126
Chalis  82
colonization  88
Darius (1)  104
Euboea  127
geography of Greece  140
Ionian Revolt  169
iron  170
Lefkandi  190
Lelantine War  190
Marathon  199
Megara (1)  206
Peisistratus  243
Persian Wars  257
Pithecusae  269
Erinna  126
Erinues. See Furies
Eristratus  205
Eros  126
acropolis  5
Alcibiades  18
Anacreon  29
Ares  44
magic  198
Ethiopia  66–67, 207
Etruscans  126–127
Aegina  7
alphabet  26
Carthage  76
colonization  88
Corinth  91
Cumae  97
Ganymede  136
Hieron (1)  156
iron  170
Italy  171
Periander  252
Phocaea  264
Pindar  268
Pithecusae  269
pottery  279
Rome  295
sport  329
Sybaris  331
trade  353
warfare, naval  363
Euboea  127–128
Artemision  50–51
Boeotia  67
bronze  69
Corinthian War  92
Delian League  105
Eretria  125–126
Euphorion  128
farming  131
Four Hundred, The  133
Hellespont  149
Ionian Greeks  168
Ionian Sea  169
Lefkandi  189
Lelantine War  190
Peloponnesian War  249
Perikles  253
Persian Wars  258
terra-cotta cart from  280
Euclid  203, 304
Eudoxus  55, 202, 203
Euphorion  128
Eupolis  54, 128, 340
Euripides  xvi, xixc, 128–129
Aeschylus  9
Agathon  14
Alcestis  18
Anaxagoras  29
Andromache  31
Apollonius  37
Aristophanes  46
Athens  60
Dionysius (1)  114
Dionysus  114
Electra  119
Eros  126
Hecuba  146
Hippolytus  158
Ion (1)  167
Iphigeneia  169
Klytemnestra  182
Macedon  197
maenads  198
magic  198
Medea  204
music  214
myth  219
Orestes  233
religion  293
Sophokles  322–324
theater  339
Zeus  374
Europa  73, 129–130, 130, 212
Europe and Asia  68, 130, 149
Eurypontid clan  15, 130
Evans, Sir Arthur  212
exposure of infants  66, 318
F
fables  11
farming  xiv, 131–132
astronomy  55
Boeotia  67
Chios  85
Cyprus  99
geography of Greece  140
Massalia  202
mathematics  202
Minoan civilization  211
Poseidonia  277
pottery  279
Taras  334
fate  132
Calydonian Boar Hunt  75
Homer  159
Oedipus  229
Sophokles  324
Stoicism  330
Teiresias  336
Thucydides (1)  349
Zeus  374
fertility  xv, 50, 282
festivals
Adonis  5
Isthmian Games  xviiic, 91, 171,
223, 275, 296
Nemean Games  xviiic, 171, 223,
223
Olympic Games. See Olympic
Games
Panathenaia  74, 144, 237, 238,
243
Panathenaic Games  xviiic, 238
Pythian Games. See Pythian
Games
figs  xiv, 85, 131, 132
flutes  213, 214
food and meals  132–133. See also
wine
figs  xiv, 85, 131, 132
grain  132
grapes  xv, 131, 132, 365
olives and olive oil  xiv, xv, 17, 85,
90, 131–133
foot race  56
Four Hundred, The  133
Alcibiades  19
Andokides  30
Antiphon  33
Peloponnesian War  249
Samos  300
Theramenes  344
Thirty Tyrants, the  348
Thucydides (1)  350
fresco  184
frieze  41, 42, 65, 79, 240, 241, 276
funeral customs  12, 133, 133, 134,
134. See also graves and tombs
Furies (Erinues)  135
Aeschylus  10
Alcmaeon (1)  20
Gaea  136
harpies  145
Klytemnestra  182
Orestes  233
Sirens  315
G
Gaea (Gaia, Ge)  136
Cronus  96
Cyclops  98
Furies  135
Giants  138
Oceanus  227
Orion  234
Poseidon  277
Titans  352
Typhon  356
Zeus  374
Ganymede  136–137, 163
Gaul  xv, 202
Ge. See Gaea
Gela  xviiic, 137
Aeschylus  10
Akragas  17
coinage  88
Crete  94
Gelon  137
Hieron (1). See Hieron (1)
Sicily  312
Syracuse  332
Gelon  xviiic, 137
Gela  137
Hieron (1)  156
Himera  157
Sicily  313
Syracuse  332
tyrants  357
geography  145
Geometric era  xi
Geryon, cattle of  284
Giants  138
Athena  56
Cyclops  98
Delphi  106
Gaea  136
Parthenon  240
Pergamon  252
sculpture  306
Sounion  324
Zeus  374
girls  117, 327, 329, 367
Glauce  204
goats  132
gods and goddesses  xv. See also spe-
cific headings, e.g.: Athena
Delphi. See Delphi
Mount Olympus. See Olympus,
Mt.
religion  291–293
sacrifice  297
Stoicism  330
Titans. See Titans
Xenophanes  370–371
gold  138–139
Abdera  1
Amphipolis  28
Archilochos  40
Archimedes  40
Asia Minor  52
Athena  57
black peoples  66
Black Sea  67
coinage  87
colonization  89
Cyzicus  101
Delphi  106
Lefkandi  190
Lydia  193
Midas  209
Minoan civilization  211
Mycenae  215
Mycenaean civilization  217
Parthenon  240
Perseus (1)  255
Pheidias  260
Philip II  261
Polycrates  274
Polykleitos  274
sculpture  305
Index
393

gold (continued)
silver  314
Sinope  314
Thasos  337
Thrace  349
Thucydides (1)  349
Zeus  374
Golden Fleece  149, 174, 175, 203,
234. See also Jason (1)
Gorgias  14, 117, 121, 139, 171, 294,
322
Gorgons  255
Gortyn  139, 183, 188
government
assembly. See assembly
council. See council
democracy. See democracy
oligarchy. See oligarchy
Thirty Tyrants, the. See Thirty
Tyrants, the
tyrants. See tyrants
grain  132
“Grand Tour”  xii
grapes  xv, 131, 132, 365
graves and tombs
decoration for  12
funeral customs  134
Lefkandi  189–190
Locri  192
Mycenaean civilization  217
painting  236
pottery  280, 281
stones for  133, 134
“Greco-Roman”  xv
Greece
colonization  89
Dorian Greeks  115–116
legacy of  xv
mainland and the Aegean Sea
ixm
and neighboring regions  viiim
during the Peloponnesian War
245m
Greece, climate and landscape of
140
Greece, geography of  xiv, 140
Greek language  xiv, xv, 141
epic poetry  123
Mycenae  215
Mycenaean civilization  216
nymphs  226
Phoenicia  265
griffin  83
gymnasium  141, 142, 142
Academy  2
Antiphon  33
Archimedes  40
Asklepios  51
Bactria  64
boxing  69
Epidaurus  125
homosexuality  161
Jews  176
Lyceum  193
marriage  201
Olympia  230
Protagoras  285
sport  329
H
Hades  143
afterlife  12
Cronus  96
Demeter  108
Eleusinian Mysteries  120
Herakles  152
Kerberos  177
Orpheus  234
painting  237
Persephone  255
Poseidon  275
religion  291
Sisyphus  315
Theseus  347
Zeus  374
hairnet (golden)  138
Halicarnassus  xxc, 143–144
Alexander the Great  23
Asia Minor  53
Dorian Greeks  116
Herodotus  154
Knidos  182
the Seven Wonders of the World
310
hanging gardens (of Babylon)  310
Hannibal of Carthage  119
Harmodius and Aristogeiton  12,
144–145, 161
harpies  145, 175, 277, 315
hats  87, 87
Hecataeus  145, 209
Hecatë  145
Hector  146
Achilles  3
Ajax (1)  16
Amazons  27
Andromache  31
Athena  57
chariots  83
Diomedes  113
Hecuba  146
Homer  159, 160
Niobë  226
Paris  239
Patroklos  241
Priam  282
Trojan War  355
Hecuba  146
Euripides  129
Hector  146
Paris  239
Priam  282
Troilus  355
Helen of Troy  146–147, 147
Agamemnon  13
Castor and Polydeuces  77
Gorgias  139
Hellën  147
Klytemnestra  182
Kratinus  185
Leda  189
Menelaus  208
Paris  239
Priam  282
Stesichorus  330
Trojan War  355
Zeus  374
heliocentric theory  55
Helios  xxc, 147
Anaxagoras  29
Apollo  36
Circe  85
Halicarnassus  144
Minos  212
Rhodes  294
the Seven Wonders of the World
310
Hellën  8, 116, 147, 148
Hellenica (Xenophon)  15, 191, 371,
372
Hellenistic Age  xii, xxc, 148–149
Antioch  32
Apollonius  36
Athens  60
Callimachus  74
cavalry  80
colonization  89
Cyclades  98
Cynics  98
Dionysus  115
Dorian Greeks  116
education  118
Egypt  118
Eleusinian Mysteries  120
Ephesos  122
Epicureanism  124
Euphorion  128
farming  132
Giants  138
gold  139
Ionia  168
Jews  176
map during, ca. 240 B.C.E. 148m
Memnon  207
Menander  207
Miletus  210
music  214
painting  237
Pergamon  251
philosophy  263
Phoenicia  266
polis  273
Polyphemos  275
Potidaea  278
Praxiteles  281
Priapus  282
religion  293
Samothrace  301
science  303
sculpture  306
the Seven Wonders of the World
310
silver  314
Skepticism  316
slaves  318
Stoicism  330
Syracuse  333
theater  340
Theocritus  342
Thrace  349
trade  353
warfare, land  359
warfare, naval  363
warfare, siege  365
women  367
Hellespont  149–150
Abdera  1
Aegospotami  7
Aeolis  8
Alcibiades  19
Alexander the Great  23
Anaxagoras  29
Asia Minor  52, 53
Athens  58
Black Sea  67
Bosporus  68
Celts  80
Chalcidicë  82
Chersonese  84
colonization  89
Cyzicus  101
Eupolis  128
Hecuba  146
Ionian Revolt  169
Jason (1)  174
Lesbos  190
Lysander  195
Marmara, Sea of  200
Miltiades  210
Mycalë  215
Peisistratus  243
Peloponnesian War  249, 250
Persian Wars  258
Philip II  262
Phocaea  264
Priapus  282
Salamis (1)  298
Sestos  309
Trojan War  355
Troy  356
Xanthippus  370
Xerxes  372
helmet  83
helots  150
Dorian Greeks  116
Epaminondas  121
Kleomenes (1)  181
Leuktra  191
Messenia  208
slaves  318
Sparta  326–328
Syracuse  332
warfare, land  361
Hephaistos (Hephaestus)  
150–151
Achilles  3
agora  16
Aphrodite  34
Ares  43
Athena  56
Athens  60
Cyclops  98
Hera  151
Prometheus  283
394
Index

religion  291
Zeus  374
Hera  151
Ares  43
Argos  44
Artemis  49, 50
Athena  56
Bosporus  68
Cadmus  73
Cronus  96
Dionysus  114
Euripides  129
Hephaistos  150
Herakles  152, 153
Io  167
Ixion  173
Jason (1)  174
Kypselos  186
magic  198
marriage  201
Minoan civilization  211
names  221
Olympia  230
Olympic Games  231
Mt. Olympus  232
Paris  239
Polycrates  274
Polykleitos  274
Poseidonia  277
religion  291, 292
Samos  299, 300
Selinus  308
Teiresias  336
women  367
Zeus  374
Heraclides Ponticus  55
Heraclitus  151–152, 315
Herakleitos  122, 303
Herakles (Hercules)  xv, 152–153, 284
afterlife  12
Agiad clan  15
Alcman  21
Alexander the Great  22
Amazons  27
Ares  44
Athena  56
Atlas  61
Bellerophon  65
black peoples  67
Castor and Polydeuces  77
centaurs  80, 81
coinage  88
Cynics  99
Eurypontid clan  130
Giants  138
Hera  151
Hesiod  155
Jason (1)  174, 175
Kerberos  177
Minoan civilization  211
myth  218
Nemean Games  223
Olympic Games  231
Philoktetes  263
Poseidon  277
Prometheus  283
religion  292
Sophokles  323, 324
Stesichorus  329
Thasos  337
Thebes  340
Theseus  345
Tiryns  352
wrestling  368
Zeus  374
Hercules. See Herakles
hermai  19
Hermes  153
Aenus  8
afterlife  12
Alcibiades  19
Alexander the Great  24
Aphrodite  34
Circe  85
clothing  87
Eros  126
Lyceum  193
music  214
Odysseus  228
Mt. Olympus  232
Pan  237
Peloponnesian War  248
Praxiteles  281
Priam  282
Prometheus  283
prophecy and divination  284
religion  291
Sisyphus  315
statute of  281
wrestling  368
Zeus  374
Herodas  153–155
Herodotus  xvi, xixc
Arion  44, 45
black peoples  66
colonization  88
Cyrene (1)  100
Cyrus (1)  101
Delphi  107
Dodona  115
education  117
Halicarnassus  143
Hecataeus  145
Ionian Revolt  169
Jews  175
Kleisthenes (1)  180
Kleisthenes (2)  180
Kleomenes (1)  181
Kypselos  186
Marathon  199
medicine  204
Mycalë  215
Naukratis  222
Olympic Games  231
Persian Wars  257
Pheidon  259
Phocaea  264
Polycrates  274
Potidaea  278
Salamis (1)  298
Sophokles  322
Sparta  325
Themistokles  341
Thermopylae  345
Thrace  349
Thucydides (1)  349
trade  353
warfare, land  359
Xerxes  372
Herophilus  205
Hero’s Tomb  189–190
Hersperides  61
Hesoid  xviic, 155. See also Theogony
afterlife  12
Aphrodite  34
astronomy  55
Athena  56
Boeotia  68
Cronus  96
Cyclops  98
Cyrene (2)  100
epic poetry  123
Eros  126
farming  131
fate  132
Furies  135
Gaea  136
harpies  145
Hephaistos  150
homosexuality  161
Kerberos  177
Muses  212
myth  219
Oceanus  227
Persephone  255
Prometheus  283
religion  292
ships and seafaring  311
Titans  353
Typhon  356, 357
women  366
Xenophanes  370
Zeus  374
Hestia  50, 57, 96, 156, 232
hetaira 54, 285, 331, 332
heterosexuality  156
Hieron (1) (dictator in Gela and
Syracuse)  xviiic, 156
Aeschylus  10
Bacchylides  63
Catana  78
Cumae  97
Etruscans  127
Gelon  137
Olympic Games  231
Pindar  267
Sicily  313
Simonides  314
Syracuse  332
theater  340
Hieron (2) II (ruler of Syracuse)  333
himation 86
Himera  156–157
Akragas  17
Gelon  137
Selinus  308
Stesichorus  329
Syracuse  332
Hipparchus of Nicaea  55, 56
Hipparette  201
Hippias (1) (Athenian dictator)  xvii-
ic, 157
Aeschylus  9
agora  15
Alcmaeonids  20
Anacreon  28
Athens  59
democracy  110
Harmodius and Aristogeiton  144
Kleomenes (1)  181
Marathon  199
Miltiades  210
ostracism  235
Peisistratus  243
Persian Wars  257
Piraeus  268
Simonides  314
Theseus  345
tyrants  357
Hippias (2) (sophist)  322
hippobotai 83
Hippocrates (1) (Greek physician)
66, 157–158, 203, 204
Hippocrates (2) (Geloan tyrant)
xviiic, 137
Hippocrates, meaning of name  221
Hippodamus  xixc, 158, 268, 295
Hippolytus  27, 50, 51, 158, 347
Hippolytus (Euripides)  xixc, 128, 129
Hipponax  158, 195
history
Diodorus Siculus  22, 112, 261
Herodotus. See Herodotus
Thucydides (1). See Thucydides
(1)
History of Art (Johan Joachim
Winckelmann)  xii
History of Greece (Herodotus)  xixc
Homer  xviic, 159–160. See also Iliad;
Odyssey
Achaeans  3
Achilles  3, 4
Aeneas  8
Aeschylus  9
afterlife  12
Agamemnon  13
Ajax (1)  16
Ajax (2)  16
Alexander the Great  22
Amazons  27
Andromache  31
Aphrodite  34
archaeology  38
Archilochos  40
Ares  43
Argos  44
Aristotle  48
Artemis  50
Asia Minor  53
astronomy  55
Athena  57
Bellerophon  65
black peoples  66
boxing  68
Index
395

Homer (continued)
Callimachus  74
Calypso  75
Cassandra  77
Castor and Polydeuces  77
centaurs  80
chariots  83
Circe  85
colonization  88
Corinth  91
council  93
Cyclops  98
Danaus  104
Diomedes  113
Dodona  115
education  117
Electra  119
epic poetry  123
Eros  126
farming  131
fate  132
food and meals  133
funeral customs  133
Ganymede  136
harpies  145
Hector  146
Hecuba  146
Helen of Troy  146
Hephaistos  150
Hera  151
Herodotus  154
Hesiod  155
homosexuality  161
Ionia  167
Jason (1)  174
kinship  179
Klytemnestra  182
laws and law courts  188
marriage  201
Muses  212
music  213
Mycenae  216
Mycenaean civilization  216, 
217
myth  219
Nausicaa  222
Neoptolemos  224
Nestor  224
Niobë  226
Oceanus  227
Odysseus  227
Oedipus  229
Orestes  233
pankration  238
Paris  239
Patroklos  241
Penelope  251
phalanx  259
Polyphemos  275
Poseidon  277
Priam  282
prophecy and divination  284
religion  292
rhetoric  294
Sirens  315
Sisyphus  315
Skylla  317
slaves  317, 318
Stesichorus  329
symposium  331
Tantalus  334
Teiresias  336
Telemachos  336
timber  351
Trojan War  355
Troy  356
Tyrtaeus  358
warfare, land  359
women  366
wrestling  368
writing  369
Xenophanes  370
Zeus  374
homicide  188
homosexuality  160–163
Aeschines  9
Anacreon  28–29
Ganymede  136–137
heterosexuality  156
Ibycus  166
Ionian Greeks  168
marriage  201
Orpheus  234
Patroklos  242
Plato  272
Sappho  301–302
Sparta  327
symposium  331
women  366
hoplite  163, 163, 164
Aetolia  11
Alcibiades  19
Arcadia  37
bronze  70
cavalry  79
Chaironeia  81
democracy  109
Demosthenes (1)  111
Demosthenes (2)  112
Egypt  118
homosexuality  161
Lelantine War  190
Lykourgos (1)  194
Marathon  200
Miltiades  210
Mycalë  215
Peloponnesian War  246
Persian Wars  258
phalanx  259
Pheidon  261
Plataea, Battle of   270
Potidaea  277
Salamis (1)  298
slaves  318
Solon  321
Sparta  324, 326
Thebes  341
Thermopylae  344
Thirty Tyrants, the  348
tyrants  357
Tyrtaeus  358
warfare, land  359, 360–361
warfare, naval  362
Xenophon  371
Horace  xv
horse(s)
cavalry  78–80, 79
centaurs  80
chariots  83
elephants  119
farming  131
Minoan civilization  211
Trojan  188
warfare, land  361
House of the Tiles (Lerna)  xiv
hubris  164
Bellerophon  65
Croesus  95
Tantalus  334
theater  338
Xerxes  372
Hundred Houses  192
Hyacinthos  141, 164–165, 187, 292,
325
Hypermnestra  104
I
Ibycus  28, 166, 267, 274, 302
Icarus  212
Iliad (Homer)  xviic, 160. See also
Odyssey
Achilles  3
Aeneas  8
Agamemnon  13
Ajax (1)  16
Alexander the Great  22
Amazons  27
Andromache  31
Aphrodite  34
archaeology  38
Ares  44
Aristotle  48
Athena  57
Bellerophon  65
black peoples  66
boxing  68
Callimachus  74
Cassandra  77
centaurs  80
chariots  83
Diomedes  113
epic poetry  123
farming  131
fate  132
Ganymede  136
Hector  146
Hecuba  146
Helen of Troy  146
Hera  151
Herodotus  154
Homer  159, 160
kinship  179
laws and law courts  188
magic  198
Menelaus  208
Mycenaean civilization  216, 217
myth  219
Nestor  224
Niobë  226
Oceanus  227
Odysseus  227
Paris  239
Patroklos  241, 242
Priam  282
slaves  318
Trojan War  355
Troy  356
warfare, land  359, 360
wrestling  368
writing  369
Zeus  374
Illyris  124, 166–167, 197
imperialism  xvi, 89. See also colo-
nization
India  xii, xxc, 119
Io  167
Ion (1) (son of Apollo)  167
Ion (2) (playwright)  167, 323
Ionia  xviic, xviiic, 167–168
Abdera  1
Aeolis  9
Anacreon  28
Anaxagoras  29
Anaximander  29
Anaximenes  30
Asia Minor  51
Cyrus (1)  101
epic poetry  123
Europe and Asia  130
Ibycus  166
Ionian Greeks  168
Ionian Revolt  168
Ionian Sea  169
Jews  175
King’s Peace  178
Lydia  193
Miletus  209
Peloponnesian War  249
Persia  256
Persian Wars  257, 258
Phocaea  264
Samos  299
Seven Sages, the  310
Thales  336
trade  353
Xanthippus  370
Xenophanes  370
Ionian Greeks  168. See also Aeolian
Greeks; Dorian Greeks
Aeolian Greeks  8
Artemision  50
Chios  85
Cyclades  98
Delos  105
Dorian Greeks  115
Ephesos  122
Hellën  147
homosexuality  161
Ion (1)  167
Ionia  167
kinship  179
Miletus  209
Phocaea  264
Potidaea  277
396
Index

Salamis (1)  298
Samos  299
Sicily  312
Ionian Revolt  xviiic, 168–169
Chios  85
Cyprus  99
Darius (1)  104
Ephesos  122
Eretria  126
Hecataeus  145
Ionia  168
Kleomenes (1)  181
Kymë  186
Lesbos  191
Marathon  199
Miletus  209
Miltiades  210
Persian Wars  257
Phocaea  264
Phrynichus  266
Samos  299
Ionian Sea  169
Ionic order  41, 41, 42
Iphigeneia  13, 169–170, 182
Ipsus  xxc
iron
bronze  70
coinage  87
Dorian Greeks  116
farming  131
Massalia  202
Mycenaean civilization  218
Phocaea  264
Pithecusae  269
Pythagoras  289
Sinope  314
Sparta  328
warfare, land  359, 360
Isaeus  170, 171
Isis  xii
Isokrates  170–171
education  117
Gorgias  139
Isaeus  170
King’s Peace  178
Philip II  262
rhetoric  294
Isthmian Games  xviiic, 91, 171, 223,
275, 296
Italy  xv, xviiic, 171, 172. See also
Rome; Sicily
Aegina  7
Aeneas  8
afterlife  13
Agathokles  14
Alcibiades  19
Ambracia  27
Apollo  35
Arion  45
bronze  70
Castor and Polydeuces  78
Chalis  82
Circe  85
colonization  88
Corcyra  89
Corinth  91
Croton. See Croton
Cumae. See Camae
Diomedes  113
Dionysius (1)  113
Dorian Greeks  116
Empedokles  121
Epidamnos  124
Eretria  125
Etruscans. See Etruscans
Europe and Asia  130
Ganymede  136
geography of Greece  140
Hieron (1)  156
Hippodamus  158
Ibycus  166
Ionian Greeks  168
Ionian Sea  169
iron  170
Kypselos  186
laws and law courts  188
Lelantine War  190
Leukippos  191
Locri  192
Locris  193
map of  172m
Minoan civilization  211
Mycenaean civilization  218
Naxos (2)  223
Odysseus  228
Orphism  234
painting  237
Parmenides  239
Periander  252
Persephone  255
Philoktetes  263
Phocaea  264
Pindar  268
Pithecusae  xviic, 269
Plato  272
Poseidonia  277
pottery  281
Protagoras  285
Pyrrhus  288
Rhegium. See Rhegium
Rhodes  294
Samos  299
ships and seafaring  311
Skylla  317
Sparta  327
Sybaris  2, 88, 96, 171, 277, 331
Syracuse  332
Taras  171, 214, 288, 290, 295,
327, 334–335
Themistokles  342
trade  353
Typhon  357
writing  369
Xenophanes  370
Zanclë  373
Ithaca  169, 172–173, 227, 228, 251,
336
Ixion  12, 164, 173
J
Jason (1) (mythical hero)  174–175
Apollonius  36
Castor and Polydeuces  77
Circe  86
Cyzicus  101
Hellespont  149
Herakles  152–153
magic  198
Marmara, Sea of  200
Medea  203, 204
Minyans  212
Mycenaean civilization  218
Orpheus  234
Polyphemos  275
Poseidon  277
Jason (2) (tyrant of Pherae)  175, 347
Jerusalem  xii
jewelry  138, 314
Jews  xv–xvi, 175–176
Alexandria (1)  25
Antioch  32
Cyrus (1)  101
Ionia  167
religion  291
Jocasta  31, 229
jockey  231
judges  188
Juno  151
juries  110, 188–189
K
Kabeiroi cult  300–301
Kadmos. See Cadmus
Kallias (Callias)  xixc, 105, 177
Kallimachos. See Callimachus
Kallinos. See Callinus
kantharos  114
Kassander (Cassander)  177
Agathokles  14
Alexander the Great  24
Antigonus (1)  31, 32
Antipater  33
Athens  60
Demetrius Poliorketes  108, 109
Diadochi  112
Menander  207
Potidaea  278
Ptolemy (1)  286
Thebes  341
Kassandra. See Cassandra
Kerberos (Cerberus)  12, 152,
177–178
Kerkyra. See Corcyra
Kimon (Cimon)  178
Athens  60
Cyprus  99
Ephialtes  122
Ion (2)  167
Miltiades  210
ostracism  235
Sophokles  322
Themistokles  342
Theseus  347
Thucydides (1)  349
Thucydides (2)  351
King’s Peace  178
Asia Minor  53
Corinthian War  92
Cyprus  99
Ephesos  122
Halicarnassus  144
Ionia  168
Isokrates  171
Knidos  183
Kymë  186
Miletus  209
Phocaea  264
Second Athenian League  306
Sparta  328
kinship  31, 179
Kirke. See Circe
Kleisthenes (1) (Cleisthenes)
(Athenian statesman)  xviiic,
179–180
Aeschylus  9
Alcmaeonids  20
Athens  59
council  93
deme  107
democracy  109
Hippias (1)  157
kinship  179
Kleisthenes (2)  180
names  221
ostracism  235
Perikles  253
Solon  321
Xanthippus  370
Kleisthenes (2) (tyrant of Sikyon)
179, 180–181
names  221
Sikyon  313
tyrants  357
Kleomenes (1) (Cleomenes)  181
Agiad clan  15
Argos  44
Athens  59
Chilon  84
Hippias (1)  157
Kleisthenes (1)  180
Sparta  328
Kleon (Cleon )  181–182
Amphipolis  28
Aristophanes  46
Brasidas  69
democracy  110
Demosthenes (2)  112
Eupolis  128
Nikias  225
Peloponnesian War  247
Pylos  287
Thucydides (1)  350
Kleopatra. See Cleopatra
Klytemnestra (Clytaemnestra)  
182
Aeschylus  10
Agamemnon  13, 14
Cassandra  77
Castor and Polydeuces  77
Electra  119
Iphigeneia  169
Leda  189
Orestes  233
women  366
Zeus  374
Index
397

Knidos (Cnidus)  182–183
Academy  2
Aphrodite  34
Aphrodite of  xxc
Aratus (2)  37
Asia Minor  53
astronomy  55
Corinthian War  92
Dorian Greeks  116
Halicarnassus  143
Konon  184
mathematics  202
Peloponnesian War  249
Praxiteles  281
Rhodes  294
Knossos  183, 184
archaeology  38
Crete  94, 95
Labyrinth  187
Linear B  192
megaron in  184
Minoan civilization  211
Minos  212
Mycenaean civilization  217
palaces at  xviic
religion  292
komos 338, 339
Konon  8, 92, 184, 193, 243
korai (youthful women)  4
Kore  108, 120, 255, 366. See also
Persephone
Korinna. See Corinna
Korinthos. See Corinth
kouroi (kore) (statues of youths)  96,
118, 305
Krates  339
Kratinus (Cratinus)  54, 128, 185, 339
Kritias (Critias)  185
Alcibiades  20
Anacreon  28
homosexuality  162
Socrates  319
Theramenes  344
Thirty Tyrants, the  348
Kroisos. See Croesus
Kronos. See Cronus
krotala  198
Kroton. See Croton
Krypteia  326
Kume. See Cumae
kylix (cup)  65, 279, 279, 332, 365
Kylon (Cylon)  20, 58, 185–186, 206,
321
Kymë (Cyme)  9, 186
Aenus  8
Cumae  97
Delian League  105
Hesiod  155
Midas  209
Peloponnesian War  249
women  367
Kypselos (Cypselus)  xviiic, 91, 186,
252, 357
Kyrene. See Cyrene
Kyros. See Cyrus
Kyzikos. See Cyzicus
L
Labyrinth  183, 187, 212, 346
Lachesis  132
Laconia  187
caryatid  77
helots  150
Melos  206
Messenia  208
Peloponnese  244
Sparta  325
Laocoön  188
“La Tène” culture  xv
laws and law courts  xviiic, 188–189
Catana  78
Draco  116
Locri  192
Lykourgos (1)  xviiic, 179, 194,
324–327
Solon  321
Leda  77, 146, 189
Lefkandi  80, 125, 189–190
lekythos (pitcher)  147, 279, 279, 281
Lelantine War  xviic, 190
Chalis  82
Eretria  125–126
Euboea  127
geography of Greece  140
Megara (1)  206
Pithecusae  269
Leonidas, bust of  345
Lesbos  190–191
Aeolian Greeks  8
Aeolis  9
Alcaeus  17
architecture  42
Arion  44
Aristotle  47
Asia Minor  52
Boeotia  68
Chersonese  84
colonization  89
Darius (1)  104
Delian League  105
Erinna  126
Greek language  141
Hellespont  149
homosexuality  160
Ibycus  166
Ionian Revolt  169
Kymë  186
music  213
Mytilene  219
Orpheus  234
Peloponnesian War  246
Pittacus  269
Samothrace  300
Sappho  301
Seven Sages, the  310
Terpander  336
Theophrastus  343
warfare, naval  363
wine  365
Leucippus. See Leukippos
Leuctra. See Leuktra
Leukippos (Leucippus)  191
Anaxagoras  29
Demokritos  110, 111
Empedokles  121
Epicureanism  124
Leuktra (Leuctra)  xxc, 191
Agesilaos  15
Arcadia  37
Boeotia  68
Chaironeia  81
Epaminondas  121
Jason (2)  175
Mantineia  199
Second Athenian League  306
Sparta  328
Thebes  341
warfare, land  361
Xenophon  372
libraries  xv
lighthouse (at Alexandria)  xxc
Linear A  211, 368
Linear B  192
Athena  56
chariots  83
council  93
Dionysus  114
Greek language  141
Minoan civilization  211
Mycenaean civilization  216–218
Poseidon  276
Pylos  287, 288
religion  292
Thebes  340
writing  368
Zeus  373
Lion Gate (Mycenae)  xviic
lion hunt  217
Lion of Chaeroneia  81
literacy  xi, 369
literature  xv. See also epic poetry;
lyric poetry; poetry; theater; 
writing
liturgy  110
Locri  192
Castor and Polydeuces  78
Croton  96
Italy  171
laws and law courts  188
Locris  193
oligarchy  229
Rhegium  293
Locris  192–193
Ajax (2)  16
Amphictyonic League  27
Dionysius (1)  114
Euboea  127
Locri  192
Naupactos  222
Phocis  264
Thermopylae  344
Long Walls, The  xviiic, 193
Athens  60
Konon  184
Peloponnesian War  246, 250
Perikles  253
Piraeus  243
Thirty Tyrants, the  348
love  126
Lyceum  xxc, 193
Academy  2
Alexander the Great  22
Aristotle  47, 48
Athens  60
gymnasium  142
medicine  205
music  214
science  303
Theophrastus  343
Lydia  193–194
Aegina  7
Asia Minor  53
coinage  87
Croesus  95, 95
Cyrus (1)  101
gold  139
Ionia  168
Lesbos  190
Midas  209
Miletus  209
Pelops  250
Periander  252
silver  314
Solon  321
Lykourgos (1) (Spartan lawgiver)
xviiic, 179, 194, 324–327
lyre  214
lyric poetry  xv, 194–195
Alcaeus  8, 17–18, 44, 219, 269,
301
Anacreon. See Anacreon
Archilochos  11, 17, 40, 161, 195,
337
Arion  44–45, 252, 301
Bacchylides. See Bacchylides
Callimachus. See Callimachus
Callinus  75, 122, 195, 213, 358
Corinna  68, 90
education  117
Ephesos  122
epic poetry  123
Hipponax  158, 195
homosexuality  160
Ibycus  166
Kritias  185
Mimnermus  210
music  213
Mytilene  219
Pan  237
Pindar  266
Sappho. See Sappho
Semonides  308–309, 366
Simonides. See Simonides
Stesichorus  119, 146, 157, 166,
233, 329––330
Terpander  44, 213, 301, 336
Theognis  136, 206, 229, 342,
343
Tyrtaeus  195, 208, 213, 327, 358
Lysander  195
Aegina  7
Aegospotami  7
Alcibiades  20
Corinthian War  92
Ephesos  122
398
Index

Lesbos  191
Peloponnesian War  250
Thasos  337
Thirty Tyrants, the  348
Lysias  195, 209, 294, 318
Lysimachus  196
Antigonus (1)  31, 32
Asia Minor  53
Demetrius Poliorketes  108
Diadochi  112
Ephesos  122
Kassander  177
Ptolemy (1)  286
Ptolemy (2) II  287
Seleucus (1)  307, 308
Thrace  349
M
Macedon  xii, xv–xvi, xxc, 197, 372
Achaea  2
Aenus  8
Aetolia  11
Alexander the Great. See
Alexander the Great
Amphipolis  28
Antigonus (1). See Antigonus (1)
Antipater  33
Aristotle  47
Athens  60
cavalry  79
Chaironeia  81
Chalcidicë  82
Chersonese  84
coinage  87
Corinth  92
Cyclades  98
Darius (1)  104
Delos  106
Demetrius Poliorketes. See
Demetrius Poliorketes
Demosthenes (1)  111
Diadochi  112
Epaminondas  121
Epirus  125
Hellenistic Age  148
Illyris  166, 167
Kassander. See Kassander
Lysimachus  196
Macedon  197
Menander  207
Messenia  208
Mt. Olympus  232
Pella  197, 243, 367
Persia  256
Persian Wars  257
phalanx  259
Philip II. See Philip II
Philip V. See Philip V
Phocis  264
Potidaea  278
Pyrrhus  288
Rome  296
Seleucus (1)  307, 308
Sparta  324, 325
Thebes  341
Thessaly  347
Thrace  349
timber  351
warfare, naval  363
Xenophon  371
Xerxes  372
maenads (mainadai) 198, 198, 234
magic  198–199
Magna Graeca  2
Mantineia  xixc, xxc, 199
Agesilaos  15
Alcibiades  19
Arcadia  37
Epaminondas  121
Olympic Games  231
Peloponnesian War  248
Tegea  335
Themistokles  342
warfare, land  361
Xenophon  372
map making  145
Marathon  xv, xviiic, 199–200
Aeschylus  9–10
Alcmaeonids  20
Aristides  45
Athens  59
Attica  62
Darius (1)  104
Delphi  106
Hippias (1)  157
Miltiades  210
Olympic Games  231
ostracism  235
Pan  237
Peisistratus  243
Persian Wars  257
Plataea  269
Simonides  314
Themistokles  341
Theseus  346
Mardonius  258, 270
Marmara, Sea of  200
Asia Minor  52
Bosporus  68
Byzantium  71
Cyzicus  101
Hellespont  149
Jason (1)  174
Thrace  348
marriage  xiv, 200–201
Agathokles  14
Alexander the Great  22
Archilochos  40
Atalanta  56
Callimachus  75
Delphi  106
Hera  151
heterosexuality  156
homosexuality  160, 161
Ixion  173
kinship  179
Kleisthenes (2)  180, 181
Peleus  242
Pelops  250
Philip II  261
Ptolemy (2) II  287
Sappho  301
Sparta  327
Telemachos  336
women  367
mask  215
Massalia  xv, 201–202
bronze  70
Carthage  76
Celts  80
colonization  89
Phocaea  264
Phoenicia  266
trade  353
wine  365
mathematics  xv, 202–203. See also
science
Academy  2
Archimedes  40
Demokritos  111
education  118
Lyceum  193
music  214
Pythagoras. See Pythagoras
science  303
Mausoleum of Mausolus  xxc, 144,
310
Meanads  114
Medea  203–204
Apollonius  37
Circe  86
Jason (1)  175
magic  198
Theseus  346
Medea (Euripides)  xixc, 128, 129
medicine  204–205
Apollo  35
Asklepios  51
Croton  96
Hippocrates (1)  66, 157–158,
203, 204
Knidos  183
Mediterranean  xiv, 354m
Medusa  205, 205, 256
Athena  56
Bellerophon  65
Corcyra  90
Oceanus  227
Perseus (1)  255, 256
Poseidon  277
Megalopolis  37–38
Megara, meaning of name  xv
Megara (1) (city of south-central
Greece)  xixc, 205–206
Athens  58
Attica  61
Byzantium  71
colonization  89
Lysias  195
Peisistratus  242
Peloponnesian War  246
Perikles  254
Persian Wars  258
Salamis (1)  298
Solon  320
Theognis  343
tyrants  357
Megara (2) (princess of Thebes)  152
megaron  184
Meleager  174
Melos  206–207
Aphrodite  34
Cyclades  96
Euripides  129
Peloponnesian War  248
slaves  318
Thucydides (1)  350
Memnon  4, 66, 67, 207, 224, 355
men  221, 284, 285, 302. See also
homosexuality
Menander (Menandros)  xxc, 60, 207,
340
Menelaus  147, 208
Agamemnon  13
Atreus  61
Helen of Troy  146
Laconia  187
Paris  239
Sparta  325
Stesichorus  330
Telemachos  336
Trojan War  355
merchant ships  311
Messenia  xviiic, 208
Epaminondas  121
geography of Greece  140
helots  150
Laconia  187
Lelantine War  190
Leuktra  191
Mycenaean civilization  217
Naupactos  222
Peloponnese  244
Pylos  287
Rhegium  293
Sparta  326, 328
Thebes  341
metalwork  xv
metics  208–209, 268, 273, 284–285
metopes 41
Midas  23, 107, 139, 209
Miletus  xviiic, 209–210
Alexander the Great  23
Anaximander  29
Anaximenes  30
architecture  42
Asia Minor  52
astronomy  55
Athenspasia  53
Black Sea  67
Chersonese  84
Chios  85
colonization  89
Cyzicus  101
Delian League  105
Ephesos  122
Hecataeus  145
Hippodamus  158
Ionia  167
Ionian Revolt  169
kinship  179
Kleomenes (1)  181
Lelantine War  190
Leukippos  191
Index
399

Miletus (continued)
Lydia  194
music  214
Mycenaean civilization  218
Naukratis  222
Panticapaeum  239
Peloponnesian War  249
Periander  252
Perikles  254
philosophy  263
Polycrates  274
Rhodes  294, 295
science  303
Seven Sages, the  310
Sinope  314
Thales  336
trade  353
tyrants  357
military training  117
Miltiades  178, 200, 210, 257, 370
Mimnermus  210
Minoan civilization  xi, xv, xvi, xviic,
210–211
archaeology  39
Atlantis  61
boxing  68
Bronze Age  70
Crete  94
Knossos  183
Labyrinth  187
music  214
Mycenaean civilization  216
myth  218
religion  292
Thera  343
writing  368
Minos  212
afterlife  12
Daedalus  103
Europa  130
Knossos  184
Minoan civilization  210
Theseus  346
Zeus  374
Minotaur  187, 211, 212, 346
Minyans  174, 212, 233
The Misanthrope (Menander)  207
Mithras  xii
money. See coinage; gold; silver; talent
mosaics  242
Muses  212, 213
Alexandria (1)  25
Apollo  35
Eros  126
Lyceum  193
music  213
music  213–214
Demokritos  111
education  117
Herakles  152
Long Walls, the  193
lyre  214
Muses  212
musical instruments  213
Orpheus  234
Peloponnesian War  250
Pythagoras  289
Pythian Games  290
sacrifice  297
Sparta  327
Mycalë  xviiic, 214–215
Ionia  167
Persian Wars  259
Poseidon  275
Xanthippus  370
Mycenae  xi, xiv, xviic, 215–216
Achaeans  3
acropolis  4
afterlife  11
Agamemnon  13
archaeology  38
Argos  44
Athens  58
Atreus  61
Cassandra  77
Egypt  118
Electra  119
gold  138
geography of Greece  140
Herakles  152
Iphigeneia  169
Klytemnestra  182
Linear B  192
Menelaus  208
Minoan civilization  211
Mycenaean civilization  216
Odysseus  227
Orestes  233
Peloponnese  244
Pelops  250
Perseus (1)  255
Pylos  287
sculpture  305
Seven against Thebes, the  310
Tantalus  334
Thebes  340
Theseus  345
Tiryns  352
Trojan War  355
Mycenaean civilization  xi, xv, xviic,
216–218
acropolis  4
Aeolian Greeks  8
afterlife  11
Apollo  36
Arcadia  38
archaeology  38
Argos  44
aristocracy  45
Athens  58
Boeotia  68
bronze  69
Bronze Age  70, 71
chariots  83, 84
colonization  88
Corinth  91
Crete  94
Cyprus  99
dagger  217
Dark Age  104
Dorian Greeks  116
Egypt  118
farming  131
geography of Greece  140
Greek language  141
Homer  159
Ionian Greeks  168
iron  170
Knossos  183
Lefkandi  189
mask  215
Minoan civilization  211
Mycenae  215
myth  218
Peloponnese  244
Poseidon  276
pottery  279–280
Pylos  287
religion  292
Samos  299
sculpture  305
Sparta  325
Thebes  340
Thessaly  347
Tiryns  352
vase  360
women  366
writing  368
myth  xi, xv, 218–219
Adonis  5
Aeneas  8
Agamemnon  13
Agathon  14
Alcestis  18
Alcmaeon (1)  20
Alexander the Great  22
Amazons  26
Anaximander  29
Andromache  31
Antigone  31
Aphrodite  33
Apollo  35
Apollonius  37
architecture  41
Argos  44
Artemis  49
Atalanta  56
Athena  56
Atlas  61
Bellerophon  65
black peoples  66
Boeotia  68
Cadmus  73
Callimachus  74
Calydonian Boar Hunt  75
Calypso  75
Cassandra  77
Castor and Polydeuces  77
centaurs  80
Circe  85
Corinth  91
Cronus  96
Cyrene (2)  100
Daedalus  103
Danaus  103
Delphi  106
Demeter  108
Dionysus  114
Dorian Greeks  115
Egypt  118
Electra  119
epic poetry  123
Eros  126
Euripides  128
Europa  129
Europe and Asia  130
farming  131
fate  132
food and meals  132
Furies  135
Gaea  136
Ganymede  136
Giants  138
Greek language  141
Hades  143
harpies  145
Hecataeus  145
Hecatë  145
Hector  146
Hecuba  146
Helen of Troy  146
Helios  147
Hellën  147
Hephaistos  150
Hera  151
Herakles  152
Hermes  153
Hesiod  155
Hestia  156
Hippolytus  158
Homer  159
homosexuality  162
hubris  164
Hyacinthos  164
Io  167
Iphigeneia  169
Ixion  173
Jason (1)  174
Kerberos  177
Klytemnestra  182
Labyrinth  187
Laocoön  188
Leda  189
Lesbos  190
maenads  198
magic  198
Medea  203
Medusa  205
Memnon  207
Menelaus  208
Minoan civilization  211
Minos  212
Minyans  212
Muses  212
music  214
Mycenae  216
Mycenaean civilization  216
Narcissus  221
Nereus  224
Nestor  224
Nikë  224
Niobë  225
nymphs  226
Oceanus  227
400
Index

Odysseus  227
Oedipus  229
Mt. Olympus  232
Orestes  233
Orion  234
Orpheus  234
Orphism  234
Paris  239
Pelops  250
Penelope  251
Persephone  255
Perseus (1)  255
Phoenicia  265
Pindar  267
Poseidon  276
pottery  280
Priam  282
Procrustes  282
Prometheus  283
prophecy and divination  283
Pylos  287
religion  291
Rome  295
science  303
Seven against Thebes, the  309
Sirens  315
Teiresias  336
Telemachos  336
theater  338
Thebes  340
Theocritus  342
Theseus  345
Tiryns  352
Titans  352
Trojan War  355
Troy  356
women  366
Zeus  373
Mytilene  219
Alcaeus  18
Aristotle  47
assembly  54
Delian League  105
Lesbos  190
Naukratis  222
Peloponnesian War  247, 250
Periander  252
Pittacus  17, 18, 190, 219, 269,
310
Sappho  301
Seven Sages, the  310
N
names  221
naphtha  364
Narcissus  141, 221–222
Naukratis  118, 222, 285, 301
Naupactos  192, 208, 222, 247
Nausicaa  222, 228
Naxos (1) (island)  97, 98
Naxos (2) (Greek colony in Sicily) 223
Catana  78
Chalis  83
colonization  88
Dionysius (1)  113
Sicily  312
Nemean Games  xviiic, 171, 223, 223
Nemean Lion  153
Neoptolemos  4, 125, 223–224, 263,
282
Neoptolemus  31
Neptune, Temple of  277
Nereid  192, 226
Nereus  224, 242, 276
Nestor  224
Messenia  208
Mycenaean civilization  217
Poseidon  277
Pylos  287
Telemachos  336
Nikë  xii, 224, 225, 240
Nikias  xixc, 225
Alcibiades  19
Delos  105–106
Demosthenes (2)  112
Euripides  129
Kleon  181
Peloponnesian War  248–249
Thucydides (1)  350
Niobë  49, 225–226
Nointel, marquis de  xii
Nubia  xv
nymphs  226
Artemis  50
Europe and Asia  130
Hephaistos  150
Oceanus  227
Pan  237
satyrs  302
Silenus  313
O
oarsmen  362
oath  158
obol  87
obsidian  206
Oceanus  12, 224, 227
Octavian  xxc
Odysseus  227–228
Achilles  4
afterlife  12
Ajax (1)  16
Athena  56
Calypso  75
Circe  85
Cyclops  98
fate  132
Hecuba  146
Homer  159, 160
Ithaca  172, 173
Kratinus  185
Mycenaean civilization  217
Nausicaa  222
Nestor  224
nymphs  226
Penelope  160, 227, 228, 237,
251, 336, 366
Philoktetes  263
Polyphemos  275
Poseidon  277
Prometheus  283
rhetoric  294
Sirens  315
Sisyphus  315
Skylla  317
Tantalus  334
Teiresias  336
Telemachos  336
Trojan War  355
wrestling  368
Odyssey (Homer)  xviic. See also Iliad
Achilles  4
afterlife  12
Agamemnon  13
Ajax (2)  16
Aphrodite  34
Ares  43
black peoples  66
Callimachus  74
Calypso  75
Castor and Polydeuces  77
Circe  85
colonization  88
Cyclops  98
epic poetry  123
farming  131
fate  132
harpies  145
Helen of Troy  146
Hephaistos  151
Homer  159, 160
Jason (1)  174
Klytemnestra  182
magic  198
Menelaus  208
Muses  212
Mycenaean civilization  216
myth  219
Nausicaa  222
Neoptolemos  224
Nestor  224
Oceanus  227
Odysseus  227, 228
Oedipus  229
Orestes  233
Penelope  251
Polyphemos  275
Poseidon  277
Sirens  315
Sisyphus  315
Skylla  317
Tantalus  334
Teiresias  336
Telemachos  336
Trojan War  355
Troy  356
women  366
writing  369
Oedipus  229
Antigone  31
epic poetry  123
homosexuality  163
Kypselos  186
Odysseus  228
Seven against Thebes, the  309
Sophokles  323
Thebes  340
Oedipus the King (Sophokles)  323
Oinomaus  250
oligarchy  229
Argos  44
aristocracy  45
Carthage  76
Corinth  91
Corinthian War  92
Cyrene (1)  100
Delian League  105
Kleisthenes (1)  180
Kleomenes (1)  181
Locri  192
Locris  193
Lykourgos (1)  194
Periander  252
Pythagoras  289
rhetoric  294
Sikyon  313
Sparta  325
Syracuse  333
Thebes  340
olives and olive oil  xiv, xv
Akragas  17
Chios  85
Corcyra  90
farming  131
food and meals  132, 133
Olympia  xiii, 230
Atlas  61
centaurs  80
Elis  120
Gelon  137
Herakles  153
Herodotus  154
Kypselos  186
Nikë  224
Olympic Games  231
Pausanias (2)  242
Peloponnese  244
Pelops  250
Pheidias  260
Pheidon  259
Polykleitos  274
Praxiteles  281
sculpture  305
Seven Wonders of the World, the
310
Xenophon  371, 372
Zeus  374
Olympic Games  xviic, 230–231
Alcibiades  19
Bacchylides  63
boxing  69
calendars  74
chariots  84
Croton  96
Elis  120
Empedokles  121
Hieron (1)  156
Isthmian Games  171
Kleisthenes (2)  180
lyric poetry  195
Nemean Games  223
Olympia  230
pankration  238
Pelops  250
Index
401

Olympic Games (continued)
pentathlon  251
Pheidon  259
Pindar  266–268
Poseidon  276
Pythian Games  290
sport  329
wrestling  367
Zeus  374
Olympus, Mt.  232
afterlife  12
Aphrodite  34
Dionysus  114
Gaea  136
Ganymede  136
Giants  138
Hephaistos  150
Herakles  153
Hestia  156
Olympia  230
Perikles  254
religion  291
Thessaly  347
Zeus  374
Olynthos  232
archaeology  39
Chalcidicë  82
Demosthenes (1)  111
Philip II  261
Potidaea  277
Tiryns  352
On Nature (Empedokles)  121
On the Nature of Man (Hippocrates
(1))  204
oratory. See rhetoric
Orchomenos  232–233
archaeology  38
Boeotia  68
geography of Greece  140
Herakles  152
Jason (1)  174
Minyans  212
Mycenaean civilization  216
Thebes  340
the Oresteia (Stesichorus)  119
Orestes  233
Aeschylus  10
Agamemnon  14
Alcmaeon (1)  20
Apollo  35
Areopagos  43
Electra  119
Furies  135
Klytemnestra  182
Stesichorus  329
Tantalus  334
Orion  49, 234
Orpheus  174, 213, 234
Orphism  234–235
afterlife  13
Empedokles  121
Orpheus  234
Persephone  255
Pythagoras  289
ostracism  235
Alcmaeonids  20
Aristides  45
assembly  54
democracy  110
Kimon  178
Perikles  253
Themistokles  341
Xanthippus  370
Ovid  123, 219, 226, 285
owls  57, 88
P
painting  236–237
Apollo  35
clothing  86
Marathon  199
Medusa  205
Pheidias  260
pottery  279
Sikyon  313
Theseus  347
palaces  217, 218
Palmyra  149
Pan  200, 237
Panathenaia  74, 144, 237, 238, 243
Panathenaic Games  xviiic, 238
pankration  238
boxing  68
Olympic Games  231
pentathlon  251
Pindar  267
sport  329
wrestling  367
Panticapaeum  67, 89, 239, 314
papyrus  71
Parallel Lives of the Noble Greeks and
Romans (Plutarch)  18, 22, 273
parchment scroll  213
Paris  147, 239
Achilles  3
Gorgias  139
Hecuba  146
Helen of Troy  146
Kratinus  185
Menelaus  208
Philoktetes  263
Priam  282
Stesichorus  330
Trojan War  355
Parmenides  239–240
Anaxagoras  29
Empedokles  121
philosophy  263
Plato  271
science  303
Parthenon  xii, 240, 241, 241
acropolis  4
Amazons  27
archaeology  38
architecture  42, 43
Athena  56
Athens  60
Bassae  64
centaurs  80
Demetrius Poliorketes  109
frieze from  87, 276
Giants  138
Panathenaia  238
Perikles  253
Pheidias  260
Poseidonia  277
pottery  279
sculpture  305
Thucydides (2)  351
Pathenon  xvi
Patroklos  160, 241, 242
Achilles  3
fate  132
Hector  146
Homer  159
homosexuality  163
Odysseus  227
Pausanias (1) (Spartan general)  258,
259, 270
Pausanias (2) (travel writer)  xii, xvi,
215, 225, 230, 242, 281
Pegasus  65, 88
Peisistratid family  xi
Peisistratus  xviiic, 242–243
acropolis  4
agora  15
Athens  58
Delos  105
democracy  110
Hippias (1)  157
Marathon  199
ostracism  235
Panathenaia  238
Solon  321
theater  339
Theseus  345
tyrants  357
Peleus  3, 174, 224, 242
Pella  197, 243, 367
Peloponnese  xii, 243–244
Achaea  2, 3
Achaeans  3
Aetolia  11
Alcibiades  19
Arcadia. See Arcadia
Argos. See Argos
Arion  45
Asklepios  51
Athens  58
Corinth. See Corinth
Crete  93
Dorian Greeks  116
Elis. See Elis
Greek language  141
Halicarnassus  143
Hera  151
Herakles  152
Kleomenes (1)  181
Knossos  183
Laconia  187
Megara (1)  206
Messenia. See Messenia
Mycenae. See Mycenae
Nemean Games  223
Nestor  224
Olympia  230
Olympic Games  231
Peloponnesian War  244
Pelops  250
Pheidon  259
Pylos. See Pylos
Sikyon. See Sikyon
Skepticism  316
Sparta. See Sparta
Thebes  341
Themistokles  342
Theseus  346
Tiryns  352
Tyrtaeus  358
warfare, land  360
Peloponnesian War  xii, xvi, xixc,
244–250
Abdera  1
Acarnania  2
Aegina  7
Aegospotami  7
Aenus  8
Aetolia  11
Agesilaos  15
Alcibiades  18
Alcmaeonids  20
Ambracia  27
Amphipolis  28
Andokides  30
Archidamus  39
Aristophanes  46
Asia Minor  53
assembly  54
Athens  58
Athenspasia  54
Boeotia  68
Brasidas  69
Byzantium  71
Catana  78
cavalry  79
Chalcidicë  82
Chalis  83
Corcyra  90
Corinth  91
Corinthian War  92
Cyclades  98
Cyrene (1)  100
Cyzicus  101
Delian League  105
Delos  105
Demosthenes (2)  112
Dorian Greeks  116
Elis  120
Epaminondas  121
Ephesos  122
Epidamnos  124
Euboea  128
Eupolis  128
Four Hundred, the  133
funeral customs  134
Greece during the  245m
Halicarnassus  143–144
Harmodius and Aristogeiton  144
Hellespont  149
helots  150
Hermes  153
hoplite  163
Ionia  168
Kleon  181, 182
402
Index

Knidos  183
Konon  184
Kratinus  185
Kritias  185
Kymë  186
Long Walls, the  193
Lysander  195
Mantineia  199
Megara (1)  206
Melos  206
Messenia  208
Miletus  209
Mytilene  219
Naupactos  222
Naxos (2)  223
Nikias. See Nikias
oligarchy  229
Olympic Games  231
Orchomenos  233
painting  237
Perikles  246, 247, 250, 253
Persian Wars  259
Phocaea  264
Phocis  265
Piraeus  243
Plataea  269
Plataea, Battle of   271
Plato  271
Potidaea  278
Pylos  287
Rhegium  293
Rhodes  294
Samos  300
sculpture  306
Second Athenian League  306
Sestos  309
Sicily  313
Sikyon  313
slaves  318
Socrates  319
Sophokles  322
Tegea  335
Thasos  337
theater  340
Thebes  341
Theramenes  344
Thirty Tyrants, the  348
Thucydides (1)  349
warfare, land  359–361
warfare, naval  363
warfare, siege   364
Xenophon  371
Pelops  250
Atreus  61
homosexuality  163
Olympia  230
Olympic Games  231
Pindar  267
Poseidon  276
Tantalus  334
Penelope  251
Homer  160
Odysseus  227, 228
Pan  237
Telemachos  336
women  366
pentathlon  231, 251, 368
penteconters  362
Pentheus  73
peplos 57, 86, 86, 238
Pergamon  xii, xxc, 251–252
Aenus  8
Asia Minor  53
Asklepios  51
Athena  56
Athens  60
Celts  80
coinage  88
Cyzicus  102
education  118
Ephesos  122
Giants  138
Hellenistic Age  148
Lydia  194
mathematics  203
medicine  204
Miletus  210
Mytilene  219
Philip V  262
Phocaea  264
Rhodes  295
Rome  296
sculpture  306
Seleucid Empire  307
theater  340
writing  369
Periander  252
Arion  44
Corcyra  90
Corinth  91
Kypselos  186
Seven Sages, the  310
tyrants  357
Perikles  xvi, xviiic, xixc, 252–254
acropolis  4
Aegina  7
Aeschylus  10
Alcibiades  18, 19
Alcmaeonids  20
Anacreon  28
Aspasia  53–54, 185, 254
Athens  58, 60
birth control  66
council  93
democracy  109, 110
Ephialtes  122, 123
Euboea  128
funeral customs  134
Ion (2)  167
Kallias  177
Kimon  178
Kleisthenes (1)  180
Kleon  181, 182
Kratinus  185
Long Walls, the  193
marriage  201
Megara (1)  206
Nikias  225
Parthenon  240
Peloponnesian War  246, 247,
250
Pheidias  260
Pindar  268
Piraeus  268
Plutarch  273
rhetoric  294
Samos  300
sculpture  305
Sinope  315
Socrates  319
Sophokles  322
Themistokles  341
Thucydides (1)  349
Thucydides (2)  351
warfare, land  361
warfare, naval  363
women  367
Xanthippus  370
perioikoi (perioeci) 254
Laconia  187
polis  273
Sparta  325–328
Peripatetic School  48, 55. See also
Lyceum
peripatos 48, 193
Persephone  108, 255
Adonis  5
afterlife  12, 13
Demeter  108
Eleusinian Mysteries  120
Hades  143
Orphism  234
painting  237
religion  291, 292
Tantalus  334
Theseus  347
Perseus (1) (mythical hero)  255, 256,
256
Argos  44
Athena  56
Bellerophon  65
Medusa  205
theater  339
Zeus  374
Perseus (2) (king of Macedon)  197
Persia  xvi, xviiic, 256–257
acropolis  4
Aeschylus  10
Alcibiades  19
Alexander the Great  21, 23, 24
Asia Minor  53
Athens  60
Byzantium  71
Corinthian War  92
Croesus  95
Cyrus (1). See Cyrus (1)
Darius (1). See Darius (1)
Delian League  105
Delos  105
Demokritos  110
Ephesos  122
Europe and Asia  130
Herodotus  155
Hippias (1)  157
Ionia  168
Ionian Revolt  169
Isokrates  171
Kallias  177
Kimon  178
King’s Peace  178
Kleomenes (1)  181
Konon  184
Marathon  199, 200
Miletus  209
Mycalë  215
Parthenon  240
Peloponnesian War  244
Perikles  253
Philip II  262
Salamis (1)  298
Seleucid Empire  307
Sparta  328
Thucydides (1)  350
Thucydides (2)  351
tyrants  357
warfare, naval  363
Xerxes. See Xerxes
Persian Empire  xi, xvi, xviiic, 176,
191, 315
Persian Wars  xi, xvi, 257–259
Aeschylus  9
Amazons  27
Artemision  50
Asia Minor  53
Chalis  83
Chersonese  84
Chios  85
Corcyra  90
Cyclades  98
Cyrus (1)  101
Delian League  105
Delphi  107
Egypt  118
Eretria  126
Euboea  127
geography of Greece  140
Herodotus  154
hoplite  163
Ionian Revolt  168
Kallias  177
Kimon  178
King’s Peace  178
Kymë  186
Marathon  199–200
Mycalë  215
Mytilene  219
Nikë  224
ostracism  235
Parthenon  240
Peloponnesian War  247
Perikles  253
Pheidias  260
Phocaea  264
Phoenicia  266
Phrynichus  266
Plataea  269
Plataea, Battle of   xviiic, 45, 259,
269, 270–271
Poseidon  275
Rhodes  294
sacrifice  297
Salamis (1)  297
sculpture  304
Sikyon  313
Index
403

Persian Wars (continued)
Simonides  314
Sophokles  322
Sparta  328
Themistokles  341
Thermopylae  344–345
warfare, land  360
Xanthippus  370
petasos 87, 87
phalanx  259
Alexander the Great  21
Chaironeia  81, 82
elephants  119
hoplite  163
Philip II  261
Philip V  263
Pyrrhus  288
Rome  296
warfare, land  359, 361
Pheidias  xvi, xixc, 260
acropolis  4
Athens  60
Athenspasia  54
Nikë  224
Olympia  230
Parthenon  240
Perikles  253, 254
Polykleitos  274
sculpture  306
Seven Wonders of the World, the
310
Zeus  374
Pheidon  44, 231, 260–261, 326
Philip, meaing of the name  221
Philip II (king of Macedon)  xii, xxc,
194, 261–262
Acarnania  2
Aeschines  9
Alexander the Great  21
Ambracia  27
Amphipolis  28
Athens  60
Byzantium  71
cavalry  78
Chalcidicë  82
Chalis  83
Chersonese  84
Corinth  92
Cyclades  98
Demosthenes (1)  111
education  117
Eretria  126
Euboea  128
gold  138
geography of Greece  140
Isokrates  171
Jason (2)  175
Macedon  197
Olynthos  232
Pella  242
Pergamon  252
phalanx  259
Plataea  270
Potidaea  278
Second Athenian League  306
Seleucus (1)  307
silver  314
Thasos  337
Thebes  341
Thermopylae  345
Thessaly  347
Thrace  349
warfare, land  359, 361
warfare, siege   364
Philip V (king of Macedon)  262–263
Acarnania  2
Aetolia  11
Delos  106
Dodona  115
Macedon  197
Pella  242
Pergamon  252
Rhodes  295
Rome  296
Philoktetes  113, 239, 263
philosophy  xii, xv, 263. See also spe-
cific headings, e.g.: Thales
Academy  2
Anaxagoras  29, 54, 129, 254, 319
Anaximander  29
Anaximenes  30
Aristotle. See Aristotle
Asia Minor  53
Athena  56
Athens  58
Cynics  98–99, 113
Cyrene (1)  100
Demokritos  110–111
education  118
Empedokles  xixc, 13, 17, 121,
231, 234, 289, 303
Epicureanism. See Epicureanism
Heraclitus  151–152, 315
Hippocrates (1)  157, 158
Ionia  167
Ionian Revolt  169
Lyceum  193
mathematics  202
Megara (1)  206
Miletus  209
Parmenides  29, 121, 239–240,
263, 271, 303
Persian Wars  257
Plato. See Plato
science  303
Skepticism  2, 315–316,
316–317
Socrates. See Socrates
Stoicism. See Stoicism
Theophrastus  193, 204, 207,
303, 343
Xenophanes  370
Xenophon  372
Phocaea (Phokaia)  264
Celts  80
colonization  89
Ionia  167
Massalia  201
Naukratis  222
Peloponnesian War  249
silver  314
warfare, naval  363
Phocis  264–265
Amphictyonic League  27
Athens  60
Boeotia  67
Delphi  106
Kleisthenes (2)  180
Locris  192
Philip II  261
Pythian Games  290
Sikyon  313
Thermopylae  344
Thessaly  347
Phoenicia  xv, xviic, 265–266
Apollo  36
Byblos  71
Egypt  118
Ionian Revolt  169
Persian Wars  258
silver  314
wine  365
Phokaia. See Phocaea
Phrynichus  10, 266, 339
phylai 179, 180
pike  361
pilos 87
Pindar (Pindaros)  xviiic,
266–268
Aegina  7
Aeschylus  10
afterlife  12
Alcman  21
Archilochos  40
Asklepios  51
Athena  56
Bacchylides  63
Bellerophon  65
Boeotia  68
chariots  84
Corinna  90
Cyrene (2)  101
Hieron (1)  156
Ibycus  166
Jason (1)  174
lyric poetry  195
music  214
myth  219
Olympic Games  231
Pan  237
Pelops  250
Simonides  314
Syracuse  332
Thucydides (2)  351
Piraeus  xviiic, xixc, 268
Aegina  7
archaeology  39
Athens  59
geography of Greece  140
Hippodamus  158
Kritias  185
Long Walls, the  193
Lysias  195
Macedon  197
Peloponnesian War  246
Perikles  253
Rhodes  295
Themistokles  341
Thirty Tyrants, the  348
warfare, naval  363
Pisander  133
Pithecusae (Pithekoussai)  xviic, 269
Chalis  82
colonization  88
Cumae  97
Etruscans  127
writing  369
Pittacus  17, 18, 190, 219, 269, 310
plague  xixc, 106, 193, 246–247
Plataea  269–270
Archidamus  39
Boeotia  68
Marathon  200
Mycalë  215
Mycenae  216
Peloponnesian War  246, 247
Persian Wars  258
Plataea, Battle of   270
Salamis (1)  297
Thebes  340
warfare, land  361
warfare, siege   364
Xerxes  372
Plataea, Battle of  xviiic, 270–271
Aristides  45
Persian Wars  259
Plataea  269
Plato  xvi, xixc, 271. See also
Academy
afterlife  11
Agathon  15
Alcibiades  18
Anacreon  28
Aristotle  47
astronomy  55
Athens  60
Atlantis  61
boxing  69
Dionysius (1)  113
education  117
Gorgias  139
gymnasium  142
homosexuality  160, 162
Kritias  185
laws and law courts  188
Lyceum  193
Lysias  195
music  214
Orphism  235
Parmenides  240
Pheidias  260
philosophy  263
Protagoras  286
Pythagoras  289
religion  293
Sappho  302
Skepticism  316
slaves  317
Socrates  319
Sophokles  323
Sparta  325
Stoicism  330
Syracuse  333
Theophrastus  343
404
Index

women  366
Xenophon  371
Plutarch (Ploutarchos)  xvi, 273
Alcibiades  18
Alexander the Great  22
Antigonus (1)  31
Aristides  45
Herodotus  155
homosexuality  160
Peloponnesian War  245
Perikles  253, 254
Plato  271
Solon  320
Sparta  325, 327
Themistokles  341
Theseus  346
poetry  xviiic
Alcman  xviiic, 20–21, 160, 302,
327, 336
Apollonius  36–37
Aratus (2)  37
choral poetry  266
Corinth  91
epic poetry. See epic poetry
Erinna  126
Euphorion  128
lyric poetry. See lyric poetry
music  213
Pindar. See Pindar
theater  338
Theocritus  342
polis  xi, 140, 148, 273
Polycrates  273–274
Anacreon  28
Delos  105
Ibycus  166
medicine  204
Pythagoras  289
Samos  299
tyrants  357
Polykleitos  xixc, 44, 274, 305
Polyphemos  98, 228, 275, 277
pomegranate seeds  108
“pony express”  104
Poseidon  275–277, 276
acropolis  4
Aeneas  8
Ajax (2)  16
Athena  57
black peoples  67
Cronus  96
fate  132
food and meals  132–133
Hades  143
Herakles  153
Hippolytus  158
Ionia  167
Isthmian Games  171
Jason (1)  175
Minos  212
Mycalë  215
Nereus  224
Mt. Olympus  232
Orion  234
Parthenon  240
Pelops  250
Pindar  267
Polyphemos  275
Poseidonia  277
Procrustes  282
religion  291, 292
ships and seafaring  311
Skylla  317
Sounion  324
Theseus  346
Zeus  374
Poseidonia  26, 275, 277, 331
Potidaea (Poteidaia)  xixc, 277–278
Alcibiades  19
Chalcidicë  82
Olynthos  232
Peloponnesian War  246
Periander  252
Poseidon  275
Socrates  319
potsherds  235
pottery  xiv, xv, xviiic, 278, 278–281,
279
Aegina  7
Agathokles  14
archaeology  38
Asia Minor  52
Athens  58
Attica  62
Carthage  76
colonization  88
Crete  95
Cumae  97
Cyclades  96
Etruscans  127
Homer  159
Ithaca  172
Minoan civilization  211
Minyans  212
Mycenae  215
Mycenaean civilization  216, 218
Mytilene  219
painting  236
Peisistratus  243
Periander  252
Pithecusae  269
Rhegium  293
Rhodes  294
Rome  295
symposium  331
Taras  334, 335
trade  353
wine  365
Praxiteles  xxc, 281, 281
Aphrodite  34
Athens  60
Knidos  183
Niobë  226
Pan  237
prostitutes  285
sculpture  306
women  367
prayer  282
Priam  282
Achilles  3
Cassandra  77
Hector  146
Hecuba  146
Neoptolemos  224
Paris  239
Troilus  355
Priapus  282
Procrustes  282–283
Prometheus  130, 228, 283, 315, 353
prophecy and divination  283–284
Cassandra  77
Cumae  97
Delphi  106–107.  See also Delphi
Epidaurus  125
prosecution  189
prostitutes  284–285
Aphrodite  33
Corinth  91
food and meals  132
hetaira 54, 285, 331, 332
heterosexuality  156
homosexuality  161, 162
marriage  201
music  214
symposium  331
Protagoras  285–286
Abdera  1
education  117
Euripides  129
religion  293
Socrates  319
sophists  322
Ptolemaeus, Claudius. See Ptolemy
(astronomer)
Ptolemy (1) (founder ruler in Egypt)
286
Agathokles  14
Alexander the Great  22
Alexandria (1)  25
Antigonus (1)  31, 32
Cyprus  99
Cyrene (1)  100
Demetrius Poliorketes  108, 109
Diadochi  112
Egypt  118
Kassander  177
prostitutes  285
Ptolemy (2) II  286
Pyrrhus  288
Salamis (2)  299
Seleucus (1)  307
warfare, naval  363
Ptolemy (2) II (king of Egypt)
286–287
Apollonius  37
black peoples  67
Jews  176
Ptolemy (1)  286
Samos  300
Samothrace  301
Theocritus  342
Ptolemy (astronomer)  54, 55
public speaking. See rhetoric
Purifications (Empedokles)  121
Pygmalion  287
Pylos  xv, 287–288
Dionysus  114
Kleon  182
Linear B  192
Messenia  208
Mycenaean civilization  216
Nestor  224
Peloponnese  244
Peloponnesian War  247
Poseidon  277
religion  292
pyramids  310
Pyrrhus  288–289
Agathokles  14
Ambracia  27
Catana  78
Demetrius Poliorketes  109
Dodona  115
Epidamnos  124
Lysimachus  196
Neoptolemos  224
Taras  335
Pythagoras  xviiic, 289–290
afterlife  13
Croton  96
Empedokles  121
mathematics  202–203
music  214
Orphism  234
Plato  272
Samos  299
Xenophanes  370
Pythian Games  xviiic, 290
Amphictyonic League  27
Bacchylides  63
chariots  84
Croton  96
Delphi  106, 107
Hieron (1)  156
Isthmian Games  171
Nemean Games  223
Pindar  267
wrestling  367
R
ramming maneuver (in warfare,
naval)  363
rape  188
red-figure pottery  xviiic, 280, 281
reincarnation  13, 234–235
religion  xi, xii, xv, 291–293. See also
gods and goddesses
afterlife  11
Antigone  31
Apollo  36
Artemis  50
Asklepios  51
Athena  56
Christianity  xvi, 124, 152, 176
Crete  95
Dionysus  114
Eleusinian Mysteries. See
Eleusinian Mysteries
Etruscans  127
fate  132
Furies  135
Gaea  136
Hades  143
Helen of Troy  147
Index
405

religion (continued)
Helios  147
Hera  151
Hyacinthos  165
Jews  176
laws and law courts  188
medicine  204
Medusa  205
Minoan civilization  211
Mycenaean civilization  216
Nereus  224
nymphs  226
Orphism  13, 121, 234, 234–235,
255, 289
philosophy  263
Poseidon  275
pottery  279
Pythagoras  289
Rome  295
sacrifice  282, 297
science  303
sport  329
timber  351
women  367
Zeus  373
Renan, Ernest  71
Republic (Plato)  271, 272, 323, 
366
resident aliens  209
Revett, Nicholas  xii
Rhea  96
Rhegium (Rhëgion) 293
Chalis  83
colonization  88
Croton  96
Ibycus  166
Italy  171
Locri  192
Polycrates  274
Zanclë  373
rhetoric  xv, 294
Academy  2
Athenspasia  54
education  117
Gorgias  139
Hermes  153
Rhodea  365
Rhodes  xxc, 294–295
Akragas  17
Apollonius  37
Asia Minor  52
astronomy  55
Byzantium  72
Colossus of  xxc, 295, 310
Demetrius Poliorketes  109
Dorian Greeks  116
Gela  137
Helios  147
Knidos  182
Naukratis  222
Peloponnesian War  249
Philip V  262
Rome  296
Second Athenian League  306
Seven Sages, the  310
wine  365
Roman Empire  xv, xvi
Abdera  1
Alexandria (1)  25
Cynics  98
Sinope  315
slaves  318
Stoicism  330
Rome  xi, xii, xv, xvi, xxc, 295–296
Aenus  8
Aetolia  11
Akragas  17
Amphipolis  28
Antiochos (2)  32, 33
Arcadia  38
Asia Minor  53
Asklepios  51
Athens  58
Byzantium  71
Carthage  76
Chalis  83
chariots  84
Corcyra  90
Corinth  92
Croton  96
Cyclades  98
Delos  106
elephants  119
Epidamnos  124
Etruscans  127
Hellenistic Age  148, 149
Herakles  152
Homer  159
Lydia  194
Macedon  197
medicine  205
Messenia  208
Mimnermus  210
Naupactos  222
phalanx  259
Philip V  262
Phocaea  264
Pyrrhus  288
Rhegium  293
Rhodes  295
sculpture  304
Stesichorus  330
Taras  335
warfare, land  359, 361
warfare, naval  364
Zanclë  373
Russia  xiv
S
Sacred Band  81, 162, 191
sacrifice  282, 297
St. Elmo’s Fire  78
Salamis (1) (island)  xviiic, 297–298
Aeschylus  9
Ajax (1)  16
Aristides  45
Artemision  51
Athens  58
Attica  61
Euripides  129
Halicarnassus  143
Herodotus  155
Himera  157
Megara (1)  205
Mycalë  215
Persian Wars  257
Phrynichus  266
Plataea, Battle of   270
Simonides  314
Sophokles  322
Themistokles  342
warfare, naval  362
Xerxes  372
Salamis (2) (city)  299
salves  214
Samos  299–300
Aesop  11
Alcibiades  19
Anacreon  28
Andokides  30
Asia Minor  52
Chios  85
Darius (1)  104
Delian League  105
Epicureanism  124
Four Hundred, the  133
Hera  151
Ibycus  166
Ionia  167
Ionian Revolt  169
Lelantine War  190
medicine  204
Naukratis  222
Peloponnesian War  249
Perikles  254
Polycrates  273–274
Pythagoras  289
religion  292
Rhodes  294
Samothrace  300
Semonides  308
silver  314
Sophokles  322
tyrants  357
warfare, naval  363
Samothrace  299, 300–301, 314
Sappho  xviiic, 301–302
Aeolian Greeks  8
Alcaeus  17, 18
Alcman  21
Anacreon  28
Arion  44
Erinna  126
homosexuality  160, 161
Lesbos  190
lyric poetry  194
Naukratis  222
women  367
sarissa (pike)  79, 259, 361
satyrs  198, 302
Dionysus  115
maenads  198
nymphs  226
Silenus  313
theater  338
Schliemann, Heinrich
archaeology  38
Mycenae  215
Mycenaean civilization  216, 217
Orchomenos  232
Tiryns  352
Trojan War  355
Troy  356
science  xii, 303–304. See also mathe-
matics
Anaximander  29–30
Anaximenes  30
Archimedes  40
Aristotle  47–49
Asia Minor  53
astronomy  29, 37, 54–56, 202,
289–290, 303, 336
Ionia  167
Ionian Revolt  169
Lyceum  193
Miletus  209
philosophy  263
Socrates  319
Stoicism  331
Thales  336–337
sculpture  xi, xii, xiv, xv, 304–306
Aegina  7
Apollo  35
archaeology  38
architecture  41
Argos  44
Athens  58
Bassae  65
bronze  70
bronze jockey  231
carving  79
centaurs  80
clothing  86
Cyclades  96
Delphi  106
Egypt  118
of female form  305
frieze  41, 42, 65, 79, 240, 241,
276
funeral customs  134
gold  138
Hermes and Dionysus  281
homosexuality  160
iron  170
Leda and Zeus  189
Locri  192
Medusa  205
Megara (1)  206
Nike  225
Niobë  226
Orestes  233
Parthenon  240, 241
Parthenon frieze  79, 87, 276
Peisistratus  243
Persian Wars  257
Pheidias  260
Polykleitos  274
Praxiteles  281
prayer  282
religion  292
Sikyon  313
Silenus  314
Sounion  324
statue of youth  70
406
Index

Thasos  337
Theseus  347
wrestling  368
Scylla  228, 277
Second Athenian League  306
Abdera  1
Athens  60
Chalcidicë  82
Chalis  83
Chios  85
Corcyra  90
Cyclades  98
Delian League  105
Delos  106
Eretria  126
Euboea  128
King’s Peace  178
Kymë  186
Mytilene  219
Samothrace  301
Thasos  337
seduction  188
seer. See prophecy and divination
Seleucid Empire  306–307. See also
Seleucus (1)
Alexander the Great  21
Antioch  32
Antiochos (1)  32
Antiochos (2)  11, 32, 33, 176,
296, 307
Asia Minor  53
Bactria  64
Chios  85
coinage  88
colonization  89
Cyzicus  102
Egypt  118
Hellenistic Age  148
Jews  176
Kymë  186
Lydia  194
Macedon  197
Pergamon  251
Persia  257
phalanx  259
Phocaea  264
Phoenicia  266
Ptolemy (2) II  287
warfare, land  361
Seleucus (1) (king of Seleucid
Empire)  xxc, 32, 307–308
Antigonus (1)  31, 32
Antioch  32
Asia Minor  53
Demetrius Poliorketes  108
Diadochi  112
elephants  119
Kassander  177
Lysimachus  196
Ptolemy (1)  286
Seleucid Empire  307
Selinus  308
Semonides (lyric poet)  308–309, 366
serfs. See helots
Sestos  309
Aegospotami  7
Chersonese  84
Hellespont  149, 150
Peloponnesian War  249
Persian Wars  259
Seven Against Thebes, the  309–310
Alcmaeon (1)  20
Antigone  31
Aristides  45
epic poetry  123
Mycenaean civilization  218
myth  219
Sophokles  323
Thebes  340
Seven Sages, the  310
Chilon  84
Mytilene  219
Periander  252
Pittacus  269
Rhodes  294
Solon  320
Thales  336
Seven Wonders of the World, the  310
Alexandria (1)  25
architecture  42
Artemis  49
Ephesos  122
Halicarnassus  144
Helios  147
Olympia  230
Pheidias  260
Ptolemy (2) II  286
Rhodes  295
Zeus  374
shields  360
ships and seafaring  xiv, xv, 99, 264,
310–311, 362–363. See also war-
fare, naval
Sicily  xv, xixc, 312–313
Aeneas  8
Aeschylus  10
Agathokles  14
Akragas  17
Alcibiades  19
Arion  45
Athens  60
Catana  78
cavalry  78
colonization  88
Corcyra  89
Corinth  91
Crete  94
Cyclops  98
Daedalus  103
Demeter  108
Diodorus Siculus  112
Dionysius (1)  113
Eretria  125
Europe and Asia  130
Gaea  136
Gela. See Gela
Gelon  137
geography of Greece  140
Hephaistos  150
Hieron (1). See Hieron (1)
Himera  17, 137, 156–157, 308,
329, 332
Ionian Greeks  168
Ionian Sea  169
Italy  171
Lelantine War  190
Locri  192
Megara (1)  206
Minos  212
Naxos (2)  78, 83, 88, 113, 223,
312
Nikias  225
Odysseus  228
Orphism  234
Peloponnesian War  244
Persephone  255
Philoktetes  263
Pindar  267, 268
Pithecusae  269
Plato  272
pottery  281
Pyrrhus  288
religion  291
rhetoric  294
Rhodes  294
Rome  296
Sappho  301
Selinus  308
Simonides  314
Skylla  317
Syracuse. See Syracuse
theater  339
Timoleon  352
trade  353
Typhon  357
tyrants  357
warfare, siege   364
Xenophanes  370
Zanclë  83, 88, 96, 157, 293, 373
siege tower  364, 365
Sikyon
Achaea  2–3
Antioch  32
Chilon  84
Kleisthenes (2)  180–181
Nemean Games  223
painting  237
Peloponnese  244
Perikles  253
Pheidon  261
theater  339
tyrants  357
Silenus  313, 314, 320
silver  314
Abdera  1
Aegina  7
Aenus  8
Amphipolis  28
Archilochos  40
Asia Minor  52
Attica  61
Celts  80
Chalcidicë  82
Chios  85
coinage  87
colonization  89
Corcyra  89
Cyzicus  101
Delian League  105
democracy  110
Egypt  118
gold  138, 139
Himera  157
Kallias  177
Lydia  194
Massalia  202
Mycenae  215
Mytilene  219
Naukratis  222
Nikias  225
Peisistratus  243
Philip II  261
Phocaea  264
Phoenicia  265
Pithecusae  269
Potidaea  277
Samos  299, 300
Samothrace  300
Sinope  314
slaves  318
talent  334
Thasos  337
Themistokles  341
Thrace  349
Thucydides (1)  349
trade  353
Simonides (lyric poet)  315
Aeschylus  10
Anacreon  28
Bacchylides  63
Hieron (1)  156
Hippias (1)  157
Ibycus  166
prophecy and divination  284
Semonides  309
Syracuse  332
Thermopylae  345
Sinope  67, 89, 98, 315–316
Sirens  85, 228, 316
Sisyphus  315, 316
afterlife  12
hubris  164
Ixion  173
Odysseus  227
Tantalus  334
Skepticism  2, 316–317
Skylla  317
slaves  317–318
Abdera  1
Aenus  8
afterlife  11
Alexander the Great  22
Amphipolis  28
Aristophanes  46
Athens  60
Chalcidicë  82
Chios  85
colonization  89
Corcyra  89
Egypt  118
Eleusinian Mysteries  120
Epicureanism  124
Gortyn  139
helots  150
Index
407

slaves (continued)
heterosexuality  156
Hippocrates (1)  158
homosexuality  161
Illyris  166
Ionia  167
Ionian Revolt  169
Jews  175
lyric poetry  195
marriage  201
Massalia  202
Mycenaean civilization  218
Naukratis  222
Nikias  225
Olynthos  232
Peloponnesian War  247
Philip II  262
polis  273
Potidaea  277
prostitutes  285
Samos  299
Samothrace  300
Sestos  309
Solon  321
Stoicism  330
symposium  331, 332
Thasos  337
Thebes  341
Theseus  347
Thrace  349
trade  353
Trojan War  355
warfare, land  360
women  366
Society of Dilettanti  xii
Socrates  xvi, xixc, 319–320
Alcibiades  18, 19
Anaxagoras  29
Aristophanes  46
Aristotle  48
Athens  60
Athenspasia  54
Cynics  98
Cyrene (1)  100
Daedalus  103
education  117
Euripides  129
gymnasium  142
homosexuality  162
Kritias  185
Lysias  195
Megara (1)  206
Parmenides  239, 240
philosophy  263
Plato  271
Protagoras  285
religion  291
ships and seafaring  310–311
Silenus  313
sophists  322
Stoicism  330
symposium  332
Xenophon  371
soldiers  360
Solon  xviiic, 320–321
Areopagos  43
Athens  58
Chios  85
Croesus  95
democracy  109
Draco  116
homosexuality  161
Kleisthenes (1)  180
laws and law courts  188
Peisistratus  242
Pittacus  269
Plutarch  273
Seven Sages, the  310
songs  194–195
sophists  321–322
Academy  2
Aristophanes  46
education  117
Kritias  185
Protagoras  285–286
Skepticism  315
Sophokles  xvi, xixc, 17, 322–324
Aeschylus  9
Agathon  14
Ajax (1)  16
Antigone  31
Archilochos  40
Athens  60
Croesus  95
Electra  119
Euripides  128, 129
funeral customs  134
Herakles  153
Herodotus  154
myth  219
Niobë  226
Odysseus  227
Oedipus  229
Orestes  233
Philoktetes  263
symposium  331
theater  339
soul  11–13, 289
Sounion (Sumium)  324
Sparta  xviiic–xxc, 324–329
Achaea  3
acropolis  4
Aegina  7
Aegospotami  7, 8
Agesilaos  15, 92, 121, 195, 199,
328, 371
Agiad clan  15
Alcibiades  18–20
Alcman  xviiic, 20–21, 160, 302,
327, 336
Alexander the Great  22
Andokides  30
Apollo  36
Arcadia  37
Archidamus  15, 39–40, 130, 246
Argos  44
aristocracy  45
Artemis  50
Athena  56
Boeotia  68
boxing  69
Brasidas  28, 69, 182, 206, 247
Castor and Polydeuces  77
Chalcidicë  82
Chilon  84, 310, 328
Chios  85
coinage  87
colonization  88
Corcyra  90
Corinth  91
Corinthian War. See Corinthian
War
Crete  94
Croesus  95
Delian League  105
Delos  106
democracy  109
Dorian Greeks  116
education  117
Elis  120
Epaminondas  121
ephor  123
Eurypontid clan  130
Four Hundred, the  133
geography of Greece  140
Greek language  141
Helen of Troy  146
Hellespont  149
helots  150
Herodotus  154
homosexuality  160–162
hoplite  163
Hyacinthos  141, 164–165, 187,
292, 325
Ionia  168
Isokrates  171
Jason (2)  175
Kimon  178
King’s Peace  178
kinship  179
Kleomenes (1). See Kleomenes
(1)
Laconia  187
Lelantine War  190
Leuktra  191
Lydia  194
Lykourgos (1)  xviiic, 179, 194,
324–327
Lysander  195
Macedon  197
Mantineia  199
Marathon  200
Melos  206
Messenia  208
Mycenae  216
oligarchy  229
Orchomenos  233
Pausanias (2)  242
Peloponnese  244
Peloponnesian War. See
Peloponnesian War
Perikles  253
perioikoi  254
Persian Wars  257–259
Pheidon  260
Phocis  264
Pindar  266
Plataea, Battle of   270
Polycrates  274
prostitutes  285
Pylos  287
Pyrrhus  288
religion  292
rhetoric  294
Samos  300
Sestos  309
Seven Sages, the  310
slaves  318
Socrates  319
sport  329
Taras  334
Tegea  335
Terpander  336
Thebes  340
Themistokles  342
Theramenes  344
Thermopylae  344
Thucydides (1)  350
tyrants  357
Tyrtaeus  358
warfare, land  360, 361
warfare, naval  363
women  366
spear  163–164
spells  198
Sphacteria  xixc
sphinx  134, 229
sport  xv, 329
Alexander the Great  22
boxing  68–69, 117, 231, 238,
251, 329, 367
chariots  84
education  117
gymnasium. See gymnasium
Hermes  153
homosexuality  162
Isthmian Games  xviiic, 91, 171,
223, 275, 296
Kleisthenes (2)  180
music  214
Nemean Games  xviiic, 171, 223,
223
Nikë  224
Olympic Games. See Olympic
Games
Panathenaic Games  xviiic, 238
pankration  68, 231, 238, 251,
267, 329, 367
pentathlon  231, 251, 368
Pythian Games. See Pythian
Games
wrestling. See wrestling
steam power  304
stëlë 134
Stesichorus  329––330
Electra  119
Helen of Troy  146
Himera  157
Ibycus  166
Orestes  233
Stoicism  330–331
Academy  2
Apollodorus of Athens  36
Athens  60
408
Index

education  118
Heraclitus  152
Herakles  152
Lyceum  193
philosophy  263
religion  293
science  303
Skepticism  316
stoneworking  xv, xix
Stuart, James  xii
stylobate 41
Sudan  xv
Sumium (Sounion)  324
surgery  204
sussition  327
swastikas  67
Sybaris  331
Achaea  2
colonization  88
Croton  96
Italy  171
Poseidonia  277
symposium  331–332
Alcaeus  18
Anacreon  28
homosexuality  162
Jews  176
lyric poetry  195
music  214
Phoenicia  265
prostitutes  285
Sophokles  323
wine  365
synagogue  xvi
Syracuse  xviic–xxc, 332–333
Agathokles  14
Akragas  17
Alcibiades  19
Athens  60
Bacchylides  63
Catana  78
colonization  88
Corcyra  90
Corinth  91
Delian League  105
Demosthenes (2)  112
Dionysius (1). See Dionysius (1)
Dionysius (2) II  xxc, 333
Dorian Greeks  116
Euripides  129
Gela  137
Gelon  137
Hellenistic Age  148
helots  150
Hermes  153
Hieron (1). See Hieron (1)
Hieron (2) II  333
Himera  157
Italy  171
kinship  179
Locri  192
mathematics  203
Naxos (2)  223
Nikias  225
Peloponnesian War  244,
248–249
Pindar  267
Plato  272
Rhegium  293
Rome  296
science  303
Selinus  308
Sicily  312
Simonides  314
Sophokles  322
theater  339
Theocritus  342
Thucydides (1)  350
Timoleon  352
tyrants  357
warfare, naval  363
warfare, siege   365
Xenophanes  371
Syria  xv, xxc
T
talent  334
Abdera  1
Aegina  7
Byzantium  71
coinage  87
Delian League  105
Gelon  137
Herodotus  154
Miltiades  210
Perikles  254
Philip II  261
Potidaea  277
Samos  300
silver  314
Thasos  337
Tantalus  12, 173, 250, 334
Taras  334–335
Italy  171
music  214
Pyrrhus  288
Pythagoras  290
Rome  295
Sparta  327
taxation  xv, 243
technology  xv, 304
Tegea  37, 43, 199, 328, 335
Teiresias  162, 228, 323, 336
Tekmessa  17
Telemachos  336
Homer  160
Nestor  224
Odysseus  227, 228
Penelope  251
Terpander (lyric poet)  44, 213, 301,
336
Thales  xviiic, 336–337
Anaximander  29
Anaximenes  30
astronomy  55
Heraclitus  151
Ionia  167
Miletus  209
Parmenides  240
philosophy  263
science  303
Seven Sages, the  310
Thasos  337
Archilochos  40
colonization  89
Delian League  105
gold  138
painting  236
silver  314
Thrace  349
wine  365
theater  xv, xvi, xixc, 337–340
Aeschylus. See Aeschylus
Agathon  14–15, 139, 197, 340
Aristophanes. See Aristophanes
Athens  58, 59
epic poetry  123
Epidaurus  125, 338
Euripides  128–129
Ion (2)  167, 323
Jews  176
Kratinus  54, 128, 185, 339
Menander  xxc, 60, 207, 340
Peisistratus  243
Pergamon  252
Persian Wars  257
Phrynichus  10, 266, 339
Sophokles. See Sophokles
Sparta  329
Syracuse  332, 333
Thebes  xxc, 340–341
Agesilaos  15
Alcmaeon (1)  20
Alexander the Great  22
Antigone  31
Apollo  36
archaeology  39
Ares  43
Athens  58
Boeotia  67
Cadmus  73
Chaironeia  81
Corinthian War  92
Demosthenes (1)  111
Dionysus  114
Epaminondas. See Epaminondas
epic poetry  123
Europa  130
geography of Greece  140
Herakles  152
homosexuality  162
Jason (1)  175
Jason (2)  175
King’s Peace  178
Leuktra  191
Linear B  192
Megara (1)  206
Mycenaean civilization  216
Oedipus  229
oligarchy  229
Orchomenos  232
Peloponnesian War  246
Philip II  261
Phocis  264
Pindar  266
Plataea  269
Plataea, Battle of   270
prayer  282
Second Athenian League  306
Seven against Thebes, the. See
Seven Against Thebes, the
Sophokles  323
Sparta  324, 325
Tegea  335
Theseus  345
warfare, land  360
Xenophon  371
Themis  353
Themistokles  xviiic, 341–342
Aegina  7
Aeschylus  10
Athens  59
democracy  109
Ephialtes  122
ostracism  235
Perikles  253
Persian Wars  258
Piraeus  268
Prometheus  283
Salamis (1)  298
Simonides  314
warfare, naval  363
Xanthippus  370
Theocritus  342
Theognis  136, 206, 229, 343
Theogony (Hesiod)  xviic
afterlife  12
Cronus  96
Cyclops  98
Eros  126
fate  132
Furies  135
Gaea  136
harpies  145
Kerberos  177
Theokritus  25, 37, 38, 275
Theophrastus  193, 204, 207, 303, 343
Thera  xviic, 343–344
boxing  68
colonization  89
Cyclades  96
Cyrene (1)  100
homosexuality  161
Minoan civilization  211
writing  369
Theramenes  185, 344, 348
Thermopylae  xviiic, 344, 344, 345,
345
Agiad clan  15
Amphictyonic League  27
Artemision  50
Demetrius Poliorketes  109
Demosthenes (1)  111
geography of Greece  140
Kleomenes (1)  181
Locris  192
Mycenae  216
Persian Wars  257, 258
Philip II  261
Phocis  264
prophecy and divination  284
Rome  296
Salamis (1)  298
Thessaly  347
Index
409

Theseus  345–347
Aegean Sea  6
agora  16
Amazons  27
Athens  58
Bacchylides  63
battles the Minotaur  346
Castor and Polydeuces  77
Dionysus  115
Hippolytus  158
Knossos  184
Labyrinth  187
Marathon  200
Medea  204
Minoan civilization  211
myth  219
Poseidon  277
Procrustes  282
Sophokles  323
Sounion  324
Thessaly  xiv, 347–348
Achaea  2
Aeolian Greeks  8
Agesilaos  15
Alcestis  18
Amphictyonic League  27
Anacreon  28
Apollonius  37
Artemision  50
Boeotia  68
cavalry  78
centaurs  80
chariots  83
Cyrene (2)  100
farming  131
Greek language  141
Ixion  173
Jason (1)  174
Jason (2)  175, 347
Kritias  185
Lesbos  190
Lysimachus  196
Macedon  197
Medea  203
Minyans  212
Mycenaean civilization  217
Olympia  230
Mt. Olympus  232
Orchomenos  232
Peleus  242
perioikoi  254
Persian Wars  258
Philip II  261
Philip V  262
Phocis  264
Poseidon  277
Rome  296
Simonides  314
Themistokles  342
Thermopylae  344
timber  351
Zeus  374
Thetis  242
Thirty Tyrants, the  xixc, 348
Athens  60
Kritias. See Kritias
Lysander  195
Lysias  195
Plato  271
Socrates  320
Theramenes  344
Xenophon  371
Thirty Years’ Peace, the  xixc, 246
Thoegony (Hesoid)
Aphrodite  34
Hesiod  155
Muses  212
Prometheus  283
Titans  353
Typhon  356
Thrace  348–349
Abdera  1
Aegean Sea  6
Aenus  8
Agesilaos  15
Amphipolis  28
Anacreon  28
Antigonus (1)  31
Antiochos (2)  33
Chersonese  84
colonization  89
Darius (1)  104
Diadochi  112
Dionysus  114
gold  138
Lysimachus  196
Macedon  197
maenads  198
Odysseus  228
Orpheus  234
Persia  256
Persian Wars  257
Potidaea  277
Ptolemy (2) II  287
Samos  299
Samothrace  300
silver  314
slaves  318
Thasos  337
Thucydides (1)  349
trade  353
wine  365
Xerxes  372
Thucydides (1) (Athenian historian)
xvi, xixc, 349–350
Alcibiades  18
Antiphon  33
assembly  54
Athens  60
colonization  88
Corcyra  90
democracy  109
funeral customs  134
Gorgias  139
Harmodius and Aristogeiton  144
Herodotus  155
Kleon  182
Lelantine War  190
Melos  206
Mytilene  219
names  221
Peloponnesian War  244, 249
Perikles  253
Polycrates  274
Potidaea  278
prophecy and divination  284
slaves  318
Sparta  325, 328
Themistokles  341
Thucydides (2)  351
warfare, naval  362
Xenophon  371
Thucydides (2) (Athenian politician)
351
names  221
Perikles  254
Pindar  267
Thucydides (1)  349
thunderbolt  374
timber  351
Abdera  1
Aenus  8
Amphipolis  28
Chalcidicë  82
colonization  89
Corcyra  89
Crete  94
Illyris  166
Potidaea  277
ships and seafaring  311
Thasos  337
Thrace  349
trade  353
Timoleon  17, 78, 313, 333,
351–352
Tiryns  352
acropolis  4
archaeology  38
Argos  44
Bellerophon  65
Cyclops  98
geography of Greece  140
Herakles  152
Kerberos  178
Minoan civilization  211
Mycenaean civilization  216
Peloponnese  244
Perseus (1)  255
Pylos  287
Titans  352–353
afterlife  12
Atlas  61, 75, 77, 153, 353
Cronus. See Cronus
Gaea. See Gaea
Orphism  234
Prometheus  130, 228, 283, 315,
353
Themis  353
Uranus  34, 96, 98, 136, 138, 352
Zeus  374
tombs. See graves and tombs
trade  xi, xiv, xv, xviic, 353
Abdera  1
Aegina  7
Aenus  8
Aeolis  9
Al Mina  25
Amphipolis  28
Antioch  32
Aphrodite  33
Apollonia  36
archaeology  39
aristocracy  45
Asia Minor  52
Bactria  64
black peoples  67
Black Sea  67
bronze  69
Byblos  71
Chersonese  84
coinage  87
colonization  88
Corcyra  89–90
Corinth  91
Cyclades  96
Cyprus  99
Cyrene (1)  100
Cyzicus  101
Dorian Greeks  116
Early Mediterranean Trade Routes
354m
education  117
Egypt  118
Ephesos  122
Epidamnos  124
Eretria  125
Etruscans  127
Europe and Asia  130
gold  138, 139
geography of Greece  140
Hellespont  149
Hesiod  155
Ionia  167
Ionian Revolt  169
Italy  171
Jason (1)  174
Kypselos  186
Lefkandi  190
Lelantine War  190
Lesbos  190
Sea of Marmara  200
Massalia  201–202
Megara (1)  206
Miletus  209
Mycenaean civilization  216
Naukratis  222
Peloponnese  244
Peloponnesian War  246
Periander  252
Pheidon  259
Phocaea  264
Phoenicia  265
Piraeus  268
Pithecusae  269
Poseidon  276
Poseidonia  277
pottery  279
Rhodes  294
Samos  299
ships and seafaring  311
silver  314
Sinope  314
Sparta  326, 328
Sybaris  331
410
Index

Taras  334
tyrants  357
tragedy  xv, 128–129, 338, 339
trepanning  204
triglyphs 41
trireme  362, 363
Triton  276
Troilus  4, 355
Trojan War  xviic, 355
Achilles  3
Aeschylus  10
Agamemnon  13
Agathon  14
Ajax (1)  16
Ajax (2)  16
Andromache  31
Apollo  36
Asia Minor  52
Atreus  61
black peoples  66
Cassandra  77
Diomedes  113
epic poetry  123
Euripides  129
Hector  146
Helen of Troy  146
Hera  151
Herakles  153
Herodotus  154
Homer  159–160
Iphigeneia  169
Klytemnestra  182
Kratinus  185
Laocoön  188
Memnon  207
Menelaus  208
Mycenaean civilization  218
myth  219
Neoptolemos  224
Nestor  224
Odysseus  227
Paris  239
Parthenon  240
Patroklos  241–242
Penelope  251
Philoktetes  263
Polyphemos  275
Priam  282
Pylos  287
Seven against Thebes, the  309
Sophokles  323
Sparta  325
Stesichorus  329, 330
Telemachos  336
Troilus  355
Troy  356
warfare, land  359
Zeus  374
The Trojan Women (Euripides)  xixc,
128, 129, 146
Troy  356
Agamemnon  13
Ajax (2)  16
Apollo  36
Apollodorus of Athens  36
archaeology  38
Asia Minor  53
Cassandra  77
Euripides  129
fate  132
Hector. See Hector
Hecuba  129, 146, 146, 239, 282,
355
Helen of Troy. See Helen of Troy
Iphigeneia  169
Klytemnestra  182
Laocoön  188
Memnon  207
Mycenae  216
Mycenaean civilization  218
Neoptolemos  224
Odysseus  227, 228
painting  236
Paris. See Paris
Penelope  251
Philoktetes  263
Priam. See Priam
Trojan War. See Trojan War
Zeus  374
tunic  86, 86
Typhon  136, 356–357, 374
tyrants  xi, xviiic, xixc, xxc, 357. See
also specific headings, e.g.:
Peisistratus
Agathokles  14, 14, 137, 288,
313, 333, 352, 357
Alcaeus  17
Alcibiades  19
aristocracy  45
Chilon  84
Corinth  91
Delphi  107
democracy  109
Dionysius (1). See Dionysius (1)
Ephesos  122
Gela  137
Gelon. See Gelon
Halicarnassus  143
Hieron (1). See Hieron (1)
Hippias (1). See Hippias (1)
Hipponax  158
Ionian Revolt  169
Kleisthenes (1)  179
Kleisthenes (2)  179, 180–181,
221, 313, 357
Kypselos  xviiic, 91, 186, 252,
357
laws and law courts  188
Megara (1)  206
Miletus  209
Mytilene  219
Naxos (2)  223
Peisistratus  242
Periander  44, 90, 91, 186, 252,
252, 310, 357
Persian Wars  257
Pheidon  44, 231, 260–261, 326
Pittacus  269
Polycrates. See Polycrates
Rhodes  294
Seven Sages, the  310
Sicily  312, 313
Sikyon  313
Solon  321
Timoleon  352
Tyrtaeus  195, 208, 213, 327, 358
U
Underworld  143, 177–178. See also
Hades
Uranus
Aphrodite  34
Cronus  96
Cyclops  98
Gaea  136
Giants  138
Titans  352
V
vases
boxing  69
Cassandra  77
clothing  86
homosexuality  160, 161
Mycenaen  360
pottery  280, 281
symposium  331
Theseus battles Minotaur  346
Ventris, Michael  192
Venus  34
Venus de Milo  xii, 34, 96, 207
Vergil  8
vessels (ceramic). See pottery
virtue  330–331
vivisection (human)  205
votive offering  282
Vulcan  151
W
war  43, 56, 57, 211, 318. See also
specific headings, e.g.: Corinthian
War
warfare, land  359–362. See also spe-
cific headings, e.g.: Lelantine War
Alexander the Great  22–24
cavalry. See cavalry
Chaironeia  81, 82
chariots  83–84
Demosthenes (2)  112
Euboea  127
Leuktra  191
Marathon  199–200
Persian Wars  257–259
Plataea, Battle of   xviiic, 45, 259,
269, 270–271
Thermopylae  344–345
warfare, naval  xviiic, 362–364. See
also ships and seafaring
Artemision  50–51
Cyzicus  101–102
Euboea  127–128
Long Walls, the  193
Peloponnesian War  244–250
Persian Wars  257–259
Salamis (1)  297–298
warfare, siege  244, 364–365
warships  311, 362–363
water supplies  xiv
weapons
bronze  69, 70
catapult  364–365
cavalry  79
hoplite  163–164
iron  170
pike  361
spear  163–164
warfare, land  360
white-ground technique (pottery)
281
Winckelmann, Johann Joachim  xii
wine  xv, 365
Aegina  7
Akragas  17
Alcaeus  18
Anacreon  28
Archilochos  40
centaurs  80
Chios  85
Cyclades  96
Demetrius Poliorketes  109
Etruscans  127
food and meals  132
Ion (2)  167
Jews  176
Knidos  183
Massalia  202
Polyphemos  275
satyrs  302
symposium  331, 332
theater  338
Thrace  348
timber  351
trade  353
women  xvi, 366, 367. See also specif-
ic headings, e.g.: Penelope
abortion  66
Achilles  4
Adonis  5
Alcibiades  18
Alexander the Great  22
Amazons  27
archon  43
Argos  44
Aristophanes  46–47
Artemis  50
Athena  57
Athenspasia  54
beauty ideal of  366
birth control  66
caryatid  77
Chalcidicë  82
Corinna  68, 90
council  93
Electra  119
Eleusinian Mysteries  120
Epicureanism  124
Erinna  126
festival for  6
food and meals  132
funeral customs  134
Hera  151
Herodotus  155
heterosexuality  156
homosexuality  160–162
Index
411

women (continued)
Jason (1)  174
kinship  179
maenads  198
marriage. See marriage
Minoan civilization  211
names  221
Neoptolemos  224
Olympic Games  231
Peloponnesian War  247
prostitutes. See prostitutes
Pythagoras  289
Samothrace  301
Sappho. See Sappho
Semonides  309
slaves  317
Sparta  327
sport  329
Stoicism  330
symposium  331
Teiresias  336
theater  339
Works and Days (Hesoid)  xviic, 55,
155
wrestling  367, 368, 368
Ajax (1)  16
boxing  68
Croton  96
education  117
gymnasium  141
Hermes  153
Olympic Games  231
pankration  238
Peleus  242
pentathlon  251
Pindar  267
sport  329
writing  368–369. See also alphabet;
Linear B
Byblos  71
education  117
laws and law courts  188
Linear A  211, 368
Linear B  192
Minoan civilization  211
Mycenaean civilization  217
X
Xanthippus  370
Alcmaeonids  20
Anacreon  28
Miltiades  210
Mycalë  215
ostracism  235
Perikles  253
Persian Wars  259
Xenophanes  370–371
Parmenides  239
prophecy and divination  284
religion  292, 293
Zeus  374
Xenophon  xvi, xxc, 371–372
Agesilaos  15
Alcibiades  18
cavalry  78
Corinthian War  92
Cyrus (1)  101
homosexuality  160, 162
hoplite  164
Kritias  185
Leuktra  191
Peloponnesian War  245
Potidaea  278
Socrates  319, 320
Sparta  325
Theramenes  344
Thucydides (1)  350
Xerxes (king of Persia)  372
Abdera  1
Aegina  7
Aeschylus  10
Alexander the Great  22, 24
Argos  44
Aristides  45
Artemision  50, 51
Athens  59, 60
black peoples  66
Corinth  91
Darius (1)  104
Demokritos  110
Gelon  137
Halicarnassus  143
Herodotus  154
Jews  175
Megara (1)  206
Olynthos  232
Persian Wars  257–258
Plataea  269
Plataea, Battle of   270
Salamis (1)  297, 298
Samos  299
Sestos  309
Simonides  314
Thebes  340
Themistokles  342
Thermopylae  344, 345
Xanthippus  370
Z
Zagreus  234
Zaleucus  188
Zanclë  373
Chalis  83
colonization  88
Cumae  97
Himera  157
Rhegium  293
Zeno  330
Zeus  189, 373–374
Adonis  5
Aegina  7
Alexander the Great  22
Alexandria (1)  25
Aphrodite  33
Apollo  35
Ares  43
Artemis  49
Artemision  51
Asklepios  51
Athena  56, 57
Atlas  61
Bellerophon  65
black peoples  67
Bosporus  68
bronze  70
Cadmus  73
Callimachus  75
Calypso  75
Castor and Polydeuces  77
centaurs  80
coinage  88
Crete  95
Cronus  96
Cyclops  98
Demeter  108
Dionysus  114
Dodona  115
Eleusinian Mysteries  120
Elis  120
Epirus  125
Europa  129–130
fate  132
Ganymede  136
Giants  138
Hades  143
Helen of Troy  146
Helios  147
Hephaistos  150
Hera  151
Herakles  152, 153
Hermes  153
Hesiod  155
Hestia  156
Hippolytus  158
homosexuality  163
Io  167
Ixion  173
Jason (1)  174, 175
Jews  176
kinship  179
Klytemnestra  182
Leda  189
Locri  192
magic  198
Memnon  207
Minos  212
Muses  212
Nemean Games  223
Neoptolemos  224
Nikë  224
Niobë  225
nymphs  226
Odysseus  228
Olympia  230
Olympic Games  231
Mt. Olympus  232
Orphism  234
Parthenon  240
Peleus  242
Pelops  250
Pergamon  252
Persephone  255
Perseus (1)  255
Pheidias  260, 261
Phoenicia  265
Pindar  267
Polykleitos  274
Poseidon  275
Praxiteles  281
Priam  282
Prometheus  283
prophecy and divination  
283
religion  291, 292
sacrifice  297
Salamis (2)  299
sculpture  305, 306
Selinus  308
Seven Wonders of the World, the
310
Sisyphus  315
Syracuse  333
Tantalus  334
Teiresias  336
timber  351
Titans  352
Typhon  356, 357
Zeus, Temple of
Akragas  17
Dodona  115
Herakles  153
Nemean Games  223
Pelops  250
Syracuse  333
412
Index

